
                              201 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     April 14, 1992, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 364 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy reaches new age

BYLINE: SPECIAL (CHICAGO TRIBUNE )

DATELINE: DETROIT

BODY:

   In an experiment that could revolutionize cancer therapy, medical researchers
announced yesterday that they would inject into malignant tumors new genes
designed to trick the human body into destroying the tumors.

   The direct injection of genes into tumors is the ultimate, streamlined
version of gene therapy and differs drastically from three earlier versions.
Those involve removing cells from patients, growing the cells in the lab,
"infecting" the cells with viruses carrying the therapeutic gene and finally
returning the modified cells to the body.

   Twelve patient-volunteers dying of metastatic melanoma, the most lethal form
of skin cancer, will receive direct injections of genes designed to trigger an
immune response and hopefully kill the cancer. Most of the patients are not
expected to live more than six months without the new approach.

   "If this method of gene delivery proves safe and effective," said Dr. Gary
Nabel, chief of the University of Michigan team that will conduct the research,
"it will hasten the day gene therapy becomes widely used in clinical practice."

   It is now possible, using genetic engineering, to prepare large amounts of
DNA, or genetic material, in the laboratory. At Michigan, this DNA will be
coated by harmless fat particles, or liposomes, and injected into a patient's
melanoma tumor. The liposomes allow the genes to slide past the cell's
protective membrane.

   Once inside, the DNA has been engineered to produce a protein that invites
attack by the soldiers of the body's immune system - white blood cells called
killer T-cells, which are believed to be responsible for destroying tumors.

   The Ann Arbor, Mich., experiment, which just received final FDA approval, is
medical science's latest attempt at immunotherapy, a tantalizing but
controversial mode of treatment that rarely works, but produces spectacular
results when it does.

   "Our patients are pioneers, and they're not expecting to be cured by this
experiment," Nabel said. "They're doing it for humanity.

   "But I believe their bravery will open a door. It will lead to new treatments
for a variety of cancers and other human diseases."

   CHICAGO TRIBUNE


LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1992


                              202 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     April 14, 1992, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 375 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy reaches new age

BYLINE: Special (Chicago Tribune)

DATELINE: DETROIT

BODY:

   DETROIT (Special) - In an experiment that could revolutionize cancer therapy,
medical researchers announced yesterday that they would inject into malignant
tumors new genes designed to trick the human body into destroying the tumors.

   The direct injection of genes into tumors is the ultimate, streamlined
version of gene therapy and differs drastically from three earlier versions.
Those involve removing cells from patients, growing the cells in the lab,
"infecting" the cells with viruses carrying the therapeutic gene and finally
returning the modified cells to the body.

   Twelve patient-volunteers dying of metastatic melanoma, the most lethal form
of skin cancer, will receive direct injections of genes designed to trigger an
immune response and hopefully kill the cancer. Most of the patients are not
expected to live more than six months without the new approach.

   "If this method of gene delivery proves safe and effective," said Dr. Gary
Nabel, chief of the University of Michigan team that will conduct the research,
"it will hasten the day gene therapy becomes widely used in clinical practice."

   It is now possible, using genetic engineering, to prepare large amounts of
DNA, or genetic material, in the laboratory. At Michigan, this DNA will be
coated by harmless fat particles, or liposomes, and injected into a patient's
melanoma tumor. The liposomes allow the genes to slide past the cell's
protective membrane.

   Once inside, the DNA has been engineered to produce a protein that invites
attack by the soldiers of the body's immune system - white blood cells called
killer T-cells, which are believed to be responsible for destroying tumors.

   The Ann Arbor, Mich., experiment, which just received final FDA approval, is
medical science's latest attempt at immunotherapy, a tantalizing but
controversial mode of treatment that rarely works, but produces spectacular
results when it does.

   "Our patients are pioneers, and they're not expecting to be cured by this
experiment," Nabel said. "They're doing it for humanity.

   "But I believe their bravery will open a door. It will lead to new treatments
for a variety of cancers and other human diseases."

   CHICAGO TRIBUNEcancer; genetics; medicine; research

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              203 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                  March 27, 1992, Friday, UNAVAILABLE EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. C18

LENGTH: 456 words

HEADLINE: New drugs may soon aid people trying to lose weight

BODY:

   not just dieting - may be the answer for people trying to pare down their
waistlines, a Toronto researcher predicts. Dr. Daniel Roncari also believes that
in the future doctors will be able to determine if children are predisposed to
obesity later in life. The predictions are based on results from 20 years of
research by Roncari into what makes people overweight.

   "Studies have clearly shown that the susceptibility to obesity is 75 per cent
genetic and 25 per cent due to environmental factors," says Roncari, head of the
department of medicine at Sunnybrook Health Science Centre. Research suggests
many overweight people have an "energy overload" within their bodies, an
inability to expend energy, which leads to storage of energy in the form of fat.
"Because it is energy overload, drugs which enhance energy expenditure will be
most useful," he says.

   Students learning

   three Rs with a twist

   BRANDON, Man. - Students at Vincent Massey High School were studying the
three Rs this week with a difference - rape, relationships and racism. It was
part of a teen conference brought to the school by counsellor Hazel Hewitt. The
most popular classes were dating, date rape, racism and financial planning.

   'Gene gun' shoots

   BBs into cells

   Researchers in gene therapy have developed a kind of "gene gun" that shoots
microscopic gold BBs coated with fragments of human genes directly into the
cells of living animals. Instructed by the foreign genes, the cells then secrete
proteins that provoke an immune response. The technique may eventually provide a
new way to immunize people against viral infections by shooting genes from a
virus into thousands of their cells at a time.

   MDs ignore rules

   for insemination

   Some doctors are ignoring rigorous safety guidelines for artificial
insemination, a federal report warns. Some still use fresh rather than frozen
sperm, record keeping is haphazard at best and some doctors aren't doing proper
follow-up. The study was prepared for the Royal Commission on Reproductive
Technologies.

   White adoption rate

   declines sharply

   The number of white babies put up for adoption in the United States has
dropped sharply since 1973, despite a rising birth rate, because more unmarried
white women are keeping their newborns, according to a study released by the
Alan Guttmacher Institute in New York.

   Beer ads put women

   in 'real situations'

   In an about-face from traditional "wiggle and jiggle" beer advertising aimed
at men, Miller Brewing Co. of Milwaukee is running ads in April issues of six
U.S. magazines - depicting female rodeo riders, jazz dancers and surfers in what
the company calls "real women in real situations."

   FROM THE STAR'S NEWS SERVICES


LOAD-DATE: March 28, 1992


                              204 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                           March 27, 1992, Friday, AM

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. C18

LENGTH: 464 words

HEADLINE: New drugs may soon aid people trying to lose weight

BODY:

   Within a few years, new drugs - not just dieting - may be the answer for
people trying to pare down their waistlines, a Toronto researcher predicts. Dr.
Daniel Roncari also believes that in the future doctors will be able to
determine if children are predisposed to obesity later in life. The predictions
are based on results from 20 years of research by Roncari into what makes people
overweight.

   "Studies have clearly shown that the susceptibility to obesity is 75 per cent
genetic and 25 per cent due to environmental factors," says Roncari, head of the
department of medicine at Sunnybrook Health Science Centre. Research suggests
many overweight people have an "energy overload" within their bodies, an
inability to expend energy, which leads to storage of energy in the form of fat.
"Because it is energy overload, drugs which enhance energy expenditure will be
most useful," he says.

   Students learning

   three Rs with a twist

   BRANDON, Man. - Students at Vincent Massey High School were studying the
three Rs this week with a difference - rape, relationships and racism. It was
part of a teen conference brought to the school by counsellor Hazel Hewitt. The
most popular classes were dating, date rape, racism and financial planning.

   'Gene gun' shoots

   BBs into cells

   Researchers in gene therapy have developed a kind of "gene gun" that shoots
microscopic gold BBs coated with fragments of human genes directly into the
cells of living animals. Instructed by the foreign genes, the cells then secrete
proteins that provoke an immune response. The technique may eventually provide a
new way to immunize people against viral infections by shooting genes from a
virus into thousands of their cells at a time.

   MDs ignore rules

   for insemination

   Some doctors are ignoring rigorous safety guidelines for artificial
insemination, a federal report warns. Some still use fresh rather than frozen
sperm, record keeping is haphazard at best and some doctors aren't doing proper
follow-up. The study was prepared for the Royal Commission on Reproductive
Technologies.

   White adoption rate

   declines sharply

   The number of white babies put up for adoption in the United States has
dropped sharply since 1973, despite a rising birth rate, because more unmarried
white women are keeping their newborns, according to a study released by the
Alan Guttmacher Institute in New York.

   Beer ads put women

   in 'real situations'

   In an about-face from traditional "wiggle and jiggle" beer advertising aimed
at men, Miller Brewing Co. of Milwaukee is running ads in April issues of six
U.S. magazines - depicting female rodeo riders, jazz dancers and surfers in what
the company calls "real women in real situations."

   FROM THE STAR'S NEWS SERVICESfast; lane

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              205 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1992 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    January 10, 1992, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 350 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may help combat cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (AP) - Researchers say they may have found a way to treat cystic
fibrosis, a fatal disease.

   If the genetic therapy works in monkeys, human tests will start soon.

   Patients might simply use inhalers to get a genetically altered cold virus
into their lungs and reverse the abnormalities that cause the disease.

   "It would not be a one-time cure, but the strategy is a cure," said Dr.
Ronald Crystal, head of the research team at the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute.

   Cystic fibrosis is an inherited disorder that causes the lungs to produce a
thick mucous that eventually damages the lungs and leads to respiratory failure
and death.

   The average age at death is 27.

   So far, the researchers have successfully used the new method in test tubes
and have tried it on rats. The results are published today in the scientific
publication Cell.

   "I have no doubt that, if we were to do the same now in a person with cystic
fibrosis, we could . . . reverse the abnormalities in the lung," Crystal said in
an interview.

   There are new treatments that alter or reduce the secretions in the lungs,
said Dr. Robert Beall, executive vice- president of the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation.

   Crystal's approach represents the first attack on the underlying genetic
cause of cystic fibrosis, Beall said.

   Altered gene therapy usually involves taking cells from the body, changing
them and putting them back. But the inside of the lung is too complicated for
such a procedure.

   Crystal's team altered a common cold virus to carry the cystic fibrosis gene
into the lungs of test rats.

   "We modified it so that it cannot cause damage," Crystal said.

   The lungs pick up the correct gene, which instructs the cells in the lining
to produce the right kind of protein.

   That protein, in turn, ensures that the abnormal transfers of sodium and
chloride that cause the thick mucous don't occur.

   Beall said treatment may have to be repeated because lung cells are replaced
every 60 to 80 days. Crystal said he doesn't know how much such therapy would
cost.medicine; research

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1999


                              206 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

              November 23, 1991, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. K10

LENGTH: 504 words

HEADLINE: Experiment reverses cancer in mice

BYLINE: (Reuter)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (Reuter) - In research that may help lead to a cure for cancer for
humans, scientists have used gene therapy to rid mice of existing cancer by
triggering the animals' own immune system to destroy tumor cells.

   "This is the first time that this type of gene therapy has been shown to cure
an animal of an already established tumor," said Dr. Drew Pardoll, a cancer
researcher at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, where the study
was conducted.

   Scientists cautioned that the Hopkins findings, which were published in the
journal Science, are preliminary.

   "It is feasible to make this method work in human cancer therapy," said Paul
Golumbek, the main author of the paper. "But a number of additional studies need
to be done to establish the effectiveness of this strategy and develop its full
potential for human cancer therapy."

   Until now, most studies have focused on preventing animals from developing
subsequent cancers. In the Hopkins study, however, specialized immune cells,
called T-cells, were activated to destroy existing tumors without apparent
damage to normal cells.

   "If regressing cancer is indeed what they've done, that's a very exciting
sort of finding," said Dr. Michael Blaise, an expert in gene therapy at the
National Cancer Institute.

   Blaise is part of an institute team, led by Dr. Steven Rosenberg, which
recently used gene therapy for the first time to try to immunize a cancer
patient against his own cancer.

   The patient, a 46-year-old man who has an advanced case of skin cancer, was
injected with tumor cells genetically engineered to secrete tumor necrosis
factor, or TNF, a natural protein that kills cancer cells.

   Studies have shown that tumors in TNF-treated mice grow for a short time and
then spontaneously regress and disappear, according to the cancer institute. The
Rosenberg team hopes to replicate this finding in humans.

   In the Hopkins study, researchers took tumor cells cultured from a mouse
kidney cancer and genetically engineered them to secrete large doses of a
naturally occurring chemical called Interleukin-4.

   Interleukin-4 is the substance that stimulates T-cells, which are not
properly activated in persons with cancer.

   Pardoll likened the inactive T-cells to soldiers who have failed to get
orders from their general.

   "The body's soldiers may recognize the enemy but need orders from the general
to kill them," he said.

   "In our study, we bypassed the general and signaled the soldiers with orders
(represented by Interleukin-4) to kill. Once activated, the T-cells function
like smart bombs that kill the specific target but leave little collateral
damage."

   One of the hurdles, Golumbek said, is finding an effective way to modify
human tumors, since they are generally more difficult to grow in culture than
mouse tumor cells.

   Golumbek said human trials could start within the next year, but that it
would be a year or two after that before results could be evaluated.cancer;
research; genetics

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              207 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    November 1, 1991, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 225 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy in mice kills off cancer tumors

BYLINE: (AP)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (AP) - Scientists have found they can genetically modify cancer
cells to stimulate an immune response that, in mice at least, is strong enough
to kill the pre-existing cancer without hurting normal cells.

   "This approach looks promising," said Dr. Drew Pardoll, assistant professor
of oncology, medicine and molecular biology and genetics at the Johns Hopkins
University medical school.

   "Whether this translates in humans also remains to be seen. We're hopeful,
but that's going to take a while to find out," he said yesterday.

   The Johns Hopkins study is published in today's issue of Science, the journal
of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.

   Previous studies have shown that gene-modified tumor cells can produce
chemicals that create a local immune response as well as a weak systemic
response. But this study is the first to use a technique that triggers an immune
response strong enough to eliminate tumors.

   At Hopkins, researchers took cells from a mouse kidney cancer and genetically
engineered them to secrete large doses of a natural chemical called
Interleukin-4.

   Ten mice were injected with it. The immune systems of seven destroyed kidney
cancer cells in their bodies. The three other mice developed tumors, but more
slowly than 10 untreated mice.cancer; reseach; genetics

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              208 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                         November 1, 1991, Friday, ME2

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 137 words

HEADLINE: Therapy destroying cancer tumors

BYLINE: (Reuter)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (Reuter) - In an experiment that heralds a new direction in cancer
research, scientists have used the immune systems of mice to destroy tumors.

   "This is the first time that this type of gene therapy has been shown to cure
an animal of an already established tumor," said Dr. Drew Pardoll, a researcher
at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine where the study was conducted.

   Scientists cautioned that the findings, published in today's issue of the
journal Science, are preliminary. "It is feasible to make this method work in
human cancer therapy," said Paul Golumbek, the paper's main author. "But a
number of additional studies need to be done to establish the effectiveness of
this strategy and develop its full potential for human cancer therapy."cancer;
research; genetics

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              209 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                July 13, 1991, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. G2

LENGTH: 267 words

HEADLINE: Patients are living longer but face increased cancer risks

BYLINE: By Nancy Ross-Flanigan Special to The Star (Knight-Ridder Newspapers)

BODY:

   With improved treatments, people with AIDS are living longer but facing
increased risk of cancer.

   Many patients who take the antiviral drug AZT, for instance, develop
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a cancer of the lymphatic system, said Jill Lietzau, a
U.S. National Cancer Institute researcher. After two years on AZT, 12 per cent
of patients with AIDS or severe AIDS-related complex develop lymphoma, and after
three years, 29 per cent develop it. The most susceptible patients are those
whose immune systems were weakest when they began taking AZT.

   By 1994, the cost of treating AIDS will reach $10.4 billion a year in the
United States, government figures indicate. The annual cost now is about $5.8
billion, almost 1 per cent of the nation's total health care bill. Since 1984,
the AIDS treatment bill has risen about 21 per cent a year.

   Boston AIDS researchers have announced the development of a promising, but
preliminary, type of gene therapy with the potential for stopping AIDS virus
reproduction in already infected people.

   In the new approach, scientists make an altered version of the AIDS virus
that is essentially an empty shell. It can't reproduce, but it can find and get
inside immune cells called CD4 cells. Researchers engineered the empty virus to
carry an anti-viral gene that will bind to and block key regions of the AIDS
virus. Then, when a live AIDS virus particle comes into a treated cell, the cell
is primed to block or at least reduce infection. The technique hasn't been
tested in animals or people.

   KNIGHT-RIDDER NEWSPAPERSAIDS; Update

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              210 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   June 22, 1991, Saturday, SATURDAY EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1/ FRONT

LENGTH: 1615 words

HEADLINE: Terry Fox's dream of cure for cancer still strong

BYLINE: By Elaine Carey Toronto Star

BODY:


    "Dreams are made if people try"

   - Terry Fox, Sept. 2, 1980

   * * *

   Terry Fox had a dream - that if every Canadian contributed $ 1 to cancer
research, the coffers would overflow and a cure would be found for the disease
that claimed his right leg when he was 18.

   His dream became, of course, the Marathon of Hope that began on April 12,
1980, when he dipped his artificial leg in the waters of St. John's harbor in
Newfoundland. And it ended suddenly near Thunder Bay on Sept. 1, 1980, when he
was forced to cut short his cross-Canada run because the cancer had reappeared,
this time in his lungs.

   Terry Fox died 10 years ago next week, on June 28, 1981, at the age of 22.
Thousands of Canadians from coast to coast cried that day, not wanting to
believe this heartless disease had struck down the brave young man who inspired
so many.

   The haunting vision of the handsome one-legged athlete, his face set in
determination as he ran alone down the country's highways, still lives with most
of us. His name, which became synonymous with courage, has to date raised more
than $ 90 million for cancer research, far beyond even his dreams.

   Yet a cure, or cures as we now know it must be, remains elusive.

   While there has been progress in treating some of the rare cancers, death
rates from the three most common forms - lung, breast and colon cancer - have
not gone down in the past 50 years. Lung cancer, particularly in women, is
increasing alarmingly because so many of this generation took up smoking.

   "In the really common cancers, the advances have been small and easily washed
out by the overwhelming magnitude of the problem," says Dr. Joseph Pater,
director of the National Cancer Institute's clinical trials program.

   Even where there are success stories, like the lower incidence of stomach and
cervical cancer, no one really knows why, anymore than they know why cancer
strikes certain people and not others or exactly when it starts or how.

   There are still far more questions than answers about the disease that will
strike 104,000 more people in Canada this year and kill more than half that
many.

   But the story of cancer research in the past decade is one of incredible
breakthroughs in understanding the genetic changes that cause cancer - much of
it done in Canada with money from the Terry Fox fund. And with that knowledge
comes the hope that it will soon be translated into successful treatment.

   One Toronto scientist, Dr. Victor Ling of

   the Ontario Cancer Institute, has won international awards for unlocking the
genetic key to why some people with cancer don't respond to chemotherapy while
others do.

   And our knowledge of the causes of some cancers - from smoking to fatty diets
to heredity - has grown enormously.

   "The advances in the past 10 years have really been spectacular. It borders
on science fiction and is literally mind boggling," says Dr. Bob Phillips, past
chairman of the research committee of the National Cancer Institute. "I think
the advances in the next 10 years are going to surpass all of the last 50
years."

   The revolutionary breakthrough has been the discovery that cancer is caused
by mutations in certain genes that produce proteins in cells. Scientists have
even identified the particular genes, called oncogenes, involved in many
cancers, including breast, lung and colon, which they hope will lead to the
first real advances in treating the three big killers.

   "In many ways, it's like the beginning years of antibiotics," Phillips says.
"We will eventually be able to target drugs to specific genes that are
defective. It's not yet happening but 10 years ago you couldn't even think about
that."

   Before drugs can be developed to attack those cancer-causing proteins,
science has to learn more about their structure and what they do. To understand
the complexity of the research, there are from 10,000 to 20,000 proteins working
together in each cell and, in a cancer cell, only three to five of them are bad.

   But in the past decade, scientists have learned to manipulate genes "the way
you play with Tinker Toys," says Phillips. They take them out of cells, alter
them, then put them back in again in their search for a cancer cure.

   One team of researchers at Mount Sinai Hospital injected mice cells with a
gene they suspected caused cancer and successfully produced a whole spectrum of
cancer tumors.

   And in the United States, researchers have begun clinical trials, using gene
therapy to treat cancer patients. They are inserting into their cells a gene
that produces a toxic substance that destroys the cancer cells. Normal cells
produce the cancer fighter but not in large enough quantities to kill it.

   "For someone educated like me in the late '60s, the kind of knowledge we have
now is mind boggling," says Dr. Ronald Buick, chief of research at the Ontario
Cancer Institute, the research arm of Princess Margaret Hospital.

   "Each month we see another example of a gene mutation. What's so encouraging
is that they're all related and so consistent and reproducible that I firmly
believe we will find these gene changes in all types of cancers."

   In another genetic breakthrough, Dr. Victor Ling discovered a protein that
cancer cells use to pump out a wide variety of toxic drugs used in chemotherapy.
If a cancer patient has that protein in his cells, the chemotherapy is
ineffective.

   The discovery was "one of the most important advances in cancer research in
the last decade," says Phillips. Now researchers world-wide are testing ways of
blocking the tiny protein pumps.

   Scientists have long known that certain things like tobacco smoke, radiation
and a whole range of chemicals increase your risk of getting cancer. Now they
know that what those agents do is increase the chances of certain genes
mutating.

   If all the causes of cancer were known, the best estimates are that it could
be reduced by about 75 per cent. The other 25 per cent occur spontaneously "and
you just couldn't avoid them if you lived in a bubble," Phillips says.

   But researchers now believe many of the unknown causes are in our diet. Fat
is now suspected to be the cause of breast and colon cancer but no one has yet
figured out why. It is the subject of one research project being conducted in
Toronto with money from the Terry Fox fund.

   "If I had to nominate the Number 1 contribution to the health of Canadians in
the last 25 years it's the evidence linking smoking and lung cancer," says
Baker. "I wish we had that strong an association with breast and colon cancer.
We're hoping fat is that link.

   "The link appears so strong that we should begin to tell the public. But how
do we do that in a way that changes behavior?"

   That is a new problem being tackled by Canadian researchers.

   The institute has just launched a major behavioral research study at a cost
of $ 2 million a year to try to determine how to change our behavior, since what
we do to ourselves is now estimated to cause 50 per cent of all cancers.

   "Thirty per cent of the population still smokes even though 99 per cent of
people would agree that it causes cancer," explains Dr. Peter Scholefield,
executive director of the cancer institute. "Many women don't have Papp tests
(for cervical cancer) and they don't do breast selfexaminations. How do you
modify human behavior? We want to know.

   "The acid test, if we're successful, will be if we begin to reduce the
incidence and death rates of the major cancers."

   Researchers now know that a single cure for cancer isn't even a remote
possibility.

   "Cancer is a general name for dozens and dozens of different diseases," says
Baker. "A cure for cancer is no longer a modern term anymore than is 'a cure for
infection.'

   "But we're convinced there are cures for cancers," he says, "and we have some
cures for some cancers. We can cure leukemia in children, testicular cancer in
young men, kidney cancers in babies. All of them were 100 per cent fatal 25
years ago. Patients now get them and get rid of them."

   But in the most common, most devastating cancers, the only progress has been
in extending life. Women with breast cancer live longer than they used to but
the cure rate hasn't improved.

   "We don't know why," says Baker. "We are excited by the clues but it's a
tough bottom line. We are spending a considerable number of research dollars on
what makes our Canadian population so susceptible to breast cancer."

   Surgery, radiation and chemotherapy have proved successful in fighting the
primary cancer tumors. The real killer is the process of metastasis - the
spreading of malignant cells from the tumor through the bloodstream and lymph
canals to other organs in the body.

   Researchers are also working to discover what it is about an individual that
makes him susceptible to cancer-causing agents. Despite the link with tobacco
smoke, most smokers don't get lung cancer.

   "It's something about ourselves that makes us susceptible," says Baker. "We
think it's in our genes but we don't know which ones. If we knew that, we could
then tell you that because of your genetic make-up, you are especially
susceptible to smoking or fats."

   The Terry Fox money has gone a long way to researching each of these thorny
problems, says Scholefield. The fund continues to grow every year from interest
and runs held every September across Canada.

   "Terry Fox has allowed us to expand our horizons," he says. "When we research
other diseases, we're forced to make decisions. But with this money, we can
begin new projects without cancelling others."

   "What we've produced in the last decade," he says, "are not cures but some
very interesting clues."


GRAPHIC: Chart: Cancer in Canadians


                              211 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                June 22, 1991, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1617 words

HEADLINE: Terry Fox's dream of cure for cancer still strong

BYLINE: By Elaine Carey Toronto Star

BODY:

   "Dreams are made if people try"

   - Terry Fox, Sept. 2, 1980

   * * *

   Terry Fox had a dream - that if every Canadian contributed $1 to cancer
research, the coffers would overflow and a cure would be found for the disease
that claimed his right leg when he was 18.

   His dream became, of course, the Marathon of Hope that began on April 12,
1980, when he dipped his artificial leg in the waters of St. John's harbor in
Newfoundland. And it ended suddenly near Thunder Bay on Sept. 1, 1980, when he
was forced to cut short his cross-Canada run because the cancer had reappeared,
this time in his lungs.

   Terry Fox died 10 years ago next week, on June 28, 1981, at the age of 22.
Thousands of Canadians from coast to coast cried that day, not wanting to
believe this heartless disease had struck down the brave young man who inspired
so many.

   The haunting vision of the handsome one-legged athlete, his face set in
determination as he ran alone down the country's highways, still lives with most
of us. His name, which became synonymous with courage, has to date raised more
than $90 million for cancer research, far beyond even his dreams.

   Yet a cure, or cures as we now know it must be, remains elusive.

   While there has been progress in treating some of the rare cancers, death
rates from the three most common forms - lung, breast and colon cancer - have
not gone down in the past 50 years. Lung cancer, particularly in women, is
increasing alarmingly because so many of this generation took up smoking.

   "In the really common cancers, the advances have been small and easily washed
out by the overwhelming magnitude of the problem," says Dr. Joseph Pater,
director of the National Cancer Institute's clinical trials program.

   Even where there are success stories, like the lower incidence of stomach and
cervical cancer, no one really knows why, anymore than they know why cancer
strikes certain people and not others or exactly when it starts or how.

   There are still far more questions than answers about the disease that will
strike 104,000 more people in Canada this year and kill more than half that
many.

   But the story of cancer research in the past decade is one of incredible
breakthroughs in understanding the genetic changes that cause cancer - much of
it done in Canada with money from the Terry Fox fund. And with that knowledge
comes the hope that it will soon be translated into successful treatment.

   One Toronto scientist, Dr. Victor Ling of

   the Ontario Cancer Institute, has won international awards for unlocking the
genetic key to why some people with cancer don't respond to chemotherapy while
others do.

   And our knowledge of the causes of some cancers - from smoking to fatty diets
to heredity - has grown enormously.

   "The advances in the past 10 years have really been spectacular. It borders
on science fiction and is literally mind boggling," says Dr. Bob Phillips, past
chairman of the research committee of the National Cancer Institute. "I think
the advances in the next 10 years are going to surpass all of the last 50
years."

   The revolutionary breakthrough has been the discovery that cancer is caused
by mutations in certain genes that produce proteins in cells. Scientists have
even identified the particular genes, called oncogenes, involved in many
cancers, including breast, lung and colon, which they hope will lead to the
first real advances in treating the three big killers.

   "In many ways, it's like the beginning years of antibiotics," Phillips says.
"We will eventually be able to target drugs to specific genes that are
defective. It's not yet happening but 10 years ago you couldn't even think about
that."

   Before drugs can be developed to attack those cancer-causing proteins,
science has to learn more about their structure and what they do. To understand
the complexity of the research, there are from 10,000 to 20,000 proteins working
together in each cell and, in a cancer cell, only three to five of them are bad.

   But in the past decade, scientists have learned to manipulate genes "the way
you play with Tinker Toys," says Phillips. They take them out of cells, alter
them, then put them back in again in their search for a cancer cure.

   One team of researchers at Mount Sinai Hospital injected mice cells with a
gene they suspected caused cancer and successfully produced a whole spectrum of
cancer tumors.

   And in the United States, researchers have begun clinical trials, using gene
therapy to treat cancer patients. They are inserting into their cells a gene
that produces a toxic substance that destroys the cancer cells. Normal cells
produce the cancer fighter but not in large enough quantities to kill it.

   "For someone educated like me in the late '60s, the kind of knowledge we have
now is mind boggling," says Dr. Ronald Buick, chief of research at the Ontario
Cancer Institute, the research arm of Princess Margaret Hospital.

   "Each month we see another example of a gene mutation. What's so encouraging
is that they're all related and so consistent and reproducible that I firmly
believe we will find these gene changes in all types of cancers."

   In another genetic breakthrough, Dr. Victor Ling discovered a protein that
cancer cells use to pump out a wide variety of toxic drugs used in chemotherapy.
If a cancer patient has that protein in his cells, the chemotherapy is
ineffective.

   The discovery was "one of the most important advances in cancer research in
the last decade," says Phillips. Now researchers world-wide are testing ways of
blocking the tiny protein pumps.

   Scientists have long known that certain things like tobacco smoke, radiation
and a whole range of chemicals increase your risk of getting cancer. Now they
know that what those agents do is increase the chances of certain genes
mutating.

   If all the causes of cancer were known, the best estimates are that it could
be reduced by about 75 per cent. The other 25 per cent occur spontaneously "and
you just couldn't avoid them if you lived in a bubble," Phillips says.

   But researchers now believe many of the unknown causes are in our diet. Fat
is now suspected to be the cause of breast and colon cancer but no one has yet
figured out why. It is the subject of one research project being conducted in
Toronto with money from the Terry Fox fund.

   "If I had to nominate the Number 1 contribution to the health of Canadians in
the last 25 years it's the evidence linking smoking and lung cancer," says
Baker. "I wish we had that strong an association with breast and colon cancer.
We're hoping fat is that link.

   "The link appears so strong that we should begin to tell the public. But how
do we do that in a way that changes behavior?"

   That is a new problem being tackled by Canadian researchers.

   The institute has just launched a major behavioral research study at a cost
of $2 million a year to try to determine how to change our behavior, since what
we do to ourselves is now estimated to cause 50 per cent of all cancers.

   "Thirty per cent of the population still smokes even though 99 per cent of
people would agree that it causes cancer," explains Dr. Peter Scholefield,
executive director of the cancer institute. "Many women don't have Papp tests
(for cervical cancer) and they don't do breast self- examinations. How do you
modify human behavior? We want to know.

   "The acid test, if we're successful, will be if we begin to reduce the
incidence and death rates of the major cancers."

   Researchers now know that a single cure for cancer isn't even a remote
possibility.

   "Cancer is a general name for dozens and dozens of different diseases," says
Baker. "A cure for cancer is no longer a modern term anymore than is 'a cure for
infection.'

   "But we're convinced there are cures for cancers," he says, "and we have some
cures for some cancers. We can cure leukemia in children, testicular cancer in
young men, kidney cancers in babies. All of them were 100 per cent fatal 25
years ago. Patients now get them and get rid of them."

   But in the most common, most devastating cancers, the only progress has been
in extending life. Women with breast cancer live longer than they used to but
the cure rate hasn't improved.

   "We don't know why," says Baker. "We are excited by the clues but it's a
tough bottom line. We are spending a considerable number of research dollars on
what makes our Canadian population so susceptible to breast cancer."

   Surgery, radiation and chemotherapy have proved successful in fighting the
primary cancer tumors. The real killer is the process of metastasis - the
spreading of malignant cells from the tumor through the bloodstream and lymph
canals to other organs in the body.

   Researchers are also working to discover what it is about an individual that
makes him susceptible to cancer-causing agents. Despite the link with tobacco
smoke, most smokers don't get lung cancer.

   "It's something about ourselves that makes us susceptible," says Baker. "We
think it's in our genes but we don't know which ones. If we knew that, we could
then tell you that because of your genetic make-up, you are especially
susceptible to smoking or fats."

   The Terry Fox money has gone a long way to researching each of these thorny
problems, says Scholefield. The fund continues to grow every year from interest
and runs held every September across Canada.

   "Terry Fox has allowed us to expand our horizons," he says. "When we research
other diseases, we're forced to make decisions. But with this money, we can
begin new projects without cancelling others."

   "What we've produced in the last decade," he says, "are not cures but some
very interesting clues."

GRAPHIC: Chart: Cancer in Canadianscancer; research; fundraising

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              212 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      May 21, 1991, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 305 words

HEADLINE: New cancer therapy to use patient's genes

BODY:

   A doctor who performed the first gene therapy for cancer says he will soon
begin a program to treat patients' malignant cells with their own genes.

   Dr. Steven Rosenberg said yesterday the approach, which involves inserting
new genes into tumor cells, is intended to marshal the body's own immune
defences.

   "We are at the birth of a new era in treating cancer through gene
modification," he said.

   The researcher at the U.S. National Cancer Institute said he had also
tentatively identified a gene that marks cancer cells as being different from
normal ones. If true, it could lead to the development of cancer vaccines for
healthy people.

   "This work is very exciting," said Dr. Harvey Golomb, president of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology.

   Rosenberg told the organization's annual scientific meeting he hopes to begin
the therapy on 50 patients in four or five months.

   Studies on lab animals suggest the tinkering makes these cells look foreign
to the body's immune system, which quickly kills them. In the process, this
alerts the body to ordinary tumor cells and the immune system destroys them as
well.

   So far, two patients have been treated, but it is too soon to assess the
success of the approach.

   In January, Rosenberg began the first experimental gene therapy for cancer.
Doctors removed cancer-fighting cells, called tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes,
from patients' tumors and inserted genes into them that allow the cells to
produce an anti-cancer protein known as tumor necrosis factor.

   When put back into the patient, doctors hope these supercharged cells will
zero in on cancer cells and kill them. So far, two patients have been treated,
but it is too soon to assess the success of the approach.

   Rosenberg said he hopes in four or five months to begin the therapy on 50
patients.



                              213 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      May 21, 1991, Tuesday, METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 362 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy program for cancer set to begin

DATELINE: HOUSTON

BODY:

   A doctor who performed the first gene therapy for cancer says he will soon
begin a program to treat patients' malignant cells with their own genes.

   Dr. Steven Rosenberg said yesterday the approach, which involves inserting
new genes into tumor cells, is intended to marshal the body's own immune
defences.

   "We are at the birth of a new era in treating cancer through gene
modification," he said.

   The researcher at the U.S. National Cancer Institute said he had also
tentatively identified a gene that marks cancer cells as being different from
normal ones. If true, it could lead to the development of cancer vaccines for
healthy people.

   "This work is very exciting," said Dr. Harvey Golomb, president of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology.

   Rosenberg presented his results at the organization's annual scientific
meeting.

   He has been a pioneer in the emerging field of biologic therapy, the idea of
arming the body to rally against cancer after - and even before - the disease
emerges and spreads.

   He developed the use of interleukin-2, a natural disease-fighting chemical,
to combat spreading melanoma skin cancer and kidney cancer.

   In January, he began the first experimental gene therapy for cancer. Doctors
removed cancer-fighting cells, called tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, from
patients' tumors and inserted genes into them that allow the cells to produce an
anti-cancer protein known as tumor necrosis factor.

   When put back into the patient, doctors hope these supercharged cells will
zero in on cancer cells and kill them. So far, two patients have been treated,
but it is too soon to assess the success of the approach.

   Rosenberg said he hopes in four or five months to begin the therapy on 50
patients.

   Studies on lab animals suggest the tinkering makes these cells look foreign
to the body's immune system, which quickly kills them. And in the process, this
alerts the body to ordinary tumor cells and the immune system destroys them, as
well.

   Rosenberg also said he believes he has found the first cancer antigen gene,
which makes a chemical marker on the surface of cancer cells identifying the
tumor as foreign.



                              214 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                      May 21, 1991, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 314 words

HEADLINE: New cancer therapy to use patient's genes

BODY:

   HOUSTON (AP) - A doctor who performed the first gene therapy for cancer says
he will soon begin a program to treat patients' malignant cells with their own
genes.

   Dr. Steven Rosenberg said yesterday the approach, which involves inserting
new genes into tumor cells, is intended to marshal the body's own immune
defences.

   "We are at the birth of a new era in treating cancer through gene
modification," he said.

   The researcher at the U.S. National Cancer Institute said he had also
tentatively identified a gene that marks cancer cells as being different from
normal ones. If true, it could lead to the development of cancer vaccines for
healthy people.

   "This work is very exciting," said Dr. Harvey Golomb, president of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology.

   Rosenberg told the organization's annual scientific meeting he hopes to begin
the therapy on 50 patients in four or five months.

   Studies on lab animals suggest the tinkering makes these cells look foreign
to the body's immune system, which quickly kills them. In the process, this
alerts the body to ordinary tumor cells and the immune system destroys them as
well.

   So far, two patients have been treated, but it is too soon to assess the
success of the approach.

   In January, Rosenberg began the first experimental gene therapy for cancer.
Doctors removed cancer-fighting cells, called tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes,
from patients' tumors and inserted genes into them that allow the cells to
produce an anti-cancer protein known as tumor necrosis factor.

   When put back into the patient, doctors hope these supercharged cells will
zero in on cancer cells and kill them. So far, two patients have been treated,
but it is too soon to assess the success of the approach.

   Rosenberg said he hopes in four or five months to begin the therapy on 50
patients.genetics; research; cancer

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              215 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                           May 21, 1991, Tuesday, ME2

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 370 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy program for cancer set to begin

DATELINE: HOUSTON

BODY:

   HOUSTON (AP) - A doctor who performed the first gene therapy for cancer says
he will soon begin a program to treat patients' malignant cells with their own
genes.

   Dr. Steven Rosenberg said yesterday the approach, which involves inserting
new genes into tumor cells, is intended to marshal the body's own immune
defences.

   "We are at the birth of a new era in treating cancer through gene
modification," he said.

   The researcher at the U.S. National Cancer Institute said he had also
tentatively identified a gene that marks cancer cells as being different from
normal ones. If true, it could lead to the development of cancer vaccines for
healthy people.

   "This work is very exciting," said Dr. Harvey Golomb, president of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology.

   Rosenberg presented his results at the organization's annual scientific
meeting.

   He has been a pioneer in the emerging field of biologic therapy, the idea of
arming the body to rally against cancer after - and even before - the disease
emerges and spreads.

   He developed the use of interleukin-2, a natural disease-fighting chemical,
to combat spreading melanoma skin cancer and kidney cancer.

   In January, he began the first experimental gene therapy for cancer. Doctors
removed cancer-fighting cells, called tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, from
patients' tumors and inserted genes into them that allow the cells to produce an
anti-cancer protein known as tumor necrosis factor.

   When put back into the patient, doctors hope these supercharged cells will
zero in on cancer cells and kill them. So far, two patients have been treated,
but it is too soon to assess the success of the approach.

   Rosenberg said he hopes in four or five months to begin the therapy on 50
patients.

   Studies on lab animals suggest the tinkering makes these cells look foreign
to the body's immune system, which quickly kills them. And in the process, this
alerts the body to ordinary tumor cells and the immune system destroys them, as
well.

   Rosenberg also said he believes he has found the first cancer antigen gene,
which makes a chemical marker on the surface of cancer cells identifying the
tumor as foreign.cancer; research; genetics

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              216 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     May 16, 1991, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A30

LENGTH: 418 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy normalizes life for girl with immune disorder

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   NEW YORK (AP) - A 4-year-old girl once confined to her house because she was
defenceless against infections is going ice skating and taking dancing lessons
after becoming the first recipient of gene-replacement therapy.

   Her parents now feel comfortable allowing her out of the house, said one of
the girl's doctors, Kenneth Culver of the National Institutes of Health in
Bethesda, Md., where she is being treated.

   The child suffers from the disorder that afflicted David, the "bubble boy" of
Houston. He spent his life inside plastic enclosures intended to isolate him
from germs and died in 1984 at age 12, when a bone-marrow transplant failed to
correct his condition.

   Culver said the girl's parents have also allowed her older sister to begin
attending kindergarten. Before the gene therapy, the child's mother and siblings
had also confined themselves to the house to avoid bringing home infections that
could threaten the child. A common cold could have been fatal.

   Culver declined to release detailed scientific information on the girl's
progress pending a thorough evaluation in June. The child, who lives in Ohio,
returns to the institute twice a month for treatment, he said. Her name and
hometown have not been disclosed.

   "We know we're doing something positive," Culver said yesterday at a news
conference sponsored by the March of Dimes. His brief update on the child's
condition is the most optimistic assessment her doctors have yet provided.

   The child was born with a mutation in a single gene that left her without an
immune system to protect against disease.

   In an experiment begun Sept. 14, some of the child's blood cells were
removed, injected with normal copies of the damaged gene and returned to her
bloodstream.

   The normal genes began to trigger production of a missing enzyme that is
critical to the function of the immune system. The levels of the enzyme in her
blood are now up to 25 per cent of normal, said Culver.

   In some people, as little as 10 per cent of normal enzyme levels is enough to
allow normal function of the immune system, Culver said.

   Another indication that her immune system is working is that her body has
begun making antibodies against blood types other than her own. That occurs in
normal individuals, but, until the treatment, those antibodies were absent in
the child's system, Culver said.

   Culver cautioned that researchers cannot yet determine the precise extent of
the girl's recovery.United; States; genetics

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              217 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     April 19, 1991, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A23

LENGTH: 161 words

HEADLINE: Scientists test new treatment for cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: Reuter

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (Reuter) - U.S. and French scientists said yesterday they were
pursuing an innovative treatment for cystic fibrosis and hereditary emphysema,
the two most common fatal hereditary diseases in North America and Europe.

   The researchers said the new approach, which relies on a genetically
engineered cold virus, already has been successfully tested in laboratory
animals against hereditary emphysema.

   And they said preliminary studies show the same strategy to be feasible
against cystic fibrosis.

   "It's a new approach to gene therapy," added Dr. Ronald Crystal of the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, a component of the U.S. National
Institutes of Health.

   Crystal led a team of scientists from the NIH, the Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique Unite Associee in Cedex, France, and Transgene SA in
Strasbourg, France.

   Their work is to be published in today's Science magazine.United; States;
genetics; research

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              218 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                        January 30, 1991, Wednesday, ONT

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A24

LENGTH: 248 words

HEADLINE: Two cancer patients treated with genetically altered cells

BYLINE: (AP)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (AP) - Two patients deemed likely to die have become the first to
be treated for cancer using genetically altered cells to attack their tumors,
the National Institutes of Health says.

   Dr. Steven Rosenberg, a National Cancer Institute physician who developed the
gene therapy technique, identified the pair only as a 29-year-old woman and a
42-year-old man.

   He said they were transfused yesterday with tumor-fighting blood cells that
had been removed from their bodies, genetically altered, then reinjected.

   "They have tolerated the treatment well and are doing fine," Rosenberg said.
"It's going to be one to two months before we know if it is helping these
patients."

   Both of the patients are in advanced stages of melanoma - a skin cancer
thought to be caused by excessive exposure to the sun, particularly at a young
age.

   It can spread rapidly throughout the body, causing tumors that grow without
restraint, and usually cannot be successfully treated once it becomes
widespread.

   Rosenberg said neither patient had responded to other types of therapy and
they normally would have only a short time to live.

   The cells that were injected into the patients had been altered by the
insertion of a gene that causes the cells to produce tumor necrosis factor, or
TNF, a powerful natural anti-tumor toxin.

   The two patients are the first of 50 who will receive the trial gene therapy
over the next year, he said.United; States; cancer; research

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              219 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1991 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   January 24, 1991, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: Team finds 'milestone' synthetic gene

BYLINE: (AP)

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   NEW YORK (AP) - A team of scientists in Houston has made a synthetic form of
the gene linked to the most severe kind of muscular dystrophy, a "milestone"
step toward gene therapy for the disease.

   In the latest discovery from the United States, a new synthetic gene, made
from mouse genetic material, was shown to work in experimental cells.

   Scientists said the accomplishment would increase the chances of treating
Duchenne dystrophy.

   "It's a milestone," said genetics researcher Ronald Worton of the Hospital
for Sick Children in Toronto and the University of Toronto.

   In 1988, Worton directed researchers at the hospital in their discovery of
part of the gene that causes Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the most severe form
of this crippling disorder.

   The newly discovered synthetic gene would work by supplying muscle cells with
a functioning version of the gene. Duchenne appears when people lack a
functioning version.

   The work is presented in the latest issue of the British journal Nature by
Cheng Chi Lee, Thomas Caskey and others at the Baylor College of Medicine and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute in Houston.

   But creating the gene is still "a long way from putting it into a patient,"
said Louis Kunkel of Children's Hospital in Boston, Harvard Medical School and
the Hughes institute there.

   The synthetic gene, like its natural counterpart, tells cells how to make a
protein called dystrophin. In Duchenne dystrophy, a lack of that protein makes
muscles waste away.

   Researchers in Quebec city, Montreal and three U.S. cities have been showing
some progress using another method of fighting the disease.

   They have been injecting muscle cells into boys with Duchenne muscular
dystrophy. The cells have been taken from the boys' relatives.

   Preliminary results are encouraging from Dr. Jacques Trembly's team at
Hospital Enfant-Jesus and Laval University in Quebec city and from a Montreal
team led by Dr. George Karpati.United; States; genetics; research; medicine

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              220 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                        December 18, 1990, Tuesday, ONT

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 292 words

HEADLINE: New genes working for girl, 4 scientists say

BYLINE: (SPECIAL)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (Special) - The first human gene therapy, in which researchers are
trying to repair a child's defective immune system, seems to be working,
scientists have told a U.S. Food and Drug Administration review panel.

   After three months of treatment, the 4-year-old girl's immune system has
become virtually normal for the first time, said Michael Blaese of the National
Cancer Institute, one of the researchers.

   And, so far, there have been no harmful side effects from the treatment, the
researchers say.

   "These are just the first preliminary results, but we are certainly excited
about them," said French Anderson of the U.S. National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute.

   Although the child's disorder is rare, gene therapy, in which new genes are
inserted in the cells of patients to perform functions missing in their own
genes, could become a vital therapy for illnesses as common as heart disease,
cancer and even AIDS.

   The girl, whose family has not permitted release of her name, is to continue
receiving infusions of genetically altered cells for another three months.

   Then the researchers will conduct a comprehensive evaluation of her immune
system.

   The child was born with a defective gene that prevented her body from making
an enzyme known as ADA. Without the enzyme, a toxin built up in her blood,
killing her T cells, a type of white blood cell that plays a central role in the
body's defence against infections.

   Whether the treatment will bring normal functioning to the girl's immune
system has yet to be proved, but there are hints that she is now able to fight
off bacteria and viruses.

   "She has had only one cold (since treatment started)," Blaese said.

   WASHINGTON POSTgenetics; research

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              221 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    November 16, 1990, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: Bourassa's cancer starts talk over Quebec's future

BYLINE: By Eloise Morin Toronto Star

BODY:

   Reports that Premier Robert Bourassa has a potentially lethal form of skin
cancer are raising questions about his political career and Quebec's future.

   Rumors started after he had a two-hour operation at a U.S. hospital Sept. 12
to remove a malignant tumor from his lower back.

   But speculation reached fever pitch yesterday after reports that he has
malignant melanoma.

   Melanoma is the rarest and most dangerous form of skin cancer. It spreads
through the body via the blood or lymphatic system but is curable if it's
removed before that happens.

   The 57-year-old premier's office hotly denies he has gone to the National
Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., because it offers a revolutionary form of
gene therapy for advanced malignant melanoma.

   "That is completely untrue," said Sylvie Godin, Bourassa's press secretary.

   "He is undergoing tests all week and we won't know anything until we get a
report on the state of his health."

   She would not confirm he has melanoma.

   Bourassa's absence from the Belanger-Campeau commission examining Quebec's
future also is raising questions.

   Should Bourassa falter, it's widely believed the lead role on the
Constitution will fall to Public Security Minister Claude Ryan and, to a lesser
extent, Intergovernmental Affairs Minister Gil Remillard.

   "The key person will be Ryan, but if Ryan and Remillard get together on
something, that's going to be even more powerful," said Pierre Fournier, a
political scientist at the University of Quebec in Montreal.

   In his 11 years as premier, Bourassa has come to be known as a man obsessed
with polls and winning the next election.

   If his health is truly failing, it could make him shift from short-term
priorities to the larger question of his place in history, said political
scientist Daniel Latouche.

   "Politicians change a great deal when this kind of thing happens," said
Latouche of the University of Quebec in Montreal.

   * With files from Southam News




                              222 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    November 16, 1990, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 332 words

HEADLINE: Bourassa's cancer starts talk over Quebec's future

BYLINE: By Eloise Morin Toronto Star

BODY:

   QUEBEC CITY - Reports that Premier Robert Bourassa has a potentially lethal
form of skin cancer are raising questions about his political career and
Quebec's future.

   Rumors started after he had a two-hour operation at a U.S. hospital Sept. 12
to remove a malignant tumor from his lower back.

   But speculation reached fever pitch yesterday after reports that he has
malignant melanoma.

   Melanoma is the rarest and most dangerous form of skin cancer. It spreads
through the body via the blood or lymphatic system but is curable if it's
removed before that happens.

   The 57-year-old premier's office hotly denies he has gone to the National
Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., because it offers a revolutionary form of
gene therapy for advanced malignant melanoma.

   "That is completely untrue," said Sylvie Godin, Bourassa's press secretary.

   "He is undergoing tests all week and we won't know anything until we get a
report on the state of his health."

   She would not confirm he has melanoma.

   Bourassa's absence from the Belanger-Campeau commission examining Quebec's
future also is raising questions.

   Should Bourassa falter, it's widely believed the lead role on the
Constitution will fall to Public Security Minister Claude Ryan and, to a lesser
extent, Intergovernmental Affairs Minister Gil Remillard.

   "The key person will be Ryan, but if Ryan and Remillard get together on
something, that's going to be even more powerful," said Pierre Fournier, a
political scientist at the University of Quebec in Montreal.

   In his 11 years as premier, Bourassa has come to be known as a man obsessed
with polls and winning the next election.

   If his health is truly failing, it could make him shift from short-term
priorities to the larger question of his place in history, said political
scientist Daniel Latouche.

   "Politicians change a great deal when this kind of thing happens," said
Latouche of the University of Quebec in Montreal.

   * With files from Southam News

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              223 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   November 15, 1990, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 412 words

HEADLINE: Bourassa has deadly form of skin cancer, report says

BYLINE: by Nicholas Regush SPECIAL TO THE STAR

DATELINE: MONTREAL

BODY:

   Quebec Premier Robert Bourassa has malignant melanoma, the most dangerous
form of skin cancer, a medical source familiar with the premier's case says.

   Doctors at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., a world leader in
cancer research and treatment, are conducting tests to see whether the premier's
cancer has spread to other parts of his body, the source said.

   "It's well established the premier has a melanoma, but he is under
investigation for what stage it is at," the source said.

   Medical experts interviewed yesterday said if the cancer has spread, Bourassa
might become a candidate for a new treatment program - involving an experimental
process called gene therapy - that was announced this week by the institute.

   Bourassa arrived at the suburban Washington, D.C., medical centre Monday.

   The premier and his office have refused to identify the type of cancer the
premier has. His office said this week's tests were a scheduled follow-up to a
two-hour operation Sept. 12 to remove a malignant skin tumor on his lower back.

   According to cancer experts, if a malignant melanoma tumor isn't deep in the
body at the time of its discovery, it often can be removed before the cancer
spreads.

   If removed in time, the operation would, in most cases, put an end to the
disease.

   However, if the cancer invades other parts of the body, death is likely in
most cases, because a melanoma that spreads resists all conventional forms of
treatment such as chemotherapy and radiation.

   Details of Bourassa's case and why the premier waited to have the tumor
removed are sketchy.

   "There's a sense that there was more of the tumor than was expected," said
one Montreal cancer expert, who asked not to be named.

   There are three main types of skin cancer - basal cell carcinoma, squamous
cell carcinoma and malignant melanoma.

   Malignant melanoma, the least frequent and most dangerous type, causes a
brown or black spot, usually on areas not normally exposed to the sun.

   Treatments to boost the immune system to attack advanced cancers, including
melanoma, have been pioneered at the National Cancer Institute, but there have
been no major advances with these therapies.

   Gene therapy, the experimental process unveiled by the institute, infuses
patients with genetically engineered blood cells which are custom-made to target
and destroy tumors.

   The institute is the only clinic in the world to offer such therapy.

   MONTREAL GAZETTE


GRAPHIC: photo Robert Bourassa


                              224 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   November 15, 1990, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 414 words

HEADLINE: Bourassa has deadly form of skin cancer, report says

BYLINE: by Nicholas Regush SPECIAL TO THE STAR

DATELINE: MONTREAL

BODY:

   MONTREAL - Quebec Premier Robert Bourassa has malignant melanoma, the most
dangerous form of skin cancer, a medical source familiar with the premier's case
says.

   Doctors at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., a world leader in
cancer research and treatment, are conducting tests to see whether the premier's
cancer has spread to other parts of his body, the source said.

   "It's well established the premier has a melanoma, but he is under
investigation for what stage it is at," the source said.

   Medical experts interviewed yesterday said if the cancer has spread, Bourassa
might become a candidate for a new treatment program - involving an experimental
process called gene therapy - that was announced this week by the institute.

   Bourassa arrived at the suburban Washington, D.C., medical centre Monday.

   The premier and his office have refused to identify the type of cancer the
premier has. His office said this week's tests were a scheduled follow-up to a
two-hour operation Sept. 12 to remove a malignant skin tumor on his lower back.

   According to cancer experts, if a malignant melanoma tumor isn't deep in the
body at the time of its discovery, it often can be removed before the cancer
spreads.

   If removed in time, the operation would, in most cases, put an end to the
disease.

   However, if the cancer invades other parts of the body, death is likely in
most cases, because a melanoma that spreads resists all conventional forms of
treatment such as chemotherapy and radiation.

   Details of Bourassa's case and why the premier waited to have the tumor
removed are sketchy.

   "There's a sense that there was more of the tumor than was expected," said
one Montreal cancer expert, who asked not to be named.

   There are three main types of skin cancer - basal cell carcinoma, squamous
cell carcinoma and malignant melanoma.

   Malignant melanoma, the least frequent and most dangerous type, causes a
brown or black spot, usually on areas not normally exposed to the sun.

   Treatments to boost the immune system to attack advanced cancers, including
melanoma, have been pioneered at the National Cancer Institute, but there have
been no major advances with these therapies.

   Gene therapy, the experimental process unveiled by the institute, infuses
patients with genetically engineered blood cells which are custom-made to target
and destroy tumors.

   The institute is the only clinic in the world to offer such therapy.

   MONTREAL GAZETTE

GRAPHIC: photo Robert BourassaRobert; Bourassa; cancer

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              225 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    October 26, 1990, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LETTER; Pg. A26

LENGTH: 77 words

HEADLINE: Defective genes a forgotten factor

BODY:


    I read with great interest David Suzuki's article, Debate needed on genetic
engineering (Oct. 20). He asked many simple questions. However, he forgot to ask
what will happen to the gene pool that is normally culled in the natural
process, but now is kept in the human population due to our interference.

   We are so enamored of genetic therapy that we forget those defective genes
can be passed to the next generation.

   R.H. HO

   Richmond Hill




                              226 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    October 26, 1990, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LETTER; Pg. A26

LENGTH: 77 words

HEADLINE: Defective genes a forgotten factor

BODY:

   I read with great interest David Suzuki's article, Debate needed on genetic
engineering (Oct. 20). He asked many simple questions. However, he forgot to ask
what will happen to the gene pool that is normally culled in the natural
process, but now is kept in the human population due to our interference.

   We are so enamored of genetic therapy that we forget those defective genes
can be passed to the next generation.

   R.H. HO

   Richmond Hill

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              227 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   September 21, 1990, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 377 words

HEADLINE: Cystic fibrosis discovery hailed as a major step

BYLINE: By Marilyn Dunlop Toronto Star

BODY:


    Canadian and U.S. researchers have made a major step toward eventually
correcting the genetic flaw that causes cystic fibrosis.

   Toronto scientists at the Hospital for Sick Children built a healthy version
of the cystic fibrosis gene, which colleagues in Michigan inserted into cystic
fibrosis cells in a laboratory dish.

   The cells were later analyzed by scientists in Alabama. They determined the
made-in-Canada gene worked and corrected the defect in the other cells.

   Cystic fibrosis is an incurable disorder that affects the lungs and digestive
tract. Cells with a defective cystic fibrosis gene cannot move chloride and
other salts properly. As a result, thick mucus accumulates in the lungs and
pancreas.

   However, the latest breakthrough is not a cure. Doctors can only make the
correction in a test tube, not in body cells.

   But the research has shown it may one day be possible to treat patients by
means of gene therapy. It also opens the door to the development of drugs that
could effectively treat cystic fibrosis.

   Although many people with the disease now live to adulthood, cystic fibrosis
still kills more Canadian children than any other genetic disease. One in every
20 Caucasians is a carrier of the faulty gene.

   "None of us expected our scientists to move along this fast," said Phil Wall,
president of the Canadian Cystic Fibrosis Society.

   The cystic fibrosis gene was first identified in August, 1989, by a team led
by Dr. Lap-Chee Tsui at the Hospital for Sick Children, along with Dr. Francis
Collins at the University of Michigan.

   In cells got from people with cystic fibrosis, scientists found a small flaw
in the gene. Recently, after six months of work, Tsui and colleague Dr. Johanna
Rommens were able to produce a replica of the healthy gene.

   Tsui said yesterday building the gene was more complex than anticipated and
involved a number of technical hurdles.

   The new research, reported today in the scientific journal Cell, provides
proof cystic fibrosis is caused by a defect in a single gene. Until now, it was
not known whether other genes were involved besides the one identified in
Toronto last year. The healthy gene corrected the defect by telling cells how to
produce a particular substance.



                              228 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   September 21, 1990, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A25

LENGTH: 743 words

HEADLINE: is the body politic ready for 'genetic therapy?'

BYLINE: By Stepehn Connor

BODY:


    LAST WEEK in the United States, a little girl took a giant step into the
future.

   The 4-year-old became the first person ever to receive gene therapy. If it
succeeds, the science of medicine will never be the same.

   Of the 100,000 genes in the child's body cells, one doesn't function as it
should. As a result, she is almost unable to fight off most infections.

   Doctors hope to restore immunity by injecting her with working copies of the
gene.

   No one knows if it will work, but scientists do know what they are up against
in gene therapy. They must find the defective gene, and the correct dose to
replace it. The new genes must find their way to the right shelf in the cell's
genetic library, without disturbing the operation of nearby genes.

   Although this new therapy has been in the works for more than 10 years, its
development has been slowed by nervous government regulation. Why be so
cautious?

   Our genes control or influence many of our traits, ranging from eye color to
emotions. If science can routinely alter genes, it will give us awesome power to
change the generations to come.

   But behind this dream of the future lurks the memory of the past. Nazi
medicine used the monstrous technique of genocide in the quest for a genetic
superman. And some American experiments and legal opinions in the past hundred
years betrayed a questionable urge to "improve" humanity.

   It is one thing to attempt to cure a critically ill child, quite another to
use gene therapy to "improve" intelligence, strength or height. Different eras
and societies have different ideas about what is healthy or sick, attractive or
ugly, normal or abnormal. As individuals we may be tolerant, but our society may
have different ideas.

   We are amused now by the fact that, 700 years ago, some European thinkers
defined womanhood in terms of disease. However, only a few years ago, a
satirical song with the line "short people got no reason to live" caused a great
outcry. Could that incident betray our society's uncertainties about what is
healthy or normal?

   Is short stature a "sickness" to be "treated?" Or is it part of the diversity
that makes humanity so unique and interesting?

   Questions like this must be raised and tackled now, while gene therapy is in
its infancy. And the discussion must involve all of us.

   The alternative is that a handful of scientists and citizens will be left to
decide which genes should be treated, and which human traits are acceptable or
not.

   However, not only broad social issues must be discussed, but also the needs
of individual, often desperate patients. Little is known about what happens in
the body when gene therapy is attempted. In the words of the doctor who
supervised last week's procedure, "it's a total black box."

   That's probably to be expected in daring medical experimentation. The
physical risk can be reduced; for example, by careful laboratory testing before
it is attempted on humans.

   But there are ethical risks as well. Researchers must be certain that every
attempt has been made to let patients give informed consent to gene therapy.
Given the uncertainty of the outcome, that will not be an easy task.

   In addition, the rights of individual patients must not be swamped by what is
seen to be good for society in general.

   Genetic diseases are costly. They account for a high percentage of admissions
to pediatric wards and perhaps a third of infant deaths. In the race to cut
health-care costs, gene therapy researchers could experience subtle political
pressure to pursue their work.

   This could lead, even without their knowing it, to pressure upon vulnerable
patients. Researchers can be vigilant and resist, but their task is made easier
if all of us protect pioneering patients by refusing to think of them as
sacrificial lambs.

   Good medical therapy benefits the patient first and then the rest of society.
Anything else is unethical, because it uses one person solely to benefit others.

   When too many people find it easy to say, "it's not important if the
patient's dying anyway," the boundary between ethical and unethical research is
more easily crossed.

   Perhaps it is good that the first gene therapy patient is a child. Because,
if this new medical marvel develops hand in hand with renewed concern for the
weak, generations to come will truly have reason to admire us.

   * Stephen Connor is a Toronto writer and lecturer specializing in medical
ethics.



                              229 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   September 21, 1990, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 383 words

HEADLINE: Cystic fibrosis discovery hailed as a major step

BYLINE: By Marilyn Dunlop Toronto Star

BODY:

   Canadian and U.S. researchers have made a major step toward eventually
correcting the genetic flaw that causes cystic fibrosis.

   Toronto scientists at the Hospital for Sick Children built a healthy version
of the cystic fibrosis gene, which colleagues in Michigan inserted into cystic
fibrosis cells in a laboratory dish.

   The cells were later analyzed by scientists in Alabama. They determined the
made-in-Canada gene worked and corrected the defect in the other cells.

   Cystic fibrosis is an incurable disorder that affects the lungs and digestive
tract. Cells with a defective cystic fibrosis gene cannot move chloride and
other salts properly. As a result, thick mucus accumulates in the lungs and
pancreas.

   However, the latest breakthrough is not a cure. Doctors can only make the
correction in a test tube, not in body cells.

   But the research has shown it may one day be possible to treat patients by
means of gene therapy. It also opens the door to the development of drugs that
could effectively treat cystic fibrosis.

   Although many people with the disease now live to adulthood, cystic fibrosis
still kills more Canadian children than any other genetic disease. One in every
20 Caucasians is a carrier of the faulty gene.

   "None of us expected our scientists to move along this fast," said Phil Wall,
president of the Canadian Cystic Fibrosis Society.

   The cystic fibrosis gene was first identified in August, 1989, by a team led
by Dr. Lap-Chee Tsui at the Hospital for Sick Children, along with Dr. Francis
Collins at the University of Michigan.

   In cells got from people with cystic fibrosis, scientists found a small flaw
in the gene. Recently, after six months of work, Tsui and colleague Dr. Johanna
Rommens were able to produce a replica of the healthy gene.

   Tsui said yesterday building the gene was more complex than anticipated and
involved a number of technical hurdles.

   The new research, reported today in the scientific journal Cell, provides
proof cystic fibrosis is caused by a defect in a single gene. Until now, it was
not known whether other genes were involved besides the one identified in
Toronto last year. The healthy gene corrected the defect by telling cells how to
produce a particular substance.genetics; medicine; research

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              230 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   September 21, 1990, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A25

LENGTH: 748 words

HEADLINE: is the body politic ready for 'genetic therapy?'

BYLINE: By Stepehn Connor

BODY:

   LAST WEEK in the United States, a little girl took a giant step into the
future.

   The 4-year-old became the first person ever to receive gene therapy. If it
succeeds, the science of medicine will never be the same.

   Of the 100,000 genes in the child's body cells, one doesn't function as it
should. As a result, she is almost unable to fight off most infections.

   Doctors hope to restore immunity by injecting her with working copies of the
gene.

   No one knows if it will work, but scientists do know what they are up against
in gene therapy. They must find the defective gene, and the correct dose to
replace it. The new genes must find their way to the right shelf in the cell's
genetic library, without disturbing the operation of nearby genes.

   Although this new therapy has been in the works for more than 10 years, its
development has been slowed by nervous government regulation. Why be so
cautious?

   Our genes control or influence many of our traits, ranging from eye color to
emotions. If science can routinely alter genes, it will give us awesome power to
change the generations to come.

   But behind this dream of the future lurks the memory of the past. Nazi
medicine used the monstrous technique of genocide in the quest for a genetic
superman. And some American experiments and legal opinions in the past hundred
years betrayed a questionable urge to "improve" humanity.

   It is one thing to attempt to cure a critically ill child, quite another to
use gene therapy to "improve" intelligence, strength or height. Different eras
and societies have different ideas about what is healthy or sick, attractive or
ugly, normal or abnormal. As individuals we may be tolerant, but our society may
have different ideas.

   We are amused now by the fact that, 700 years ago, some European thinkers
defined womanhood in terms of disease. However, only a few years ago, a
satirical song with the line "short people got no reason to live" caused a great
outcry. Could that incident betray our society's uncertainties about what is
healthy or normal?

   Is short stature a "sickness" to be "treated?" Or is it part of the diversity
that makes humanity so unique and interesting?

   Questions like this must be raised and tackled now, while gene therapy is in
its infancy. And the discussion must involve all of us.

   The alternative is that a handful of scientists and citizens will be left to
decide which genes should be treated, and which human traits are acceptable or
not.

   However, not only broad social issues must be discussed, but also the needs
of individual, often desperate patients. Little is known about what happens in
the body when gene therapy is attempted. In the words of the doctor who
supervised last week's procedure, "it's a total black box."

   That's probably to be expected in daring medical experimentation. The
physical risk can be reduced; for example, by careful laboratory testing before
it is attempted on humans.

   But there are ethical risks as well. Researchers must be certain that every
attempt has been made to let patients give informed consent to gene therapy.
Given the uncertainty of the outcome, that will not be an easy task.

   In addition, the rights of individual patients must not be swamped by what is
seen to be good for society in general.

   Genetic diseases are costly. They account for a high percentage of admissions
to pediatric wards and perhaps a third of infant deaths. In the race to cut
health-care costs, gene therapy researchers could experience subtle political
pressure to pursue their work.

   This could lead, even without their knowing it, to pressure upon vulnerable
patients. Researchers can be vigilant and resist, but their task is made easier
if all of us protect pioneering patients by refusing to think of them as
sacrificial lambs.

   Good medical therapy benefits the patient first and then the rest of society.
Anything else is unethical, because it uses one person solely to benefit others.

   When too many people find it easy to say, "it's not important if the
patient's dying anyway," the boundary between ethical and unethical research is
more easily crossed.

   Perhaps it is good that the first gene therapy patient is a child. Because,
if this new medical marvel develops hand in hand with renewed concern for the
weak, generations to come will truly have reason to admire us.

   * Stephen Connor is a Toronto writer and lecturer specializing in medical
ethics.genetics; medicine; ethics

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              231 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                   September 2, 1990, Sunday, SUNDAY EDITION

SECTION: INSIGHT; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 860 words

HEADLINE: Dawn of new era in fighting cancer? Breakthrough in gene therapy may
lead to cure for immune system diseases, too

BYLINE: by Marilyn Dunlop Toronto Star

BODY:


    Scientists have shown for the first time that they can safely put a new gene
into the cells of sick people, opening the door to a new approach in fighting
cancer and providing a possible cure for some genetic diseases.

   "We hope this is the dawning of an era," Dr. W. French Anderson said when he
was given the green light to start clinical trials.

   So far, inserting new genes into cells has not been used as treatment. It has
just been given a trial run in a handful of patients.

   But now that researchers have demonstrated it is possible and causes no harm,
they are ready to try gene therapy on patients.

   The first people to undergo gene therapy as treatment for their diseases -
probably this fall - will be a few cancer patients and five children with a
genetic condition that disables their immune systems, leaving them defenceless
against infections.

   The results of the trial run on the first five people were published last
week in the New England Journal of Medicine. The trial was conducted by a team
of researchers led by Dr. Steven Rosenberg, chief of surgery at the United
States National Cancer Institute in Washington, which called it a "landmark
study."

   During research, doctors collected the white blood cells that fight cancer
from five patients suffering from melanoma, a lethal form of skin cancer.

   In the laboratory, a new gene was inserted into these cancer-fighting cells.
The gene was carried into the genetic material of the cells by a virus, which
had been deactivated so it wouldn't cause infection.

   Researchers returned the altered cells to the patients and found that cells
containing the new gene could be detected in the bloodstream for up to two
months, meaning the experiment was a success.

   Rosenberg says the research team is now ready to insert into cells a gene
that can combat cancer. The gene orders cells to produce a toxic substance
called tumor necrosis factor, which can destroy cancer cells.

   The body normally produces tumor necrosis factor in exceedingly small
amounts, not enough to combat cancer successfully. It uses it to regulate the
immune system and to respond to injuries.

   It is highly potent, but could not be given as a drug because it also causes
severe weight loss.

   Rosenberg has said that when the gene is inserted, normal white cells, called
tumor-infiltrating cells, produce up to 100 times more tumor necrosis factor.
Such cells go to cancer tumors and carry high doses of the toxin into the tumors
without attacking healthy tissue.

   Gene therapy for children who lack immune systems, a rare condition called
severe combined immune deficiency, will be directed by Anderson. The condition
is also known as "bubble boy disease" because of the widely publicized case of
David, a Texan who spent his life in a series of sterile, plastic bubbles
because he had no immune system.

   David died at age 12 in 1984 from infection, soon after he was taken out of
his protective bubble for a bone marrow transplant.

   Children with "bubble-boy disease" are born with a defective gene that causes
them to lack an enzyme, adenosine deaminase, commonly called ADA. Treatment
today involves a bone marrow transplant to give the young patients a new,
healthy supply of blood cells that have the ADA gene.

   A new treatment recently given approval is also quite effective, doctors say.
It involves supplying the missing enzyme by means of a drug called PEG-ADA.

   There are probably only 20 children in the world who might benefit from being
given ADA genes through the new therapy because they cannot undergo transplants.

   Anderson and his colleagues, who were given permission in July to test ADA
gene therapy in patients, plan to try it in five children who are being treated
with PEG-ADA.

   They will continue receiving the drug in addition to gene therapy because
doctors say it would be unethical to switch children from a treatment that works
reasonably well to an unknown therapy.

   Anderson has been working for six years on ADA gene research and he believes
it can work.

   "But nobody knows what may happen when a human therapeutic gene enters the
body of a human being," he said. "It's a total black box."

   At Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children, Dr. Chaim Roifman, head of clinical
immunology, says two patients who were born lacking the immune enzyme are being
treated here. One is on PEG-ADA drug therapy while the other is recovering from
a bone marrow transplant.

   But he would not recommend that either of them take part in the gene study
yet. "We'd rather wait a couple of years and see how it (the gene therapy)
goes," he says.

   ADA deficiency is the first genetic disease in which gene therapy will be
tested because it is less complicated than most other genetic diseases. It is
caused by a single gene defect and the repair can be made in blood cells that
can be taken out of the body and returned.

   Repairing the genetic material in cells that form solid tissue in the body
will be tougher.

   But this first attempt to replace bad genes with good ones to eliminate a
disease could lead to cures for many other of some 3,000 known genetic
conditions.


GRAPHIC: File photo Toronto Star : Boy in Bubble


                              232 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                September 2, 1990, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: INSIGHT; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 860 words

HEADLINE: Dawn of new era in fighting cancer? Breakthrough in gene therapy may
lead to cure for immune system diseases, too

BYLINE: by Marilyn Dunlop Toronto Star

BODY:

   Scientists have shown for the first time that they can safely put a new gene
into the cells of sick people, opening the door to a new approach in fighting
cancer and providing a possible cure for some genetic diseases.

   "We hope this is the dawning of an era," Dr. W. French Anderson said when he
was given the green light to start clinical trials.

   So far, inserting new genes into cells has not been used as treatment. It has
just been given a trial run in a handful of patients.

   But now that researchers have demonstrated it is possible and causes no harm,
they are ready to try gene therapy on patients.

   The first people to undergo gene therapy as treatment for their diseases -
probably this fall - will be a few cancer patients and five children with a
genetic condition that disables their immune systems, leaving them defenceless
against infections.

   The results of the trial run on the first five people were published last
week in the New England Journal of Medicine. The trial was conducted by a team
of researchers led by Dr. Steven Rosenberg, chief of surgery at the United
States National Cancer Institute in Washington, which called it a "landmark
study."

   During research, doctors collected the white blood cells that fight cancer
from five patients suffering from melanoma, a lethal form of skin cancer.

   In the laboratory, a new gene was inserted into these cancer-fighting cells.
The gene was carried into the genetic material of the cells by a virus, which
had been deactivated so it wouldn't cause infection.

   Researchers returned the altered cells to the patients and found that cells
containing the new gene could be detected in the bloodstream for up to two
months, meaning the experiment was a success.

   Rosenberg says the research team is now ready to insert into cells a gene
that can combat cancer. The gene orders cells to produce a toxic substance
called tumor necrosis factor, which can destroy cancer cells.

   The body normally produces tumor necrosis factor in exceedingly small
amounts, not enough to combat cancer successfully. It uses it to regulate the
immune system and to respond to injuries.

   It is highly potent, but could not be given as a drug because it also causes
severe weight loss.

   Rosenberg has said that when the gene is inserted, normal white cells, called
tumor-infiltrating cells, produce up to 100 times more tumor necrosis factor.
Such cells go to cancer tumors and carry high doses of the toxin into the tumors
without attacking healthy tissue.

   Gene therapy for children who lack immune systems, a rare condition called
severe combined immune deficiency, will be directed by Anderson. The condition
is also known as "bubble boy disease" because of the widely publicized case of
David, a Texan who spent his life in a series of sterile, plastic bubbles
because he had no immune system.

   David died at age 12 in 1984 from infection, soon after he was taken out of
his protective bubble for a bone marrow transplant.

   Children with "bubble-boy disease" are born with a defective gene that causes
them to lack an enzyme, adenosine deaminase, commonly called ADA. Treatment
today involves a bone marrow transplant to give the young patients a new,
healthy supply of blood cells that have the ADA gene.

   A new treatment recently given approval is also quite effective, doctors say.
It involves supplying the missing enzyme by means of a drug called PEG-ADA.

   There are probably only 20 children in the world who might benefit from being
given ADA genes through the new therapy because they cannot undergo transplants.

   Anderson and his colleagues, who were given permission in July to test ADA
gene therapy in patients, plan to try it in five children who are being treated
with PEG-ADA.

   They will continue receiving the drug in addition to gene therapy because
doctors say it would be unethical to switch children from a treatment that works
reasonably well to an unknown therapy.

   Anderson has been working for six years on ADA gene research and he believes
it can work.

   "But nobody knows what may happen when a human therapeutic gene enters the
body of a human being," he said. "It's a total black box."

   At Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children, Dr. Chaim Roifman, head of clinical
immunology, says two patients who were born lacking the immune enzyme are being
treated here. One is on PEG-ADA drug therapy while the other is recovering from
a bone marrow transplant.

   But he would not recommend that either of them take part in the gene study
yet. "We'd rather wait a couple of years and see how it (the gene therapy)
goes," he says.

   ADA deficiency is the first genetic disease in which gene therapy will be
tested because it is less complicated than most other genetic diseases. It is
caused by a single gene defect and the repair can be made in blood cells that
can be taken out of the body and returned.

   Repairing the genetic material in cells that form solid tissue in the body
will be tougher.

   But this first attempt to replace bad genes with good ones to eliminate a
disease could lead to cures for many other of some 3,000 known genetic
conditions.

GRAPHIC: File photo Toronto Star : Boy in Bubblecancer; research; genetics

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              233 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    August 1, 1990, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 311 words

HEADLINE: History's first gene therapy wins approval of U.S. agency

BYLINE: (SPECIAL)

DATELINE: BETHESDA, MD.

BODY:

   BETHESDA, Md. (Special) - In an atmosphere charged with hopeful excitement,
U.S. government regulators yesterday approved history's first proposed attempts
to cure disease by altering human genes.

   "Medicine has been waiting for this for thousands of years. We've reached a
watershed," said Gerard McGarrity, chairman of the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee of the U.S. National Institutes of Health, which has governed genetic
engineering in the United States for 15 years.

   The experiments - one for an immune-system disorder and the other for a
deadly form of skin cancer - will be closely watched by the medical community.
If the techniques work, they will open the door to a powerful new approach to
fighting previously untreatable diseases.

   "The public may be assured that gene therapy has undergone a long, intense
and often tumultuous review," said cell biologist McGarrity, president of
Coriell Institute for Medical Research in Camden, N.J.

   The new therapy was developed by a partnership among three senior researchers
of the institute - hemotologist gene splicer French Anderson, immunologist
Michael Blaese and cancer specialist Steven Rosenberg.

   Anderson and Blaese will try what is viewed as classic gene therapy: to
insert corrective genes into disease-fighting white blood cells of children born
with a lethal inherited disorder - adenosine deaminase deficiency (ADA), which
has wiped out their immune systems.

   The advisory committee is a U.S.-wide panel of experts, including scientists,
physicians, legal scholars, religious leaders, ethicists and lay people.

   Both gene therapy proposals, and the preliminary experiments that led to
them, have already passed through 16 committees of the institutes of health and
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

   CHICAGO TRIBUNEgenetics; medicine; research; United; States

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              234 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                         August 1, 1990, Wednesday, ONT

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 599 words

HEADLINE: Medical use of engineered genes allowed for 1st time by U.S. panel
Blood cells will be altered to produce a protein that cuts off nutrition to
tumors

BYLINE: (AP-REUTER)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (AP-Reuter) - A U.S. panel has approved the treatment of human
disease using gene therapy, the process of inserting curative genes into human
cells.

   The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, a panel of the U.S. National
Institutes of Health, yesterday voted to allow use of the therapy in treating a
lethal form of skin cancer and an inherited disorder that deprives children of
an immune system.

   Approval by a committee of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is still
required before the therapy can begin on patients, but yesterday's vote was
considered the most crucial one by experts in the field.

   Genetic engineering, only recently the stuff of science fiction, is already a
part of the everyday commercial landscape and is slowly changing the face of
health care and farming.

   The genes of plants, animals and bacteria are now routinely spliced together
in laboratories around the world, yielding new strains of food crops and
animals.

   Gerard McGarrity, chair of the panel, called yesterday's approval a historic
move.

   "What we're doing today is adding gene therapy to vaccines, antibiotics and
radiation in the medical arsenal," he said. "Medicine has been waiting thousands
of years for this."

   But Dr. Steven Rosenberg, a health institute researcher who has been
experimenting in the laboratory with gene therapy for more than a decade,
cautioned that the treatment "will only be important if it works. This puts us a
step closer."

   Rosenberg and Dr. French Anderson, another researcher, said they have
patients, some dying of malignant melanoma, who could be used in the
experimental therapy.

   If successful, Anderson said, the gene therapy would be "the first step in
what probably will be a revolution in medicine over the next two years."

   Researchers should know within six months after the treatments start whether
or not the gene therapy works, Rosenberg said.

   Both Rosenberg and Anderson said they expect final approval of their
proposals soon and that they will start treating patients by fall.

   Genes are, in effect, instructions to a cell will cause the treated cells to
produce special proteins that will either amplify a biological action or replace
proteins that were missing.

   Rosenberg, who proposed the anti-cancer therapy, said he plans to alter the
genetic makeup of a blood cell called the tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte by
inserting a gene that will command it to produce a protein called tumor necrosis
factor. This protein kills tumor cells by blocking them from establishing a
blood supply.

   In effect, the genetically altered cell will be turned into a factory making
a tumor-killing protein inside the tumor itself.

   A slightly different technique will be used to correct a condition called
severe combined immunodeficiency disease.

   This rare, inherited disorder occurs in children who are born lacking a key
gene in a type of white blood cell called the T-lymphocyte. Without this gene,
the cells cannot produce an enzyme called adenosine deaminase, which is
essential for a healthy immune system.

   Without it, children have no defence against disease.

   Anderson, who leads a research team into the deficiency, said the plans call
for T-lymphocytes to be removed from patients and cultured in test tubes. A
normal gene, which will make the enzyme, will be inserted into the lymphocytes,
which will then be returned to the patient's blood stream.

   Once in the body, the lymphocytes will make ADA and cause the patient's body
to build resistance to disease.genetics; medicine; research; United; States

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              235 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                     May 23, 1990, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A24

LENGTH: 273 words

HEADLINE: Foreign genes may help treat cancer, researchers find

BYLINE: (AP)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (AP) - Experiments have shown for the first time that human blood
cells carrying foreign genes will zero in on tumors, opening a new strategy for
treating cancer, researchers say.

   The preliminary study is the first approved attempt at human gene therapy -
inserting potentially helpful genes inside the body in places where nature
failed to put them.

   The experiment, involving seven patients, was intended to show that the
approach is possible.

   Physicians introduced a bacterial gene that had no effect on the patients'
cancer.

   Soon, however, they plan to equip patients' blood cells with a gene that
delivers a powerful natural cancer-killing substance known as tumor necrosis
factor. The researchers hope that will cure the disease by blitzing the tumor
with extremely high levels of toxic proteins.

   "This is the first study in which foreign genes have been introduced into
humans with survival of those cells," Dr. Steven Rosenberg, a researcher withthe
U.S. National Cancer Institute, said yesterday.

   "This is meant to pave the way to introducing genes that can improve the
survival of cancer patients."

   His pilot study showed that not only did the cells survive, they homed in on
tumors and produced a foreign protein there.

   Rosenberg outlined his results at the annual meeting of the American Society
of Clinical Oncology.

   Dr. Robert Young of Philadelphia's Fox Chase Cancer Centre noted that while
biologists have isolated genes that make potentially useful substances,
transferring that knowledge from the petri dish to cancer patients has been
difficult.cancer; genetics; research

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              236 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    April 19, 1990, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. K5

LENGTH: 640 words

HEADLINE: New method may treat genetic diseases

BYLINE: Special to The Star Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   LOS ANGELES - Researchers have developed a revolutionary way to treat genetic
diseases that could greatly accelerate human gene therapy, which has been
delayed for a decade by ethical considerations and technical problems.

   Special genetic material would simply be injected into muscle tissue every
few days or weeks in much the same fashion that insulin is now injected daily to
treat diabetes.

   The technique, developed by San Diego and Wisconsin scientists, could apply
to a wide range of genetic diseases for which there is now no adequate therapy,
ranging from muscular dystrophy to rare diseases of the immune system.

   Cheaper method

   It might also serve as a way to deliver genetic engineering products, such as
human growth hormone, much more cheaply than is currently possible.

   In addition, according to researchers, it could be a valuable tool in the
search for an AIDS vaccine or help fight infections by the AIDS virus.

   Until now, scientists have experimented with replacing defective genes by
using special viruses to insert healthy genetic material into an individual's
own DNA. But researchers and critics have feared that the viruses would insert
the genes at the wrong site in DNA, thereby disrupting healthy genes.

   In the surprisingly simple new technique, the researchers would inject
specially prepared genetic material into the person's muscle tissue, stimulating
production of an enzyme or protein whose absence is the cause of the disease.
The protein would be carried by the bloodstream to body tissues where it is
needed.

   Because a virus is not used, the injected material would pose no risk to the
recipient's genes.

   The added genetic material would break down in a period of days or weeks, so
the genetic therapy would be reversible if adverse effects should appear.

   The researchers, from Vical Inc. in San Diego and the University of Wisconsin
Medical Centre report that they have used the technique to successfully produce
proteins in mice. They hope to extend the studies to humans within five years,
most likely for the treatment of muscular dystrophy, which causes progressive
weakening and wasting of muscles. About one in every 3,500 males develops the
disease.

   Major change

   "We are ushering in a very major change . . . that is going to push gene
therapy ahead much faster in the next decade," says biochemist Philip L. Felgner
of Vical.

   Felgner and his colleagues were working with messenger ribonucleic acid, or
mRNA, which serves as a sort of working copy of the genetic information
contained in DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) that is used by the cell's
protein-making machinery.

   mRNA has certain potential therapeutic applications in its own right, and
many laboratories are looking for ways to get it inside cells. Vical has been
working with liposomes, microscopic globules of fat that would encase the mRNA
and carry it into cells. To test how well the liposomes worked, they decided to
inject naked mRNA into tissues, assuming that none of it would make it into
cells.

   They were wrong.

   The naked mRNA was taken up by the cells faster than the mRNA in liposomes.
"I didn't believe it at first," says medical geneticist Jon A. Wolff of
Wisconsin. "It was a total surprise," Felgner adds. "Nobody would have even
thought to (try it)."

   After they convinced themselves that the mRNA was being taken up, research
progressed rapidly. "The procedure is extremely simple," Felgner says. "It's
simple to administer the mRNA, and it's simple to make it. It's straightforward
molecular biology."

   They do have to modify the mRNA, though. Special segments of RNA must be
added to the ends of the RNA gene for the cells to make proteins from it.
Additional segments must be added if the cells are to secrete the proteins into
the blood stream.genetics; research

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              237 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    February 9, 1990, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A28

LENGTH: 510 words

HEADLINE: Lack of gene cited in prostate cancer

BYLINE: (AP)

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON (AP) - A gene that blocks a rare eye cancer can also suppress
prostate tumors, one of the most common cancers among men, a group of
researchers report in a study to be published today.

   In experiments in laboratory mice, scientists at the University of
California-San Diego say they have shown a retinoblastoma gene, or RB, inserted
into human prostate cancer cells is able to suppress tumors.

   That same gene is usually missing, mutated or not functioning when the tumors
do develop.

   Dr. Robert Bookstein, one of the researchers, said the study may help
scientists learn how to control cancer through use of tumor suppressor genes,
such as RB, or the proteins that such genes produce.

   "The idea with cancer suppressor genes, since the loss is oncogenic (cancer
nurturing), that maybe putting it back somehow will be therapeutic," Bookstein
said.

   "That is a distant goal, but I think a valid goal. You could call it gene
therapy that directly makes up for the defect in the tumor cell."

   Such cancer therapy, however, "is years and years away," he said.

   Barry Nelkin, a cancer suppressor gene researcher at the Johns Hopkins
University Oncology Centre, said the California study "is potentially quite
important.

   "A lot of people are looking for the genetic link to prostate cancer. The few
studies that have been done have not pointed to anything specific."

   Gene inserted

   Bookstein said scientists in the California study used a retrovirus to insert
the RB gene into human prostate cancer cells that did not contain the gene.

   The genetically treated cancer cells were injected into the right flanks of
20 "nude" mice, a breed of laboratory mice that lacks an immune system. The
scientists injected untreated prostate cancer cells in the left flank of the
mice.

   Within two months, tumors formed in the left flank of all the mice. Three of
the 20 mice did not develop any tumors in the right flank. The right flank
tumors that did develop in 17 mice were up to 350 times smaller than the
left-flank cancers.

   Bookstein said that the fact that tumors formed at all in the right flank
showed that the transfer of the gene to the cancer cells was not perfect.

   Cells with the gene were unable to form tumors, he said. Further studies
showed that, where tumors did develop, the gene was either missing or mutated.

   "This is only the first tumor suppressor gene implicated in prostate cancer,"
he said. "Undoubtedly there are others. I have already found cases with normal
RB genes, so other genes have to be involved."

   Scientists at the University of California-San Diego laboratory led by
Wen-Hwa Lee reported in 1988 that the same gene was able to block tumor
formation in the cells of retinoblastoma, a rare eye cancer.

   The latest study was co-written by Bookstein, Lee, Jin-Yuh Shew, Phang-Lang
Chen and Peter Scully, all of the University of California-San Diego. It is in
today's edition of Science, the journal of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science.cancer; research; genetics

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              238 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1989 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                December 24, 1989, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: INSIGHT; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 915 words

HEADLINE: Genes, Earth head decade's top 10 chart of discoveries

BYLINE: From Associated Press

BODY:

   More than any other field of discovery, biology was the science headliner of
the 1980s - the biology of the gene and the biology of the planet.

   Researchers made brilliant strides in snipping and splicing genes, in finding
clues to the causes of disease. And they detected an alarming fragility in the
global environment, making discoveries and embarking on research whose impact
will be felt for years to come.

   Here is a look at 10 top scientific advances of the past decade:

   * Superconductivity. In 1986, Georg Bednorz and Alex Mueller of IBM
discovered the first of a new class of materials that carried electricity
without resistance at temperatures higher than those of liquid helium.

   In the new materials, superconductivity occurs at the temperature of liquid
nitrogen, making them more practical. The discovery of the new class of
materials earned Bednorz and Mueller a Nobel Prize in 1987.

   * Fight Against AIDS. A deadly and mysterious disease emerged in 1981. An
intensive search for its cause paid off two years later, when a team led by Luc
Montagnier of France's Pasteur Institute discovered a new virus in patients
suffering from the disease, acquired immune deficiency syndrome, shortened to
AIDS. Another team, headed by Robert Gallo of the U.S. National Cancer
Institute, learned to grow the virus in the lab and proved that it caused AIDS.

   In 1985, cancer institute doctors conducted the first human tests of the drug
AZT. It remains the mainstay of AIDS treatment.

   * Voyager Planetary Tour. Humanity's most productive space exploration
mission spanned the 1980s, as Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 toured the outer planets.
The two spacecraft, launched in 1977, explored Jupiter in 1979 and Saturn in
1980 and 1981. Voyager 2 then visited Uranus in 1986 and Neptune in 1989.

   The robot probes forced wholesale revision of astronomy textbooks, snapping
81,000 photographs as they discovered more than 20 moons, numerous
planet-orbiting rings of debris, sulfur volcanoes on Jupiter's moon Io and ice
volcanoes on Neptune's moon Triton.

   * Genetic Causes of Disease. In 1981, researchers discovered the first of a
series of cancer genes responsible for the development of tumors. Others were
discovered later, as were several anti-cancer genes that appear to protect the
body against cancer unless they are somehow altered.

   Researchers have also identified the genetic causes of cystic fibrosis and
muscular dystrophy, an essential step toward developing a cure for these
previously mysterious ailments.

   * Cyclosporine. In 1980, transplant surgeons at several hospitals began
reporting promising results with a drug that stops the body's natural tendency
to reject new organs. The medicine, called cyclosporine, was discovered by the
drug firm Sandoz while it was screening soil from Norway for possible
antibiotics.

   Cyclosporine was approved for routine use in the United States in 1983 and
has enabled doctors to routinely transplant hearts, livers and other organs.

   * Ozone Hole Discovery. In 1985, researchers reported the discovery of what
has come to be called the "ozone hole" over Antarctica. The atmosphere's ozone
layer partly shields the Earth from the cancer-causing ultraviolet rays of the
sun. Chemical pollutants are gradually destroying it.

   The discovery of the severe thinning of the ozone layer over Antarctica
helped bring attention to the worldwide climate problems, which includes not
only ozone loss, but also global warming, another feared consequence of
atmospheric pollution.

   * Immunotherapy for Cancer. Telephone calls flooded Dr. Steven Rosenberg's
office at the National Cancer Institute in December 1985 after he reported that
laboratory-altered human white blood cells attacked and shrank tumors. This new
technique is called immunotherapy. It turns the body's own immune system against
cancer.

   In 1989, Rosenberg and his colleagues used a modified form of the technique
that included a first step toward human gene therapy - introducing foreign genes
into patients.

   * Supernova Discovery. On Feb. 23, 1987, light reached Earth from a
catastrophe that happened about 163,000 years earlier: the collapse and
explosion of a star about 1.6 million trillion kilometres from Earth.

   Spotted by University of Toronto astronomer Ian Shelton, Supernova 1987A was
the brightest exploding star since the one observed by Johannes Kepler in 1604,
and gave astronomers greater understanding of one of the most violent events in
the universe.

   * Artificial Heart. On Dec. 2, 1982, Barney Clark became the first person to
receive a permanent artificial heart. He lived 112 days. Almost two years passed
before the next was implanted in William Schroeder, on Nov. 25, 1984. Schroeder
lived 620 days. Clark and Schroeder spent those days tethered to a
refrigerator-sized compressor.

   Although the program was ultimately abandoned, it did demonstrate for the
first time that replacement of the heart was possible, if not yet practical.

   * Mass Extinctions. In 1980, Luis and Walter Alvarez and colleagues published
a still controversial study proposing that a mountain-sized rock struck the
Earth 65 million years ago, killing the dinosaurs.

   David Raup and J. John Sepkowski Jr. concluded in 1984 that mass extinctions
occur every 26 million years. One explanation is that an undiscovered "death
star" called Nemesis passes the Earth periodically, causing a catastrophic
shower of comets to strike the Earth's surface.

GRAPHIC: Star photo Barney Clark

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              239 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1989 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

                    October 24, 1989, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 399 words

HEADLINE: Centre at U of T will study ethics of medical issues

BYLINE: By Marilyn Dunlop Toronto Star

BODY:

   Canada's highest court will pay close attention to results of research and
analysis of medical ethics issues at a new centre for bioethics at the
University of Toronto, a top judge says.

   The legal system is confronted almost daily with difficult and controversial
issues such as abortion, consent to treatment and surrogate parenting, Supreme
Court of Canada Chief Justice Brian Dickson said at the opening of the centre
yesterday.

   "We look to the academic community for help in grappling with these difficult
problems," Dickson said.

   The centre is the first of its kind in Canada. It will conduct research
studies into complex subjects such as the use of life-sustaining systems, organ
transplant policies, care of people with AIDS, gene therapy and ethical
implications of any changes in Canada's health-care system.

   Hospital work

   Dr. Fred Lowy, director of the new centre, said it is the only one in Canada
that will offer Master's Degrees and Doctorates in bioethics.

   Lowy said it will work in partnership with the U of T's 10 teaching hospitals
but will not be a part of any one university faculty. The centre will bring
together legal scholars, social scientists, philosophers and health
professionals to study ethical issues.

   Dr. John Evans, president of Allelix Inc. and a former U of T president, will
chair the centre's advisory committee. The centre will select for study issues
that have a significant impact on society and that are central to the lives of
many Canadians, he said.

   Dr. Martin Barkin, Ontario deputy health minister, said health professionals
make ethical decisions daily and are entitled to community support to help them
make such decisions.

   "They should not be forced to work in isolation. The issues are most complex
today than ever before."

   Welcomes research

   Barkin said the ministry welcomes research by the centre in issues involving
the health-care system.

   Among problems the centre has given priority are a definition of basic health
care to which all Canadians are entitled, and the question of ethics in the way
doctors are paid.

   The health ministry is encouraging the formation of medical centres where
doctors are not paid fees for each medical service but are paid a yearly flat
rate for each patient.

   Start-up costs of the new centre, housed on the main university campus, will
be $2 million, Lowy said.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              240 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1989 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

               September 24, 1989, Sunday, SUNDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: INSIGHT; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 859 words

HEADLINE: Benign growth may help body heal itself

BYLINE: By Sally Squires Special to The Star (The Washington Post)

BODY:

   Biomedical researchers are inventing a way to treat disease by making the
body grow a kind of new organ - called an organoid or a neo-organ - whose job is
to cure, or at least to treat, the malady.

   One technique involves implanting into the body of an animal (the method has
not been tried on humans) a small plastic scaffold in the form of a fibre pad
coated with natural substances that stimulate cell growth.

   Body cells colonize the scaffolding and develop into a lump of tissue that
then secretes hormones and other chemicals.

   The method has broad implications for treating a variety of illnesses, from
heart disease to AIDS.

   In an August presentation at the annual meeting of the National Cancer
Institute's Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology, W. French Anderson told
researchers that he and his colleagues have been able to form neo-organs or
"organoid structures" in rats, mice, rabbits and monkeys. These structures
contain blood vessels and grow bundles of cells that resemble nerve tissue.

   Studies show that just like normal organs, the new structures can "secrete
products directly into the bloodstream of the animal," said Anderson, who is
chief of the laboratory of molecular hematology at the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md. "What you end up with is basically a new
organ."

   By marrying this new technology with gene therapy - the ability to transfer
new genes into a cell - researchers now have a potential new treatment to
overcome a host of genetic diseases, from diabetes and the immune deficiency
disease known as ADA deficiency to hemophilia and the metabolic disease known as
phenylketonuria, or PKU.

   In theory, for example, it might be possible to treat diabetes by inserting a
new gene for insulin production into cells removed from the patient. The cells
would be placed on the plastic scaffolding with growth factors, inserted in the
body near the pancreas and allowed to develop into a little insulin factory.

   The technique has the potential of helping to treat "any genetic disease that
can be corrected by the secretion of a product," said Anderson, whose results
will be published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Science.

   The ability to stimulate neo-organs has led researchers to speculate about
one day, far in the future, being able routinely to replace damaged or aging
organs, such as the liver, pancreas, spleen or heart, with replacements grown
from the patient's own cells. That could cut the demand for transplants and
extend the average life span.

   "This will have a major impact clinically on a wide variety of diseases,"
said Thomas Maciag, chief of molecular biology at the Jerome H. Holland
Laboratories for the Biomedical Sciences in Rockville, Md. "And this is going to
happen within our lifetime."

   The idea of regenerating blood vessels and other organs is not new.
Amphibians such as frogs and newts have long intrigued scientists by their
ability to grow new limbs and organs.

   Yet mammals and other higher animals have a comparable capability only once -
during embryonic development.

   The key to unlocking the secrets of organ regeneration lies with "tricking
the adult organism into thinking that it is an embryo again," said John Thompson
of Genetic Therapy Inc. in Gaithersburg, Md., which is collaborating with
Anderson's group.

   To do that, Anderson and his colleagues take fibres of Gore-Tex, the brand
name of a plastic polymer used to make sleeping bags, tents and rain gear.
Gore-Tex stimulates little or no immune response and has long been used for
suture material and other implantable materials.

   The fibres, about the width of a human hair, are coated with gelatin,
sterilized and then loosely matted into pads about an inch across. Then the pad
is impregnated with protein, called heparin-binding growth factor, that
stimulates the proliferation of endothelial cells, which line blood vessels,
lymph channels and various other cavities in the body.

   Fetal tissues are especially rich in HBGF. Babies and young children have
greater amounts than do adults, which is one reason why cuts and broken bones
heal more quickly in youngsters than adults.

   When an injury occurs, white blood cells called macrophages appear at the
wound and eat the damaged or dying cells as well as any microbial invaders that
might be present.

   The macrophages release proteins that activate HBGF and enable it to
stimulate a special type of immature cell, called a stem cell, to multiply and
mature so as to repair the wound. HBGF also attracts other cells to the area to
aid in rebuilding the damaged tissue.

   Anderson and his colleagues exploit this same process to create organoids.

   By coating the fibres with HBGF, cells are attracted to the fibres and begin
to colonize them. Although the HBFG is depleted within 24 hours, "once you
trigger the organ formation process, it just keeps going on its own," Anderson
said. "The body does it all."

   About a month later the neo-organ is formed, complete with blood vessels and
nerve tissue. Neo-organs have been formed next to the spleen and liver in
animals.

   THE WASHINGTON POST

GRAPHIC: Washington Post chart (Johnstone Quinan): steps involved in creating a
neo-organ

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999


                              241 of 241 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1989 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
                                The Toronto Star

               April 15, 1989, Saturday, SATURDAY SECOND EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 1628 words

HEADLINE: What kind of Brave New World Genetic technology is itself being
dissected to answer its moral questions

BYLINE: By Debra Black Toronto Star

BODY:

   HOW MANY angels can dance on the head of a pin? That's the kind of question
ethicists and philosophers have tried to answer since the beginning of time -
without much success.

   The questions currently involving genetic engineering and reproductive
technology seem as impossible to answer:

   * Geneticists are mapping the mysteries of the human gene. Will they one day
have the power to change man's genetic structure, and re-design mankind?

   * Reproductive specialists now routinely bring forth life in a test tube.
What should be done with the embryos used in this process?

   Even wise Solomon would scratch his head if he had to deal with some of these
issues. The answers are not clear-cut, prompting many to cry out: What kind of
brave new world might we face?

   The federal government's announcement earlier this month of plans to set up a
royal commission examining reproductive technology comes in the wake of lobbying
by women's groups and academics.

   One ethics specialist says we are confronting "a new social structuring of
reproduction."

   "It's something Canada should be thinking about," says Christine Overall, a
philosophy professor at Queen's University and author of the book Ethics And
Human Reproduction: A Feminist Analysis.

   "When we're talking about reproduction . . . we're talking about issues that
very powerfully affect women. Women should be very, very heavily involved in
policy formation on this."

   Overall warns that, without the royal commission, "decisions will be made
anyway on an ad-hoc basis."

   The commission, which will look at issues such as artificial insemination,
in-vitro fertilization and surrogate mothering, will have to deal with a
wide-ranging series of ethical and moral issues, including:

   * Should offspring from artificial insemination be told of their genetic or
family history?

   * How many embryos do you plant in a women's uterus to increase her chances
of pregnancy, knowing if some take, you'll abort the others?

   * How much money should we commit to in-vitro fertilization programs as
opposed to doing research on the prevention of infertility?

   * To whom do embryos belong in case of a divorce or death?

   * Should we set up commercial sperm, egg or embryo banks?

   * Should we legalize surrogate motherhood?

   The federal government isn't the first to examine this quagmire. In 1985 the
Ontario Law Reform Commission released a two-volume report with 67
recommendations on the legal implications of the new reproductive technology.

   Similarly in Europe, Britain, Australia and the United States researchers
have looked at the issue and tried to establish guidelines.

   Rather than set up another commission some bioethicists believe the public
would be better served by first examining the existing studies. And there are
many.

   "At least they should be reviewed before we start generating an entirely new
series of guidelines from the ground up as though no one had ever done anything
on this," says David Roy, director of the Centre for Bioethics at the Clinical
Research Institute of Montreal. "This is to me a very unwise way to conduct a
study leading to public policy guidelines."

   One of the most touted reports is Britain's Warnock Report, which according
to a report in the Sunday Times tried to strike "a balance between pride in
technolgical achievement" and "unease at the apparently uncontrolled advance of
science" with its 64 recommendations.

   For the most part these guidelines and other international recommendations
have sat on the shelf. And there may be a very good reason for this.

   "It's a very complex issue," says Dr. Margaret Somerville, director of the
McGill Centre for Medicine, Ethics and the Law.

   "My current view is there may not be any right answers at the moment. We
simply are in a mid-position of not knowing the way we should go on a lot of
these issues."

   "We've got to have a group of wise persons . . . plus we've got to have some
fairly well-defined and worked out decision-making structures. We can't just let
people use ad-hoc situations."

   Some say there are, realistically, no absolute answers.

   "You've got to recognize you cannot have a right answer technologically,"
adds Bernard Dickens, a professor at both the University of Toronto's Faculty of
Law and the Faculty of Medicine.

   "You can have a right answer ideologically. One is, don't interfere. The
other is, control and stop." But neither route will satisfy people on opposing
sides of the question.

   Ever since the birth of the world's first test tube baby, Louise Brown,
almost 11 years ago, the field of reproductive technology has advanced rapidly
and helped many infertile couples.

   But critics have compared the advances in reproductive technology to "playing
God," worrying about the "Frankenstein factor" and "the possibility of
influencing not only the present generation but generations to come," explains
Abyann Lynch, director of the Westminster Institute for Ethics and Human Values
in London, Ont.

   Now an even larger issue hangs over the heads of the international scientific
community: the mapping and sequencing of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), which
contains the genetic prescription for life. It is unlikely that the royal
commission will study this complicated area, however.

   Yet its impact on mankind will be astounding, researchers say.

   Scientists from Britain, the United States, Japan, France and West Germany
are all intensely working on this project, hoping to determine the location and
identity of each of the estimated 50,000 to 100,000 genes that are in a single
strand of DNA. Each of these genes is responsible for the various jobs of cells
and organs.

   "In doing this they would learn knowledge equivalent to what they learned in
undertaking to put a man on the moon," says McGill's Somerville. "We've gone
into outer space. Now, we're going into the most inner of inner space."

   Indeed, the quest has become a kind of holy grail.

   Repair defective gene

   "Genes are eternal," says University of Toronto's Dickens. "It is us that are
mortal. In a sense we're simply containers of genes and through reproduction we
pass on our genes. So our genes survive. We don't. If we see some of our own
immortality in genes then that perhaps explains why we find them so interesting
and powerful."

   "We will know what we're made of structurally," explains Louis Siminovitch,
director of research at the Toronto-based Mount Sinai Hospital Research
Institute and internationally well-known geneticist. "For diseases we'd be able
to put a map on people and know who they are and what they are at the DNA
level."

   This will mean that through genetic engineering scientists could one day
repair, remove or replace the defective gene that's at the root of a disease.

   But many worry about the potential problems that could come with this
knowledge. Bioethicists are asking themselves a number of questions about what
DNA mapping might mean for the future of humanity, including:

   Genetically programmed

   * How would parents cope if they were able to know what their children would
die of before they were even born, through DNA mapping?

   * What if the mapping was used to breed only a certain kind of offspring,
perhaps one who is genetically programmed to be the best basketball player or
blue-eyed?

   * Will genetic engineering or the medical intervention in our DNA change
forever the genetic makeup of mankind?

   "We don't know the prescription for human survival," says Dickens. "Once we
start tinkering with conditions that will affect future generations we are
altering the human blueprint. And we ought to do that only by stealth."

   For this reason some academics would like to see the question of genetic
engineering and gene mapping included in the royal commission.

   But the Centre for Bioethics' Roy believes reproductive technology, genetic
engineering and the gene mapping program are distinct and different areas of
scientific research and should be treated accordingly.

   What's more Roy believes it may be jumping the gun to conclude that the quest
to map DNA and genetic engineering will lead to apocalyptic results.

   "Some of the concerns are unrealistic . . . We are just about getting ready
perhaps to do some of the first attempts at genetic therapy for single gene
diseases and certainly not all single gene diseases.

   'Power for evil'

   "To jump from there to imagine within a short while we're going to be trying
to do genetic modification of behavioral traits that depend on many genes, is
totally unrealistic."

   That's not to say that scientists and ethicists shouldn't give serious
consideration to these issues, Roy says.

   He warns, that despite the potential power for good, "it is theoretically
possible to turn it around and make it a great power for evil.

   "I think even the most committed scientists recognize the need to reflect on
the broad social, philosophical questions that will arise with increasing
frequency as the mapping of the human genome advances and as the sequencing of
those genes advances."

   What's needed, Roy and others believe, is a "sober, sombre, totally
well-informed, critical, ethical analysis and review," involving people who are
not directly involved in the scientific projects but who can understand genetics
and speak in an informed way about it.

   Ultimately there may be no single or clear cut answer to any of the ethical
and moral questions in these areas.

   Francis Rolleston, a biochemist and director of scientific evaluation at the
Medical Research Council, sums up the complex challenge:

   "It comes down to a framework of proper behavior that is set by society,
which is called the law, and then within that an enormous amount of individual
discretion."

GRAPHIC: drawing: genetic model

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1999
