
                               1 of 59 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1989 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    December 24, 1989, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Magazine; Page 8; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5545 words

HEADLINE: SLOUCHING TOWARD THE MILLENNIUM;
PROGNOSTICATIONS, PROPHECIES AND JUST PLAIN GUESSES ABOUT WHAT THE LAST DECADE
OF THE 20TH CENTURY WILL BRING

BYLINE: By JACK JONES, Jack Jones retired in 1989 after 34 years as a Times
staff writer. His last story for this magazine was Tales From the Freeway.

BODY:

   THE WORLD CHANGED SO DRAMATICALLY in the 1980s, particularly in the past few
months, that at times one felt nostalgic about last week. The 1980s saw the
collapse of communism in Eastern Europe; the diagnosis of a deadly disease --
AIDS -- that has escalated into a worldwide epidemic, and the ascendancy of
American conservatism. Indeed, so much changed so rapidly in the waning years of
the decade that the prospect of contemplating more U-turns in the 1990s makes
one a bit lightheaded.

   But these are vertiginous times, like it or not. The calendar dictates a new
decade, ready or not. We aren't reckless or presumptuous enough to try to label
the '90s before they arrive, but we thought it might be wise to ask for help in
preparing for the next spin of the wheel of history.

   Many of the specialists we queried were ill at ease about trying to gaze into
the future. Because events have a way of embarrassing horse-racing handicappers
and denim salesmen, the squeamishness evoked by questions about peace, economics
and environmental issues is understandable. But, with a little prodding, we came
up with a panel of 14 prophets who speculated, wondered, expounded, hedged and
warned about the coming years. Two main currents stand out: sweeping optimism
and chilling pessimism.

   So don't expect a dull decade. And don't blame us if they turn out to be
wrong.

   THE ENVIRONMENT: DAVID R. BROWER

   Brower, a leader in conservation issues for 50 years, is chairman of the San
Francisco-based environmental group Earth Island Institute.

   THERE HAS TO be in the coming decade a major move toward restoration of the
earth. We've got to put back together, as well as we can, the things we took
apart since the Industrial Revolution. It was a big party. Now the bills are
coming in: global warming, acid rain, holes in the ozone layer, loss of species
and loss of hope. We've got to turn that all around. All we can do is give
nature a chance. If we continue the worst addiction of all -- the addiction to
gasoline -- nature won't get that chance.

   Of course we're going to do it. All we have to do is say that's where we want
to go. We can't restore the rain forest, but we can give it our best stab. As
for global warming, it's certainly going to be slowed down, and we'd better
reverse it. The last moment -- or the next to the last moment -- has arrived. As
somebody said, "The threat of being hanged gets one's attention."

   Ironically, it is the pessimism of others that makes me optimistic. The very
strength of Bill McKibben's presentation in his book, "The End of Nature," will
draw attention. So will the Conservation Foundation-sponsored report on toxic
chemical pollution in the Great Lakes and its threat to fish, birds, mammals,
reptiles and 35 million people.

   There are several great pieces of news: Mercedes is developing a car that
burns hydrogen. The Valdez Principles (a code of conduct recently introduced by
a coalition of environmental groups, religious organizations and investors) are
suggesting what big and small investors in big corporations can require them to
do to be socially responsible. The Council on Economic Priorities has put out a
booklet, "Shopping for a Better World," telling people which corporations are
doing well environmentally and which aren't. We can invest and vote with our
purchases every day.

   RACE RELATIONS: ALVIN POUSSAINT

   Poussaint is an associate professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School
and a senior associate in psychiatry at the Judge Baker Children's Center in
Boston. He is the author of "Why Blacks Kill Blacks" and co-author of "Black
Child Care."

   I'M A LITTLE PESSIMISTIC about race relations in this country during the
1990s because of the number of new immigrants, particularly Hispanic Americans
and Asians. They will be competing for jobs. We already have animosity between
blacks and Latinos. We still have a lot of poverty in black and Hispanic
communities. A recent congressional report indicated that 50% of black children
in the United States live in poverty. They are more likely than other young
people to be involved in drugs and crime or to be killed.

   With the general population feeling threatened, all the issues such as drugs
and crime are going to come out in racial terms. There will be more segregation.
And with the sliding backward of affirmative action and set-aside programs, you
leave people in power who were in power before. There is more cronyism and
nepotism.

   There are disturbing signs that the advances since the 1960s are fading.
College enrollment of blacks is declining. In the past 15 years, the number of
blacks in medical schools has not gone up.

   There has been the killing of blacks by whites at Howard Beach and in the
Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn and the attack by black youths on a white woman
jogger in Central Park. There was the battle between the police of Virginia
Beach and a crowd of predominantly black students. These incidents further
polarize the two groups, raising the levels of animosity and fear. After years
of quiescence, there have been racial incidents on college campuses that hadn't
had any before.

   The post-Martin Luther King generation, young people with negative feelings
toward a lot of groups -- somehow they feel legitimacy in expressing these
views. Despite the success of black athletes that white kids worship, too,
despite a black Miss America, despite TV shows such as Bill Cosby's, feelings of
racism don't seem to be eradicated. People are segregated, so they're still
basically prejudiced. That may change with the next generation, but not with
these kids. The polls show they still have the same attitudes as their parents.

   There is one bright spot. I think we're going to have more black elected
officials, more participation in the process. That's because there is a growing
black population and a growing sophistication. As blacks gain political power,
they can make things happen.

   EDUCATION: VARTAN GREGORIAN

   Gregorian is president of Brown University. A historian and former University
of Pennsylvania provost, Gregorian revitalized the New York Public Library
during seven years as its president.

   EDUCATION IN America faces three crises during the 1990s: for one, a shortage
of 1.1 million high school and elementary school teachers and of 500,000
professors. So where is our seed corn? And who will educate the educators?
Second, 23 million to 30 million Americans are functionally illiterate. We also
face a third crisis: the shortage of skilled labor, due to demographic factors;
the decline of the birthrate, and high school dropouts, especially in the inner
cities.

   Related to all of this is that in this country we don't have a gestalt
approach to education. There is a great lack of philosophical, educational,
administrative and organizational unity. As a result, the colleges and the
universities are expected to solve and resolve the neglect and malpreparation of
our high school students. More and more, the first two years of college resemble
the last two years of high school.

   During the '90s, our educational issues will be compounded by social issues:
poverty, the breakdown of families and the ravage of drugs. Unless we're able to
solve the economic and social issues simultaneously, we will have an underclass
that will drag America down economically. As Europe and Asia become strong, we
will no longer be able to draw skilled immigrants -- only the unskilled,
compounding the problem of educating the waves of them coming in.

   We have to revitalize our schools, not just give speeches. It's going to
require a massive infusion of funds for laboratories and the teaching of math
and science. We must join our forces and faculties to fight the nation's No. 1
crisis. Fortress America will not be a fortress if our foundations are
corroding.

   ART: RICHARD KOSHALEK

   Koshalek has been director of the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles
since 1983, after having served as its deputy director and chief curator.

   THE CASCADE OF change in the 1980s will continue into the '90s. To manage
such change is going to be the major problem confronting cultural institutions,
whether they be MOCA, a theater, a concert hall or a dance company. The most
important issue confronting museums will be developing broad-based educational
programs that will lead visitors to a more sensitive understanding and
appreciation of the arts.

   The increasing valuation of works of art is going to have an effect on
museums, especially museums of contemporary art. The art market is so
competitive and so inflated with regard to artists competing internationally
that these museums will have to be more flexible. They can't always have the
well-known works, so they will have to look for other sources. We might see
greater interest in the work of artists working within the region a museum is
associated with, such as the light-and-space artists working in California, and
a greater emphasis by museums in acquiring the work of emerging and
under-recognized artists. The art market will continue to move higher in very
select areas and in the work of certain artists, but, overall, I see a leveling
off of valuation increases throughout the '90s.

   Museums will be more international in their outlook. There will have to be a
greater interconnecting of artists between the institutions, exchange programs
with museums in Japan and South America, not just Europe. Curators from
different continents will put together joint shows and share them. Artists will
become more concerned about originality and will be influenced by a wide range
of sources, such as mass communication, architecture and urban planning and new
technologies such as video and high-resolution television.

   FOOD: JULIA CHILD

   Child has taught cooking to millions through her books and television shows.
Her latest book is "The Way to Cook."

   WE'RE GOING through a very bad period when people don't have much information
about their food. They're inclined to get hysterical about things. A good
example was the scare over the use of the chemical Alar on apples. There was
such a hysterical pitch that it clearly crippled the apple industry and deprived
children of healthy foods.  Cholesterol is another place where we're getting
into hysteria. People don't know what all of that means. You have to have a
certain amount of fat, and if you take too much fiber, you're going to get
diarrhea. The point is moderation -- eating sensibly and exercising. Every fat
calorie you eat should be a pleasure. You should know what you're doing and
enjoy every mouthful. That's what's going to happen: We will have more sense, go
back to the pleasures of the table in a reasonable way. I think we'll go back to
simple foods -- baked potatoes.

   People keep saying, "I don't have time to cook." We have fast foods and all
that sort of thing. I think that's beginning to change. People are finding it
doesn't take so long to cook. You really need family life at home. It's much
nicer to eat at home than at a fast-food joint. You know what you're eating.

   There has been a great improvement in supermarket produce. That availability
will continue. The influence of immigrants on American eating habits is
fascinating, the tremendous emergence of all those Mexican foods and others from
South America. Chinese seems to have toned down a little bit while Thai has gone
up. Sichuan and Japanese foods seem to be coming up. I think this will continue.
A lot of Oriental dishes are very healthy. Of course, some people are afraid of
raw fish. . . .

   BUSINESS: JOHN F. WELCH JR.

   Welch has been chairman and chief executive officer of General Electric since
1981.

   THE CHALLENGE for business people is to take advantage of broader, expanding
markets. With the world so intertwined, there is very little incentive for any
country not to work with other countries to sustain a consistent pattern of
global growth.

   The United States grew rapidly during the '50s and '60s. There was a dramatic
increase in the standard of living and relatively benign global competition.
Then, in the '70s, we focused too much on how to manage all this growth. We lost
position to Europe and Japan. The '80s were a reaction to the '70s. Mergers,
acquisitions and leveraged buyouts were getting some of the fat out of the
corporations -- a hardware restructuring. The U.S. became much more productive.

   We're going from a decade of hardware to a decade of software -- the human
element -- as we drive to spread responsibility through companies. To win in the
'90s, companies are going to have to increase the speed of decision making, the
speed of bringing products to market and putting proposals together. Companies
will move to give more responsibility, more authority and more freedom to
individuals, asking them to use their creativity to increase production.

   Business won't be able to bring a product to market, build a new facility or
complete a merger that won't take into account the impact on the environment.
Words like recyclable will become common terms. The massive trend toward
deregulation during the 1980s will moderate and perhaps reverse -- although not
back to where we were.

   The acquisition of U.S. businesses and property by the Japanese and other
foreign investors should lead to greater productivity here, greater taxable
income, a higher standard of living, more jobs and yet greater investment.

   POLITICS: ARTHUR M. SCHLESINGER JR.

   Schlesinger, a writer, historian and educator, is Schweitzer professor of
humanities at City University of New York. He served as special assistant to
President John F. Kennedy and has won Pulitzer prizes for history and biography.

   THE CONSERVATIVE 1980s were a re-enactment of the conservative 1950s, as the
1950s were a re-enactment of the conservative 1920s. In similar fashion we have
liberal periods at 30-year intervals: Theodore Roosevelt and the Progressive Era
in 1901; Franklin Roosevelt and the New Deal in the 1930s; John F. Kennedy and
the New Frontier in the 1960s. If the rhythm holds, the national mood in the
1990s will be much more like the Progressive Era and the 1930s and the 1960s
than like the conservative 1980s.

   There is no mystery about the 30-year cycle. That is the span of a
generation. People tend to be formed by the ideas that prevail when they become
politically conscious. Kennedy touched and formed a political generation. That
generation's time should come in the 1990s.

   It looks as if the tide is beginning to turn. The recent off-year elections
in New York, New Jersey and Virginia constituted, as pollster Louis Harris put
it, "a vote for activist government." President Bush's rhetoric on education,
the environment, housing, day care and so on represents a clear departure from
hard-line Reaganite conservatism.

   Mr. Bush's problem is that people will soon begin to see a gap between his
rhetoric and his action. He has been reluctant in a variety of fields to
mobilize the resources necessary to redeem his promises. I am afraid that Mr.
Bush's "no-new-taxes" pledge is condemning the country to impotence, both at
home and abroad. We can't repair our collapsing bridges and dams, we can't house
the homeless, we can't improve our schools, we can't give much help to countries
like Poland struggling toward democracy -- all because of the tax taboo. And
polls show that Americans are quite ready to pay taxes for particular things
they care about. We need to recognize that it is impossible for us to remain a
great nation without paying for it.

   Abortion will turn out to be a major mistake for George Bush. Nobody is
wildly enthusiastic about abortion. But most people feel that the choice should
be made by the woman involved. Bush's anti-abortion stand has created special
problems for the Republicans, who have become a coalition of aspiring
free-enterprisers, who believe in personal liberty, and evangelical zealots, who
believe in enforcing morality. The Bush line will make it harder for
suburbanites and yuppies to vote Republican in the future.

   RELIGION: MARTIN E. MARTY

   Marty, professor of church history at the University of Chicago, is the
author of "Pilgrims in Their Own Land: 500 Years of Religion in America."

   AMERICAN CHURCHES are very busy adjusting to change. Conservative religion in
America was galvanized by the image of the Soviet Union as the "evil empire."
Now the revival of Jewish and Christian faiths in Russia and the relative
increase of freedom in other East European nations are confusing and liberating
all at once. Meanwhile, the real dynamism in Christianity is in the southern
world -- Latin America, Asia, Malaysia. The contest is between Christianity and
Islam in some of those places, while in Latin America it is between Protestants
and Catholics.

   Catholicism will be marked by the shortage of priests and nuns and the
continuing failure of many American Catholics to pay attention to the church on
such issues as birth control. Nevertheless, Catholicism will remain America's
largest religious bloc.

   As for conservative Protestants, the TV evangelists and the scandals in the
movement have led the serious ones to see they have to go back to basics, not be
so flamboyant and worldly.

   American Jews on one hand are participating in a widespread recovery of
tradition, but at the same time many are less ready to fashion their identity in
relation to Israel. The debate over who is a Jew hurt the majority of American
religious Jews badly. The response by Israel to the intifada has created some
conscience problems. Toward the end of the '90s we'll be getting close to having
as many Muslims as Jews in this country, so we'll no longer be a WASP or
Judeo-Christian nation.

   MEDICINE: KENNETH T. SHINE

   Shine has been dean of UCLA's School of Medicine since 1986. He is a
cardiologist and former president of the American Heart Assn.

   WE'RE ALMOST certain to see fundamental changes in the way health care is
financed. The rate of growth in health-care costs demands some kind of solution.
Both the elderly and the corporate communities will be pushing for some kind of
basic health insurance that will include providing health care for the poor and
uninsured. The biggest problem we have is making health care available to the
uninsured. Five million Californians are uninsured. Two-thirds of those are
people who work and don't have adequate insurance.

   Scientifically, I think the most exciting development in the '90s will be the
capacity to match the genome, the genetic structure of the human body. If the
genetic code for humans can be unraveled, we could eliminate specific genetic
abnormalities. By the end of the decade, I would anticipate that one could
identify perhaps 10,000 genes in a newborn or in an adult. This will allow the
identification of predisposition to a variety of diseases and disorders. It
would be possible to determine whether someone is at risk for diabetes,
hypertension or a variety of things.

   And it is very likely that by the end of the '90s there will be some genetic
treatment -- gene therapy. But that's going to mean that the '90s will also be a
time of greater concern about ethics, not only in genetic therapy but also in
the area of health care and what is appropriate treatment.

   It's possible genetic therapy could be useful in the treatment of cancer and
AIDS, but it won't start there. It will start with a specific disorder where
there is a known single genetic defect.

   One exciting area is the expanding knowledge of cancer through the genetic
regulation of oncogenes, the genes identified as causing cancer in humans. This
is particularly exciting in offering a promise for prevention as well as
treatment for cancer. This includes a better understanding of the way
environmental agents -- some of the toxins we are exposed to -- alter genetic
regulation and therefore predispose a person to cancer.

   As a cardiologist, I'm very excited about the expanding understanding of
cholesterol, metabolism and the way in which fat gets deposited in blood vessel
walls. There'll be many new ways to prevent the blockage of blood vessels by
fat. People are living healthier life styles. Life expectancy has gone up over
the past 20 years.

   There is a good chance that a successful vaccine against AIDS will be
developed in the next decade. People are beginning to get clues to the way the
virus behaves. It's a virus that changes its colors very frequently. There are
some outstanding minds working on the problem, and I think they are making
progress.

   FASHION: ANNA WINTOUR

   Wintour became editor of Vogue nearly a year and a half ago. A former
editor-in-chief of British Vogue, she also has been an editor at Harper's
Bazaar, New York magazine and American Vogue.

   IN LOOKING AHEAD to the '90s, it's important to look at what happened in the
'80s. First of all, there was the enormous influence of fitness. Whether you're
looking at Jane Fonda or the New York Marathon, the fitness boom has had a
tremendous influence in terms of fabrics and ease of clothes -- whether women
were wearing sneakers in the street, with the way women were feeling much better
about the way their bodies look. Azzedine Alaia is kind of the king of stretch
or body-fitness clothes -- sexy and fashionable and desirable at the same time.
That's going to go on into the '90s.

   We first saw the power suit during the '80s. That came out of the Italian
designers, kind of an aggressive look; women in the workplace. I think that was
very important in the '80s. Another thing: It was the decade of black.
Everywhere you went you saw women in black, a sea of black. We saw the enormous
influence Karl Lagerfeld had at Chanel; he made women more approachable,
feminine, attractive.

   Looking ahead to the '90s -- to next season, at least -- I think we'll see a
move away from this power dressing, the aggressive look. The word I'm hearing is
soft. Women want to look more feminine, prettier; less of a uniform approach,
more of a personal style. At the same time, the athletic, more relaxed approach
is going to be very important. In the most recent collections, we saw very chic
jackets thrown over a kind of bicycling-jogging suit. And I think we're going to
see the emergence of very young designers such as Isaac Misrahi and Marc Jacobs
and Michael Kors, which is great for my profession. We haven't had a group of
new designers for a while. This would give us an injection.

   SPORTS: HARRY EDWARDS

   Sports sociologist Edwards is a professor at UC Berkeley and a consultant to
Major League Baseball assigned to help bring nonwhites into coaching and
management. He is also a consultant to the San Francisco 49ers and the Golden
State Warriors.

   COMMERCIALISM IS going to be the dominant force in athletics during the
1990s. We have a situation where, owing to the money available, the number of
Major League Baseball regular-season games telecast on network television have
dropped to 16 for the coming year. Everything else is going to be on pay cable.
That will virtually eliminate access to live baseball for vast segments of the
population, including those segments that have provided tremendous player
personnel resources. The rural poor white kids and the inner-city black kids --
the (future) Rickey Hendersons, the Frank Robinsons, the Vada Pinsons -- are not
going to have access. The time is long past when kids could go peer through a
knothole in the fence and watch their heroes. Eliminating that access is
eventually going to hurt baseball because these are the athletes of the future.

   We can expect a tremendous influx of foreign athletes with the growing
internationalization of sports, thanks to the satellites. The attractiveness of
bringing in foreign athletes who will be heroes for foreign markets is probably
going to be very difficult to ignore. This means tens of millions of new fans,
opening a tremendous market for sports paraphernalia. Right now, if you look at
the NBA, Africa is represented. Russia is represented. Czechoslovakia is
represented. Yugoslavia is represented. Growing internationalization could erode
the tradition of American sports and the involvement of the typical American
fans who find sports heroes appealing because they can identify with them. Now
they've got to break through all sorts of cultural barriers. They probably can't
even pronounce the name of Sarunas Marciulionis, who is on the Warriors roster
and is the first Russian to play in the NBA. So commercialism will remove a
degree of identification with the players for the fans here at home.

   Satellite communications is going to bring more sports from more places than
we have ever experienced into the American living room. We are going to have to
come to grips with the fact that sports can reach a saturation point. Last
basketball season, on a Saturday afternoon, I turned on my satellite and had
access to 13 basketball games within a five-hour period. I watched a little bit
of each of them. As one got boring, I switched to something else. At the end, I
not only didn't know who had won, I didn't know who had played whom. And I was
bored by most of it. More is not necessarily better.

   SCIENCE: RICHARD C. ATKINSON

   Atkinson, the chancellor of UC San Diego, is president of the American Assn.
for the Advancement of Science and former director of the National Science
Foundation.

   WE ARE GOING TO have a tremendous shortfall of scientists as we move toward
the 21st Century. If corrective actions are not taken immediately, by early next
century the annual supply of Ph.Ds in this country will be about 10,500 --
versus a demand for about 18,000. This will dramatically affect our ability to
maintain our scientific leadership and economic capabilities. That's the
overriding issue that relates to the health of American science, whether we're
going to attract the talent to keep the enterprise rolling. Too many young
people are going off to law school and MBA programs. Or they get bachelor's
degrees and then get recruited by industry without getting Ph.Ds. We pay such
high salaries in fields such as computer science and the like that these people
aren't willing to stay on for the Ph.Ds. This will be a problem even if the
shrinking defense budget causes fewer scientists to gravitate toward defense
research.

   In terms of science itself, on every front there are simply spectacular
developments. What's happening in the neurosciences is absolutely mind-boggling.
Information that's being accumulated about the nature of the neuron and the
molecular processes involved in neurotransmission is going to open up a totally
new view of the nature of the human mind and of psychological issues. Every
psychological mood and condition will probably relate to some aspect of the
transmitters, allowing us to research and study every facet of an individual's
personality.

   Molecular and cellular biology is simply revolutionary in terms of its impact
on medicine. Our neurosurgeons at UCSD, for example, are anticipating implanting
into the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease genes that would generate an
increased level of certain neurotransmitters that we believe are related to the
disease. There's no question that this can happen during the coming decade.

   Things are rolling at such a fast rate that to make predictions is very
difficult. It's clear that in fields such as physics, the superconducting
supercollider will be a major scientific instrument. Also, I think there's a
renewed interest in nuclear fusion as a source of energy.

   Then you've got this whole development of new techniques for visual imaging
-- the ability, through nuclear magnetic resonance and other procedures, to
literally image the structure of a molecule or something even smaller. We can
image the activities of the brain. In physics and chemistry, in the
neurosciences, billions and billions of observations can be put together by a
computer to provide images. We can literally see the structure of particular
molecules, the form they are and why they interact the way they do. If we can
understand the structure of a molecule, we can create chemicals that mimic the
structures found in the body.

   When the space telescope gets up there next spring, we may find ourselves
with a completely new view of the universe. It will have the capacity to see
farther and in more detail than we've ever been able to before. Everywhere along
the way the excitement is spectacular.

   WORLD AFFAIRS: WARREN CHRISTOPHER

   Christopher is chairman of the L.A. law firm of O'Melveny & Myers. As deputy
secretary of state in the Carter Administration, he was chief negotiator in
freeing the U.S. hostages in Iran.

   THE UNITED STATES will have to develop a whole new strategy for a
dramatically changed world. With the diminished burden of the heavy cost of
armaments, we have a chance to address a new agenda -- and just in the nick of
time. Because of that easing of arms costs, we are likely during the coming
decade to have an opportunity to concentrate on environmental and economic
issues to a degree that has not been possible in the past. This can lead to a
better life for the disadvantaged here as well as elsewhere in the world. That's
a pretty optimistic scenario, but I hope that it turns out to be true.

   For 40 years, our foreign policy has been dominated by fear of the Soviet
Union and the strategy to curb its expansion. Now we are emerging from a bipolar
world to confront a more complex but encouraging set of relationships. I think
we are in for a dramatic change in our relationship with the Soviet Union. If
you look down the long corridors of history, there is no fundamental reason that
we cannot have better relations. In the '90s, some other power may arise as our
principal adversary, probably a Pacific power -- China or Japan.

   Gorbachev and the end of the Cold War have changed the scene. While some
Americans yearn for the simplicity of a bipolar world and urge that we cling to
an obsolete strategy, we must not yield to nostalgia. Rather we must get about
the task of developing a new strategy. The United States and Soviet Union are
certainly not allies and not even friends in the old-fashioned sense. But we
have passed the point where any Soviet advancement is tantamount to a U.S.
setback. There may be setbacks, but now, increasingly often, we recognize a
mutuality of interest in dealing with issues. Both conventional and
nuclear-arms-control agreements are feasible to a degree previously only dreamed
about. Clearly, the '90s will see major agreements, both in the nuclear and
conventional arms fields.

     In Eastern Europe, we should help each of the nations to achieve
emancipation without expecting that they will join our bloc. Austria and Finland
are promising "neutral" models, and we should resist the temptation to achieve
the moon. We may find that we can work together with the Soviets in addressing
such regional problems as Angola, Cambodia and Nicaragua.

   As we replace our preoccupation with Soviet containment, we must persuade
other nationsto do the same. Some of those nations are painfully poor and are
focused on short-range needs. How do we convince them that they must take steps
to prevent destruction of the environment through global warming and
deforestation? How do we compete in a world where we are no longer dominant and
where threats of protectionism are pervasive? Multilateral diplomacy with all
its frustrations is the most promising avenue to cope with these cosmic and
urgent problems. It is a new world -- promising, but full of daunting risks.

   TRENDS:

   Popcorn, born Faith Plotkin, is founder of the Manhattan-based marketing and
trend analysis firm BrainReserve. She advises corporations about developments
likely to affect the marketplace.

   WE'RE LOOKING at an era we call the "cleanup decade." We're going to be
paying back for the sins of the '80s. We're going to have to clean up the
economy, the ecology, education and ethics. We're glutted out. We've spent too
much, produced too much garbage and lied too much. There's a relief in the fact
that it's going to catch up with us. People are going to pare down and become
more conservative about family stability, value for the dollar and so on.

   The reasons are both economic and emotional. People are sick of the glut and
the glitz. They want their cars to last 10 years. They want to be in their
houses for 50 years. They want their kids to grow up straight. They're tired of
drugs and the threat of drugs.

   The biggest thing will be the consciousness that changes from me to thee. The
'80s were all about me and what I needed, and money, money, money. The '90s will
be about children and community and concern for the planet and concern for
people of China and Russia. Marketing will have to shift to demonstrate an
ethical stance. One current example is Ben & Jerry's Ice Cream; they have a
flavor called Amazon Rain Forest Crunch, and proceeds from it go toward
conservation in South America.

   That's being optimistic, but we're going to have to do with a lot less. There
is a major gap between the haves and the have-nots, and the haves are going to
have to start taking care of and responsibility for the have-nots.

GRAPHIC: Drawing, COLOR, (COVER) Illustrated by Jim Heimann. ; Photo, COLOR,
HARRY EDWARDS ; Photo, COLOR, DAVID R. BROWER Robert Cardin; Photo, COLOR, ALVIN
POUSSAINT ; Photo, COLOR, VARTAN GREGORIAN Jed Wilcox; Photo, COLOR, RICHARD
KOSHALEK Gary Moss; Photo, COLOR, JULIA CHILD Max Aguilera-Hellweg/Onyx; Photo,
COLOR, MARTIN E. MARTY Gwendolyn Cates, top;; Photo, COLOR, ANNA WINTOUR Eric
Bowman, top; Photo, COLOR, JOHN F. WELCH JR. ; Photo, COLOR, ARTHUR M.
SCHLESINGER JR. ; Photo, COLOR, FAITH POPCORN Ann Summa; Photo, COLOR, RICHARD
C. ATKINSON ; Photo, COLOR, WARREN CHRISTOPHER ; Photo, COLOR, KENNETH T. SHINE
Amy Etra, center


                               2 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 4; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1691 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Cite Gains On Sickle Cell Disease

BYLINE: By WARREN E. LEARY

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   AFTER years of slow, steady progress against sickle cell disease, scientists
have recently reported a flurry of research advances and potential new
treatments for the crippling blood disorder.

   With laboratories around the world reporting tantalizing initial results in
test-tube and animal studies of drugs, the scientists say they may have reached
a turning point in their battle against the hereditary disease, which afflicts
millions of people around the world.

   The disease is characterized by an abnormal form of hemoglobin, the
oxygen-carrying protein of red blood cells, which causes the cells to stiffen,
distort into odd shapes and clog blood vessels. These clogs not only can be
painful, but they can lead to damage to internal organs and other problems.

   Until recently, treatment of the incurable condition was primarily
symptomatic. Doctors were confined to using analgesic drugs to ease painful
episodes brought on by clogged blood vessels, giving transfusions to supply
patients with healthy blood cells and using antibiotics to treat potentially
fatal infections.

   But the research efforts are now pointing to ways that could attack sickle
cell disease directly. ''I get an upbeat feeling from talking with people doing
research or treating patients,'' said Dr. Clarice Reid, chief of the sickle cell
branch at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

   ''We don't want to overstate the progress or give premature hope to sickle
cell patients, but we're on the edge of making some real progress in
treatment,'' said Dr. Reid, who administers the $30 million spent annually by
the National Institutes of Health on sickle cell research.

   In the United States, the disease primarily affects blacks, but variations of
it are seen in whites of Mediterranean, Middle Eastern and East Indian descent.
An estimated 60,000 American blacks suffer from the disease and about 2.5
million of the nation's 30 milion blacks carry the genetic trait for it. If
parents have the trait, they can give the disease to their children, even if
they do not have the disease themselves.

   Dr. Reid said a ''significant part of the non-black population'' also carries
sickle cell genes, but the exact number is unknown because not all babies are
tested at birth, despite recommendations for such testing from a Federal
advisory panel.

   New hope about treating sickle cell comes from a multi-pronged attack on the
disease:

   * At several centers doctors have begun a clinical trial of the drug
hydroxyurea, which increases the body's production of a type of hemoglobin that
resists sickling.

   * New drugs are being tested that interfere with the structure of sickle cell
hemoglobin, blocking it from becoming inflexible.

   * Calcium channel blockers, drugs used to treat cardiovascular disease, have
shown some promise in reducing the rigidity of sickled cells in early human
tests.

   * Several chemicals are under investigation that affect blood cell surface
membranes and blood vessel linings. Researchers hope they will lead to ways to
interfere with vessel clogging.

   * Scientists say they are completing development of a genetically altered
mouse that could be used in research and serve as the first true animal model
for the disease.

Progress on Genetics

   Dr. Lennette J. Benjamin, a sickle cell researcher and assistant professor of
medicine at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York, said there has been
enormous progress in understanding the genetics of sickle cell disease and in
looking at potential ways to cure it, like gene therapy or bone marrow
transplants.

   ''But in all the years we've known of the basic defect, we've come up with
almost no treatments, things that have impact on patients while we wait for a
cure,'' said Dr. Benjamin, who is also co-director of the Sickle Cell Center at
Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.

   ''There seems to be a new surge of interest in treatments and some promising
candidates,'' she continued. ''This is an exciting time after a real lull in the
treatment area.''

   Dr. Alan N. Schechter, a sickle cell and hemoglobin researcher at the
National Institutes of Health, said the new therapeutic approaches are possible
because of previous research into the molecular and cellular characteristics of
the abnormal red blood cells. He noted that some hopeful approaches, like using
drugs to force a sickle cell patient's body to produce more normal hemoglobin,
have been tried before with other agents. But those appeared too toxic to use.

   One development that could have a significant impact on sickle cell
treatments, he said, is developing a true animal model of the disease. With an
animal that is able to develop the disease, researchers could test possible
therapies, including transplanting normal hemoglobin genes or trying numerous
drug stategies, he said.

   Dr. Schechter said a half-dozen laboratories, including his own, are close to
producing a mouse to serve as such a model. Researchers have inserted the
genetic defect that causes sickle hemoglobin into mice and they have produced
offspring that show the entire cycle of the disease.

'Getting Tantalizingly Close'

   ''We now have mice that express the sickle gene, but they handle it too well
and don't get sick with the disease,'' Dr. Schechter said. ''We're getting
tantalizingly close, but getting the right model still may be two years away.''

   He added, ''The aftermath of a sickle cell mouse would be a major
breakthrough for sickle cell and other genetic diseases, such as cystic
fibrosis, for which it would serve as a model.''

   The most promising drug research involves hydroxyurea, a prescription product
normally used to treat leukemia patients. Six medical centers have begun a
three-year clinical trial with sickle cell patients using the drug. Early tests
at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore and elsewhere indicated the chemical
increased production of a type of hemoglobin found in fetuses and newborns.

   Dr. Samuel Charache, Dr. George J. Dover and associates at Johns Hopkins said
the hydroxyurea treatment appears to switch on the gene responsible for
production of fetal hemoglobin. This fetal hemoglobin, which is produced in only
minute amounts in adults, has been associated with a symptom-free form of sickle
cell disease.

   ''Our goal is to produce a milder form of sickle cell disease in adults by
increasing the levels of fetal hemoglobin,'' Dr. Charache said. ''The treatment
works very well for some patients and not at all for others, but we don't know
why.''

   Sickle hemoglobin has an abnormality that allows its molecules to lock
together in rod-like crystals when they give up the oxygen they carry in red
blood cells. This crystalline structure helps distort the cells and give them
rigidity.

   Fetal hemoglobin lacks the hooking abnormality that locks adult hemoglobin
molecules together, and scientists have found that the more of the fetal variety
present, the less sickling that occurs.

Combining to Test Effect

   In a related study being conducted at Johns Hopkins and Harvard, researchers
are combining hydroxyurea with a growth factor called erythropoietin to see if
the drugs together are more effective than either alone. Erythropoietin, a
hormone that stimulates red blood cell production, also stimulates some fetal
hemoglobin production, but it has not proved especially effective for sickle
cell patients, scientists said.

   But the researchers, noting that hydroxyurea can have negative effects on
bone marrow, hope that using it in conjunction with erythropoietin will permit
lower effective doses.

   Dr. Benjamin of Montefiore Medical Center and other investigators are testing
drugs that affect the membranes of red blood cells.

   When sickle cells start to stiffen, researchers note, the outside membranes
also undergo secondary changes. These changes in membrane proteins and fats can
result in water loss and increased hemoglobin concentration, which helps
transform the cell into rigid sickle shapes.

   Studies by Dr. Benjamin and others found that the drug cetiedil affected
membrane permeability and prevented such dehydration. In one trial, the duration
of painful sickle cell attacks was shorter for patients who received the drug
during the episodes.

   Other research indicated cetiedil also affected the blood vessels in a way
that could aid sickle cell patients. Studies found that the drug improved
microcirculation, allowing freer flow of blood cells.

   Because cetiedil is similar to a class of drugs called calcium channel
blockers, which are used to treat chest pains and high blood pressure,
researchers have begun looking at several of them as potential sickle cell
treatments, Dr. Benjamin said. So far, the calcium blockers verapamil, diltiazem
and nifedipine have been shown to relieve some sickling or sickling-related
complications, while nitrendipine did not work as well.

   Dr. James M. Manning and others at Rockefeller University are looking at
compounds that might act directly on sickle hemoglobin to prevent it from
sticking together. Early studies with a chemical called sodium cyanate showed
that this approach could be successful, he said, but the compound was not
specific to hemoglobin and proved too toxic to use.

   But researchers screened a series of non-toxic sugars known to react with
amino acids in the hemoglobin protein chain and have found one, glyceraldehyde,
that inhibits sickling in test-tube studies. In addition, Dr. Manning said
Rockefeller researchers are working with a newly synthesized compound called
methyl acetyl phosphate. Tests indicate that the globin molecule and stops
sickling by interfering with himoglobin gelling.

   Each of these compounds affectred a different site on the hemoglobin
molecule, Dr. Manning noted, and continuing studies like these will tell
scientists how sickle hemoglobin reacts when chemicals bind to its different
sites. This raised the possibility of designing a specific drug to treat sickle
cell disease.

   ''Studies with these compounds are defining parts of the hemoglobin molecule
that are susceptible to attack by selective chemical modification,'' Dr. Manning
said.

GRAPHIC: Photos of red blood cells, left, from a patient with sickle cell
disease; normal doughnut-shaped red blood cells. (pg. C6)


                               3 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1989 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    October 31, 1989, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z8

LENGTH: 1282 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Testing for Cystic Fibrosis;
About One in 20 Americans Has the Gene and Can Pass It to Their Children

BYLINE: Sally Squires, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   When scientists announced in August that they had discovered the gene for
cystic fibrosis, they opened the way for designing a diagnostic test that could
screen large numbers of people for the common inherited illness.

   "For the first time, perhaps the entire population will be eligible to be
screened," said Beryl Rosenstein, director of the cystic fibrosis clinic at the
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in Baltimore. "The magnitude on health care
is relatively unprecedented."

   But medical researchers are also raising questions about the money, time and
commitment that will be needed, should widespread screening become possible.

   "The education part of this process is not yet under way," said Francis
Collins, an associate professor of internal medicine and human genetics and part
of the team at the University of Michigan that helped identify the gene. "Public
health people who might be setting up programs for doing carrier screening
haven't yet discussed how that could happen. There's a crying need to have those
discussions and end up with some national consensus."

   Cystic fibrosis affects 30,000 Americans, more than the blood disorder,
hemophilia, or the crippling disease, muscular dystrophy. The disease impairs
glands in the digestive system, the respiratory tract and the skin.

   About one in 20 Americans carries the gene for cystic fibrosis. Carriers show
no signs of the illness, but if two carriers have children, their offspring have
a one in four chance of developing the disease.

   About 2,000 babies are born each year in the United States with cystic
fibrosis. The disease varies in severity, and those with mild cases can expect
to live well into adulthood.  At the same time, more than half of those
afflicted with CF die before their 21st birthday.

   The gene identified in August by Collins and Lap-Chee Tsui, of the Hospital
for Sick Children in Toronto, is responsible for about 70 percent of CF cases in
this country. While it is largely a disease of Caucasians, a slightly less
severe form occurs among blacks and other minorities and appears to be caused by
a different gene.

   Now that the predominant gene for CF has been identified, "it should be easy
and straightforward to identify the other genes [for CF]," said Arthur Beaudet,
a researcher at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston. "I think it could take as little as three to six months."

   Once that is accomplished, it would be possible to do mass screening for
cystic fibrosis. Tests are expected to run about $ 50 to $ 100 per person.
(Current tests, which are only used in families that already have one child with
the disease, cost about $ 500 to $ 1,000 to perform.)

   One concern about the new test is that doctors will automatically start
screening patients before guidelines are established by health officials because
of the potential for medical malpractice suits. While no tests are available
yet, at least half a dozen biotech companies have expressed interest in
manufacturing the screening test for CF. It could be on the market within the
next year or two.

   "Obstetricians might fear that if they don't offer the test, that a patient
might have reason for litigation," said Beaudet. "It is a legitimate fear, and
that kind of reasoning could lead to rapid, premature implementation of
testing."

   The other pressing need is for trained genetic counselors who will be able to
advise families about whether they should be tested. "If a significant portion
of the population chooses to be tested for CF, this might generate the need for
an additional 500 to 1,000 genetic counselors," said Rosenstein. "We really
don't have the capacity to address that need right now. It's another big issue
that is going to have to be faced."

   How the test for CF will be accepted and used by families is also difficult
to answer. "While some geneticists are predicting that everyone will want to
take this test, I am not sure," said Rosenstein. "I don't think that we have
enough information to make those predictions."

   Then there is the question of when to screen. Should the test be added to the
battery performed with amniocentesis? Should babies be screened at birth for
cystic fibrosis? Should couples be screened routinely as part of their blood
tests for a marriage license? Or should testing be done just prior to starting a
family?

   "My preference would be to do it in young couples [before they start their
families] or very early in pregnancy," said Haig Kazazian, director of the
Center for Medical Genetics at The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions in
Baltimore.

   The cause of CF is a defect in a normal gene found on chromosome seven. The
abnormal gene results in the manufacture of a defective protein by glands
throughout the body.

   The defect is small.  Proteins are made up of amino acids, and the defective
protein in CF is missing just one out of 1,480 amino acids. That tiny change
results in sweat that is saltier than normal and thick, copious mucus that
interferes with digestion, clogs the lungs and leaves lungs vulnerable to
infection. Saliva is also thicker and stickier than normal. It can impair the
ability of CF patients to speak and swallow, and it leaves them at greater risk
of developing infections that can spread to the rest of the body.

   Today, most of the digestive problems in patients with cystic fibrosis can be
controlled with careful medical treatment. What remain difficult to overcome are
the respiratory complications. People with CF often have trouble breathing and
are prone to frequent, lingering infections of the lungs.

   Isolating the gene for CF opens up a wide array of new possibilities for
treatment, ranging from new drugs to perhaps one day replacing the faulty gene
with a normal one.

   Scientists have already learned how to clone the normal gene in the
laboratory, and it may soon be possible one day to make large quantities of the
normal protein. Researchers speculate that these manufactured proteins could be
used to treat patients with CF.  In one approach, according to Collins, the
protein might be incorporated into an aerosal spray that a patient could inhale
several times a day. That, presumably, would replace the defective protein and
allow victims to produce normal mucus and breathe normally. This theory has not
been tested in animals and whether it would actually work is not known.

   In the meantime, other drugs may help prolong the lives of CF patients.
Researchers at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill have had some
success using the experimental drug amiloride to prevent CF-associated lung
problems. Amiloride seems to work by halting water loss from mucus in the lungs.

   "Amiloride shows promise," said Rosenstein, "but a significant amount of
additional testing needs to be carried out."

   In a soon-to-be published annual report on cystic fibrosis by the National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, scientists say that in
a small number of patients, "the drug has appeared to be effective when
administered as an aerosol spray four times a day and has produced no evidence
of toxicity in the CF patients treated."

   Ultimately, the way to overcome this disease would be with gene therapy --
that is, replacing the defective gene with a gene that functions properly.

   Initial experiments in the basic technology of this approach are under way at
the National Institutes of Health. None of the tests has yet focused on the
ability of gene therapy to treat a specific disease.  As Collins said about the
possibility of using gene therapy for CF: "It will still take about five to 10
years before we could do anything like that."

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION


                               4 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1989 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            October 27, 1989 Friday
                                 Second Edition

SECTION: Business; Pg. C08

LENGTH: 67 words

HEADLINE: CHEMICALS TO BE SHIPPED

DATELINE: CORVALLIS (AP)

BODY:

   Friday, October 27, 1989 CHEMICALS TO BE SHIPPED

   TEXT:

   Antivirals Inc., a 9-year-old Corvallis company, next month will ship the
first prototypes of its therapeutic compounds to drug companies, founder James
Summerton says.

   Twenty-five pharmaceutical companies in the United States, Japan and Europe
have been offered the chance to buy prototypes of Antiviral's Neu-Gene and Anti-
Gene therapeutic chemicals.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2006


                               5 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 1989 The Sunday Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Sunday Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             October 8, 1989 Sunday
                                 Fourth Edition

SECTION: Northwest Magazine; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1581 words

HEADLINE: MEDICINE DAMAGE CONTROL

BYLINE: Cliff Collins

BODY:

   Sunday, October 8, 1989 MEDICINE    DAMAGE CONTROL

   TEXT:

   Prognostication has been a source of fascination for as long as humans have
possessed reason. Foretelling the future is perhaps the ultimate conceit: In a
world filled with uncertainty, it implies that we will still be here tomorrow.

   Accurately predicting how science will prevent and overcome diseases may seem
particularly dicey, but it is far from a crap shoot. Granted, advances in
medicine occasionally result from lucky ``accidents,'' but the so-called
breakthoughs more often come about because of a calculated chipping away at
theories and paradigms that hold promise. Even so, as in games of chance, it
takes money: Research is expensive, and the people with ample cash place their
bets with big-ticket projects that are most likely to pay dividends -- economic
as much as health.

   During the coming decade, those projects will involve biomedical research,
gene therapy, genetic manipulation and new understanding about the body's
complex immune system. The studies relating to immunity are particularly
exciting and are expected to affect knowledge about diseases as diverse as
arthritis, diabetes, multiple sclerosis and other neurological disorders and
cancer. Research on AIDS will contribute greatly to scientific progress in
unraveling the mysteries of the body's defense system.

   Still, a quick look at the major causes of death in this country confirms
that our daily habits have more to do with prevention of disease than any
hypothetical medical breakthrough will. Here is a sample of what crystal-ball
gazers see for some of the major ills that plague us.

   Heart Disease

   Although cancer and AIDS dominated health headlines in the 1980s,
cardiovascular diseases are far and away the leading cause of death in America.
We mistakenly think they are diseases of the elderly, yet about half of all
heart attacks occur in people under age 65. Atherosclerosis, the medical term
for narrowing of the arteries due to the buildup of plaque, is a complex
process, and scientists are unsure of the precise cause.

   We do know several controllable risk factors, however: Smoking and high blood
pressure are the major ones, and contributing factors are obesity, diabetes,
physical inactivity and stress. In the coming decade, cholesterol in the blood
will gain universal acceptance as the third major risk factor. Cholesterol has
gotten so much press lately that you could be forgiven for thinking its day has
already arrived. In fact, only very recently has there been much widespread
acceptance among physicians that cholesterol should be checked, monitored and
controlled.

   The evidence that cholesterol matters is ``massively documented,'' says
preventive cardiology pioneer Dr. Jeremiah Stamler of Northwestern University.
That evidence, coupled with the efforts of the National Cholesterol Education
Program -- which chose doctors as its first target group -- has brought many
medical people around, says Sonja L. Connor of Oregon Health Sciences
University. Connor adds that cholesterol is taking the route of high blood
pressure, which 20 years ago wasn't treated. Like blood pressure, cholesterol is
becoming a number to know, one patients will memorize.

   The number of people taking the new finger-prick, three-minute test is
skyrocketing. Diet always is the first strategy in lowering cholesterol, even if
a doctor later adds a cholesterol-lowering drug, and diet must remain an
integral part of cholesterol treatment therapies. In China, intake of saturated
fat and cholesterol is low and the population's blood cholesterol total, HDL and
LDL measurements are optimal, also, coronary heart disease is rare, Stamler
says.

   Gene research will play a big role in discerning who possesses
characteristics, aside from the controllable factors, that put them at risk of
heart disease. Scientists have identified the gene that causes high cholesterol
in families, for instance, an important step because the condition is the most
prevalent gene defect known, says Connor.

   A million people, perhaps many more than that, in the United States are
infected with HIV, the human immunodeficiency virus responsible for AIDS.
Approximately that many people die annually from cardiovascular disease. Yet
last year, for the first time, cancer was displaced at the top of the health
problem-everyone-fears-most polls by acquired immune deficiency syndrome. AIDS
still isn't among the Centers for Disease Control's top 10 in terms of the
number of people who die of it annually, but it was unknown in this country
before 1981; the agent responsible was not identified until 1984; and AIDS is
the most uniformly lethal disease of modern times.

   Ever since science discovered the modes of transmission, AIDS has become a
classic example of one of the most difficult challenges our society faces:
Persuading people to alter behaviors that lead to avoidable health problems. Dr.
Mark O. Loveless, medical director of the Oregon AIDS Task Force and director of
the HIV program at OHSU, notes that AIDS differs little from other
lifestyle-related disease such as those caused by smoking, alcohol and drug
abuse and so forth: It is a preventable disease, but how do you inspire behavior
change? An increasing percentage of cases are in injected-illicit-drug users and
their sexual partners, a population that has been and will remain difficult to
reach.

   Aside from prevention, hope during the coming years lies with increased
confidence that once someone is infected with HIV, doctors are going to be able
to forestall damage. That goal is not so different from the current state of
knowledge for other chronic diseases such as diabetes, where a cure is hoped for
down the road but medicine is able to offer improved control, allowing patients
to live more productive lives. The new optimism is a direct result of evidence
that the drug AZT can slow progression of HIV, Loveless says. Other strategies
are in the developmental stage, and he predicts that the next five years will
offer exciting progress in management of HIV infection.

   Medicine has had a tough time with viruses. Even so, the search for a vaccine
is worthwhile because if researchers find one, ``we will have deveoped
technologies for a large number of viruses,'' Loveless says.

   Cancer

   Personal behavior plays a role in almost 90 percent of all cancer cases,
according to the National Cancer Institute. Predicting major breakthroughs in
cancer prevention amounts to predicting changes in our habits -- not an easy
chore. Cancer is the nation's second leading cause of death, and by far the
number one cancer killer is lung cancer. Smoking accounts for more than eight
out of 10 cases of lung cancer and about one-third of all cancers in the United
States. For example, smokers are at greater risk for cancers of the mouth,
throat, bladder, pancreas and kidney. Sixty years ago lung cancer was a rare
disease, but incidence increased in relation to smoking patterns.

   What that means for the next few years is that lung cancer will level off
among males at the same time it increases in women. By 1995, the CDC estimates,
more women than men will be smoking, a trend expected to continue. The cancer
institute tabs excessive sun exposure, industrial pollutants and diet as other
known cancer causes. Greater understanding of dietary factors will aid
decision-making about diet.

   Cancer researchers are forecasting significant progress in cancer treatment.
That's because they are getting better at designing more specific ways to
eliminate tumors without damaging healthy cells. But the three main strategies
against cancer -- chemotherapy, radiation and surgery -- have had limited
success in curing the cancers that claim the most lives each year: lung, breast,
colon and rectum, and prostate. Dr. Grover Bagby, an oncologist at Portland
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, says the key will be to find out why a cancer
cell becomes cancerous so that chemical ``magic bullets'' can reach these cells
and convert them into healthy cells. ``In the next 10 years cancer therapy will
be potentially less toxic and more effective, and will be used only when it will
help,'' says Bagby.

   Eye Disorders

   For nearly every one of the past 25 years, surveys showed that the public's
greatest health fear was cancer, followed by blindness. And as the population
ages, eye problems will become more prevalent. Pharmaceutical companies know
that, and they are pouring money into research for drugs that will retard
cataract formation. Laser surgery, which doctors are using in more and more
applications, began in ophthalmology, and additional types will continue to keep
eye surgery on the cutting edge of medicine. Over 90 percent of patients now
undergoing cataract surgery regain useful vision, a remarkable advance in a
relatively short time. Intraocular lenses implanted in the surgery have improved
each year.

   Evidence is increasing that macular degeneration, the breakdown of vision
associated with aging and a leading cause of blindness, may be associated with
long-term exposure to the blue portion of the light spectrum. If further studies
point to blue light as a cause, more efforts will be focused on prevention,
which would come from wearing sunglasses with blue-light filters.

   CLIFF COLLINS is an Aloha writer who contributes regularly to Northwest
Magazine's health and fitness column. RODD AMBROSON is a free-lance medical
illustrator who lives in Lake Oswego.

   ILLUSTRATION:        Drawings by Rodd Ambroson

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2006


                               6 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1989 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     October 8, 1989, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z8; EDITOR'S NOTE

LENGTH: 568 words

BODY:

   Mark Twain would have enjoyed the current boom in health and medicine. As he
put it: "The only way to keep your health is to eat what you don't want, drink
what you don't like, and do what you'd druther not."

   A lot has changed since Twain surveyed the American scene in the 19th
century. Most recent is the compelling new evidence on the role of behavior in
determining how long and how well a person lives. Studies increasingly show that
diet, exercise, life-style habits such as smoking and substance abuse,
environmental conditions and economic status are all linked to health and the
development of illness. Meanwhile, there has been an explosion of medical
research as scientists uncover the basic secrets of the human cell and devise
new ways to diagnose and treat disease.

   Five years ago, The Washington Post asked readers what kinds of stories they
wanted to see more of in the paper. The answer came back resoundingly: more
health news, more coverage of medicine and social trends. As a result, The Post
created the Health Section, a weekly journal that covers everything from gene
therapy and divorce to AIDS and health insurance.

   Today we are expanding our coverage further. Good Health is a feature
magazine devoted to information you need to stay well -- and keep up with the
latest health trends. The stories are written by Health reporters and columnists
along with Post writers Tom Shales, Nina Hyde, Curt Suplee, Phyllis C. Richman,
Boyce Rensberger and Jeffrey A. Frank, and others. Topics range from medicine
and sports to fitness and fashion. This issue is a bonus for 1989. We will
publish another issue of Good Health in April.

   The Washington Post's Good Health is part of a new venture in publishing that
involves four other newspapers. The Boston Globe, the Chicago Tribune, the Los
Angeles Times and the New York Times also are coming out with their versions of
Good Health today.

   Though many ads appear in all five magazines, each newspaper has created its
own editorial material. The stories in the five magazines are different.  The
publishing concept, however, is the same: a national health magazine that meets
the needs of readers in each part of the country. Altogether, Good Health will
have a circulation of 6.1 million readers, making it the sixth-largest national
magazine in the United States.

   We in Washington have a particular story to tell about health. It is here
that many of the major decisions about health are made: How long can you stay in
the hospital? What foods lower cholesterol levels? What is the latest treatment
for cancer? Are the drugs you take safe?

   The answers are found in federal agencies -- the National Institutes of
Health, the Food and Drug Administration, the Public Health Service; on Capitol
Hill, where Congress passes laws on catastrophic health insurance and child
care; in institutions such as the National Academy of Sciences.

   The answers also are found in the decisions individuals make over a lifetime:
when to marry and have a baby, where to find work, how to take care of young
children and aging parents.

   Our mandate is to write about health in the broadest sense.

   As the British statesman Benjamin Disraeli said more than a century ago: "The
health of the people is really the foundation upon which all their happiness and
all their powers as a State depend."

   ABIGAIL TRAFFORD

   Washington Post Health Editor


                               7 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1989 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 3, 1989 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 972 words

HEADLINE: Cracking human genetic code soon may get just a bit easier

BYLINE: Ann Gibbons, Tribune Science Writer

BODY:

   A GROUP OF the nation's leading geneticists yesterday proposed a new strategy
that could simplify the massive international effort to unravel the human
genetic code. In San Diego for a three-day forum on genetics, the scientists
enthusiastically announced a new plan for mapping the human genome, the complete
set of genetic instructions for making a human being. The scientists proposed a
simple but elegant plan to use a standard method of tagging interesting segments
of the genome.

   Using this technique, known as STS, for sequence tagged sites, geneticists
finally would have a uniform way to share their data. "There seems to be a
remarkable consensus that this approach will make the task of the Human Genome
Project immensely easier," said Charles Cantor, director of the Human Genome
Center at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in Berkeley, and one of the
scientists who proposed the new approach. He estimated that the new approach
could cut the cost of deciphering the human genetic code by half and reduce the
time needed to identify all the genes in the human body. The idea received an
enthusiastic reception from many of the 800 scientists attending the Human
Genome I forum sponsored by Science magazine at the Town and Country Hotel,
where scientists are meeting to plan their strategy and discuss techniques for
deciphering the human genetic code. "I think it's a useful tool," said Raymond
White, co-chairman of the Human Genetics Department at the University of Utah.

   "It takes people about 30 seconds to appreciate what a good idea this is.
"It's an evolution in the way we think about the Human Genome Project." The
Human Genome Project is a $3 billion effort to identify each of the estimated
100,000 genes in the human body within the next 15 years. From their command
post inside each human cell, these inherited genes issue the instructions that
make the proteins essential for life, ranging from the hemoglobin that ferries
oxygen in the blood to the collagen that gives skin its structure. The genes are
strung out along 46 threadlike strands called chromosomes that are tucked within
the nucleus of almost every one of the body's 100 trillion cells.

   Each chromosome contains a fibrous molecule of deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA,
that is the chemical blueprint for heredity. The DNA is made of four subunits
(called base pairs) that are informally known by their first letters -- A for
adenine, T for thymine, G for guanine and C for cytosine.

   The sequence of these units spells out the different codes for making various
proteins.

   A gene is considered the set of instructions for making one protein, and
often consists of a string of 100,000 of these four letters spelling out a
unique message.

   This genetic alphabet is estimated to be about 3 billion letters long.
Scientists want to crack this genetic code and determine the correct sequence
for every gene in the body.

   The work has broad implications for medicine, because defects in the genetic
code lead to disorders as common as cancer, mental illness and heart disease.
Scientists recently identified the code for the gene that can cause cystic
fibrosis, and are zeroing in on other genes that can cause such devastating
diseases as Huntington's disease and neurofibromatosis, in which soft tumors
grow all over the body.

   Although their work already is leading to new prenatal tests and screening
techniques for these and other inherited disorders, scientists still are a long
way from testing genetic therapies to treat them. "I believe that even if we
actually had the entire genetic sequence today -- if it fell from the sky --
we'd be in a very poor position to use it," Cantor said. For that reason, the
purpose of the Human Genome Project is not only to unravel the genetic code, but
to develop new tools and spur research leading to novel techniques for
manipulating DNA. Using STS, scientists working with a piece of DNA will
identify parts of the sequence with the same, uniform method -- by unraveling
the order of the four letters (A, T, G and C) that make up the ends of the
fragment.

   If a scientist is working on a segment of DNA that is 100,000 bases long, for
example, he might work out the sequence for about 20 letters on each end. That
unique sequence would then be sent to a special computerized index. Other
scientists reading the 20-letter code would be able to use that bit of
information to go to their labs and make copies of the same segment of DNA.
Eventually, scientists hope to establish a computer data bank of the sequence of
these key segments of DNA. Some of the scientists compared the human genome to a
highway of about 3 billion bases.

   The codes would be known for STS landmarks spaced roughly every 100,000 bases
apart on the genome -- giving scientists signposts along the entire genome that
would flag regions of interest. One of the main benefits of the approach is that
it allows scientists to exchange data without having to make copies of each
other's laboratory specimens, cells that are known as clones.

   Keeping such clones in a national repository was an expensive proposition
that scientists now may be able to replace with the less expensive STS index.
The proposal still must be approved by the scientific community.

   While some scientists are calling for voluntary adoption of the new approach,
others are suggesting that the federal government require researchers using
federal grant money to use the new technique.

   Or, journals such as Science could request that all researchers who publish
in their pages use the method. "One of the difficulties that has emerged is that
each of the scientists using new approaches couldn't talk to each other," Cantor
said.

   "What has emerged over the past month or two is an agreement in principle on
how to get a common language -- to translate our results into a common
currency."

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. CHARLES CANTOR | Urges plan to simplify work (Eds.
1,2,3,4) 2. RAYMOND WHITE | "I think it's a useful tool" (A-12)

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                               8 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               September 19, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 372 words

HEADLINE: Human Transplant of Altered Cells Is Success

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 18

BODY:

   Scientists at the National Cancer Institute said today that the first
federally approved transplant of genetically altered cells into a human had been
successful.

   ''We have found that it is practical and feasible and safe'' to transplant
genetically altered cells into humans, said Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, a leader of
the research team.

   The primary purpose of the genetic manipulation was to make the cells easily
identifiable so doctors could track them in the patient's body. The researchers
ultimately hope to develop cancer treatments that make use of the body's own
natural disease-fighting abilities, as opposed to such treatments as surgery,
radiation and chemotherapy.

   ''Our next step, hopefully, will be to introduce genes that will make those
cells better cancer fighters,'' Dr. Rosenberg said after briefing members of the
National Cancer Advisory Board on the early results of the research.

   In the experiments, human cancer-fighting cells were altered by insertion of
an of an altered mouse virus that markedthe cells.

   To avoid any potential harm, the virus was deliberately crippled so that it
could not reproduce in the patient.

   The cells that were altered are cancer-fighting white blood cells known as
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. These cells were removed from the cancer
patient, tagged by the addition of the new genetic material, allowed to
proliferate, then returned to the patient.

   So far, the gene-modified cells have been administered to five patients, and
Dr. Rosenberg said he found no side effects from the cells in any of the five.

   The patients who volunteered for the experiment had advanced cancers.
Although they were not expected to benefit from the genetic manipulation, they
could benefit from the actions of the cancer-fighting cells.

   In the first patient to receive the modified cells, a 29-year-old woman,
''the cells are in fact present and circulating 19 days later,'' Dr. Rosenberg
said. The researchers received Government clearance to begin the transplants in
May after a long review.

   Unsuccessful attempts at gene therapy were made in 1980 on two patients
suffering from a blood disorder. The attempts, by American scientists, were done
abroad without Federal approval.


                               9 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1989 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   September 19, 1989, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 212 words

HEADLINE: Door open for gene therapy

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   ''We now have demonstrated the practicality and feasibility of transfering
genes into humans,'' Dr. Steven Rosenberg, National Cancer Institute, said
Monday. ''It opens the possibilities to gene therapy.''

   The purpose of the experiments was to determine whether human cells that are
removed from the body and modified with a new gene can survive after being
reinjected into the bloodstream.

   Rosenberg told the National Cancer Advisory Board the gene-modified cells
lived at least 19 days with no side effects to the patients.

   The tests represent a collaboration between Rosenberg and NCI gene therapy
researchers Dr. Michael Blaese and Dr. French Anderson.

   Rosenberg has been developing an experimental cancer therapy made from the
body's own natural tumor fighting cells. The treatment has shown promising
results, but works with varying degrees of success and sometimes not at all.

   In the experiments, these cancer-fighting cells were modified with a
non-human gene which made it possible to track the cells through a patient's
body.By doing so, Rosenberg hopes to learn how to improve the cancer therapy.

   The next step for Blaese and Anderson is to introduce new genes into the
tumor-fighting cells that will directly boost the treatment's effectiveness.


                               10 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1989 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   September 19, 1989, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z5; THE CUTTING EDGE

LENGTH: 364 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Progress Reported

BYLINE: Larry Thompson

BODY:

   National Institutes of Health scientists have announced encouraging results
in their first report on the progress of transplanting genes into human
patients.

   So far, the transfer of genetically altered white blood cells has been
successful in five patients; in one patient, researchers have evidence of the
new gene persisting in the body for 19 days.

   "We have been able to isolate gene-modified cells from patients both in blood
and in the tumors," said Steven A. Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute,
who presented these preliminary findings to the National Cancer Advisory Board
yesterday. "We have seen absolutely no side effects to the gene transfer."

   Rosenberg and collaborators W. French Anderson of the Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute and NCI's R. Michael Blaese received permission earlier this year to
begin the first gene transfer experiments in 10 patients with advanced cancer.

   The patients have malignant melanoma, a lethal form of skin cancer, and are
expected to live three months or less. The patients range in age from 26 to 52.

   The gene therapy experiment is part of an ongoing study to see if white blood
cells from the immune system can be used to fight the cancer. These cells,
called TIL cells, are surgically removed from a tumor and grown in the
laboratory until there are billions of TIL cells that can be injected back into
the body.

   The cancer therapy shows promise, but scientists do not know how long the
effect may last. By tagging the cells with a new gene, they can monitor the life
of the TIL cells. At the same time, they can test the concept of using gene
transfer to treat a range of diseases.

   Preliminary results showed that the gene transfer "took"; in addition, the
TIL cells retained their tumor-killing activity and there were no side effects
from the gene-transfer procedure.

   Rosenberg also showed some dramatic slides of a 26-year-old woman with
melanoma who had a large cancerous spot on the roof of her mouth, among other
places on her body. Ten days after treatment with the gene-altered white blood
cells, the tumor shrank significantly.

   For this first group of patients, Anderson said, "everything has gone well."


                               11 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1989 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    August 31, 1989, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: OPINION EDITORIAL; PAGE A26

LENGTH: 490 words

HEADLINE: Cracking a Code

BODY:

   THE DISCOVERY, announced last week, of the precise gene that causes cystic
fibrosis is a genuine scientific breakthrough -- the kind of dramatic advance
that science-fictionists once dreamed would result from a direct reading of the
human genetic code, back when that capability was still a fantasy. The "code" is
the order in which amino acids are arranged on the long chains of DNA that make
up human genes and chromosomes. Mistakes in the chain -- which, in humans,
comprises about 3 billion "base pairs" of these amino acids -- are the cause of
about 4,000 known genetic diseases, of which cystic fibrosis is one of the most
lethal and, among whites, the most widespread. About 30,000 people in North
America have it, and half of them die by the time they reach their early
twenties. The potential of curing this disease and similar diseases -- muscular
dystrophy is another -- by actually fixing the code where it has gone awry, at
the unimaginably microscopic level of human genetic material, moves nearer by
such breakthroughs, and it is a potential that commands both wonder and
perplexity.

   Cystic fibrosis is inherited when both mother and father are carriers of a
recessive gene with a particular defect. Its symptoms include constant
respiratory infections and a thick mucus that fills the lungs, along with
disorders of the sweat glands and the pancreas. But nobody has known till now
what that defect was or how it caused the symptoms. The only approach has been
to treat the symptoms. Doctors have been doing this with steadily improving
antibiotics, but there is a point at which such treatment ceases to be
effective.

   Now scientists are at the source. The gradually narrowing search for the
right gene has taken a half decade of work by many labs -- the success came from
a collaboration between the Toronto Hospital for Sick Children and the
University of Michigan -- and assorted leaps forward in gene mapping and
computer techniques. In 1985, Dr. Lap-Chee Tsui of Toronto figured out which of
46 human chromosomes carried the flaw. That narrowed it to 1.5 million pairs of
amino acids. Other scientists were meanwhile developing new methods, such as
"chromosome jumping," to sort through this haystack for the cystic fibrosis
needle. The size of the needle has been compared to the size of a pen on your
desk if the haystack, stretched out like the genetic chain, were the length of
the earth's equator.

   Researchers must still figure out how the flaw they found produces the
illness's depredations -- only then can there be attempts at treatment, maybe in
the still untested realm of "gene therapy." Other benefits such as a screening
test may be sooner to arrive. Genetic work at this fundamental level sometimes
makes people uneasy, raising the specters of engineered life forms and unnatural
meddling. A discovery like this reminds that this kind of work can also bring
relief from unspeakable suffering.



                               12 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1989 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           August 30, 1989 Wednesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 437 words

HEADLINE: UCSD gene map project may aid disease treatment

BYLINE: David Graham, Staff Writer

BODY:

   UCSD biologist Theodore Friedmann has been awarded a $1.9 million grant to
map the location of the genes on the human X chromosome, which is the site for
genes causing color blindness, hemophilia and some forms of mental retardation.
The grant is made in conjunction with the national Human Genome Project, an
effort sponsored by the government to identify all of the estimated 50,000 to
100,000 genes which scientists believe give people attributes ranging from hair
color to muscle tone to intelligence. Friedmann will undertake the mapping
project with collaborators at UCSD and other schools. One consequence of the
genome project could be better treatments for diseases that are caused by the
genes. Each gene on a chromosome governs a particular function in a person.

   The chromosomes are in virtually every cell in the body within each cell's
nucleus. The X chromosome "is more tightly packed with disease-related genes
than any other human chromosome," Friedmann said.

   The X chromosome also determines gender. There are two copies of the X
chromosome in the cells of females and one copy in males. Genes on the X
chromosome are associated with more than 70 diseases, including Lesch-Nyhan
Syndrome, a rare condition similar to cerebral palsy. The disease occurs in the
absence of the HPRT gene. The X chromosome also has a bend in it, a region known
as "fragile X," that is associated with some types of mental retardation.

   Friedmann and his collaborators hope to map that region, too. Using complex
analytic techniques, Friedmann will make a physical map showing the order of the
genes along the chromosome and the distance the genes are from one another. Each
gene is composed of a particular sequence of chemicals given the shorthand names
A G C and T, and the goal of the project is to identify each gene by its
specific sequence.

   Then, scientists want to show where each gene lies in relations to other
genes on the chromosomes. Doctors hope one day to treat genetic diseases by
replacing defective genes with a functional copy in a technique known as gene
therapy.

   Friedmann is an advocate of the therapy.

   Isolating specific genes is important to the future of gene therapy. The
grant is given over five years by the National Insitute of General Medical
Sciences as part of the Human Genome Project.

   The entire project is estimated to cost $3 billion. Other research teams at
UCSD will be competing for grants to participate in the mapping project.
Friedmann's group is collaborating with researchers at Los Alamos National
Laboratory, Oxford University and the MCR Laboratory of Molecular Biology in
Cambridge, England.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                               13 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1989 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 29, 1989 Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 784 words

HEADLINE: UCSD scientist gets grant to map genetic formation

BYLINE: Ann Gibbons, Tribune Staff Writer

BODY:

   A UCSD scientist has been awarded a five-year, $1.9 million grant to make a
detailed map of some of the genetic instructions that nature uses to build and
run a human being. Molecular biologist Theodore Friedmann and his team at the
University of California at San Diego plan to zero in on one of the more
interesting portions of the human genetic makeup -- the X chromosome, one of two
sex chromosomes in human cells. The team hopes to locate genes on the X
chromosome that are responsible for a variety of diseases, ranging from muscular
dystrophy, hemophilia, color blindness and Fragile X, one of the most common
forms of mental retardation. "We're not aimed at any particular gene, but we
want to get good at rapid and extensive characterization of genes on the X
chromosome," said Friedmann, a professor at both the School of Medicine and at
the Center for Molecular Genetics at UCSD.

   The project is one of the first to be funded by the National Institute of
General Medical Sciences as part of the Human Genome Project, a $3 billion
undertaking by researchers worldwide to unravel the human genome. Several other
teams at UCSD and the Salk Institute also are applying for some of the $53
million in federal money set aside in fiscal 1989 to map portions of the genome,
which is the complete set of instructions for making a human being. Those
instructions are contained in an estimated 100,000 genes, which are strung out
along 46 threadlike strands called chromosomes that are tucked within the
nucleus of the body's 100 trillion cells.

   Each chromosome contains a fibrous molecule of deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA,
that is the chemical blueprint for heredity. A gene contains four DNA subunits
that are informally known by their first letters -- A, T, G and C. The sequence
of these genetic letters spells out different codes for making different
proteins, which are essential for life.

   Proteins do everything from providing structure in muscle to working as
antibodies to fight disease and as enzymes to speed up chemical reactions in the
body. Sometimes, when those DNA subunits become defective, the wrong code is
expressed and the body either makes the wrong protein or fails to make the right
one -- leading to disorders as varied as cancer, mental illness and heart
disease. The goal of scientists is to crack this genetic alphabet, to find out
what the correct sequence is for every gene in the body.

   They also hope eventually to learn the code for diseases, which could lead to
gene therapy and strategies to help prevent disease. Several approaches are
being tried.

   Some scientists are working to find the location of various genes causing
disease, including the announcement last week that a team of Canadian and
American scientists had isolated the defective gene that causes cystic fibrosis.
Others, such as Friedmann's team, are systematically targeting specific
chromosomes, planning to map them and, thus, break the code for many genes along
the way. The X sex chromosome is of particular interest because it "is more
tightly packed with disease-related genes than any other human chromosome,"
Friedmann said.

   Females have two copies of the X chromosome in their cells, while males have
just one -- along with a Y sex chromosome. Friedmann has long been interested in
the disorders that have been traced back to defects in the X chromosome.

   In 1983, he isolated a gene that leads to a rare disease similar to cerebral
palsy that is called Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome.

   That gene is known as the HPRT gene. Today, more than 70 human diseases have
been linked to genes on the X chromosome by a technique called genetic-linkage
mapping.

   These gene maps are assembled by calculating the frequency with which certain
inherited diseases are associated with genetic markers, specific variants in the
genes that often are found only in people with an inherited disorder. A more
precise method for locating genes is known as physical mapping.

   In this technique, scientists identify the actual order of DNA letters and
the distance between one gene and another along the chromosome.

   Friedmann's team will use state-of-the-art techniques to separate large parts
of the X chromosome from the remainder of the cell's DNA, so that it can be
chopped into smaller fragments to determine the order of the DNA. The team hopes
to make a library of about 15,000 fragments of the X chromosome.

   The final map inevitably will have some huge blanks, Friedmann said, but
other techniques will be used to try to bridge them. The UCSD group is doing its
research in collaboration with researchers at the Los Alamos National
Laboratory, the University of Oxford and the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology
in Cambridge, England.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                               14 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1989 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     August 28, 1989, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1722 words

HEADLINE: RACE IS ON TO APPLY DISCOVERY;
Cystic fibrosis gene's first payoff likely to be in prevention, not treatment;
MEDICINE

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   Minutes after the momentous announcement that researchers had found the gene
causing cystic fibrosis, a bubbly 4 1/2-year-old patient in a yellow dress,
Ashley Dyer, obliged reporters and camera crews by allowing them to film her
undergoing tests for lung damage.

   Ashley, who appeared at a news conference at the Hospital for Sick Children
where the landmark discovery was made, had become a sudden celebrity. It was not
only because she is among the thousands of cystic fibrosis patients whose
prospects may have taken an upward leap: Ashley and her family also were among
about 100 families whose donated blood and tissue had been used in the long,
dogged effort to single out the gene causing cystic fibrosis, the most common
genetic disease of Caucasians.

   The long-awaited announcement last Thursday brought worldwide congratulations
to the researchers, Lap-Chee Tsui and John Reardon of the Hospital for Sick
Children, and Dr. Francis Collins of the University of Michigan. The gene they
discovered, a chemical unit of heredity containing some 250,000 "letters" of
genetic code, was found on the seventh of the 23 pairs of human chromosomes in
each human cell.In cystic fibrosis patients, the researchers found, the coded
information contained a subtle misspelling, resulting in a chemical imbalance
that causes the disease.

   Almost instantly, the hospital was besieged by calls from pharmaceutical and
biotech companies interested in developing treatments for the disease or
diagnostic tests to determine if healthy individuals carry a silent, mutant
cystic fibrosis gene.

   Cystic fibrosis researchers said they were already scanning lists of existing
drugs that might help correct the chemical defect in cystic fibrosis patients'
lungs. Others have begun work on strategies to replace the faulty gene in lung
cells with a normal gene, one that might be inserted into the cells by harmless
viruses.

   All these measures are aimed at preventing the basic problem in cystic
fibrosis patients - a chemical imbalance that causes a buildup of thick, sticky
mucus in the lungs, progressively damaging them and spawning life-threatening
infections.

   "By understanding the basic cause of this disease, we may be able to develop
ways to prevent those problems altogether," said Dr. Richard Boucher, head of
the cystic fibrosis research center at the University of North Carolina.

   Yet, other recent gene discoveries have proven difficult to translate into
the hoped-for new treatments or cures, and some researchers urged that caution
temper the excitement.

   "It is an excellent hope for a cure for cystic fibrosis, but misleading to
say that it's likely to lead to a cure any time in the next five to 10 years, in
my opinion," said Dr. Arthur Beaudet, professor of molecular genetics at the
Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.

    Officials of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, which with the US National
Institutes of Health has funded much of the research effort, emphasized the
encouraging aspects of the discovery. They noted, for example, that unlike
genetic disorders affecting the entire body - muscular dystrophy, for one - in
cystic fibrosis the most dangerous effects are in the lungs, which are
relatively accessible to drug treatment. For the same reason, Robert Beall,
executive vice president of the foundation, said, cystic fibrosis is now a prime
candidate for attempts to replace the flawed genes.

    He said scientists gathered to discuss strategies for gene therapy months
before the gene discovery was announced, and are thinking of approaches such as
administering normal genes to patients by means of harmless viruses inhaled in
an aerosol spray. The viruses would then insert the genes into cells lining the
lungs, causing the cells to make the normal protein and thereby correct the
chemical imbalance.

   However, Beaudet said, while gene therapy is an attractive possibility,
scientists "have no significant experience with trying to deliver DNA to lung
tissues. I think, because of the large number of affected patients who might
have false hopes raised, it's important to take the cautious rather than the
optimistic view."

   Beaudet said he believes the earliest benefits of the advance will be
improved testing of carriers - those who harbor a cystic fibrosis gene but are
healthy - and prenatal diagnosis.

   "I think the identification of the gene has much more immediate applications
for prevention than treatment," he said. With the gene and its mutations having
been pinpointed, it will be soon be possible to develop tests to identify the 1
in 20 people in the general population who carry a silent cystic fibrosis gene.

   When two people who carry the cystic fibrosis gene mate, there is a 25
percent chance their offspring will inherit both genes and be afflicted with the
disease.

   If a test revealed that both partners are carriers, they would have to decide
whether to take the risk of having an affected child, forego pregnancy, or
undergo prenatal testing with the possibility of aborting an affected fetus.

   The pressure for carrier testing is likely to come from companies wanting to
market the tests, from individuals who have become more knowledgeable about
genetic risks and want the test, and from experts in genetic testing and
counseling, researchers say.

   The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, unlike some other genetic disease
organizations, does not stress prevention of the disease by genetic screening;
it concentrates instead on finding treatments.

   Beaudet described the policy as a political decision. "Obviously, by staying
away from diagnosis they avoid the abortion issue, and don't jeopardize their
fund-raising," he said in a telephone interview.

   The gene discovery has enabled scientists to determine that the flawed gene
makes a misfunctioning protein, one that causes an imbalance in the movement of
salt and water in and out of the lung cells in cystic fibrosis.

   This protein, said Beall, is similar to those that make some tumors resistant
to anti-cancer drugs: the proteins literally pump the cancer-killing drugs out
of the tumor cells before they can have their intended effect. Because this
group of proteins has been studied for some time, he said, "there may be drugs
already on the shelf" that could be used to restore the correct balance of salt
and water flow through the lung cell membranes in cystic fibrosis patients.

   A key structure in the balance of salt and water is a channel that penetrates
the membrane enclosing the cell. Through this chloride channel, molecules pass
in and out to maintain a proper salt balance. In cystic fibrosis, cells in the
lungs, sweat glands, pancreas and intestines seem to have a flaw in the
regulation of the chloride channel, so that chloride molecules and water build
up in the cells, and mucus on the outside of the cells (which line air passages
in the lung) becomes thick and sticky. The abnormal mucus traps bacteria that
cause pneumonia and other infections.

   The abnormal protein made by the defective cystic fibrosis gene has been
labeled the Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Regulator (CFTR). Hopes are that drug
treatments can be found that would compensate for the faulty CFTR protein and
make the chloride channels function normally.

   While the search for treatments goes on, the prospect of carrier testing and
improved prenatal diagnosis is sure to become an intensely discussed issue.

   It's estimated that about 12 to 15 million people in the United States carry
a silent cystic fibrosis gene. At present, affected couples are unlikely to know
they are carriers until they have an affected child. When that occurs, it's
possible to offer the couple prenatal diagnosis should they want to have another
child, so they will have the option of abortion if the fetus is affected.

   Close relatives of the partners can also be tested in some cases to determine
if they are carriers.

   When these tests became possible several years ago, some biotech companies
began offering them on the assumption there would be high demand. But a recent
study by medical geneticist Dr. Richard Erbe at Massachusetts General Hospital
and Janet Rosenfield, a genetic counselor at Boston's Shriver Center for Mental
Retardation, found a surprisingly low use of the tests.

   "For one thing, we found that in about half of the families who have had a
child with cystic fibrosis, they have chosen to be surgically sterilized" and
have no more children, said Rosenfield.

   Many other families evidently would not choose abortion to prevent the birth
of a cystic fibrosis child. A questionnaire showed they would be more likely to
terminate pregnancy of a retarded child, said Rosenfield.

   However, she predicted that many people who haven't had any cystic fibrosis
children in their families will want to have carrier testing. "I think when
you've not had a child before, the thought of a child with cystic fibrosis could
be perceived more as a burden more than in families who have had experience with
the disease," she said."For the cystic fibrosis families, I don't think it
changes very much - what they want is treatment or therapy allowing a better
prognosis for their children. That will be very exciting for them."

   No one could be more hopeful for such a development than Ken Vance, a Toronto
cystic fibrosis patient who works for City TV, a television production company.
Vance has been one of the extremely lucky ones, having had few serious
complications. But at 28, with progressing lung damage, he is pushing the limits
of the age that cystic fibrosis patients are known to reach.

   In an interview, Vance said he and his wife are trying to adopt a baby
(nearly all male cystic fibrosis patients are sterile). With his disease,
however, he and his wife don't rate well with agencies or mothers giving up
babies, he said. And, noting that "I might not be around in another five years,"
he is reluctant to adopt a baby with disabilities that would be difficult for
his widow to raise.

   "This discovery is something I've been waiting for a long time," Vance said.
"It's going to be the pivot point of research" - and possibly lead to a better
treatment in his lifetime.

   While he knows time could be running out for him, he said, "I would like to
feel that I might be part of the first generation to live to a ripe old age."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO DIAGRAM, 1. Jack Riordan, Dr. Francis Collins and Lap-Chee Tsui
(from left) announce discovery of cystic fibrosis gene. / CP photos 2. Ashley
Dyer, 4 1/2, (right), who has cystic fibrosis, with playground friends.


                               15 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1989 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     August 28, 1989, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A3; SCIENCE: CELL BIOLOGY

LENGTH: 1251 words

HEADLINE: Treating the Body From Within: The Promise of 'Organoids';
Secretions From Newly Created Structures Could Combat a Variety of Diseases

BYLINE: Sally Squires, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Biomedical researchers are inventing a way to treat disease by making the
body grow a kind of new organ -- called an organoid or a neo-organ -- whose job
is to cure, or at least to treat, the malady.

   One technique involves implanting into the body of an animal (the method has
not been tried on humans) a small plastic scaffold in the form of a fiber pad
coated with natural substances that stimulate cell growth. Body cells colonize
the scaffolding and develop into a lump of tissue that then secretes hormones
and other chemicals.

   The method has broad implications for treating a variety of illnesses, from
heart disease to AIDS.

   In a presentation last week at the annual meeting of the National Cancer
Institute's Laboratory of Tumor Cell Biology, W. French Anderson told
researchers that he and his colleagues have been able to form neo-organs or
"organoid structures" in rats, mice, rabbits and monkeys. These structures
contain blood vessels and grow bundles of cells that resemble nerve tissue.

   Studies show that just like normal organs, the new structures can "secrete
products directly into the bloodstream of the animal," said Anderson, who is
chief of the laboratory of molecular hematology at the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute. "What you end up with is basically a new organ."

   By marrying this new technology with gene therapy -- the ability to transfer
new genes into a cell -- researchers now have a potential new treatment to
overcome a host of genetic diseases, from diabetes and the immune deficiency
disease known as ADA deficiency to hemophilia and the metabolic disease known as
phenylketonuria, or PKU.An Insulin Factory?

   In theory, for example, it might be possible to treat diabetes by inserting a
new gene for insulin production into cells removed from the patient. The cells
would be placed on the plastic scaffolding with growth factors, inserted in the
body near the pancreas and allowed to develop into a little insulin factory.

   The technique has the potential of helping to treat "any genetic disease that
can be corrected by the secretion of a product," said Anderson, who published an
early report last September in the journal Science. The latest results will be
published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Science.Replacing
Damaged Organs

   The ability to stimulate neo-organs has led researchers to speculate about
one day, far in the future, being able routinely to replace damaged or aging
organs, such as the liver, pancreas, spleen or heart, with replacements grown
from the patient's own cells. That could cut the demand for transplants and
extend the average life span.

   "This will have a major impact clinically on a wide variety of diseases,"
said Thomas Maciag, chief of molecular biology at the Jerome H. Holland
Laboratories for the Biomedical Sciences in Rockville. "And this is going to
happen within our lifetime."

   The idea of regenerating blood vessels and other organs is not new.
Amphibians such as frogs and newts have long intrigued scientists by their
ability to grow new limbs and organs.

   Yet mammals and other higher animals have a comparable capability only once
-- during embryonic development.

   The key to unlocking the secrets of organ regeneration lies with "tricking
the adult organism into thinking that it is an embryo again," said John A.
Thompson of Genetic Therapy Inc. (GTI) in Gaithersburg, which is collaborating
with Anderson's group.

   To do that, Anderson and his colleagues take fibers of Gore-Tex, the brand
name of a plastic polymer used to make sleeping bags, tents and rain gear.
Gore-Tex stimulates little or no immune response and has long been used for
suture material and other implantable materials.

   The fibers, about the width of a human hair, are coated with gelatin,
sterilized and then loosely matted into pads about an inch across. Then the pad
is impregnated with protein, called heparin-binding growth factor (HBGF) that
stimulates the proliferation of endothelial cells, which line blood vessels,
lymph channels and various other cavities in the body.

   Fetal tissues are especially rich in HBGF. Babies and young children have
greater amounts than do adults, which is one reason why cuts and broken bones
heal more quickly in youngsters than adults.

   'The Body Does It All'

   When an injury occurs, white blood cells called macrophages appear at the
wound and eat the damaged or dying cells as well as any microbial invaders that
might be present.

   The macrophages release proteins that activate HBGF and enable it to
stimulate a special type of immature cell, called a stem cell, to multiply and
mature so as to repair the wound. HBGF also attracts other cells to the area to
aid in rebuilding the damaged tissue.

   Anderson and his colleagues exploit this same process to create organoids.

   By coating the fibers with HBGF, cells are attracted to the fibers and begin
to colonize them. Although the HBFG is depleted within 24 hours, "once you
trigger the organ formation process, it just keeps going on its own," Anderson
said. "The body does it all."

   About a month later, the neo-organ is formed, complete with blood vessels and
nerve tissue. Neo-organs have been formed next to the spleen and liver in
animals.

   In one strain of rats that are chronically jaundiced because their livers
lack the gene needed to break down bilirubin, Anderson's group has successfully
stimulated formation of a new liver by implanting cells from strain of normal
rats that possess the gene. This has cured the animal's hereditary affliction.

   "We have also had tremendous success in animals in forming new blood vessels
that could become collateral blood vessels for the heart," GTI's Thompson said.

   A major uncertainty about neo-organs is whether they have the potential to
grow out of control and develop into a tumor. These growth factors are so
potent, they "could conceivably cause other problems," said Ward Casscells of
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

   Six months of experience in rats has revealed no evidence of tumors. "The
assumption is," Anderson said, "that if there is any problem with the neo-organ,
you can go in and snip it out."

   Human Applications

   If scientists really can control the development of new organs and blood
vessels, they have the potential for a powerful therapy.

   The first application in humans is likely to be in treating AIDS with a
neo-organ that would produce a substance called soluble CD4. It is a molecule
that blocks the virus's ability to enter cells.

   Another use is in heart disease. By stimulating blood vessel growth, doctors
may soon have a way to sidestep bypass surgery, in which blood vessels from
other parts of the body are grafted onto the heart to restore adequate blood
flow.

   "We know that it is possible to grow new capillaries in 36 hours," said
Casscells, a principal investigator in the study. "If someone comes in with
pre-heart-attack chest pains, maybe we can some day spritz their heart with
something that will help them to grow new blood vessels."

   The possibilities do not end there. Knowing how to turn off blood vessel
growth also could be helpful in treating arthritis, certain types of solid
tumors and skin diseases, such as psoriasis.

   Then there is the ultimate: The potential of one day stimulating nerve
growth. "The last domino to fall is going to be regrowing the central nervous
system," Casscells said. "But in this era of designer genes, all these things
are now on the drawing board."


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, HOW TO MAKE A NEO-ORGAN (DATA FROM ILLUSTRATION NOT
INCLUDED), JOHNSTONE QUINAN


                               16 of 59 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1989 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     August 25, 1989, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part 1; Page 1; Column 5; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 916 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS ISOLATE GENE THAT CAUSES CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, Times Science Writer

BODY:

   A Canadian-American research team said Thursday that it has isolated and
cloned the defective gene that causes cystic fibrosis, the most common lethal
genetic defect in the United States.

   The researchers have also identified the defective protein produced by the
gene and believe they know how it functions.

   The isolation of the gene and the protein was widely hailed by other
scientists as a major step toward conducting prenatal screening for the disease
and toward a potential cure. They hope to use their knowledge of the biochemical
defect to design new drugs and ultimately to develop genetic therapy to insert a
healthy gene into victims.

   "This is the most significant breakthrough in the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation's 35-year history," President Robert K. Dresing said. "It's the piece
of the puzzle we had to get in place before we can focus our attention on why we
are really in this business -- developing new therapies and a cure for the
disease."

   One in every 20 whites and a far smaller number of minorities -- about 12
million Americans in all -- carry the defective gene and one in every 1,800
children suffers from the disease. Cystic fibrosis is marked by a buildup of
mucus in the lungs that impairs breathing and leaves the victims susceptible to
respiratory infections. The disease also affects the pancreas in about 75% of
victims, blocking secretion of enzymes necessary for digesting and absorbing
fats in the diet.

   Earlier in this century, cystic fibrosis was uniformly fatal, killing most
affected children during their first year of life. The development of new
antibiotics during World War II extended their life spans to the mid-teens by
fighting the respiratory infections that are the normal cause of death.

   More recently, better antibiotics and newly devised forms of nutritional
therapy have expanded the victims' expected life span to a median of about 26
years, and many males live into their 30s and 40s, Dr. Henry Levison of the
Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto said.  A crucial advance in cystic
fibrosis research came in October, 1985, when a team headed by molecular
geneticist Lap-Chee Tsui of the Hospital for Sick Children narrowed the gene's
location to a small region of chromosome 7, one of the 23 pairs of chromosomes
in the human cell.

   Tsui ultimately discovered the defective gene, working with Jack Riordan of
the Hospital for Sick Children and geneticist Francis Collins of the University
of Michigan.

   The cystic fibrosis gene has been difficult to isolate in large part because
the change in the defective gene is subtle. Many of the disease genes that have
recently been identified using new molecular biology techniques -- such as those
for muscular dystrophy and retinitis pigmentosa -- are missing rather large
segments of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid, the cell's genetic blueprint), allowing
researchers to readily distinguish them from their healthy counterpart.

   But the cystic fibrosis gene, Tsui and Collins have found, is missing just
three of the 250,000 individual chemicals, called bases, of which it is
composed. The researchers thus had to adopt the "brute force" method of
identifying every single base on the chromosome in the area of the suspected
gene, an approach made doubly difficult by the gene's large size, biochemist Ron
Davis of Stanford University said. "It's a magnificent achievement," he said.

   Collins and Tsui have also identified the protein for which the defective
gene codes. Like the gene, it is huge, containing 1,480 individual amino acids.
Compared to the healthy protein, it is missing just one amino acid. It is
probably located on the membrane of cells in the lungs, pancreas and elsewhere
in the body.

   Many researchers have previously shown that the cause of cystic fibrosis is a
defect in the transport of charged atoms called ions, particularly chloride
ions, into and out of cells. This defect reduces the amount of water found
inside the cells, and thus leads to the production of thicker-than-normal mucus,
which is involved in cleaning the interior of the lung.

   Tsui said he and Collins believe that the newly identified protein is the
actual agent that pumps chloride ions through the cellular membrane. Because of
its defect, they suggest, the protein is not able to get enough energy from
other molecules in the cell to perform the pumping successfully.

   The researchers will publish their results in the Sept. 8 issue of Science.

   Researchers have a "wealth of experiments" to carry out now, Collins said.
The defective gene they identified is found in only about 70% of cystic fibrosis
victims, so they must find other defects, presumably in the same gene, that
account for the rest. But that should be "relatively simple" now that they know
which gene is involved, he added.

   Discovery of all the genetic defects will make possible prenatal screening
for cystic fibrosis. Currently, such screening can be performed only in families
that already have one child with cystic fibrosis, and it is only 80% to 90%
effective. When the other defects are identified, the test should be "100%
effective for everybody," Tsui said.

   Dresing said the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation will call a meeting within the
next month to bring together scientists who are already working on cystic
fibrosis and many who are not. "We are going to be extremely aggressive in
identifying and getting into the loop those people who can help us with the
development of new therapies," he said.


                               17 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1989 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     August 25, 1989, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A4

LENGTH: 655 words

HEADLINE: Cystic Fibrosis Gene Discovered;
Faulty Protein It Produces Also Identified, Researchers Report

BYLINE: William Booth, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Scientists who have been searching for the gene that causes cystic fibrosis,
one of the most common inherited killers of children and young adults, confirmed
yesterday that they have isolated the gene and identified the faulty protein it
produces.

   The finding is a major advance for researchers struggling to understand the
development of cystic fibrosis, a genetic disease that strikes one in 2,000
Caucasian children and causes a buildup of a sticky, thick mucus in the lungs.
The mucus encourages bacterial infections that eventually destroy the lungs.
Some 30,000 children and young adults in the United States have the illness, and
about one-half die before their mid-20s.

   Currently, a crude form of prenatal test for cystic fibrosis is available for
families with a history of the disease. The new findings should lead to improved
tests not only of fetuses but of would-be parents before a child is conceived,
said Francis Collins, a geneticist at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at the
University of Michigan, who made the discovery along with Lap-Chee Tsui
(pronounced Choy) and his colleagues at the Hospital for Sick Children in
Toronto and researchers at the Frederick Cancer Research Facility in Frederick,
Md.

   About 12 million Americans harbor a single copy of the cystic fibrosis gene,
but since it takes two copies of the gene to develop the disease -- one from
each parent -- these carriers remain healthy. The new screening tests could
identify carriers before they have children. If both parents carry a copy of the
gene, there is a one-in-four chance that the offspring will develop cystic
fibrosis.

   Collins also said that identifying the cystic fibrosis gene and the protein
it produces in the body may lead to new drugs to treat the illness directly,
instead of simply alleviating the symptoms, which include not only mucus-filled
lungs but malfunction of the pancreas and the sweat glands.

   The researchers speculated that there might be ways to alter the defective
protein or even one day to use "gene therapy" to replace the defective gene with
a normal one.

   The discovery was announced yesterday at back-to-back news conferences in
Toronto and Washington before the data had been published in a scientific
journal. The highly unusual announcements were staged after word of the
discovery had leaked and been published in several newspapers. The editor of the
journal Science confirmed that the papers will be published in the Sept. 8
issue.

   The discovery, if confirmed, would cap a great competition in which
scientists have been racing to discover the elusive gene. Tsui compared the
search to looking for a house in a city between New York and Los Angeles without
knowing the city or the street address. Humans harbor an estimated 50,000 to
100,000 genes situated on their 46 chromosomes. Each gene is a segment of DNA
bearing the genetic code that directs the cell to produce one of the thousands
of different kinds of proteins that carry out the business of life.

   The great difficulty in hunting for the cystic fibrosis gene arose because
scientists had no idea what protein the gene produced. So instead they collected
DNA from families with a history of cystic fibrosis and compared it with other
genetic material using a technique called "gene linkage."

   In 1986, Tsui and colleagues found that the gene must lie in a region of
chromosome No. 7. At that point they used special DNA probes discovered by other
researchers to home in on their quarry.

   The cystic fibrosis gene produces a protein that researchers believe is
important in the transfer of salt and water between and among cells. The
researchers speculate that if this protein is faulty -- missing only one of
1,480 amino acids found in a normal protein -- it may cause an imbalance that
allows the lungs to fill with sticky, dry mucus instead of the thin, wet mucus
that allows normal lungs to resist infection.


                               18 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1989 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    August 24, 1989, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 637 words

HEADLINE: Space age fabric used to deliver gene therapy;
Medical Notebook

BYLINE: By Judy Foreman, Globe Staff

BODY:

   IT IS NOT EVERY science meeting that turns them away at the door or has
scientists scribbling like freshmen, but that was the scene this week at the
AIDS meeting in Bethesda, Md., convened by Dr. Robert Gallo, co-discoverer of
the AIDS virus.

   The matters these people discuss over coffee, the way the rest of us discuss
the weather, is esoteric. But here goes.

   Gore-Tex, the space age fabric used to make parkas, may be a good way to
deliver gene therapy for AIDS and cancer, said Dr. French Anderson, the National
Cancer Institute pioneer in gene therapy.

   Among other experiments, his team is using mice to test an idea for AIDS
patients: injecting white blood cells containing the gene for the CD4 receptor,
the molecule through which the AIDS virus enters cells.

   The altered cells make CD4 molecules that float freely in the blood, keeping
the AIDS virus from infecting cells. But it turns out, said Anderson, that the
altered cells do not make enough CD4. Which is where Gore-Tex, or any of a
number of other materials being tested, comes in.

   A piece of Gore-Tex, which has already been approved by the Food and Drug
Administration for medical uses, is coated with blood vessel growth factors and
biological "glues" like collagen, and then with genetically altered cells
containing the CD4 gene. The whole thing is then inserted under the liver with
its rich blood supply, where it grows its own blood supply and lasts six months,
in animals at least, turning out CD4.

GROWTH FACTOR IDENTIFIED

   GALLO AND HIS team at the National Cancer Institute have identified a growth
factor made in AIDS-infected cells that causes the cells of Kaposi's sarcoma, an
AIDS-related tumor, to grow. The work is still unpublished, Gallo said, but adds
nicely to other work on the natural chemicals that make blood vessels grow.

HOW AIDS GENES WORK

   THE AIDS VIRUS is now one of the best-understood hunks of genetic material in
the universe. It has at least 11 genes, which make not just 11 proteins, as
would have been assumed a few years ago, but at least 30 pieces of messenger
RNA, from which 30 proteins might be made. George Pavlakis, a government
scientist, calls it an "amazing arrangement."

   Scientists have known for several years that genes in a cell's nucleus can be
spliced together in different combinations yielding different proteins, and that
"frame shifts" occurring in the cell's protein factory, the ribosome, can
further expand the number of proteins made from a given a piece of RNA.

   (Picture a strand of RNA like one side of a zipper, then imagine the ribosome
like a little railroad car, chugging along "reading" the zipper's bumps in
groups of three and turning each threesome into an amino acid to be added to a
growing string of protein. A frameshift happens when the railroad car backs up a
bump, starting in the "wrong" place.)

   It is "revolutionary," says Harvard retrovirologist William Haseltine, that
so much of the genetic flexibility of the AIDS virus comes from its
"post-transcriptional" rearrangements. These occur in the few minutes after RNA
is made in the nucleus and before proteins form in the ribosome. "It's after RNA
is made," Haseltine says, "that the real circus begins."

   So, here's the latest version of how the AIDS genes work. Three genes, called
GAG, POL and ENV, make proteins for the virus core. The other seven are
regulatory genes that allow the virus to do tricks, such as speed up and slow
down its own growth.

   TAT, REV, which is the hottest "new" gene, VPR and TEV, or TNV, the most
recently discovered gene that is actually an alternative form of TAT, speed up
viral replication. NEF probably slows it down. VIF makes the virus extra
infectious. And VPU gets it out of cells faster. Each of the genes is a
potential target for AIDS therapy.


                               19 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1989, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 938 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH;
Scientists Find Hope for Victims of Cystic Fibrosis by Discovering Its Gene

BYLINE: By SANDRA BLAKESLEE

BODY:

   Prospects for saving the lives of people with cystic fibrosis have been
greatly enhanced by the discovery of the gene that causes it, experts said
yesterday.

   A team of scientists from the United States and Canada are to announce the
discovery today in Toronto and Washington.

   The principal researchers, Dr. Francis Collins of the University of Michigan
at Ann Arbor and Dr. Lap-Chee Tsui of the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto,
have refused to comment on their work before the announcements. But experts
familiar with their research say the achievement is a major step in learning how
the disease attacks the body and could lead to treatments that might save the
lives of many patients.

'Magnificent Opportunities'

   Cystic fibrosis, a disorder of the breathing system, pancreas and sweat
glands, is the most common lethal genetic disease in North America. Few who have
it live past their 20's. About 30,000 people in the United States have cystic
fibrosis, and 1,000 to 1,200 new cases are diagnosed each year.

   Twelve million Americans, about 5 percent, carry the gene for the disease,
but a child must inherit it from both parents to be affected. The disease
strikes whites almost exclusively.

   ''Parents should be absolutely optimistic and excited about this,'' said Dr.
Robert J. Beall, executive vice president for medical affairs at the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation in Bethesda, Md. ''We have been in a bottleneck and now we
have magnificent opportunities before us.''

   But he added: ''We still have a lot of work to do. Finding the gene is just
the beginning of new opportunities.''

Genetics in Reverse

   Dr. Victor A. McKusick, a professor of medical genetics at Johns Hopkins
School of Medicine who is an authority on gene-mapping techniques, said cystic
fibrosis was ''near the top of the list of diseases one wanted to crack by
reverse genetics.''

   Each gene in the body is coded to produce a protein; abnormal genes can lead
to abnormal proteins. In reverse genetics, researchers first identify a gene and
then identify the protein whose production it governs. From there, they figure
out whether the protein initiates disease and try to devise ways to halt the
disease process. In ordinary genetics, researchers have studied a disease and
then looked for the gene or genes that cause it.

   The gene that has just been discovered accounts for all cases of cystic
fibrosis. But the researchers have found a mutation on the gene; that defect
accounts for about 70 percent of the cases. The remaining cases, they said, are
caused by three to five other mutations on the same gene.

Carriers and Sufferers

   People with one normal and one abnormal copy of the gene are carriers of
cystic fibrosis; they do not develop the disease. But when carriers have a
child, there is a 25 percent chance that the baby will inherit two bad copies of
the gene and have cystic fibrosis. Another child might inherit two copies of the
normal gene; a third could inherit one good and one bad copy, thus becoming a
new carrier.

   According to scientists familiar with the new findings, the gene appears to
be related to a protein that takes part in the normal movement of chloride and
sodium ions across cell membranes in the lung and pancreas. When the gene is
defective, the process is disrupted. Affected cells tend to absorb water from
the surrounding environment, including mucus. This dries out the mucus, opening
the door to chronic bacterial infections, especially in the lungs.

   ''These bacteria eat away at the lungs and eventually destroy them,'' said
Dr. Beall of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. ''It is what eventually kills most
patients.'' Thick, dry mucus also builds up in the pancreas, inhibiting the
release of digestive enzymes.

   The current treatments for cystic fibrosis are antibiotics given
intravenously and medications that help the pancreas release enyzmes.

On to a Treatment Strategy

   The newly discovered gene is relatively large, spokesmen for the researchers'
institutions said, and it has features that make it easy to devise strategies
for developing treatments.

   Because people need only one copy of the normal gene to have healthy lung
functions, Dr. Beale said, one idea involves splicing copies of the normal gene
into a special virus that would insert itself into lung tissue. In a kind of
shotgun approach, he said, many of the genes would find their way to the
chromosome where they belong, the seventh of 23 chromosome pairs. There they
would become active, displacing the bad gene in a significant number of cells
and reversing the basic defect.

   The virus would die after it inserted itself into the chromosome, Dr. Beall
said. Patients would inhale the virus-gene combination through an aerosol. The
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation has already made grants for exploring this kind of
gene therapy, he said.

Tedium and a Shortcut

   Spokesmen for the institutions where the researchers work said Dr. Collins
and Dr. Tsui teamed up two years ago. Dr. Tsui had data on families in which the
disease occurred and Dr. Collins had a new technique, chromosome jumping, that
could speed up the search for the gene.

   Normally researchers look for a gene by examining segments of DNA. If the
gene is not found, they snip off another segment and begin again. Dr. Collins
developed a shortcut that enabled the research team to examine segments three to
five times as long - 60,000 to 100,000 units called base pairs. They had to
examine a million and a half bases, according to scientists familiar with the
work, and the gene turned out to be smack in the middle of the chromosome.


                               20 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1989 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     August 8, 1989, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z5; THE CUTTING EDGE

LENGTH: 487 words

HEADLINE: Departing NIH Head Notes Politicization of Research

BYLINE: Victor Cohn

BODY:

   The job of directing the National Institutes of Health has traditionally been
non-political, based on the belief of most scientists that research for better
health should not be distorted by partisan goals.

   But the tradition has sometimes been breached. Two NIH directors were fired
during the Nixon administration, at least one for failing to set NIH's course to
the political winds. The tradition was breached again this year when White House
officials decided that James Wyngaarden, NIH director from early 1982 until
Monday of last week, should resign.

   Wyngaarden has been offered another administration job, and he said last week
that his dismissal seemed to be part of President Bush's determination to
replace virtually all Reagan administration presidential appointees.

   In a session with health reporters, however, the former Duke University
medical professor also spoke of the many ways in which bioscience itself has
become increasingly politicized:

   The sometimes violent activities of foes of research using animals have now
"severely curtailed several kinds of research."

   Federal financing of research using fetal tissue from legal abortions remains
forbidden, and a recent advisory panel recommendation that some research to try
to help some brain disease victims be permitted "is still being studied in the
Department [of Health and Human Services] someplace." If the recent past is a
guide, it may never emerge.

   Among other areas that have become increasingly political, he said, are the
regulation of emerging biological technologies such as gene therapy, which
remains severely limited; in vitro (test tube) fertilization, where NIH may do
or finance no research; cases of scientific misconduct or alleged misconduct,
which have drawn intense congressional probing; and NIH-industry and
university-industry relations, where there arise many new opportunities for
conflicts of interest.

   Some critics have called Wyngaarden a passive NIH leader, partly because he
is a soft-spoken person not given to making public pronouncements. But he was
able to list some remarkable accomplishments.

   In 1982, he said, he set out to double NIH's then $ 3.6 billion budget by
1990. The current figure is $ 7.2 billion, indeed doubled.

   In previous years, the number of new research grants to scientists around the
country had been fluctuating wildly from year to year, sometimes numbering as
many as 5,000, sometimes only 2,500. With increased financing, the number has
stabilized at "at least 5,000," he said, encouraging young highly trained
scientists not to abandon the search for new knowledge and seek other careers.

   Among NIH's remaining problems, he said, are the low salary levels of NIH
scientists, compared with university professors in similar fields, making it
difficult for NIH to hire new senior scientists and causing many NIH scientists
to leave for more lucrative jobs elsewhere.


                               21 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1989 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     August 1, 1989, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 246 words

HEADLINE: Abortion is still leading defense against defects

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   ''Most scientists believe gene therapy will become a realistic option for
certain patients with certain diseases,'' says Dr. David Valle, Johns Hopkins
School of Medicine, Baltimore. ''But prevention (elective abortions) will play a
much greater role.''

   Leading expert Dr. French Anderson, of the National Institutes of Health,
predicts gene therapy will be limited over the next five years to research
centers treating a few patients with rare cancers, AIDS and some heart diseases.
It will become more widely available, but will remain limited to a minority of
patients.

   Those most likely to benefit would have some forms of diseases caused by a
single gene defect or multiple gene defects that would be helped by treating one
of the bad genes.

   Abortion is likely to remain the most common option, says Valle, because
prenatal diagnosis will be made earlier.

   Already, chorionic villus sampling - the newest alternative to amniocentesis
- can be performed in the eighth to 10th week of pregnancy. (Both test for
genetic defects). CVS makes abortion possible before the second trimester. Each
year, 50,000 women undergo amniocentesis; 5,000 have the newer CVS procedure.

   Studies show that when serious genetic defects are found, just under 50
percent of women opt for abortion.

   Says Valle: ''The public may have the idea that progress and technology are
so powerful, that if we turn our attention to a particular problem, we can
correct it. But that is naive.''


                               22 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1989 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              July 28, 1989 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1275 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy takes its shot at diseases

BYLINE: Ann Gibbons, Tribune Science Writer

BODY:

   In a government hospital in Bethesda, Md., five cancer patients are making
medical history: They became the first humans to be injected with cells
containing foreign genes in a federally approved study. The new genes won't cure
their cancer.

   They just will help doctors trace the movement of white blood cells that are
fighting the deadly skin cancer in the patients' bodies. But the injections that
started May 22 have marked a major milestone in gene therapy.

   They have launched medicine into a new era -- one where gene therapy has come
out of the research laboratory and into the hospital ward. "The significance is
that these are the first genetically manipulated cells introduced into humans,"
said Donald Mosier, chief of the division of immunology at the Medical Biology
Institute in La Jolla. "We've crossed a long-awaited threshold.

   It is a milestone, because this experiment sets the protocol for actually
injecting genetically altered cells into humans.

   It will make all subsequent experiments with humans easier." Inserting new
genes to repair defective ones in patients might someday lead to treatments or
cures for some of the 4,000 known disorders that are inherited, such as cystic
fibrosis, Duchenne's muscular dystrophy and hemophilia. Many scientists predict
that the new tools of genetics and molecular biology also will be used to treat
cancer, heart disease and brain disorders such as Alzheimer's disease. While
such ambitious medicine still is far off, the experiment at the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., is the first crucial step on the long
road to gene therapy. The gene transfer test itself is quite simple and not
particularly impressive scientifically.

   Far more complex gene transfers have been performed in animals in labs from
coast to coast, where scientists have begun to insert foreign genes into mice
and other species to try to treat and cure diseases as varied as AIDS,
Alzheimer's and heart disease. But the protocol for inserting foreign genes into
humans has been more complex than for animals.

   The scientists at the National Institutes of Health waited more than a year
for the settlement of a lawsuit and the go-ahead from various oversight
committees to perform the simple experiment on 10 patients, five of whom so far
have been injected with the cells. Now, they are studying the results and
planning for the day when they can use genetically altered cells to treat cancer
and other diseases in humans, said Richard Morgan, a scientist who is part of
the 30-member team at the National Institutes of Health that performed the
experiment. Speaking to scientists at La Jolla's Medical Biology Institute this
week, Morgan predicted that his team would be ready within three years to try to
treat malignant melanoma -- a deadly form of skin cancer -- with gene therapy.
In their experiments, the NIH team removes special white blood cells from the
cancer patient's tumors and grows them in the lab.

   A large dose of these cells, known as tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs),
is then infused back into the patient, where they sometimes boost the immune
system's ability to attack and destroy cancer cells. In their current
experiment, the NIH team has inserted a new gene in those TIL cells.

   This gene makes a protein that can be traced in the patients' body, allowing
scientists to study how long the TIL cells last and where they travel in the
bloodstream. Eventually, the scientists hope to insert powerful new genes into
the TIL cells that boost their ability to kill cancer cells further, Morgan
said. They might insert genes that make anti-cancer proteins, such as interferon
and tumor necrosis factor, for example. "This will be the first gene therapy,"
Morgan said.

   "I don't think there's any other system that has progressed to the level of
where we are now with TILs." Other scientists, however, are more cautious about
predicting the first gene therapy.

   They say there are daunting technological problems and ethical considerations
that still need to be solved before foreign genes are inserted in humans to cure
or treat their illnesses. Just getting cells in and out of the body so that a
new gene can be inserted can be formidable.

   Then, delivering the normal gene to the proper target in the body and making
sure it does it work for some time is another difficult task -- not to mention
ensuring that the new gene does no harm. "The problem is that many scientists,
including me, underestimated the complexity of this," said Inder Verma, a
professor of biology at the Salk Institute and a pioneer in the work to deliver
foreign genes into the body. "Our enthusiasm has to be tempered with
pragmatism." But the fact that scientists already have begun to test genetically
engineered cells in humans proves how far the concept of gene therapy has come
in the past 20 years. "There's been a real revolution in the thinking toward
gene therapy.

   The stunning effect is that both the medical and molecular biology
communities are now thinking that gene therapy is feasible.

   That's very different from a decade ago," said Dr. Theodore Friedmann, a
professor of pediatrics at the University of California at San Diego and a
member of a Congressional oversight committee on biomedical ethics. The new NIH
experiments with humans also have stimulated the debate about which diseases
will be the first to be treated -- and in what manner. For years, many
scientists have thought that gene therapy first would be used to treat genetic
disorders -- those that are inherited from one's parents. In these diseases, a
gene or group of genes is defective.

   When they are defective, these genes issue the wrong instructions for making
proteins -- the complex molecules such as enzymes and most hormones that are
responsible for the basic business of living. The result can be hemophilia where
the patients' body fails to make the factor it needs to clot the blood.

   Or it can be Down's syndrome where the patient has an extra chromosome. The
most likely candidates for gene therapy are those where a single gene is
defective, according to Verma at Salk. One candidate is a disease where patients
cannot make an enzyme called adenosine deaminase (known as ADA), a disorder
where their immune systems are severely compromised.

   Another good candidate could be thalassemia, a severe form of anemia where
the patient is unable to make enough hemoglobin to transport oxygen in the
blood. Morgan, however, thinks the rare genetic disorders may be too difficult
to cure.

   He thinks that scientists will use gene therapy first to treat and manage
cancer, heart disease and infectious diseases, such as AIDS and hepatitis.
"We've come in a short number of years from thinking of using gene therapy to
cure these very rare genetic diseases to evaluating gene therapy for treating
cancer, heart disease and infectious diseases -- in this case AIDS," Morgan
said. He is working with Mosier and other scientists at the Medical Biology
Institute to work on a genetic therapy for treating -- not curing -- AIDS.
Specifically, they are inserting into mice genes that produce a protein called
CD4, which acts as a decoy in the bloodstream to attract the AIDS virus and
prevent it from infecting and destroying the cells of the immune system. To
some, such as Friedmann at UCSD, the debate about which disease will be treated
first is meaningless. "There are lots of disease models -- one will be first.

   Which one is a non-issue," he said. "It's absolutely clear there's lots of
work going on, and out of the blue may come something that may be simple and
straight-forward that nobody's thought of before.

   It's impossible to predict."

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                               23 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1989 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 24, 1989, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1311 words

HEADLINE: New attack readied on muscular dystrophy;
Injecting healthy genes in humans is planned

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    When Boston researchers discovered the gene that causes muscular dystrophy
two years ago, it marked the first major inroad against the incurable
muscle-wasting disease that draws its young victims into a spiral of disability
and early death.

   Now, something potentially even more dramatic is on the horizon - an
experimental treatment that could be the first to slow the relentless course of
muscular dystrophy.

   In a bold strategy that researchers plan to test in a matter of months,
healthy muscle cells from relatives would be injected into the dying muscles of
dystrophy patients in the hope that the transplanted cells will grow and
partially regenerate the wasted muscle. If successful - and the scientists
caution that there is no guarantee it will be - the treatment might maintain the
use of important muscles longer and even extend the lives of patients with
muscular dystrophy and similar diseases.

   "It's a very intriguing concept, and the animal studies to date have been
very promising," said Dr. Theodore Munsat, a muscular dystrophy specialist at
the New England Medical Center.  Dr. Robert Brown, a neurologist at
Massachusetts General Hospital, said that the best results from the animal
experiments "really take your breath away. . . . It's like science fiction, and
we really, really want to explore this."

   Beyond muscular dystrophy, the implant research is generating excitement
because it is one of the first experimental treatments to emerge from a recent
cascade of discoveries about genes that cause severe diseases. And it is
certainly the most ambitious, because the gene flaw affects tissues throughout
the body and repairing them will be an enormous challenge.

   "To replace a structural protein in a disease caused by a gene defect is a
very tall order," said George Karpati, a researcher at the Montreal Neurologic
Institute. "I don't think it has ever been achieved in a mammalian organism."

   A structural protein is a building block of the body's basic architecture.

   Within months, in Boston or elsewhere, scientists expect to be ready to begin
initial human experiments. The first injections would be into a single small
muscle of a few affected children, to see if the implanted cells "take" and make
the muscle stronger.

   If the tests are successful, and rejection of the implants is not a serious
problem, the treatment would be expanded to more muscles. The ultimate goal is
to try to strengthen muscles in the arms, legs, hands and other key areas and
probably muscles between the ribs used in breathing. In theory, the implants
might delay the disability that usually confines dystrophy patients to a
wheelchair by late childhood and leads to death in the late teens or early 20s.

   Researchers agree that even if the implants work, it will be a formidable
task to extend them to muscles throughout the body, particularly to the
diaphragm and heart.  The implants might have to be spaced as closely as every
half-inch along a muscle, requiring hundreds of needle injections, some of them
quite deep.

   "It's a major problem," said Munsat, "but I think it's doable."

   Doctors, patients and families are trying to curb their expectations of the
research, most of which has been funded by the Muscular Dystrophy Association, a
volunteer agency. But it is difficult not to be hopeful when the disease has
resisted previous attempts at treatment.

   "There really has been nothing until now that's been this apparently
promising," said Sherry Ouellette, a Saugus resident whose 11-year-old son,
Matthew, is a potential candidate for implant experiments. "We keep reminding
ourselves that it might not work at all, but at least it's a step to try and
help, whereas now there isn't anything you can do."

   "I think it's very exciting," said Helen Blau, a pharmacology researcher at
Stanford Medical School who is working on the muscle cell transplants, a process
known as myoblast transfer.

   "I don't think we can anticipate a cure for muscular dystrophy," she said,
"but there is a hope of perhaps delaying the progression of the disease and
improving the function of muscles that are important to the patient."

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the most common form of the disease, afflicts
about 1 in every 3,500 boys. Women may be carriers but are almost never
affected.

   Until a few years ago, scientists had virtually no clue as to why muscular
dystrophy victims develop a progressive muscle weakness in the first few years
of life, with muscle cells deteriorating and dying. Because the disease is
inherited, some flaw in the genes was clearly involved, but no one knew which of
the body's 50,000 to 100,000 genes was at fault.

   Using powerful new tools to analyze chromosomes, a team led by Louis Kunkel,
chief of genetics at Children's Hospital, first pinpointed and then, in 1987,
isolated the defective gene.

   What that gene normally does, the scientists soon determined, is produce a
protein called dystrophin, that lines muscle cell membranes and helps maintain
their strength.

   At first, this discovery seemed discouraging because it did not point toward
any sort of practical treatment. How could scientists hope to replace a missing
structural substance in the body's billions of cells?

   Fortunately, the body has a natural mechanism for repairing damaged muscles
that scientists could turn to their advantage. Everybody's muscles contain a
reserve of cells called myoblasts, which are primitive muscle cells that can
mature and fuse with damaged muscle fibers if injury occurs. They also contain
dystrophin, the raw material needed by dystrophic muscles.

   The concept of myoblast transfer is much like an organ transplant, but it
also resembles gene therapy "because a good gene is allowed to be expressed in
diseased tissue," said Brown of MGH.

   Researchers take muscle tissue from a donor related to the recipient and grow
a vast number of the myoblast cells in the laboratory. One adult myoblast can
generate billions of others, which is fortunate because a large quantity will be
needed for transplants, said Stanford's Blau.

   Then, the cells are injected into the patient's muscles at close intervals.
It is not known how far the new cells will migrate. In mouse experiments, the
transferred myoblasts were found to fuse with each other and with damaged muscle
fibers.

   In experiments with a type of mouse that lacks the dystrophin protein, Kunkel
and others have found that the cells also supply the missing dystrophin. But no
one has yet published conclusive evidence that the implants improve muscle
function.

   At least three medical centers - Stanford, Montreal's Neurologic Institute
and the University of Tennessee at Memphis - say they may begin small-scale
experiments within months.

   Perhaps the most anxious to begin is Peter K. Law of the University of
Tennessee, who has been working toward muscle transplants for many years and
says he has found in unpublished experiments that the implants prolong the lives
of mice with a dystrophy-like condition.

   Other researchers, including Kunkel at Children's Hospital, voice caution.
Kunkel said it is still too early to say how large a problem immune rejection of
the implants will be, and what side effects might occur.

   "You don't want to have something harmful happen in a kid when you could have
found it out in animals," said Kunkel.

   Matthew Ouellette, the 11-year-old patient from Saugus, has lost much of his
strength and has used a wheelchair since age 8. His mother said he is undergoing
preliminary testing at New England Medical Center.  His muscle strength is being
measured so that the results of an implant could be evaluated.

   "His brother passed away at 19" from muscular dystrophy, said Sherry
Ouellette. "Matthew knows he has the same disease, and he knows what his brother
went through.  He's very excited to see if this works."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Matthew Ouellette, 11, who has muscular dystrophy and may
undergo the implant experiments, plays with his parakeet. / Globe staff photo /
Wendy Maeda


                               24 of 59 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1989 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                July 24, 1989, Monday, San Diego County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part 2; Page 1; Column 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1982 words

HEADLINE: AUTHOR JUMPS INTO THE ETHICAL FRAY OF EMBRYONIC LIFE

BYLINE: By GREG JOHNSON, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Syndicated columnist George Will suggested earlier this month that, when U.
S. Supreme Court justices head off for summer vacation, they take along "Science
& the Unborn," a thought-provoking book by Clifford Grobstein, a biologist from
Rancho Santa Fe.

   In an unexpected boost, the conservative commentator, called the book "a
lucid guide to reasoning about how to assign status to a fetus" and urged that
the justices read it before tackling their next round of abortion-related
decisions.

   "That was a nice touch," said Grobstein, a UC San Diego professor emeritus
who has studied embryology for more than four decades. His "Science & the
Unborn" painstakingly outlines what scientists know and don't know about life in
the womb. The book also defines six stages of human development in the womb, and
attempts to assign rights based on each stage.

Need for Public Policy

   Forty years as a biologist and medical doctor have convinced Grobstein that a
zygote, the single human cell produced at conception, should not hold the same
legal and social status as a full-grown adult, or even a month-old fetus.

   His endorsement of the "pre-embryonic" stage has sparked debate among
scientists, most of whom agree with the need for public policy decisions to
address the issue of early life.

   The book seems certain to outrage right-to-life advocates, who contend that
human life should be fully protected from conception on. Already, experts in the
medical and scientific community are debating key parts of Grobstein's six-stage
description of "individuality" in the womb.

   The book is among a growing number that grapple with the ethical questions
raised by rapid advances in science and technology. At the Central Library
downtown, it sits on a shelf with "Life Choices," "Playing God," "Exploring
Medical Ethics," "Brave New People" and "Tough Decisions."

   One of the key ethical questions Grobstein deals with is whether embryos
should be used in medical research. He is among a group of scientists who use
the term pre-embryo to describe the first two weeks after fertilization.

Research Uses

   Because pre-embryos have not yet attached to the uterine wall, they are "too
immature structurally, functionally and behaviorally to warrant classification
as a person," and therefore may be used for research, Grobstein said in the
book.

   But that research must be carefully controlled because pre-embryos are
"recognized as a member of the human family entitled to protection against
treatment or deprivation of life that is casual or demeaning."

   "I'm aware that these issues are very difficult," Grobstein said in an
interview. "On some of them we'll never reach unanimity because of differing
philosophies and religious background. But (the book attempts) to give guidance
which . . . won't leave people floundering in a sea of uncertainties."

   Columnist Will wasn't the only conservative to add Grobstein's book,
published in late 1988, to the must-read list: "It seems to me (the book) would
be of interest to anyone who is interested in human life and the protection of
human life," said Richard A. McCormick, a Jesuit priest who serves as professor
of Christian Ethics at the University of Notre Dame.

   So far, the national debate on the status of embryos and fetuses has revolved
almost exclusively around the explosive issue of whether abortion should be
allowed.

   But Grobstein urges society not to ignore a number of equally pressing public
policy issues generated by "developments in reproductive biology and medicine
(that) have raised new questions about the status of the unborn."

   Grobstein points to life-and-death questions raised by the growing ability to
generate "test tube" babies, the heated debate over fetal tissue transplants and
stunning advances in fetal surgery and gene therapy.

   He is concerned that the clouded legal status of a rapidly developing embryo
could preclude the use of some existing forms of birth control -- as well as the
introduction of new methods, including the already-controversial "morning after"
pill developed by French scientists.

   Grobstein worries that research into human development will grind to a halt
unless society gives scientists access to cells gathered from early embryos.

   And he cautions that decisions made in the near-term could haunt future
generations as science makes it possible to discover -- and, in some cases,
repair -- severe abnormalities.

   "These things are all caught in the public policy tangle," Grobstein said.
"Although abortion is indeed an important issue, taken cumulatively, the other
(issues) cannot play a minor role" as the nation debates the thorny issue of
whether an embryo's status changes as it matures, he said.

What About Extra Eggs?

   For example, Grobstein said, society might determine that scientists should
be allowed to experiment with cell tissues taken from select newly fertilized
embryos, most likely those generated during in vitro fertilization.

   Reproductive experts are already facing tough decisions about the status of
what Grobstein and others define as pre-embryonic life. Grobstein gives as an
example doctors who need guidance on how to dispose of fertilized eggs that are
created during in vitro fertilization, but that, for various reasons, are not
returned to the donor's womb.

   Those that do not move forward to the next "stage of individuality . . .
ought not to be discarded as if there were no value there at all," said
Grobstein, who suggests that those pre-embryos might well be used for research
that could benefit humanity.

   Not surprisingly, his endorsement of the pre-embryo concept has enraged
right-to-life advocates.

   "All he's doing is refining the viability argument" that the U. S. Supreme
Court used in the controversial Roe vs. Wade decision in 1973, which legalized
abortions but set limits on when they can be performed, said Bob Marshall,
director of research for the Stafford, Va.-based American Life League, a
240,000-member organization that opposes abortion.

   "He's talking about an increasing stage of value that society, or Mom and
Dad, gets to place on the baby in utero," Marshall said. "But who the hell am I
to place a value on an individual?

They Do or They Don't

   "Either (embryos) have human value or they don't. Anything (in between) is
just allowing me to play God."

   "Grobstein and I agree on many things, but (with the pre-embryo term) he's
creating a boundary that's arbitrary, that has no great biological significance,
in my view," said John Biggers, a professor at Harvard Medical School's
Laboratory of Human Reproduction and Reproductive Biology.

   Biggers has submitted articles to professional journals that seek to counter
Grobstein's contention that a pre-embryonic stage exists for the first two weeks
of life.

   "Pre-embryo is a word that was created (for use in public policy debates)
that is now being adopted as a scientific word -- and it never was that in the
first place," Biggers said.

   While he strongly disagrees with Grobstein on the existence of a 14-day
pre-embryo stage, he shares Grobstein's concern that important issues will be
ignored or incorrectly decided if status questions are answered solely to end
the abortion debate.

   Grobstein argues that society must use "the best science" to craft moral,
philosophical and theological decisions on the status of an embryo or a fetus.
"The early stages of human life have never really been systematically
addressed," he said. "International declarations about human rights are limited
to the stages of human life beyond birth. They don't specifically include . . .
the status prior to birth."

National Commission

   McCormick, who said he comes down "pretty conservatively" on moral and
theological decisions involving the origins of life, has endorsed Grobstein's
call for a national commission to "frame the issues, and act as a credible force
for wide public discussion" of them.

   The commission would not "make specific solutions, but (offer) guidance on
how these issues would be addressed," Grobstein said. It would particularly
focus on "smoking out" those people who do not readily fall into the
right-to-life or pro-choice camps.

   "We have to set up a public policy based on consensus, which will be an
arbitrary thing," Biggers said. "But we have to (ensure) that it has a sound
scientific basis upon which the philosophy can come out."

   Grobstein maintains that Americans have exhibited "an almost deliberate
avoidance (of the status question) because of the difficulties, the sense of
contentiousness of the issue."

   Such avoidance means that medical professionals are faced with the "stern
reality" that the interests of a fetus might be at "cross-purposes with maternal
and familial wishes." On a daily basis, Grobstein wrote, doctors and parents,
lacking public policy guidance, must use a "tortured calculus" to determine
whether heroic efforts should be extended to save an extremely premature and
very sick infant.

   Reproductive experts "would feel much more comfortable . . . if their
responsibilities" were better outlined, he said.

Father of Five

   Grobstein, 73, first grappled with public policy issues shortly after an Army
Air Force hitch in the waning days of World War II.

   Then, Grobstein's concern was the seemingly rapid spread of atomic weapons.
The father of five and grandfather of eight has since studied public policy
issues surrounding population growth and genetic engineering.

   Medicine has become something of a family affair along the way: His wife,
Ruth, is a radiation oncologist at Scripps Clinic in La Jolla, two children are
doctors and a third is married to a doctor.

   Grobstein has written an earlier book, delving into the societal questions
generated by genetic engineering. He is preparing another that will "look at
life from a cosmic perspective, through cosmology, astronomy, etc."

   "I regard (the study of social issues) as my profession at the time,"
Grobstein said. "My own opinions are just like everyone else's . . . but what I
try to provide is a professionally guided approach" to complex social and
scientific issues.

   "I don't hold myself forth as philosopher," he said. "I'm a scientist and I
deal with issues as a scientist who is interested in public policy issues."

Some of Each

   Despite that disclaimer, Grobstein has acknowledged that his most recent book
will appeal to "people who are on the pro-choice side than the right-to-life
side."

   He describes himself as "both pro-choice and pro-life. I don't see how any
thinking and morally inclined people can fail to be both pro-life and
pro-choice."

   Grobstein's interest in reproduction grew from initial work begun 40 years,
when he spent days in the lab conducting experiments on material drawn from mice
embryos.

   While scientists continue to learn about the origins of life from mammalian
research, Grobstein believes that certain questions will be answered only
through "research on human rudiments." But it is up to society to "specifically
analyze" whether scientists are to have access to human cells drawn from
embryos, he said.

   For Grobstein, the final decision should reflect the diverse nature of the
United States.

   "We're committed to a public policy that's not expressive on any specific
religious doctrine," he said. "We have to be tolerant of a diversity of
religious doctrines, which has always been an important element of American
public policy that is to be defended at any cost."

   Grobstein expects medical and scientific experts to help frame the policy
questions. But he said the debate isn't only for professionals: "Even though in
one instance it's a man and woman in the bedroom and in the other its a
scientist in the laboratory, it involves people making decisions . . . on
matters that are both extremely important to them and the entire society," he
said.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Clifford Grobstein Los Angeles Times


                               25 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1989 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 21, 1989, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 831 words

HEADLINE: AIDS decoy work advances;
MEDICAL NOTEBOOK

BYLINE: By Judy Foreman, Globe Staff

BODY:

   EVER SINCE scientists realized several years ago that they could concoct a
chemical decoy capable of capturing the AIDS virus in the body, ingenious ideas
for how to use the decoy, called CD4, have been sprouting in labs across the
country.

   The latest, described this week in the Journal of the National Cancer
Institute, involves combining decoys with gene therapy, itself a
wet-behind-the-ears approach.

   Here's how it works. On the surface of certain immune cells lies a receptor
molecule called CD4, through which the AIDS virus enters cells. Using the gene
for this receptor, genetic engineers make artificial copies of the receptor -
the decoys.

   Tested this year in patients, the decoys appear safe, though how effective
they are is unclear. One problem is the decoys remain in the bloodstream only
about 15 minutes.

   This fall, second-generation decoy technology, in which the decoy is
chemically hitched to an antibody called IgG, will begin human testing. These
decoys should stay in the bloodstream for 48 hours and therefore be more
effective.

   Now, thanks to Richard Morgan, a researcher at the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, and his colleague W. French Anderson, a gene therapy expert,
there may be another approach. They hooked the CD4 gene to a deactivated
retrovirus, which acts as a carrier to take the gene into cells.  Once inside
the cells, the gene begins making large quantities of decoys. These altered
cells would then be injected into patients.

   Next week, said Morgan, the team will begin testing the system in mice. "We
are excited," he said, because the gene therapy should allow mice to produce
decoys continuously.

LEUKEMIA SETBACK REPORTED

   THE VERY CHEMOTHERAPY or radiation treatments used to successfully treat one
type of childhood leukemia, known as ALL, now appear in some cases to cause a
second type of leukemia, known as AML, and to damage children's reproductive
organs, according to two studies published this week in the New England Journal
of Medicine.

   Doctors in Memphis, Tenn., said nearly one out of 20 children suffering from
acute lymphoid leukemia, or ALL, who endure the treatments and beat the disease
will subsequently develop acute myeloid leukemia, or AML.

   And doctors in Australia found that treatments for ALL significantly damage
cells in the reproduction system of both boys and girls, raising the possibility
of infertility, sexual problems, brittle bones and a higher risk of heart
disease.  The treatments also seem to make puberty come earlier among girls.

MORE TESTS FOR ALZHEIMER DRUG

   EARLY RESULTS from a study of a controversial new treatment for memory loss
caused by Alzheimer's disease are promising enough to keep the study going,
researchers said this week.

   But they would not say whether THA, also called tetrahydroaminoacridine or
tacrine, actually helped restore the memory of Alzheimer's patients, as was
claimed in a previous study later challenged by the Food and Drug
Administration.

   Despite some problems with liver toxicity, the results of the new study of
100 patients "indicate continuation of the study is warranted," said Dr. Kenneth
Davis of New York's Mount Sinai Medical Center, who heads the study.

   THA has been at the center of a medical controversy since its effects were
first described by a California psychiatrist, Dr. William K. Summers, in 1986.
Summers wrote that the drug helped restore the memory of a small number of
Alzheimer's patients. But the FDA later accused Summers of deficiencies in his
research.

   Alzheimer's disease afflicts primarily the elderly and is characterized by
progressive memory loss and senility. Its cause is unknown and there is no cure.
In the United States it affects about 4 percent of the population over 65 years
of age.

MORE BAD NEWS ON TANNING

   GETTING A TAN to improve your looks raises your risk of skin cancer,
wrinkles, eye damage and changes in the skin's immune system, according to a
report in today's Journal of the American Medical Association.

   No health benefits are known from cosmetic tanning, except that "tanned skin
may have positive psychological value by creating an enhanced image of personal
worth," says the report by the AMA's Council on Scientific Affairs.

   The price can be high: premature wrinkles, dryness and leathery skin; a
heightened risk of skin cancer; damage to the eyes; and genetic changes that may
compromise the skin's ability to fight invaders, the report says. It adds that
"despite the hazards, many people cannot be dissuaded from sunbathing or using
artificial tanning devices."

   To reduce risks from the sun's rays, the report recommends that sun bathers
minimize exposure to ultraviolet radiation, the component of sunlight that
causes tanning and burning, by staying out of the sun between 10 a.m and 2 p.m.
and using a sunscreen with a sun protection factor of at least 15 for skin that
burns easily or tans only gradually, or higher at greater elevations.


                               26 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1989 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                      July 14, 1989, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A14

LENGTH: 545 words

HEADLINE: New Strategy Uses Genes Against AIDS;
Virus Reproduction Blocked in Early Tests

BYLINE: Michael Specter, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Searching for an entirely new strategy to treat AIDS, scientists have created
fake versions of genes from the AIDS virus that when inserted into normal cells
living in a laboratory dish prevents the virus from harming them.

   The approach, which many researchers consider especially ingenious, is in its
earliest research stages and it would be years at best before it could yield a
successful AIDS therapy. It has not even been tested in animals. But because it
has the theoretical potential to produce a cure someday, it has excited many
specialists in the disease.

   The work is described in two papers in today's issue of the journal Cell. The
molecular biologists took genes that are essential for the AIDS virus, HIV, to
reproduce and, in a test tube, made mutant genes that blocked the process. Cells
given the mutant genes could be infected with HIV but the virus could not
reproduce and the cell was unharmed.

   Maurice Green of St. Louis University and Bryan R. Cullen of the Howard
Hughes Institute at Duke University used separate genes in their research,
although their approaches were similar. In addition, David Baltimore, director
of the Whitehead Institute in Cambridge, Mass., has done similar work with a
third gene from the AIDS virus. Last year Baltimore proposed the novel approach,
which he calls intracellular immunization.

   "At this point all we can say with certainty is that it is possible to use
these genes as machines that positively interfere with the growth of the virus,"
said Cullen. "If you can engineer the genes into enough cells you can probably
protect a person."

   The process would not be simple and much of the technology needed to make it
work in humans would still have to be developed.

   First, scientists would remove some of an AIDS patient's bone marrow, which
contains cells that proliferate to make the immune system cells that are
destroyed by the AIDS virus.  Then they would insert the mutant genes into the
cells.

   The altered cells would then be put back into the person's body, as is done
in a bone marrow transplant now, and take up residence in the marrow. As the
altered marrow cells proliferated to make new blood cells, they would pass on
the mutant gene as if it were a native gene. The mutant genes would make
defective versions of the proteins that the AIDS virus needs to reproduce. Tests
show that the defective proteins block HIV from reproducing.

   Over time, the AIDS virus would kill all those immune system cells that did
not have the mutant genes. This would permit the cells with the fake genes to
grow and flourish unharmed by HIV.

   Those cells would still become infected with HIV, but when they did they
would make proteins that prevented the virus from reproducing and destroying
other cells.

   "There is nothing in theory to block this form of therapy," said Baltimore.
"Ten or 20 years down the road, the scientific community will have solved all
the problems of gene therapy in bone marrow-derived cells. It will become
moderately routine."

   The three genes tried so far are called TAT, REV and GAG. Each is necessary
either to regulate or carry out the process of making new proteins and genes,
the components of new AIDS viruses, or to assembling the components into a
complete virus.


GRAPHIC: CHART, HOW NEW AIDS THERAPY MIGHT WORK (DATA FROM CHART NOT INCLUDED).
MICHAEL DREW


                               27 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1989 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 29, 1989 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 2374 words

HEADLINE: `Biological revolution' just beginning in La Jolla

BYLINE: Ann Gibbons, Tribune Science Writer

BODY:

   When Renato Dulbecco first saw the Salk Institute in 1964, it was just a hole
in the ground.

   The few scientists already on hand were working in makeshift labs near the
construction site, and UCSD was little more than a graduate school for a few
hundred students. But the well-known physician became one of a score of
scientists to leave prestigious posts at the nation's best universities to stake
their careers on the upstart institutions rising on the mesa above the Pacific
Ocean. "It started from nothing, but it was an adventure," said Dulbecco, a
native of Italy and one of seven Nobel Prize-winning scientists to have worked
at Salk.

   "We had a dream.

   We could see the technology was developing to look into molecules.

   We could see that a whole new world would follow where the molecular
techniques would be applied to higher organisms, especially humans. "We didn't
know the details of how that would happen, but we were enthusiastic." In just 26
years, Dulbecco has watched that dream materialize on Torrey Pines Mesa. As the
University of California, the Salk Institute for Biological Studies and the
Research Institute of Scripps Clinic rose among the eucalyptus and Torrey pines,
La Jolla grew from a remote scientific outpost into one of the leading centers
for molecular and cellular biology. Today, the three institutions are the
nucleus of a vibrant biomedical research community -- one that has been blessed
by what some say is almost an embarrassment of riches. The three institutions
rate so well in obtaining national funding that the dean of the UCSD School of
Medicine, Gerard Burrow, said: "Our major problem is that people are getting too
many grants, at a period of time when it is so hard to get grants." Their
success has inspired the founding of 69 biotechnology companies that employ
about 2,800 people in San Diego, giving the area the third-largest concentration
of biotechnology companies in the nation.

   Several smaller research institutions also have grown up in the shadow of the
"Big Three," including the La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, the Agouron
Institute and the Medical Biology Institute. Scientists around the world now
recognize San Diego as one of a half-dozen cities where scientists have done the
most to usher in the age of molecular biology.

   The researchers wield the powerful new tools of biology to study cells and
the molecules of which they're made in organisms as varied as bacteria, plants
and humans. "La Jolla is definitely one of the major centers in molecular
genetics in the world," said David Baltimore, a Nobel prize-winning biologist
who worked at Salk and who is director of the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical
Research at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Though the boom in
molecular and cellular biology research reflects a worldwide trend, San Diego's
institutions are unusual for their youth and their rapid expansion.

   The labs have become world-class research centers, even though they lack an
Ivy League past or the decades-old reputations of leading West Coast schools. It
was a destiny for which they were designed. The early founders, led by Roger
Revelle, tried to position the new institutions so they would become leaders in
what Revelle calls "modern biology." Revelle helped recruit some of the top
biologists of the day to join the faculty of the nascent university, where a
major emphasis was placed on biology.

   "It was quite clear by the end of the 1950s that modern biology was going to
be one of the important areas for research and technological development, which
would bring industrial research to San Diego," he said. But the degree of
success surprises even Revelle and Dulbecco.

   As acting president of Salk, one of Dulbecco's most challenging tasks has
been to find laboratory space for new scientists he wants to recruit to Salk.
Today, Dulbecco works in a spacious office on the top floor of the Salk
compound, where he speaks enthusiastically of plans for a new $10 million
building.

   When it opens in late 1992, its labs should be full of scientists using the
tools of molecular biology to study AIDS, the immune system, the brain and
nervous systems. The same thing is happening down the road at the gleaming white
campus of Scripps, and across the highway at UCSD, where new buildings already
are taking shape. "The growth is explosive," said Richard Lerner, director of
the Research Institute of Scripps Clinic.

   As he sat in his mahogany-paneled office with a view of the Pacific Ocean,
Lerner spoke of his vision of a new chemistry department -- one that would take
shape in a new $20 million building to open in late 1991. Scientists there will
study the form and function of proteins, complex molecules that carry out the
essential work of cells. At UCSD, workers already are putting the roof tiles on
the new 40,000-square-foot addition to the Center for Molecular Genetics, an $8
million lab that opened in 1987. The center is headed by biology Professor
Donald Helinski, and draws its faculty from both the medical school and the
university's science departments. "The biological revolution is just beginning,"
said Helinski, as he sat in the lobby of the ultramodern glass and graystone
center.

   Scientists here are working with genes, the basic hereditary blueprint in all
living organisms. They are manipulating genes to understand how they issue the
instructions that give cells and their components their identities and
functions, whether they are genes that turn on cancer cells in humans or genes
that affect a plant's susceptibility to frost or pests. Across the street on the
campus, architects are completing blueprints for a new $50 million science
building that would be large enough for the university to recruit 40 more
faculty-level biologists and chemists in the next decade. All of this research
is still basic laboratory science.

   But these new tools of molecular biology, Helinski said, will someday change
the methods of medicine and agriculture, leading to new drugs and new industrial
techniques.

   "There's no question that gene therapy will be in the physician's black bag
as an approach to disease in the future," Helinski said. Burrow, dean and vice
chancellor at the School of Medicine, is planning for that day, but he has a
surprising problem.

   He doesn't have enough lab space to accommodate all of the UCSD scientists
winning research grants.

   "If we don't find space for them, they will go elsewhere," he said. As a
result, Burrow is in the midst of planning for no fewer than five new buildings
on a 40-acre site east of the medical school.

   The buildings would range from a $25 million laboratory for basic research to
an $11 million neuropsychiatric hospital where physicians hope to transfer
state-of-the-art techniques straight from the lab into new treatments for
patients. "It's not enough to make a discovery," Burrow said.

   "You have to get it out into the world, from the bench to bedside to
biotech." Across town, at San Diego State University, professors are training
students who make up a good part of that biotech work force.

   The school is the only one of the 19 state universities (excluding the UC
campuses) to offer a doctoral degree in molecular biology, as part of a joint
program with UCSD. The first four graduates of the program were awarded their
doctorates in May, and immediately were offered post-doctoral research jobs at
UCSD, Scripps and UC San Francisco, said Sanford Bernstein, a biologist who is
associate director of the Molecular Biology Institute at SDSU. Even
undergraduates and adult-education students who earn the Recombinant DNA
Certificate at SDSU have no trouble finding jobs in the biotechnology and
research communities -- if they are good.

   Bernstein said he gets a telephone call a month from a biotech company
official asking if he has any students for hire. "In general, the biology
department has gone whole hog into the area of molecular biology," Bernstein
said.

   "It helps us build our reputation and turn out students to work for biotech
companies and in research." Administrators at these institutions said all of
this growth is sustainable because they have fared so well in federal funding.
UCSD ranked 15th in the nation in fiscal year 1988 for grants and other awards
from the National Institutes of Health, the major source of federal funding for
biomedical research.

   Officials at Scripps boast that the research institute receives more federal
funding than any other private, non-profit biomedical research institute in the
nation, ranking 31st among all recipients last year. UCSD is on particularly
sound financial footing because it also receives state money in proportion to
the number of students who enroll in the university.

   Already, one in six of the students on campus majors in biology, and
academics predict that large numbers will continue to enroll in biology and
chemistry in the next decade as the university student body swells from 16,678
to about 27,000. But none of the administrators is complacent about funding.

   The federal budget deficit has made competition for basic research funds
increasingly difficult, with only one in four screened applications for funds
being granted by the NIH. To keep that money flowing into San Diego,
administrators know that one solution is to build lab space. That way, they can
recruit new scientists, who bring grant money with them, and encourage in-house
scientists to expand their research.

   Researchers at all three institutions, for example, are now preparing to
apply for grants that would give them some of the federal money set aside to
"sequence the human genome" -- crack the total genetic code of human beings.
Hardly a month goes by, in fact, without an announcement of the recruitment of a
leading biologist or chemist, often from a prestigious Eastern university or
research institution. "There's no question there's been a major shift over the
past two decades toward the West Coast, despite the opinion of many people who
have thought the center of gravity intellectually is in Massachusetts," said W.
Maxwell Cowan, vice president and chief science officer of the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute in Bethesda, Md., a non-profit scientific organization that
funds biomedical research nationwide, including a new lab at UCSD. "California
institutions, from Berkeley, Stanford and UCSF in the north to San Diego in the
south now collectively represent one of the great intellectual masses in the
country," Cowan said. No one really knows why the growth is so explosive on the
West Coast, but some think there's more of an entrepreneurial spirit and,
perhaps, more freedom to pursue ideas outside the mainstream.

   That freshness, in fact, was part of the attraction for the founding fathers
of UCSD and the Salk Institute, many of whom saw La Jolla as a refuge from the
bureaucracies they had left behind. "The people who were brought here to make
biology happen came with a clean slate," said Paul Saltman, a professor of
biology and former vice chancellor for academic affairs at UCSD. "We didn't have
any of the old futzes hanging around from the 19th century threatened by these
young kids and their new ideas.

   It was a new community, a new vitality.

   It was very open, very collaborative.

   There was this crazy intellectual incest between these three institutions."
The timing was right.

   All three institutions were growing up just when scientists were unraveling
the structure of DNA and solving some of the basic mysteries of the way proteins
and viruses are built, at a time when federal funding was ample in the '60s and
early '70s. And then there's the legendary weather. "We tell recruits they'll
forget what a snow shovel looks like," said Burrow, dean of the UCSD medical
school. James Feramisco was one of the new recruits from the East Coast.

   He had a bright future at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on Long Island, where
he worked with James Watson, a Nobel laureate who sparked a revolution in
molecular biology in 1953 when he and Francis Crick (now at Salk) discovered the
helical structure of the DNA molecule, the genetic material that is the master
molecule of life. "To leave Cold Spring Harbor required some incredible draw,
and of all places, San Diego provided it," said Feramisco, a molecular biologist
who studies the genes that cause cancer. What drew Feramisco to UCSD's Cancer
Center last year were the medical school's ambitious plans for expansion and
recruitment of new scientists. "As molecular medicine comes of age, we want to
create an environment that rivals the best of the East Coast bloc," he said. He
was convinced that San Diego had the brain power to do it when he surveyed the
eclectic group of scientists already here who were experts in studying the
workings of the cell and its molecular components. "As science progresses,
everything we do becomes more complicated," Feramisco said.

   "The more colleagues you have in the immediate area who know something you
don't know, the better.

   You get constant trades of information. "It's very exciting here -- the
university with Salk and Scripps has such a broad array of scientists who think
in terms of molecular medicine, working on everything from sea urchins to
humans." There is so much collaboration among the three institutions, in fact,
that Burrow is now recruiting a scientist who will act as a liaison between the
medical school and Salk, Scripps and other academic departments at UCSD. The
institutions also have assembled the expensive tools that are magnets to new
recruits, including the supercomputers at Scripps and the San Diego
Supercomputer Center at UCSD that are used to model the structure of molecules,
such as proteins. "There was sufficient computer equipment that I feel like I
died and went to heaven," said Jeffrey Skolnick, a chemist who left Washington
University in St. Louis to come to Scripps this month. As a new generation of
scientists move to San Diego, they bring a vitality with them.

   In turn, they attract more bright young scientists working to fill the gaps
in the biological picture of mankind. "I think one of the best services I've
performed is providing an East Coast conduit," Feramisco said.

   "The phones ring constantly with people who hear about what's going on in San
Diego."

GRAPHIC: 4 DRAWINGS; 2 CHARTS; CAPTIONS: 1,2,3,4,5. BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH BOOM |
All three institutions are hiring new faculty and planning new laboratories to
open on their campuses on Torrey Pines Mesa in the next five years. The numbers
of scientists to be recruited are estimates, and all three institutions make
distinctions between faculty, who have special status, and other scientists who
work in their labs. The total number of scientists cited are estimates of
researchers with advanced degrees. (A-10) 2. UCSD School of Medicine (A-10) 3.
Research Institute of Scripps Clinic (A-10) 4. Salk Institute (A-10) 6. FEDERAL
FUNDS FOR BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH | The National Institutes of Health, the major
source of federal funding for biomedical research, awards funds each fiscal year
to almost 1,700 universities and research centers in the U.S. for research,
fellowships and contracts. Each of the three institutions' national rank is
shown. They also receive money from the National Science Foundation and private
donors, in addition to other sources. (A-10); PHOTOBY: 1,2,3,4,5. Source: UCSD,
Scripps and Salk | Tribune/Fred Gates 6. Source: National Insitutes of Health |
The Tribune

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                               28 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1989 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 29, 1989 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-10

LENGTH: 821 words

HEADLINE: Molecular biologist at Scripps has `Wright stuff'

BYLINE: Ann Gibbons, Tribune Science Writer

BODY:

   Like all humans, Peter Wright is made of tens of thousands of different kinds
of proteins ---- complex molecules that are the stuff of life. Unlike most
humans, Wright spends his days trying to figure out how those proteins are
built. As he sat at a computer terminal and tinkered with a colorful image of a
molecule, Wright explained why proteins are one of the marvels of the molecular
world.

   "We've realized that you have to understand the structure of proteins to
understand the biology of life," said Wright, chairman of the Department of
Molecular Biology at the Research Institute of Scripps Clinic. Proteins, it
seems, carry out many of the essential functions of the cell. They ferry oxygen
and cholesterol in the blood; they mount an immune defense against foreign
invaders; and they supply the collagen that gives strength to skin and bone --
to name just a few of their tasks. As a result, Wright and a team of about 100
scientists at Scripps are intent on cracking the chemical code that contains
instructions that tell these three-dimensional proteins how to fold into
different shapes -- particularly those molecules that could be of interest to
pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies designing the drugs of the future.
Across town, at the University of California's Cancer Center, James Feramisco
also is intrigued by proteins.

   He is studying the proteins that cause cancer. In his laboratory, he peers
into a microscope at a single cell.

   He manipulates a gear and lever to pierce the cell with a needle whose tip is
100 times finer than a human hair.

   Then he squeezes a plunger and fills the cell with proteins that make the
cell grow out of control, creating tumors known as cancer. Feramisco wants to
know how those proteins make good cells go bad.

   He thinks the biochemical steps to malignancy start at the genetic level,
where normal, useful genes go awry and start issuing instructions to make
proteins at the wrong place and time. "My lab is trying to isolate the genes we
know that are responsible for cancer," said Feramisco, a molecular biologist who
is associate director of the cancer center.

   "That's step one.

   Step two is to try to find out what those gene products (proteins) do in the
cell -- how they regulate cell growth." Both teams are using the new tools of
molecular biology for their research, techniques that were born in the
recombinant DNA revolution of the 1970s, when scientists learned to manipulate
genes and study their protein products. DNA is the master molecule of life, made
up of about 100,000 genes in humans.

   From their command post in the nucleus of a cell, those genes issue
instructions for assembling all the proteins that make up organisms as varied as
humans and fruit flies. With the dawn of molecular biology in the 1950s,
scientists began to decipher the structure of those genes and proteins.

   The real breakthroughs started in the mid-1970s, however, after they learned
to isolate specific genes and to make large amounts of them and their protein
products in a process known as cloning. "We can now, virtually at will, produce
a protein or a piece of a protein to study," Wright said. Once the Scripps
scientists have isolated an interesting protein, such as one that causes the
blood to coagulate, they try to map its precise structure. They tackle the
problem by using a bevy of high-tech tools, including techniques known as
nuclear magnetic resonance and X-ray crystallography. The two very different
methods essentially capitalize on the way the molecules absorb or diffract
radiation. The resulting data are entered into a supercomputer, which helps the
scientists create graphic models of the proteins. Such state-of-the-art
techniques already have been a boon to agriculture, plant research and medicine.

   They have led to diagnostic tests and prenatal screening for some genetic
diseases, and to the design of new plants that are more productive and
disease-resistant. Eventually, scientists hope to use these tools and their
knowledge of protein structure to make vaccines and to correct genetic disorders
in humans -- ideally before birth. In December, scientists at UCSD took a major
step toward creating just such a genetic treatment for some cancers by blocking
the development of tumors in mice, using the tools of molecular biology. A team
led by Drs. Wen-Hwa Lee and Theodore Friedmann took tumor cells and inserted a
foreign gene inside them, one that works to prevent certain kinds of cancer.

   When the tumor cells with the protective gene were injected into the flanks
of mice, the tumors did not grow. But when tumor cells without the protective
gene were inserted in the mice, tumors grew. "The real revolution in all of this
is the change in our thinking toward genetic therapy," Friedmann said.

   "Both the medical and molecular biology communities are now thinking that, in
fact, genetic therapy is feasible. That's very different from a decade ago."

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: PETER WRIGHT | Decoding chemical mystery; PHOTOBY:
Tribune photo by Jack Yon

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                               29 of 59 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1989 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                June 28, 1989, Wednesday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Business; Part 4; Page 6; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1182 words

HEADLINE: ADVICE FOR ENTREPRENEURS: LEARN TO DELEGATE RESPONSIBILITY

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY MULLANEY, The Baltimore Sun

DATELINE: BALTIMORE

BODY:

   Running a business is a lot like raising rabbits, or so it seemed to Andrew
Carnegie. And modern-day entrepreneur John Henry, a fan of business biographies,
says his contemporaries could still learn a thing or two from the famous steel
magnate.

   As a boy in Scotland, Carnegie wanted to raise rabbits at his poor parents'
home, but his mother said the family couldn't feed them. Undeterred, young
Carnegie rallied his friends to take care of the rabbits, promising to name one
after each friend in exchange for their work gathering food.

   The rabbits thrived, Carnegie wrote in his autobiography, and he learned that
organization, not raw effort or pure brains, was the key to making a growing
enterprise work.

   "If they understand the rabbit story," said Henry, chairman and chief
executive of Crop Genetics International Corp., "they understand everything."

Delegation Vital

   Unfortunately, many entrepreneurs don't get it. One of the things that
routinely hampers growing businesses -- and sometimes even kills them -- is the
inability of the boss to make the adjustment from be-everywhere, do-everything
company czar to orchestrator who can effectively delegate day-to-day work and
focus on the big picture.

   In other words, many bosses never figure out how important it is to get the
other kids to feed the rabbits.

   "Most of us grew up with this Protestant work ethic," said Frank A. Adams,
president of Grotech Partners, a venture capital firm based in Timonium, Md.
"What it comes down to is, 'If I want to be successful, I've got to do it
myself,' all of which is a good tenet, but it don't have much to do with
managing."

   People who have run growing companies, as well as others who have invested in
start-ups that are now thriving, say the hands-on boss is indispensable early in
the life of the business. But, just as a child needs to be let out of the house
to become an adult, a business needs to function outside its top manager's sight
to mature from a small to a mid-sized company. The key is knowing when to begin
and how to guide the delegation.

   There are two schools of thought about when delegating needs to begin. One
school says it's usually time to add a first layer of management help when sales
reach $4 million or $5 million. That's when an entrepreneur needs to identify
people who are good at the things the boss doesn't do well, said Charles W.
Newhall, general partner of New Enterprise Associates, a Baltimore-based venture
capital firm.

   "The critical issue at this point is that the entrepreneur brings in people
with independent minds," he said. "The classic mistake is to hire a recent
college graduate to be chief financial officer."

Second Transition

   This school says that a second transition hits the company when its annual
sales reach anywhere from $10 million to $50 million, depending on the expert.
That's when a founder-chief executive needs to create a true management team,
including the first elements of middle management, and to step firmly out of the
daily flow of the business.

   "Now everything must be delegated," Adams said. "The job becomes managing the
important details through other people."

   The second school avoids naming a specific sales figure at which changes
should begin; it says an owner should be able to hear the chairs squeaking and
figure out when it's time to start adding managerial grease.

   "It's when the job isn't getting done as well as it should," said James
Barrett, president of Genetic Therapy Inc. in Gaithersburg, Md. He said there
are usually obvious signs: Checks bounce if finance isn't being run well;
product returns rise if there's a problem in manufacturing; sales drop because
of problems in marketing.

   Both schools of thought agree that the first sign a company is running
raggedly should prompt some serious self-evaluation by the boss.

   "You need to start with an honest assessment of what you're good at. From
there, there's an honest assessment of what your staff's good at," Adams said.

   Then, he said, look hard at what the business needs and whose skills answer
the company's problems. "If the answer is I've got the skills and my staff
doesn't, you have to question whether you did it honestly," Adams said.

   Joseph Kelly, chief operating officer at Crop Genetics International, said
tricks as simple as the chief executive's keeping a log of what he did for a
week can also guide delegating. "It should jump out at you what you did wrong,"
Kelly said. "If you made the decision to pick out the secretary's chair, you've
got a problem."

   Managers can build extra candor into their evaluations by setting up formal
and informal structures to keep them honest, Barrett said. They can take
customers to lunch and ask for answers instead of orders. They can build
networks in their industry whose members will tell them what their company is
doing wrong.

   More formally, network members can serve as outside directors whose
independent judgment can check the often-rampant entrepreneurial ego. "If your
board is your mother, your father and your wife, you're not going to find out
much that you don't know," he said.

   But even after the decision to start delegating more authority and listening
to more viewpoints is made, doing it right is still tricky. It's hard for many
entrepreneurs to entrust important tasks to subordinates who are new to the
company or who are taking on more authority than before.

   But Henry and Kelly say managers can lay the groundwork for trusting
subordinates by setting high standards so everyone can see excellence is
expected. It starts with little things.

   "Letters don't go out around here with mistakes in them," Kelly said. "Once
you work with a guy, he gets the idea. And once he's thinking that way, it's
easier to hand things off to him."

   Adams said managers can build trust by giving new or newly promoted staff
members small jobs first, as the company begins to experiment with more
delegation.

   Top executives should watch for their subordinates' candor about how they're
doing and their ability to recover from mistakes. Then, if the small jobs go
well, the staff members should be worked up to bigger tasks and then broad areas
of responsibility.

   "A CEO builds confidence and an employee gains confidence in the same way --
through little victories," he said.

   The best way to learn to trust subordinates is to hire experienced managers,
not just people who "will do." Spend the money, even if it seems like a stretch,
say entrepreneurs and advisers.

   Another critical factor in successful delegation is diversity in a company's
corps of top managers.

   "I don't think the five of us would ever be what you'd call friends," Henry
said. "But you don't want mirroring. You want a variety of perspectives. You
couldn't get a more diverse set of backgrounds than ours."

   Diverse expertise helps a company manage operations better than the do-it-all
boss ever could. It also frees the boss to plan and think more. One thing to
think about is how to stay on top of things now that the boss isn't doing the
work directly any more.


                               30 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1989 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     June 27, 1989, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z17

LENGTH: 666 words

HEADLINE: The AIDS Virus Manages To Enter the Brain

BYLINE: Larry Thompson

BODY:

   When the AIDS virus attacks the body, it subverts a type of white blood cell
called the macrophage, a scavenger that patrols the blood gobbling up debris and
infectious agents, into a Trojan horse that can carry the virus into the brain.

   Normally, macrophages seldom enter the brain. They are blocked by the
blood-brain barrier, a physical obstruction created by cells lining the brain's
tiny blood vessels called capillaries. This barrier literally locks out blood
cells, bacteria, viruses and even large molecules such as proteins and
water-soluble drugs such as penicillin.

   The AIDS virus, however, somehow modifies the macrophage, giving it new
powers to overwhelm the barrier. Once inside the brain, the AIDS-altered
macrophage strips nerve cells of their protective covering -- the myelin sheath
-- which looks and acts like the insulator on electrical wire. Without the
sheath, nerves fail to function, resulting in an AIDS-caused dementia.

   With AIDS, physicians face a familiar problem. The disease can get into the
brain, but the drug that can treat the problem, AZT, can't -- at least, not very
well. The blood-brain barrier bars the drug.

   One solution to getting therapeutic agents into the brain might be human gene
therapy. This involves putting into the brain some genes that produce the
missing molecules needed to repair the disease.

   The AIDS virus may provide a hint as to how that might be done. If scientists
can find out how the AIDS virus turns the macrophage into a Trojan horse that
enters the brain, it may become possible to use macrophages to carry repair
genes into the brain, said Gary W. Goldstein, a physician and president of the
John F. Kennedy Institute in Baltimore, a research center that studies brain
diseases in children.

   Although much of the talk about human gene therapy for brain disorders
remains speculative, several research groups already are working on the problem.
Edward Neuwelt, a neurosurgeon at the Oregon Health Sciences University School
of Medicine and the Portland Veterans Administration Hospital, has been looking
at ways to get retroviruses, which gene therapy researchers have been using like
cellular taxicabs to shuttle repair genes into target cells, into the brain.

   Since Neuwelt has focused on cracking open the blood-brain barrier with
concentrated sugar solutions, he wanted to know if something as large as a
retrovirus could get into the brain. Already he has preliminary evidence that it
is possible to get viruses into the brains of cats. Once in the brain, the
carrier virus, for example, could be used to transplant the gene that makes
hexosaminidase, the enzyme missing in Tay-Sachs disease. If the gene is
successfully transplanted and turned on to make the enzyme, these patients could
be cured, Neuwelt said.

   But, he cautioned, it will be more than a decade before gene therapy for the
brain will be tried on patients. The first human experiments with gene transfers
only recently got under way at the National Institutes of Health in cancer
patients.

   A research group led by Fred Gage at the University of California at San
Diego is trying to repair brain defects by inserting cells that produce a
missing chemical into the brain. It has been tried extensively with Parkinson's
disease, for example. Results have been mixed, however, because transplanted
cells usually do not produce much of the missing chemical, dopamine. Gage's
group wants to use gene therapy to customize cells to make enough dopamine and
then transplant the cells back into the brain.

   Preliminary work in rats shows that it is possible to insert the gene for
nerve growth factor into cells that can be transplanted into the rat brain. To
see if this has any clinical effect, Gage then damaged certain nerves, which
normally are injured in Alzheimer's disease. Usually, the rats get symptoms of
Alzheimer's. But if the rats received a transplant of gene-altered cells in the
proper part of the brain, the damage was reduced.


                               31 of 59 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1989 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     June 25, 1989, Sunday, Bulldog Edition

SECTION: Part 1; Page 3; Column 5; Advance Desk

LENGTH: 924 words

HEADLINE: ETHICS ISSUES STAND OUT IN RELIEF AS GENE MAPPING ADVANCES

BYLINE: By CATHERINE ARNST, Reuters

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN, Conn.

BODY:

   Science fiction has long been filled with chilling scenarios of the future in
which evil leaders try to engineer a master race of genetically perfect human
beings.

   The tools to accomplish such a feat are slowly moving out of the realm of
fiction, however, as geneticists around the world struggle to identify and
decode all of the genes contained in the human body.

   At the same time they must struggle with the ethical questions that have
always surrounded the science of genetics, but their efforts in that area may be
moot. Scientists at a recent conference on gene mapping frequently pointed out
that, once they determine how a human being is made, they will have little
control over how their discoveries are used.

   "We want to make people literate about genetic knowledge . . . there is no
doubt that this knowledge would be very useful," said Dr. James Watson, the
Nobel laureate who with Francis Crick discovered the structure of DNA, the basic
building block of cells.

   But Watson told the Yale University conference that, although he is
"genuinely concerned" about how that knowledge is applied, "we cannot make
policy . . . all we can do is educate."

   Gene mapping is one of the hottest areas of science now, and a unique
international effort has been undertaken to locate and define all of the
chemical instructions that create a human being, collectively known as the human
genome.

   Researchers are working to map the position of each of the 100,000 or so
genes contained on the body's 46 chromosomes. They must then determine the
sequence of a four-letter code contained on the DNA of each gene, known as the
genetic code.

   This code controls everything from hair color to some aspects of personality
and consists of about 3.5 billion characters for the entire genome.

Nearly 2,000 Genes Mapped

   So far researchers have mapped just under 2,000 genes. They do not expect to
complete the arduous process for another 15 to 20 years.

   The United States has announced plans to invest more than $3 billion over the
next 15 years in the National Institutes of Health's gene-mapping project,
making it the largest in the world.

   France also has a well-advanced gene-mapping program. The European Community
plans to invest $20 million over the next two years on a genome project. And
Japan, the Soviet Union, Italy and Canada have announced plans for national
programs.

   "It is very clear that the human genome initiative has captured the
imagination of the world," said Norton Zinder, chairman of the advisory
committee to the NIH's human genome program.

   The world, however, is not interested merely for the sake of improving
knowledge. Researchers expect that once the genome is defined, medical science
can apply the findings to the diagnosis and cure of more than 4,000 human
diseases known to stem from gene defects.

   Doctors could predict an individual's, or even a fetus's, susceptibility to
everything from Alzheimer's disease to cancer, and could possibly alter
biological instructions to eliminate genetic defects.

Issues Raised

   Consequently, gene mapping raises a host of social and ethical issues, such
as rights to privacy raised by genetic testing, the prospects of more abortions
to eliminate the "genetically unfit" and whether gene therapy should move from
the treatment of a disease to the alteration of a person's genetic makeup to
eliminate the possibility of disease.

   Many of the 700 scientists who attended the Yale conference were obviously
concerned about ethics but also confused as to how much they should be involved
in issues generally decided outside the laboratory.

   Victor McKusick, director of an international group called the Human Genome
Organization (HUGO) that is trying to coordinate gene-mapping research
worldwide, said that scientists may think they have no place in setting social
policy, but in this area "we have to take (ethics) seriously."

   "The truth is we are going to have genetic information," he said. "We must
make decisions on how it will be used."

   The NIH, under the auspices of Watson and Zinder, have set up a working group
on ethical issues connected to the genome project led by Nancy Wexler, an
associate professor of clinical neuropsychology at Columbia University and
president of the Hereditary Disease Foundation.

   The project also plans to spend 3% to 5% of its annual budget, up to $5
million, on ethical concerns and public education.

Opposition to Mapping

   But gene mapping is already running into opposition. Jeremy Rifkin, president
of the Foundation on Economic Trends and an outspoken opponent of genetic
engineering, has organized a coalition of 70 consumer representatives including
Ralph Nader and National Organization for Women President Molly Yard to lobby
for the creation of a permanent congressional board to "address the issues of
genetic discrimination, privacy and eugenics caused by the human gene-mapping
project."

   In West Germany, the environmentally focused Greens Party is strongly opposed
to the genome project, claiming that the research could lead to human eugenic
experiments similar to those carried out by the Nazi regime.

   However, scientists note that the regulations imposed by individual countries
may be meaningless for a project that is so international in scope.

   Zinder said the NIH group has been approached by several Third World nations
interested in sharing research efforts and results. "I don't know that we can do
anything about how they will use it," he said. "We can only provide the
information."


                               32 of 59 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1989 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      June 19, 1989, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part 2; Page 3; Column 5; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 169 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF:  SCIENCE / MEDICINE;
2 RESEARCH GROUPS DEVELOP GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: From staff and wire reports

BODY:

   A new approach to gene replacement therapy in animals and, eventually, in
humans has been developed independently by two groups of researchers. The groups
reported last week in the journal Science that they had used a special virus to
insert the gene for a protein into cells isolated from the lining of blood
vessels, then reintroduced the cells into pigs and dogs. The engineered cells
then colonized the interior of blood vessels and began producing the new
protein.

   In the past, researchers have speculated about using bone marrow cells, the
source of blood cells, for gene replacement therapy. The new technique should be
simpler to perform and less painful for the the recipient.

   The researchers said that the first use of the technique might be to
introduce anticoagulants, vessel-dilating or growth-promoting agents into the
vascular system. The procedure also could be used for the treatment of any
inherited disease that requires secretion of biological agents directly into the
bloodstream.


                               33 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1989 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 11, 1989 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 566 words

HEADLINE: Use of sperm, genes may alter animal traits

BYLINE: David Graham, Staff Writer

BODY:

   A new laboratory technique that uses sperm to transplant genes could allow
creation of designer farm animals and provide for a new approach to treating
inherited human diseases, La Jolla researchers say. The experimental technique
uses sperm to absorb foreign genes which give rise to new characteristics in the
animals, and it could represent a significant advancement in practical genetic
technologies, say scientists at the Salk Institute and UCSD who are planning to
experiment with the technique. Italian researchers reported earlier this month
that they had introduced new traits into mice by placing foreign genes with
mouse sperm in a test tube.

   The sperm apparently absorbed the genes, and when the sperm fertilized an
egg, the offspring developed the foreign traits.

   The work was done by Corrado Spadafora of the Institute of Biomedical
Technology in Rome. "It really came as a surprise to all of us in the field,"
said Pamela Mellon, assistant professor at the Salk Institute who studies gene
transplants.

   "It would be useful in animal husbandry.

   It would relieve us of hours of work every week." The new approach could
yield farm animals designed to be heftier or to have leaner meat, for example,
or it could produce animals with special traits for laboratory research. Now,
most gene transplants in animals are performed by insertion of the genes into a
fertilized egg with a needle.

   This technique is laborious and requires expensive microscopes, and the eggs
of useful stock like cows and pigs often collapse, Mellon said. Friedmann said
his lab has in fact attempted experiments similar to the Italian ones using
mouse sperm, but without success. Friedmann said the sperm technique is
promising for treatment of inherited diseases in humans at the time of
conception. This approach involves inserting a new gene at conception and is
known as "germ line" gene therapy.

   The gene would be carried in every cell of the developing person and would
become part of his genetic inheritance. "If this does work, and we can battle
the ethical questions that seem important in lots of people's minds, then the
applications would be obvious," Friedmann said.

   "I think we will find useful applications even at germ line therapy."
Diseases which might be treated with gene therapy that are understood now
include the blood disease phalassemia and sickle cell anemia.

   Many more potentially might be amenable to therapy if their genetic basis
were known. "It's something we've wanted to do," Friedmann said of the new
approach. "It's a new thing.

   It's certainly something to follow." Germ line intervention has never been
attempted in people, and the work is controversial because, in theory, almost
any characteristic, including eye or hair color or even intelligence, could be
altered if the genes governing those features could be identified. Now the most
prevalent research approach to gene therapy in people envisions inserting a
specific type gene into an adult to correct a specific disease.

   But even this approach has not been attempted in people. In December, Wen-Hwa
Lee, a UCSD researcher, and Friedmann reported that the retinoblastoma gene
implanted into cancerous cells stopped the cancerous activity in the cells.

   The work helped confirm the gene's cancer suppressing abilities and
reinforced that possibility that it might one day be able to be used to supress
certain types of cancer in people.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                               34 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                   June 2, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words

HEADLINE: Simplified Gene Transplant Method Reported

BYLINE: By HAROLD M. SCHMECK Jr.

BODY:

   A remarkably simple way of transplanting genes by using sperm as the vehicle
has been discovered by Italian scientists in a research development that other
specialists have described as surprising, even astounding.

   In experiments, the scientists showed that spermatozoa of mice readily
capture genetic material in a test tube. The sperm, in turn, were used to
fertilize egg cells, later yielding animals that carry the transplanted genes.

Report by Italian Team

   The tests showed that many of the animals transmit the foreign genes to their
offspring, creating new breeds that permanently carry the foreign traits. Such
animals are called transgenic.

   The newly discovered method is being reported today in the journal Cell by a
team led by Dr. Corrado Spadafora of the Institute of Biomedical Technology in
Rome.

   An editorial in the journal said it would be important to have other
scientists confirm the research by replicating the results, something that has
not been done.

   By greatly simplifying production of transgenic animals, the research might
have a major impact on the scientific and commercial uses of gene
transplantation.

   The technique would not be applicable to human gene therapy of the kind now
being pursued by several medical research groups. In this kind of therapy, genes
would be transplanted into the patient via blood, skin or liver cells.

   But the use of sperm might be applied to a different kind of therapy, in
which genes are transplanted into an early human embryo. But medical scientists
almost universally agree that this kind of gene therapy should not be considered
for now because of many ethical and technical questions.

   Gene transplantation in animals is beginning to be exploited commercially to
create breeds with traits like enhanced growth, resistance to disease and the
ability to produce rare human substances useful in medicine. In basic research,
transgenic animals are being used for a variety of purposes, including better
understanding of cancer and the most intimate effects on cells of the AIDS
virus.

Contrast to Current Method

   Most specialists now painstakingly transplant genes by direct injection into
egg cells in a test tube, a technique requiring great skill and expensive
microscopic equipment. If genes can be transmitted by using sperm, as the new
report indicates, the production of transgenic animals will probably become much
more common, American specialists said yesterday.

   ''If the experiments can be repeated by others, this publication will be a
cornerstone in biology,'' Dr. Max L. Birnstiel and Dr. Melnrad Busslinger said
in the editorial that accompanied the report. Both are with the Research
Institute of Molecular Pathology in Vienna.

   The editorial characterized the findings as ''astounding.'' It said the
research was potentially important ''not only because the technique promises to
do away with the laborious and technically demanding needle work for producing
transgenic animals, but also because of its potential usefulness in introducing
commercially important features into such animal species that have thus far
proved difficult to deal with.''

Theoretical Questions

   Transplants have been done in a wide variety of species but have proved
difficult in important domestic animals like pigs and cows.

   The editorial raised the question of whether sperm's newfound natural ability
to pick up foreign genes might contribute to the natural flow of genes between
species in evolution and perhaps even in transmitting disease. But American
experts said it is likely that male semen and the female reproductive tract have
developed natural defenses against this kind of transfer.

   American leaders in transgenic research said they had heard rumors of the
research in Rome, but they were cautious in their comments yesterday because
they had not yet seen the published report.

   Dr. Ralph L. Brinster of University of Pennsylvania said that if the report
was confirmed, the technique would be important in facilitating the production
of transgenic animals.

   Dr. Frank Costantini of Columbia's College of Physicians and Surgeons called
the new report ''amazing'' and said it was surprising that no one had thought to
try such a simple method before. If the method works, he said, it might become
widely used.

   Dr. Jon Gordon of Mount Sinai School of Medicine was skeptical that any
profound advances in gene transplant technology would come from the new method.

Experiments Described

   ''To me, the most significant thing about this is that it shows that sperm
can take up something like that,'' Dr. Gordon said.

   The report in Cell described experiments in which sperm were ''washed'' and
then put in a solution briefly with segments of foreign DNA that included a
bacterial gene. DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is the substance of the genes in
all living things.

   In this surprisingly simple procedure, the sperm heads seemed to capture
large amounts of the foreign genetic material in 15 to 30 minutes. Much of it
appeared to be tightly incorporated into the sperm head and could not be washed
off.

   When the sperm were used to fertilize mouse egg cells in the laboratory, the
foreign genes were transplanted into the eggs, the report said. The eggs were
then transferred into female mice and allowed to develop as natural fetuses.
About 250 mice were born from these eggs, and scientists identified the foreign
genetic material in about 30 percent of them.

   Many of the mice born with the transplanted genes transmitted functioning
copies of the foreign genes to their own progeny when mated with normal mice.
The transfers only worked when living sperm was used.

   The foreign gene used in the experiments was a bacterial gene called
chloramphenicol acetyl transferase, widely used in research because it is easy
to detect.

   In addition to Dr. Spadafora, the authors of the report were Marialuisa
Lavitrano, Antonella Camaloni, Vito M. Fazio, Susanna Dolci and Maria G. Farace.

   In related experiments, the scientists did comparable experiments with sperm
of the frog species Xenopus and with sea urchins. indicating that the ability of
sperm to take up foreign DNA is widespread among species.


                               35 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1989 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             June 1, 1989 Thursday
                                 Fourth Edition

SECTION: Science; Pg. D02

LENGTH: 291 words

HEADLINE: SEATTLE TEAM PIONEERS NEW CANCER TREATMENT

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: SEATTLE

BODY:

   Thursday, June 1, 1989 SEATTLE TEAM PIONEERS NEW CANCER TREATMENT

   TEXT:

   Scientists at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center are playing a part
in a research effort aimed at finding ways to treat disease by genetic
engineering.

   Researchers at the National Cancer Institute announced last week they had
introduced foreign genes into a terminally ill cancer patient using a modified
rodent virus.

   The virus is supposed to ``infect'' the patient, who suffers from advanced
skin cancer, with chemically enhanced cells that attack cancer cells.

   A. Dusty Miller, a molecular biologist at Fred Hutchinson, led the Seattle
team that made the virus for the National Cancer Institute experiment. It is
called a retrovirus and it infects cells by injecting its own genetic material
into them.

   He and the other scientists are now testing another modified rodent virus to
determine its ability to transfer genetic material to bone marrow cells.

   Transferring a gene to bone marrow would be an extraordinary advance in the
move toward gene therapy or gene transplantation for disease, Miller said.

   Because the body's immune system and all the components of blood are created
in bone marrow, he said, successfully transferring genes into bone marrow could
be expected to be a treatment for deficiency diseases, hereditary illnesses or
blood-based disorders.

   ``These cells have only been infected in mice as yet,'' Miller said. His team
is now pursuing this kind of gene transfer in larger animals.

   With their lead in developing the retroviruses for gene therapy, Miller and
his colleagues hope to be the next to make a major step in this innovative
approach to disease treatment. Miller, unlike some other figures in his field,
is unwilling to predict when that might be.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2006


                               36 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1989 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                      May 30, 1989, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z10

LENGTH: 3323 words

HEADLINE: NEW ERA OF GENE THERAPY BEGINS;
Experiment Opens the Door to Treating a Wide Range of Diseases

BYLINE: Larry Thompson, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   "That was a small step for a gene, but a large step for genetics." -- A sign
on a laboratory wall at NIH

   Last week, for the first time, scientists at the National Institutes of
Health removed cells from a person with cancer, genetically altered these cells
and then put them back into the patient.

   It was a historic and sobering moment, a first step toward using the new
technique of gene therapy to treat a wide range of diseases.

   After nearly two decades of debate about whether an altered gene could -- or
even should -- be put in a person, the deed was done. Gene therapy, long scoffed
at by researchers in other fields, had to be taken seriously.

   "We have gone past the stage where we are wondering whether this approach to
disease is going to work or not," said Theodore Friedmann, a gene therapy
researcher from the University of California at San Diego. "The concept has
pretty much gained hold. There are very few people who doubt or object to the
development of gene therapy."

   So far the patient, who has malignant melanoma, is doing fine. Four days
after the procedure, he went home.  Over the next weeks -- perhaps beginning
this week -- nine more patients will undergo this technique.

   The gene transfer experiment -- piggybacked onto an ongoing cancer study --
will show whether it is possible to put new genes into a human cell and then
return the altered cell to the patient. This set of tests will give scientists
their first measure of how safe gene transplants are in humans. Once safety is
shown, other gene therapy procedures may follow in short order.

   "In symbolic terms, it is very significant," Dusty Miller, another longtime
gene therapy researcher from the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in
Seattle, said of the NIH experiment. "It will, if it works, allay our fear that
there might be horrible consequences of putting in a gene. It will mean a green
light for people to think of trying . . . actual gene therapy experiments. It
was a way to get this whole field moving."

   If things get moving, the benefits for patients could be tremendous. Instead
of treating disease with half-way measures -- surgically slicing out disease or
giving drugs, sometimes for the life of the patient -- physicians may one day be
able to stop diseases at their genetic roots.

   And not just rare, inherited disorders. When gene therapy was first
conceived, scientists thought about unusual illnesses that few people ever heard
of: severe combined immune deficiency, which forces a person to live in a
plastic bubble to ward off usually harmless bacteria and viruses in the
environment, and Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, a brutal mental illness where the
afflicted individual involuntarily eats his own fingers, lips and other body
parts.

   But now, as gene therapy technology has come of age, researchers are looking
at the major illnesses: heart disease, cancer, neurologic illnesses such as
Alzheimer's disease, even gene therapy for AIDS.

   Last week's experiment represents the convergence of two of this decade's
most promising and controversial technologies: gene therapy, which manipulates
and transfers genes into cells, and so-called adoptive immunity against cancer,
a way to super-charge a patient's own immune system to attack certain kinds of
cancer.

   The work was pioneered by three of this country's most promising and
sometimes controversial scientists: W. French Anderson of the National Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute, an early designer of gene transfer technology and an
outspoken proponent of the approach; Steven A. Rosenberg of the National Cancer
Institute, who caused a sensation in 1985 when he announced his innovative
cancer therapy, and R. Michael Blaese, a geneticist at NCI who had been trying
for years to put genes into a special type of white blood cell.

   The collaboration leading to last week's experiment gave both technologies a
boost.

   Said Anderson: "This experiment opens the way for a lot more."

   The First Experiment

   The mood was tense on Monday, May 22, as the medical team waited along with
the patient and his wife for a key phone call.

   In the microbiology laboratory in the NIH's 500-bed hospital, a sample of
specialized white blood cells from the patient was being tested for signs of
bacterial infection or other contaminants.

   Up to that point, everything had gone like clockwork. Though critically ill
with cancer, the patient was healthy enough to undergo the experimental therapy,
which had well-known but potentially lethal side effects.

   A section of his tumor had been surgically removed. It contained powerful
white blood cells already attacking the cancer -- cells that could be isolated
and grown in the laboratory.

   About one third of the cells taken from the patient were then exposed to a
mouse leukemia virus that had been genetically engineered to carry a special
bacterial gene.  Like a Trojan horse, the mouse virus entered the white blood
cell, unloading its genetic cargo into the cell's chromosome. The gene would be
used as a marker to help scientists track the activity of the immune cells
against the cancer.

   The genetically marked cells were mixed back in with the remaining white
blood cells isolated from the tumor -- they are called tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes, or TIL cells. The next step was to stimulate the whole batch of
white blood cells with the growth factor interleukin-2 until there were more
than 70 billion TIL cells swirling around inside five plastic intravenous bags.

   All that remained was to inject the 70 billion cells back into the man. The
TIL cells would attack the cancer, researchers hoped, freeing him from the
disease. In the process, the scientists hoped to learn something about how long
TIL cells survived in the body and why the treatment helps half the patients but
not the others. And they also expected to learn whether transfering altered
genes into human patients is safe.

   The phone rang. The samples were clean, said the technican: It's a go.

   "Steve and I both looked at our watches at the same time," Anderson recalled.

   At 10:47 a.m. on May 22, the first genetically engineered human cells began
flowing into the first human patient to receive such a treatment. It would take
half an hour to drain all five bags.

   The patient tolerated the procedure very well, said the official report.

   The scientists, however, were on edge.  Anderson, who is also a fourth-degree
black belt, taught karate classes over the weekend before the experiment. "I
sparred with everyone in the school on Friday night," he said.

   Rosenberg, too, was excited. "It has taken us almost nine months [of often
intense official and scientific reviews] to get to this point," he said later.
"I am glad it is finally happening." Echoing the astronauts quoted in Tom
Wolfe's book "The Right Stuff," Anderson said:

   "All I wanted to do was make sure I didn't mess up. I just wanted to get the
job done, do it right and not mess up."

   Their concerns weren't trivial.

   "We were [ready] for every problem except the patient dying," Anderson said.
"If the patient had died immediately -- we obviously would have to say so --
[NIH director James B.] Wyngaarden would be in the position of announcing the
first [gene transfer] patient and he dies.

   "That," Anderson said emphatically, "would have set the whole field back."

   Advancing Two Fields

   Steve Rosenberg is almost ruthless in his singlemindedness: Find a cure for
cancer.

   "Gene transfer is just a tool," he said. "We want to use this gene transfer
technology to improve cancer therapy."

   In fact, Rosenberg initially was reluctant to get into the gene therapy
business. Since 1969, he had been thinking about ways to use the body's immune
system just like an anti-cancer drug.

   In 1969, Rosenberg had removed the gallbladder of a man who a decade earlier
had been seen at a Veteran's Administration Hospital with inoperable stomach
cancer. The man had been sent home to die. When Rosenberg opened the man's belly
a decade later, there was no sign of the disease. Somehow, Rosenberg reasoned,
the man's immune system kicked in and cured the cancer.

   That led Rosenberg into some unorthodox experiments. Once he tried
transfusing some of that man's blood into another man with the same blood type
who had a similar cancer. No effect.

   After arriving at the National Institutes of Health in the early 1970s,
Rosenberg vaccinated pigs with cancer cells from six patients and then purified
pig white blood cells and injected them into the patients. Nothing happened --
good or bad. Rosenberg wrote four scientific reports, but nothing ended up being
published.

   Meanwhile, by the late 1970s, a special growth hormone for white blood cells
was discovered by Robert C. Gallo, later co-discoverer of the AIDS virus.
Rosenberg began using the growth hormone, called interleukin-2, to grow white
blood cells that had been primed to attack cancers.

   Successful animal experiments led to human trials in which white blood cells
were removed from the blood circulation and grown in high numbers in the lab and
returned to the body. In 1985, he reported that 10 percent of the patients had
their cancers go away. As a result, thousands of desperate patients and their
families flooded the NCI phone lines pleading for the treatment.

   In the majority of patients, however, the treatment failed. Rosenberg
improved the approach by taking white blood cells from the tumor itself, instead
of the general circulation, but still didn't get the success rate he sought. To
find out why, he needed to track the white blood cells in the body to separate
the characteristics of the cells that kill cancer efficiently from those that
don't.

   French Anderson, too, is singleminded: Transfer genes and get them to
function in the body.

   A visionary in attacking diseases at their genetic roots, Anderson has spent
more than two decades working to make technical progress in gene therapy and
convince researchers to work in the field.

   By the early '80s, medical scientists had developed a number of techniques
for getting genes into cells in the laboratory and to make those genes produce
their protein products in the cell. They predicted human gene therapy was right
around the corner. They were wrong.

   A major problem was finding a cell type that could be taken out of the body,
genetically changed and then reinjected. Several research groups concentrated on
bone marrow; the results were promising but they could not get long-lasting
genetic changes in the bone marrow cells, nor could they get the transformed
cells to produce enough protein to be effective as a therapy.

   Scientists also found that the genes were not always stable once put into a
cell, and, in some experiments, the transformed cells died out. Diseases
initially targeted for cure were put on hold. The future of gene therapy looked
bleak.

   It was the NCI's Michael Blaese who found the common ground between Anderson
and Rosenberg. In his research, he had looked for ways to put new genes into a
special type of white blood cell called T cells.

   TILs are T cells. Why not try to solve Rosenberg's tracking problem by using
Anderson's gene transfer techniques to mark them with an inserted gene?

   The three men met in April 1988 to discuss the idea, and a proposed
experiment was submitted to several NIH review bodies on June 10. After public
hearings, NIH director James Wyngaarden gave his blessing in January. Since
then, the three researchers and their team have been preparing for last week's
experiment.

   "I see this as just a first step," said Rosenberg. "We already, in the lab,
are introducing genes that will make the cells more effective."

   For example, Rosenberg's team has used techniques developed by Anderson and
Blaese to put genes for interferon, tumor necrosis factor and interleukin-2,
into TIL cells. Preliminary results show that the new genes function. The
long-range goal is to test these genetically supercharged TIL cells in human
patients to see if they prove effective against cancer.

   For the gene therapy researchers, last week's experiment promises to solve
the fundamental problem of getting gene-altered cells back into the body.

   "We haven't had ways to introduce genes into patients in ways that they would
continue to survive and be expressed," Rosenberg said. "TILs represent a vehicle
for introducing these genes."

   Gene Therapy's Promise

   The first real gene therapy, where the transplanted gene is intended to cure
the disease, will probably be aimed at cancer, Anderson predicted. If the
current NIH experiment goes well, it could start there sometime within the next
year.

   Focusing on cancer is remarkable because scientists once wanted to apply gene
therapy to a narrow range of inherited disorders: hemophilia, sickle cell
anemia, immune deficiency or thalassemia, all inherited blood disorders, and a
handful of other rare inherited disorders.

   "The number of diseases that one might think about treating genetically is
very much greater than we thought a few years ago," said UCSD's Friedmann.

   For example, Friedmann's group is thinking about how to treat cancer not by
boosting the immune system but by replacing a gene missing in certain kinds of
cancers, including a cancers of the eye, breast, bone and lung.

   Some cancers arise when the retinoblastoma gene (named for a rare eye cancer)
is inadvertently lost from a cell. This gene appears to prevent uncontrolled
growth -- the essence of cancer. UCSD's Wen-Hwa Lee isolated the retinoblastoma
gene and, in collaboration with Friedmann, has shown in animal experiments that
inserting it into those cancer cells can block the formation of tumors.

   "We are arguing that you fix what is broken," Friedmann said. "Cancer is a
genetic disease. If the genes are broken, you fix the gene."

   Friedmann envisions a time when cancers can be attacked with a mouse virus
carrying the anti-cancer gene. "It may be possible to shrink a tumor by getting
many [cancer] cells infected," he said, "Or getting multiple exposures of the
tumor to the gene."


   AIDS is another disease that gene therapy could logically attack. Anderson
has begun a collaboration with NCI's Robert Gallo to develop a technique for
blocking the AIDS virus once it is inside the body.

   Researchers currently are testing the ability of a protein called soluble CD4
to stop the AIDS virus from spreading in the body of infected individuals. The
results are promising, but CD4 has to be repeatedly injected.

   Anderson believes that it may be possible to insert the gene to make CD4 into
a number of different cells and then implant the cells in the body. Once in
place, the cells would secrete the CD4 into the bloodstream, providing a
constant, internal source to block the spread of the AIDS virus.

   A research team at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle has
taken a drastically different approach to treating AIDS with genes. When the
AIDS virus first infects a cell, it unpacks its genes in the chemical form of
ribonucleic acid, RNA. Scientists have shown it is possible to block the AIDS
virus infection by injecting into the cell a version of RNA that is a mirror
image to the RNA for AIDS. The mirror image RNA binds to the viral RNA,
preventing its action.

   According to Seattle's Dusty Miller, the Hutchinson scientists believe they
can insert genes to make the mirror RNAs into various populations of cells
within the body of an infected individual, slowing or even stopping the
progression of the disease. The research is still very preliminary.

   Another innovative approach to getting genetically engineered cells back into
the body involves developing an artificial organ.  Anderson and others have
worked out a technique for making what he calls neo-organs.

   In this technique, scientists genetically engineer some cell type, a skin
cell called a fibroblast, for example, and program it to secrete a missing
protein, such as an enzyme. The cells are placed on a fibrous sponge that can be
surgically placed in the belly. The sponge is treated with chemicals to make
blood vessels and nerves grow into it, feeding the genetically altered cells and
carrying away the newly manufactured proteins.

   Anderson already has shown that this strategy can be used to cure Gunn rats,
which lack the ability to eliminate bilirubin from the body, causing them to be
yellow. When given the neo-organs, the rats return to normal color.

   Researchers are also investigating ways to treat Alzheimer's disease.
Another San Diego researcher, Fred H. Gage, led a research group that showed it
may be possible to block some of the deterioration of Alzheimer's disease.
Scientists believe that as the brain ages, it loses nerve cells that use the
chemical acetylcholine to communicate with other nerves. These cells are
associated with learning and memory and their loss is associated with
Alzheimer's.

   By genetically engineering skin cells to produce nerve growth factor, a
substance that promotes nerve survival, and then implanting the cells into the
skulls of brain-injured rats, Gage prevented the acetylcholine neurons from
being lost.

   While it's too soon to say how this would be applied to Alzheimer's, the
animal experiments suggest that gene-altered cells can be used in the brain.

   Also on the horizon are gene-therapy techniques for a host of other diseases,
including heart disease. One approach involves the molecules that carry
cholesterol in the blood. Scientists are looking into ways to stop blood from
clotting in plastic blood vessels.

   In addition, research is under way to find more viruses to package these
altered genes so that they can be inserted into all kinds of cells. Some
scientists even are talking about artificial, virus-like carriers.

   "Five, six, seven years ago, a lot of reputable molecular biologists were
embarrassed to say gene therapy in public," Friedmann said. "Now, that is not
the case."

   Ethics and Gene Therapy

   As progress takes place on the technical front, the ethical issues that once
dominated the debate over gene therapy now seem to have calmed.

   No one argues any longer that there are ethical or moral problems with gene
therapy in the body of a single individual -- so-called somatic gene therapy --
said LeRoy Walters, director of the Center for Bioethics at the Kennedy
Institute of Ethics at Georgetown University.

   Since the 1980s, he said, government and religious groups have produced 15
statements concluding that "somatic gene therapy is morally justifiable in
principle. That is an impressive international consensus."

   There are, however, many unanswered questions about gene therapy techniques
that can permanently change genes passed on to the next generation -- so-called
germ line gene therapy. No one is currently proposing such an experiment.

   But while there may be no moral objections to the current experiment and
although the first gene transfer experiment already has been done, it doesn't
mean the next team that wants to transfer some genes into a patient is going to
have an easy time of it, said Walters, who chairs NIH's subcommittee on human
gene therapy.

   "For an attempt at gene therapy, researchers have to demonstrate that the
procedure is likely to be safe and it is likely to be effective in alleviating
the patient's disease," Walters said.

   At present, no proposal is before the gene therapy subcommittee and none is
expected for its July 31 meeting, Walters said. Nevertheless, the review for the
next stage gene therapy experiment could be as lengthy as the review conducted
for the current procedure.

   For those who have followed the field closely for a long time, Walters said,
"the pace is slower than many of us hoped in terms of researchers being able to
help patients. But it certainly is an avenue of research that offers great
promise . . . It offers promise to patients who otherwise have very little hope
of effective treatment."


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, GENETIC TRACERS: HOW GENES CAN ALTER CELLS. (DATA FROM
ILLUSTRATION NOT INCLUDED), PETER HOEY


                               37 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1989 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                      May 30, 1989, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z13

LENGTH: 1203 words

HEADLINE: For 3 Key Scientists,Decades of Highs and lows End in Euphoric
'Moonshot'

BYLINE: Sally Squires, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   At 10:47 a.m. on May 22, a nurse in the surgical intensive care unit at the
National Institutes of Health switched an intravenous bag for a patient and
launched a new era in medicine.

   "It was like a moonshot," said W. French Anderson, chief of the laboratory of
molecular hematology at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, who helped
lead the first human experiment in gene therapy. "Everything went exactly
according to plan because we have gone up to the point of putting the cells in a
patient at least a dozen times before."

   Along the way, however, there were many fits and starts. Anderson, a
52-year-old Harvard-trained physician researcher, set up the first gene therapy
lab in 1968 at NIH. The intervening 21 years have been fraught with technical
problems, federal regulatory snags and a lawsuit by Jeremy Rifkin, president of
the Foundation on Economic Trends. Rifkin, an opponent of genetic engineering of
all types, including gene therapy, sued to change the procedure to approve gene
therapy studies. The case was dismissed earlier this month by a U.S. District
judge.

   Before that, Anderson and his colleagues Michael Blaese, deputy chief of the
metabolism branch at the National Cancer Institute, and Steven Rosenberg, chief
of surgery at NCI, had to shepherd their proposed experiment through 26 hours of
formal review hearings before seven advisory committees and regulatory agencies,
including the Food and Drug Administration and internal review boards at NIH.

   "We knew the number of regulatory agencies looking over our shoulders would
be enormous, but the degree of scrutiny we have been under has been
extraordinary," said Rosenberg.

   There were also plenty of technical hurdles.  One of the lowest points came
on June 24, 1980, at Airlie House in Virginia, where Anderson chaired a
scientific meeting on gene transfer. "When we had all finished presenting our
research," he said, "I realized that we had no idea of how to carry out a
clinical human gene study. The technology did not exist."

   That night, Anderson couldn't sleep. Around 3 a.m., he got up, dressed and
drove back to his home in Bethesda. The next day, Anderson, a black belt in the
martial art Taekwon Do decided to focus more on his hobby: sports medicine. He
became physician to the U.S. Taekwon Do team and traveled throughout the world
to meets. "I carried on a research lab, but did it halfheartedly," he recalled.
"It was a very depressing time."

   But by 1983 he was back in the lab again full time, thanks to painstaking
work with retroviral vectors -- shells of viruses that can carry new genes and
implant them into a cell's DNA. Anderson started collaborating with Eli Gilboa,
a microbiologist at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, on the
retroviral work. Gene transfer suddenly looked feasible again. About this time,
his wife Kathrin, a pediatric surgeon at Children's Hospital National Medical
Center in the District, introduced him to Blaese, an immunologist and
pediatrician at NCI with an interest in correcting inherited diseases of the
immune system.

   Together the two reasoned that changing a defective gene might best be
possible in a patient with a disease known as ADA deficiency. People who suffer
from ADA deficiency lack a key enzyme known as adenosine deaminase. Without it,
the amount of a chemical, deoxyadenosine, rises to abnormal or toxic levels in
the blood, preventing white blood cells, specifically T cells, from dividing,
multiplying and ultimately from fighting infection.

   There were some promising inroads but a lot of frustation, too. Success came
in the test tube but eluded them in animal experiments. "We ran into a brick
wall in trying to do the bone marrow gene therapy," Blaese said. "We could not
get the genes into the bone marrow stem cells at a high enough level to be
sufficient for treatment." The team switched to using white blood cells known as
lymphocytes and finally found some success.

   Blaese, who had been following Rosenberg's work with white blood cells known
as tumor infiltrating lymphocytes -- TILs -- hit upon an idea. "Steve was
putting cells into people and we were putting genes into cells. I approached
[him] with the idea that we might combine our interests."

   That meeting, which took place in Rosenberg's cramped second-floor office of
the Clinical Center, set things in motion. "When Mike, Steve and I sat down, it
was obvious that this was so clearly an appropriate plan that we really had no
doubts," Anderson said.

   In that meeting, the goal of the first gene therapy experiment in humans
changed. Instead of trying to infect bone marrow cells with a new altered gene,
the team would target TILs. Earlier work by Rosenberg and his team has made
these white blood cells easier to obtain and keep alive in the laboratory.

   In the little more than a year since then, the team has conducted weekly
Monday afternoon meetings to review their progress. More than 50 people --
physicians, researchers, nurses, fellows, technicians and computer specialists
in the three labs -- have been part of the effort. Nine months ago, Anderson and
Blaese entered into a collaborative research agreement with Genetic Therapy
Inc., a Gaithersburg-based company that produced much of the material for the
study. "We couldn't have made it through the FDA process without them," said
Anderson.

   The decision to go ahead with the experiment was made on Saturday, May 20.
But it wasn't until Monday morning, after the patient's condition and the
quality of the cells to be transfused had been checked and rechecked, that the
team decided to go ahead. While the microbiology lab was conducting its last
analysis on a small sample of cells, Anderson and Rosenberg waited by the
telephone in Rosenberg's office.  "I had the cells in my hand, keeping them
stirred and warm," Anderson said. "It was a dramatic moment when the call came."

   "These cells are living things," Rosenberg said. "They're not like drugs in a
vial. They have a life of their own."

   Had everything not been right on Monday morning, he said, "the whole thing
could have been aborted."

   The actual transfer of the cells to the patient was uneventful. Anderson,
Blaese, Rosenberg and two of their staff crowded around the patient's bed in the
bustling 13-bed intensive care unit. The patient's spouse was also present. The
night before, physician Richard Sherry had inserted a central line that led into
the patient's subclavian vein near the heart. On the morning of the experiment,
the nurse, Robert Parmentier, simply switched the intravenous bag, the drip
began and history was made.

   "It didn't appear to be any different from anybody else's intravenous bag
dripping in on the intensive care unit," Rosenberg said.

   Anderson kept busy monitoring blood samples that Susan Calabro, a surgical
resident, had been drawing both before the experiment began and after the i.v.
had been hooked up. Twenty minutes later, the group moved on to other patients.

   "But we all kept passing each other in the hall as we went back to check the
patient," said Blaese.

   The overwhelming emotion was relief. "Our feeling is that this is just a
step," said Anderson, "a small step."



                               38 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1989, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 579 words

HEADLINE: THE DOCTOR'S WORLD;
Patient Gets Altered Genes in First Approved Test

BYLINE: By HAROLD M. SCHMECK Jr.

BODY:

   THE first federally approved transfer of cells containing foreign genes into
a human was accomplished yesterday at the Clinical Center of the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.

   Cancer-fighting cells that had been altered by insertion of a foreign gene
were infused into the bloodstream of a cancer patient who had volunteered for
the experiment. The primary purpose of the genetic manipulation was to make the
cells easily identifiable so that doctors could track them in the patient's
body. The patient is not expected to benefit directly from the manipulation.

   The cells, called tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, had been taken from the
patient's cancerous tissue and treated in the laboratory to increase their
numbers and therefore their ability to attack the cancer tissue.

Understanding the Lymphocytes

   In performing the transfer of a bacterial gene into human cells, the doctors'
immediate objective was to increase their understanding of the actions of tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes in the body. They expressed hope that such knowledge
could be used to improve the effectiveness of treatments using such cells.

   In the long run, the experimental gene transfers are expected to help
scientists develop effective techniques to transplant foreign genes to cure or
help control genetic disease.

   The transfer was performed yesterday by a team led by Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg
and Dr. R. Michael Blaese of the National Cancer Institute, and Dr. W. French
Anderson of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. The institutes are
major units of the National Institutes of Health.

   Unsuccessful attempts at gene therapy were made in 1980 on two patients
suffering from a blood disorder. The attempts, by American scientists, were done
abroad without Federal approval and led to censure by the institutes.

   The research team that performed the new experiment plans to do gene
transfers in 10 patients while studying the use of tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes in cancer therapy. Lymphocytes are immune defense cells that
circulate naturally in the blood. Dr. Rosenberg has been a pioneer in the use of
such cells in treating human cancers. Dr. Anderson is a leader in research aimed
at developing effective gene therapy.

Stringent Guidelines

   Because the procedure involved genetic alterations in the human cells that
are used in the transfers, the proposal to do the medical experiments was
studied and discussed for seven months by several committees of the national
institutes. Federal guidelines require stringent studies of any attempted gene
transfers.

   The patients who volunteered for the experiments all have advanced cancers
and are expected to live only about 90 days. Although they are not expected to
benefit from the genetic manipulations, they might benefit from the actions of
the tumor infiltrating lymphocytes.

   In the future, scientists hope to enhance the effectivness of the
cancer-fighting cells by transplanting into them genes that can actually enhance
their therapeutic effectiveness. The first round of transfers uses transplanted
genes that serve only as easily identifiable markers. The gene manipulations are
not expected to add to the immediate therapeutic efficacy of the treatment.

   ''Ultimately this new technique could open the door to studies that will use
gene insertion to produce therapeutic results in a wide range of diseases,''
said Dr. James B. Wyngaarden, director of the National Institutes of Health.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg of the Natinoal Cancer Institute
(Reuters)


                               39 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1989 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      May 23, 1989, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 212 words

HEADLINE: Gene transfer points way to healthy future

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   ''The methods we now use to treat disease involve external agents such as
drugs and surgery. This is the first approach to altering the genetic makeup of
the patients themselves,'' says Dr. Steven Rosenberg of the National Cancer
Institute, co-director of the experiment.

   But before gene therapy is possible, an efficient way of delivering new genes
to cells is needed, Anderson says.

   Monday's experiment - six years in the making and involving the most
extensive approval procedure in history - tested the most promising method:

   - Part of a virus' genetic material is removed and a new gene inserted in its
place.

   - The gene-modified cells are then injected into the patient's blood.

   - Infected cells then follow new genetic instructions and abandon their
defective ways.

   In this first experiment, the new gene was designed to track a new cancer
therapy's ability to kill tumor cells.

   Rosenberg developed the new cancer therapy, which uses a patient's own immune
system cells to combat tumors. Anderson and Dr. Michael Blaese pioneered the
gene transfer method.

   The researchers hope to learn why the cancer therapy works only in some
people. A later goal will be to alter the genes of the immune cells to make them
even more aggressive cancer fighters.


                               40 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1989 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                      May 23, 1989, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A1

LENGTH: 834 words

HEADLINE: Genetically Engineered Cells Injected Into NIH Patient;
Test Will Track Cancer-Fighting Lymphocytes

BYLINE: Larry Thompson, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   National Institutes of Health scientists yesterday injected genetically
engineered cells into a human patient for the first time in a federally approved
experiment.

   This first round of gene transfer experiments, in which a gene was inserted
into a patient's white blood cells, is not expected to actually benefit the
individual patients. Instead, the inserted gene is being used to track the
movement in the body of the cancer-fighting white blood cells in the NIH
experiment.

   Nonetheless, the technique of "gene insertion [could] produce therapeutic
results in a wide range of diseases," NIH Director James B. Wyngaarden said in a
prepared statement.

   Inserting human genes to repair defects may one day help with a host of
inherited disorders, including cystic fibrosis or Duchenne's muscular dystrophy.
Gene insertion might also help brain disorders such as Alzheimer's disease or
other illnesses, such as growth disorders, heart disease caused by alterations
in the way cholesterol is metabolized and defects of the immune system.

   Yesterday's experiment was designed to track special, laboratory-grown white
blood cells known as tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). The TILs in turn
attack the cancer.

   "I think this represents an important step for us," said Steven A. Rosenberg,
chief of surgery at the National Cancer Institute and head of the team that
developed the new cancer therapy. "It demonstrates that we can modify these
[anticancer] cells in ways . . . that [potentially] will make them more
effective."

   In December, Rosenberg reported that TIL therapy produced a remission in 11
of 20 patients receiving the treatment. As in a previous therapy that used white
blood cells to attack the cancer, it remained unclear why some patients
benefited and others didn't from TIL therapy. To find out, the researchers want
to know how long the TIL cells survive in the body and where they are located.

   Using gene transfer technology developed by W. French Anderson of the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and NCI's R. Michael Blaese, the NIH
team inserted into the TIL cells a bacterial gene that inactivates the drug
neomycin. This will allow them to track the cells in patients.

   In the current procedure, the NIH team surgically removed a few pieces of
melanoma, a difficult-to-treat form of skin cancer that frequently spreads to
many parts of the body.

   Within the tumor, there were some of the patient's white blood cells that
recognized the cancer as a disease and were attacking it. These are the TIL
cells. When the tumor was cut out, these white blood cells also were removed.

   Using a hormone called interleukin-2 (IL-2), the researchers grow the TIL
cells in the laboratory. As cells were starting to grow, a sample of TIL was
removed and exposed to a mouse virus that carried the neomycin-resistance gene.
As the virus enters the TIL cells, it permanently deposits its genetic cargo in
the TIL's chromosomes.

   The bacterial gene acts as a marker for the affected cells, giving them the
ability to resist a version of neomycin, called G418, that poisons human cells.

   The researchers can then routinely take blood samples and biopsies from the
patients and either treat the white blood cells with G418 to kill all but the
genetically changed TIL cells or probe the DNA of white blood cells to find the
genetic marker.

   This will give them some idea of how many TIL cells persist. It also will
allow scientists to grow the recovered TIL cells in the laboratory and identify
properties of the TIL cells in patients that recover, Blaese said.

   Although the scientists declined to reveal details about the patient to
protect his privacy, they reported that the man with melanoma tolerated the
procedure. Except for the addition of the marker gene, the treatment has been
used on dozens of patients and the side effects, which can be severe, are well
known.

   A second patient could be treated by the end of the week, Rosenberg said. The
NIH team has permission to treat 10 patients who are expected to live less than
three months. The patients are volunteers who are required to sign an informed
consent form to participate. Permission to treat them was granted after a
seven-month review by several NIH committees. The research team will need
additional approval before it can expand the study beyond 10 patients or into
other types of gene therapy.

   Eventually, scientists expect to use gene-transfer techniques to heighten the
effectiveness of the TIL treatment. In the laboratory, the NIH team already has
inserted into TIL cells genes that make anticancer proteins, such as interferon
and tumor necrosis factor, and the growth hormone interleukin-2.

   "This is hopefully a first step," Rosenberg said. "In the laboratory, we
already are introducing genes that will make the [anticancer] cells more
effective . . . . Our real goal is to improve the treatment."

   "Now that the first has been done," he said, "we hope to push ahead and
quickly move on."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, STEVEN A. ROSENBERG.


                               41 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                   May 18, 1989, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: 10 CANCER PATIENTS VOLUNTEER FOR GENE-TRANSFER EXPERIMENT

BODY:


   BETHESDA, Md. - Ten cancer patients who face certain death within a few
monthsare about to undergo a gene-transfer experiment for which they have
volunteered.  A federal court ruling Tuesday opened the way for the experiment
to begin.  In the next few days, Dr. James B. Wyngaarden, director of the
National Institutes of Health, is expected to announce that the first patients
have entered the scientific forerunner of a new technology known as gene
therapy.  In this experiment, scientists will transfer specialized bacterial
genes into billions of tumor-fighting white blood cells that have been
surgically removed from the patients themselves and treated in the laboratory to
increase their power against cancerous tissue.  Altered by the engineered genes,
the patients' own white blood cells will then be returned to their bodies.  As
the cells move into the tumors, the scientists will be able to track them by
their new genetic characteristics.  The gene transfer experiment is not designed
to treat the cancer patients directly, but rather to produce markers to learn
precisely where the white cells act within the tumors and to monitor how long
they remain active in their battle against tumor tissue.  The patients have been
informed that the genetic experiment poses little if any risk. They know that
their life expectancy is brief.  They have accepted a ''consent'' statement
saying that although the experiment ''is not expected to improve your therapy at
this time,'' it is also possible that the study ''may lead to improve cancer
therapies for yourself and others in the future.'' What is even more likely is
the prospect that with this experiment under way after more than a year of
reviews by a dozen government committees, federal approval for more ambitious
gene therapy operations will be forthcoming.  Approval by the government group,
known as the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, is mandatory before any gene
therapy project is undertaken anywhere in the United States. Its membership
includes scientists, physicians, lawyers and ethicists.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1993


                               42 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1989 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 13, 1989 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1437 words

HEADLINE: Structural abnormality in the brain linked to autism, UCSD scientist
says

BYLINE: Ann Gibbons, Tribune Science Writer

BODY:

   When Eric Courchesne looked at images of his patients' brains for the first
time, he knew he'd found a key piece in the puzzle of autism. There, in
remarkable detail, were pictures of 14 brains that weren't built quite right.

   Some were too small.

   Others were missing lobes a half-inch wide. The damage was so obvious that
any radiologist could tell something clearly was wrong. When Courchesne, a
neuroscientist at UCSD and Children's Hospital, published his findings a year
ago in the New England Journal of Medicine, they caused a stir.

   They were the first evidence of brain damage in living autistic patients,
putting to rest, once and for all, the old notion that autism is a psychological
instead of physiological disorder. Today, the work has been confirmed in
Courchesne's studies of 11 more autistic patients, and scientists say they are
closing in on the regions of the brain that are defective in many autistics.

   It also is helping them better understand the intricate workings of the brain
in all humans. "This says, in at least some forms of autism, there is a
structural abnormality," said Courchesne, leader of a research team at the
University of California at San Diego and Children's Hospital.

   The team includes his wife, Rachel Yeung-Courchesne, Gary Press, John
Hesselink and Terry Jernigan. "The brain wasn't constructed properly during
development.

   We don't know why, but now we'll be better able to find the cause." Their
findings were a major leap for scientists who long have been baffled by the
mysterious disorder, which strikes one in 2,500 children and leaves them
socially and mentally disabled.

   It's a devastating disorder that destroys curiosity, imagination and the joy
of human contact in these people -- and often leaves them retarded. Even now, 45
years after autism was first described, scientists still don't know the cause.

   At first, parents were blamed for their children's odd behavior, and told
they were too cold with them when they were infants. Some families sued their
doctors, claiming damage occurred during births. Others said it was a learning
disorder. Those who thought it was a neurological disorder didn't know where to
look for the damage.

   Then, about nine years ago, a few scientists began to see deformities in
autopsies of autistics' brains. The big break came a few years ago with a new
tool: magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a scanning technique more revealing than
X-rays for the soft tissue of the living body. Courchesne's team got a glimpse
of the brains of 18 of their patients by using MRI to focus on the cerebellum, a
fist-size structure at the bottom of the brain.

   It is the portion of the brain that indirectly affects many systems,
including memory, attention, speech and control of movement. Tucked within its
folds is the wormlike cerebellar vermis that wraps up tightly into lobes.

   Two of these lobes were about 25 percent smaller than normal in 14 of the
autistic patients.

   None of the patients in the original study was mentally retarded. Since that
study was published a year ago, Courchesne also has found that the entire
cerebellar hemisphere was underdeveloped in 10 of the 18 patients studied. This
type of damage isn't something found in all autistic people. "Whether it's 10
percent or 80 percent of autistics, we don't know," said Courchesne. And it
isn't the cause of the disorder in his patients.

   But the work should help neuroscientists find the event that ravaged these
autistics' brains in the first place.

   The damage in the cerebellum is like a clue left behind at the scene of a
crime -- a marker of the time and type of agent that was so destructive to the
developing brain. "It's like we're looking for a killer, but now instead of
looking all over the country, we're looking in California," said Edward R.
Ritvo, a professor of psychiatry at UCLA's School of Medicine, who has found
other brain defects in autopsies of autistics. Courchesne zeroed in on the
cerebellum after reading a study by Margaret Bauman, a Harvard Medical School
neurologist.

   She had done an autopsy on a young autistic man in 1983 and found
abnormalities in several parts of his brain, including the cerebellum and the
limbic system, which is involved in emotions and memory. What intrigued
Courchesne most was that the man had a shortage of Purkinje cells, nerve cells
that relay messages from the cerebellum to other parts of the brain. After
Courchesne found abnormalities in his patients' brains, he came up with a theory
to explain the damage. Courchesne and Bauman think a shortage of Purkinje cells
may be the reason the cerebellums were so small in his brain scans. Normal
people have about 15 million Purkinje cells in their cerebellums, where they
make extensive connections with other nerve cells in the brain. If these nerve
cells aren't working as a gate to inhibit the neurochemical signals leaving the
cerebellum, those signals could be constantly flooding other parts of the brain.
The living brain essentially is a chemical soup, so if the wrong signals are
triggered, it can wreak havoc -- impairing memory, attention, speech and
movement. Such an anatomical defect could explain autistics' strange behavior.
Courchesne suspects that autistics don't have a problem collecting information,
just processing it. They seem to be overstimulated and confused, unable to make
choices between information that warrants their attention and that which should
be ignored. One result is they often have a tough time with language.

   Many never learn to speak in a meaningful way, and those who do often use the
language stiffly and mechanically.

   They may repeat word for word what someone else has just said, but seldom
seem to grasp the full meaning of their words and actions. "To be a unique and
full human, you have to be able to take the diversity of experience in your life
and process it in a way that's uniquely yours," said Courchesne.

   "Autistic people are more like recorders of other people around them." Those
who are intelligent -- about one-fourth of all autistics -- try to compensate
for their inability to make sense of the world. They have a proclivity for
making lists and for living regimented lives, bound by rules far more than most
people. One of Courchesne's patients is a 25-year-old named Ed, who is an avid
cyclist.

   He rides his bike every Saturday, but only visits places around the San Diego
area in alphabetical order. Such mystifying behavior has more than one cause,
just as there are many ways to trigger high blood pressure or senility. But in
cases where the cerebellum is underdeveloped, Courchesne thinks something goes
wrong when the fetus is less than 30 weeks old.

   The damage, however, could occur as late as the second year after a child's
birth. Whatever the timing, the tragic events that marred these patients'
growing brains could be a toxic chemical, a virus or a misfired gene that turns
on when it isn't supposed to.

   Any of those could change the chemistry of the brain just when the
cerebellum, the Purkinje cells and a few other structures are at a critical
stage of development. The result of the damage is abnormal wiring in the way the
brain is hooked up.

   That faulty wiring, in turn, interferes with the growth and function of other
parts of the brain. It is Courchesne's hunch that the cause of the damage he
sees is genetic, not environmental. After his paper was published last year, he
learned of work by Allan L. Reiss at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
in Baltimore.

   They have found the same kind of damage in the cerebellums of retarded people
who are not autistic, people who are known as Fragile X patients. By comparing
the genetic damage and behavior of autistics and Fragile X patients, the
scientists hope to learn more about the damaged circuitry that leads to autism
in one case and retardation in the other.

   The similar brain damage is an important clue, leading Courchesne and Reiss
to believe there must be some overlap in the defective genes that cause both
conditions. If they isolate the damaged genes, their work hints at some far-off
possibilities for treating or preventing autism -- perhaps by using gene therapy
to replace faulty genes, transplants of brain cells or prenatal testing.

   Those prospects are still remote, but Courchesne and his colleagues are
slowly closing in on the causes of autism. "The real excitement is, people are
really looking at how the brain is put together in these kids," said Bauman of
Harvard.

   "We're beginning to look at it in a very serious way, and to think how the
brain might have been rewired, prenatally if you will, to make these children so
strange."

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Allison Halle, 9, touches her mother, Lillian, at
their home in Escondido where the family is having difficulty handling the
autistic child 2. Lillian Halle tries to calm daughter Allison (A-6); PHOTOBY:
1,2. Tribune photo by Bob Ivins

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                               43 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                April 30, 1989, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 6; Page 24, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4425 words

HEADLINE: BEYOND THE QUARK

BYLINE: By James Tref: James Trefil is Clarence J. Robinson Professor of Physics
at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va. He is co-author of ''The Dictionary
of Cultural Literacy.''

BODY:

   DRIVING SOUTH FROM THE DALLAS FORT Worth airport, you see signs for some
well-known Texas landmarks - Texas Stadium (home of the Dallas Cowboys), the Six
Flags Over Texas theme park.

   But as Route 287 leaves the last shopping center of the ''metroplex'' behind,
you enter the exurbs - not city, but not really country either. Scattered
subdivisions and factories alternate with gently rolling farmland dotted with
scrub oak trees. When cotton was king, this fertile blackland prairie provided
the region with a rich income. Later, there were hopes that oil might be found
here, but the white chalk remnant of an old sea bed that underlies the area
yielded no such riches. ''Now,'' says one local resident, ''we find that it's a
gold mine after all.''

   Thanks at least in part to that chalk bed, the town of Waxahachie may soon
become the site of a $4.4 billion Federal construction project. For Waxahachie -
pop. 19,500, whose name is Tonkawa Indian for buffalo creek, and which natives
pronounce walks-a-HA-chee - is smack in the middle of the area that the
Department of Energy has chosen for the construction of the Superconducting
Supercollider (S.S.C.), the world's largest and most ambitious high-tech
engineering project. A machine 53 miles in circumference, in which protons will
be smashed together at enormous speed, the S.S.C. may provide scientists with
the clues they need to answer one of the most profound questions they can ask:
How did the universe come into being?

   At the moment, although the elaborate site selection process has been
completed, not a penny has been appropriated for construction. Sometime in 1990,
Congress will cross a Rubicon of sorts, when it decides whether or not to vote
funds to begin building. The initial dollar amounts aren't huge as these things
go - the Energy Department's 1990 budget request is for $250 million, $160
million of which is for construction costs. But the impending decision has
rekindled the debate about whether this enormously complex and costly machine
should be built. Scientists are far from unanimous. It's one thing to support
design studies and research, at a cost of some $200 million so far, and quite
another to spend billions of dollars developing hardware and pouring concrete.

   Perhaps the most vocal opponents are those who see this project as
detrimental to the traditional way of doing science. The supercollider is just
one of three proposed American scientific megaprojects - the other two being the
$3 billion human genome program (to map the entire complement of genes that
explain human heredity) and the $23 billion space station - which together are
probably encountering more opposition than any one would alone.

   Other critics question the wisdom of not waiting for the next generation of
superconductors to become available; the S.S.C.'s defenders contend that there
is no guarantee that these high-temperature ceramic superconductors will be
applicable to atom smashers (as accelerators have long been dubbed), and in any
case they would not lower the cost.

   Still other opponents question whether this should be a purely
American-financed project. They feel that if we go ahead, it should be with
international cooperation.

   But those of us who support the project feel that it may hold the key to the
resolution of problems man has wrestled with for millenniums. At their core is a
simple but profound question: What are the fundamental constituents of matter,
the basic building blocks of the universe we inhabit, and how do they behave?

   TO A PHYSICIST, A SHIRT OR sweater isn't just a piece of cloth, it's a web of
emptiness dotted with long molecules held near one another by the action of
invisible forces. Sometimes, as in steel, those invisible forces are strong, and
the larger object holds together. Sometimes, as in the butter you put on your
toast this morning, the invisible forces are relatively weak and you can break
them easily. But whatever happens in the physical world happens because of the
behavior of things one can't see - the atoms and the molecules they combine to
form, from which everything is built.

   Throughout the late 19th and early 20th centuries, physicists carried on
their search for a fundamental understanding of matter by moving down through
these layers of reality, from materials to molecules to atoms, as though they
were peeling the layers of an onion. At each deeper level, nature revealed
itself as simpler, more elegant and, ultimately, more beautiful.

   Each time a new layer was peeled off, a major new technology also resulted.
So while there is a great deal in this history for those who appreciate
intellectual beauty, there is something for the hard-nosed cost accountant as
well. The accumulated effect of these advances has shaped our society into what
it is today. Learning to manipulate molecules allowed us to construct all sorts
of new materials - the synthetics that we wear, drive on and, in some cases,
eat. It would be hard to imagine modern life without them.

   Beginning in the 1930's, scientists learned to manipulate the electrons that
flow in and around the nuclei of atoms. This revolutionized our society (and
added many billions of dollars to our economy) by allowing us to build the
transistors and microchips that are the heart of our electronic systems. It is
these devices that allow us to reserve a seat on an airline, make a
trans-Atlantic telephone call, use a microwave, get sparks to car cylinders
(solid-state ignition) - any of the thousand and one things without which the
complex web of modern urban life would not be possible.

   After World War II, the focus of research shifted from the atom to the
nucleus of the atom. The nucleus was found to be made up of particles, most of
them protons and neutrons. Again, penetrating this layer resulted in important
technological advances - X-ray and radiation therapy for cancer; nuclear
reactors; radioactive tracers that are used throughout medicine, agriculture,
industry, and, most recently, in improved methods for fabricating microcircuits.

   The next layer of the onion is taking us inside those particles. This study -
called ''high energy'' or ''elementary particle'' physics - has been the concern
of physicists for the past 20 years. It requires energy so high that it can only
be supplied by accelerators, which propel a particle at velocities approaching
the speed of light, and then aim it into a collision with another particle. In
the debris of these collisions, physicists look for telltale evidence of the
nature and behavior of the fundamental building blocks of matter.

   But the deeper we penetrate into the structure of matter, the more energy we
need. It takes millions of volts (and millions of dollars) to rummage around
inside an atom's nucleus. When America's premier high-energy accelator was built
at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory near Chicago in 1972, it cost
$243.5 million. When it was upgraded to its present trillion-volt capacity in
1983, the cost was another $100 million. Its sister machine near Geneva, which
is to open in July, cost nearly twice as much as the upgraded Fermi operation.
Built by a 14-nation consortium called CERN (an acronym for the Center for
European Nuclear Research), with a circumference of 17 miles, it will be the
latest in a series of accelerators at this site and the state-of-the-art
accelerator until the S.S.C. is built.

   Because of these machines, the world looks a lot simpler to physicists than
it did 20 years ago. Where once scientists saw millions of chemical compounds,
hundreds of atoms, or hundreds of particles inside the atom, they now believe
that everything in the universe is made of only two kinds of elementary,
indivisible particles. These are called quarks and leptons. Quarks make up the
neutrons and protons in the atom's nucleus. Of the leptons, the electrons - the
stuff of ordinary electrical current - are the most familiar.

   We also now understand that the interactions between these basic constituents
of matter are not nearly as complex as they were believed to be. Physicists have
known for a long time that whenever anything happens in the world it does so
because of the action of one of the four different forces acting in the
universe. These are gravity and electricity/magnetism, familiar from everyday
experience, and the so-called strong and weak forces, which act inside the
nucleus of atoms. It is the strong force that holds the nucleus together, and
the weak force that is responsible for the process of radioactive decay. But
physicists now believe that these four forces are simply different aspects of
the same force, which operated in its pure form only at the very beginning of
time.

   It is a deeply held belief among physicists that the key to the universe lies
in understanding the one fundamental force that underlies everything. The search
for a so-called unified field theory, which would show that two (or more) forces
can be thought of in this way, dates from Albert Einstein's attempts in the
1920's and 30's.

   Our current generation of accelerators has made it possible to give science
the experimental basis for one such combination of theories, called the standard
model. The standard model is a set of equations that describe the way(Continued
on Page 44) 5:83>that elementary particles ought to interact at energies
available through the use of current accelerators. According to the standard
model, the electromagnetic and weak forces are unified at energies we can now
reach. (The model also assumes that quarks are indivisible.) The theories
incorporated in the standard model were verified by the discovery of the W and Z
particles, which actually carry the weak force, at CERN in 1983. The standard
model represents our closest approach yet to a fundamental understanding of the
universe.

   As physicists developed the standard model, moving deep into the structure of
matter, they encountered the cosmologists, who wanted answers to an equally
profound question: How did the universe begin and how did it get to be the way
it is now?

   In one of the most surprising scientific developments of our lifetime,
scientists found that the search for the very small and the study of the very
large were the same thing - that you couldn't answer the physicists' question
about the nature of matter without at the same time answering the cosmologists'
question about the beginning of the universe.

   Because the forces are believed to have been unified only for the smallest
fraction of a second at the beginning of time (a fraction of a second before
matter appeared, in the form of quarks and leptons as we know them), we cannot
think about the creation of the universe without thinking about the nature of
matter. Using the standard model, we can now trace the history of the universe
back to those fractions of a second at the beginning of its existence.

   IF WE'RE THAT CLOSE to the creation of the universe now, why do we want to
expend enormous amounts of effort to close those last moments? By smashing
particles together at unprecedented speeds, the S.S.C. will allow us to
understand the details of the mechanism by which forces unify. It may be hard to
believe, but as exciting as the road we've taken to our present state of
knowledge may be, the road ahead promises to be even more so. It leads into the
domain of the complete unified field theory - one in which all four forces of
nature are brought together. This has been the single most important quest of
the physics community. The S.S.C., with its unprecedented energies, is a logical
next step on the road to the goal of complete unification.

   Scientists will now try to come up with an explanation - a class of theories
grouped under the term grand unified theories, or GUTs - that will unify the
strong force with the newly combined electroweak force. Ultimately, they hope to
develop a theory that would unite all four forces into a single equation that
describes the entire universe. Although the necessary technology to develop this
theory is still beyond the imagination, scientists have begun thinking about
rudimentary candidates for the theory with names like superstring and the
(tongue in cheek) theory of everything.

   The S.S.C. is designed to explore the way that forces unify by allowing
scientists to look at the mechanism that unifies the electrical and weak forces.
We saw the effects of this unification at lower energy levels, when the W and Z
particles were discovered. Just this month, scientists at the Stanford Linear
Collider (built at a cost of only $120 million) produced a Z particle at
relatively low cost, in what they hope will be the beginning of mass production
- resulting in enough Z's to enable scientists to study them in detail. But it
will take the much higher energies of the S.S.C. before scientists can probe the
interaction of the forces that actually led to the production of the W's and
Z's. The S.S.C. is the next step on the way to replicating the conditions near
the time of the Big Bang. There is a chance the S.S.C. will tell us enough about
the unification process to allow us to extrapolate with some confidence to the
creation of the universe. More realistically, it will resolve ambiguities in our
current theories and point the way toward the problems that the next generation
of physicists will face.

   As a side benefit, there is a very good chance that data taken at S.S.C.
energies will give us an understanding of one of the most profound and
mysterious properties of matter - the fact that most particles have energy in a
form that we call ''mass.'' The machine may tell us why things have mass and how
that mass originates.

   Physicists involved with the S.S.C. have a very real sense that they are
taking the next step on a long and difficult path - of doing our bit to carry
forward a project that has occupied our ancestors and will occupy our
descendants. They also are most aware of a budget-conscious Washington.

   Leon M. Lederman, director of the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, who
shared the 1988 Nobel Prize for physics and who is one of the leading spokesmen
for the S.S.C., says ''When I look over one shoulder, I see the tremendous
responsibility I have to be worthy of Maxwell and Einstein and Bohr.'' Then,
with a twinkle in his eye, he adds, ''Over the other shoulder I see Gramm and
Rudman. It's terrifying!''

   EVEN IN A WASHINGTON of trillion-dollar deficits, $4.4 billion is more than
just walking-around money.

   The supercollider's 53-mile tunnel - big enough to easily encircle Manhattan
- will be dug at an average depth of 150 feet into the chalky rock beneath the
Texas prairie. Inside the tunnel will be two rings, each about two feet across.
Each ring will contain more than 4,000 magnets which will keep the protons
confined as they are propelled tens of millions of times around the ellipse.
Most of the magnets will be more than 50 feet long and all of them will be
immersed in baths of liquid helium that will hold their temperature down to
about -450 degrees Fahrenheit. (To understand the expense, note that a large
magnet can easily cost $100,000 - as much as a new Ferrari. Imagine a ring of
Ferraris parked in a 53-mile circle and you can see how the figures would
escalate.) The magnets will be superconducting - that is, they will be made of
materials capable of carrying electrical currents without loss of energy.
Testing the magnets has revealed some vexing technical obstacles: they are so
powerful that they can literally tear themselves apart.

   When the machine is operating, protons will be fed successively into two
smallish rings (each of which would have been state-of-the-art machines 20 years
ago). The accelerated protons are then diverted into the big tunnel, where they
are split into two beams so that those in one ring travel clockwise and those in
the other, counterclockwise.

   After being further pushed on as they repeatedly pass through special
accellerator chambers so that they reach almost the speed of light, the protons
are focused into an area where they are allowed to collide with each other. When
a head-on collision occurs, for the briefest instant more energy will be poured
into a microscopic volume than is being generated by all the power plants on
earth. That volume, for that instant, will be at the temperature that existed in
the universe when it was 10-#1#6, or 0.0000000000000001, seconds old. In the
ensuing maelstrom, by recording the fractured particles on huge electronic
detectors, physicists hope to find the clues that will lead them to an
understanding of how forces unify and, in the process, to an understanding of
how the universe originated.

   In the words of Leon Lederman, ''The supercollider is the logical next step
for our science. It will be the most sensitive probe ever to test our
understanding of the nature of space and time.''

   YOU MIGHT THINK that the prospects of a scientific advance of this magnitude
would have my colleagues dancing in the streets. But in fact, the scientific
literature is ringing with arguments about whether the machine should or should
not be built, with Nobel laureates speaking out both for and against it.

   You need look no farther than the price tag to understand one aspect of the
debate. The cost introduces a very real concern that funding for a megaproject
like the S.S.C. will reduce the money available for smaller, more traditional
kinds of scientific research.

   If you walk through the basement of any science department in any university,
you will see a series of laboratories, one next to the other. Each is the domain
of a single professor, a senior researcher who is responsible for the lab's
scientific program. This kind of research effort is the prototype of ''small''
science. It has been the historical norm, the way that things have always been
done.

   Contrast this with a typical experiment at a large accelerator like Fermilab.
A hundred or more scientists and graduate students may be involved, each dealing
with a small part of a mammoth problem. The lead scientist will spend more time
managing and fighting the bureaucracy than doing science. This corporate system
is called ''big'' science, and for many it is an evil omen.

   To those who champion small science, the S.S.C. represents a step toward a
future in which the treasured individuality of the lone investigator is
exchanged for the gray flannel lab coat of the large research group. As such, it
joins a host of other developments in science that seem to threaten an old and
cherished way of life. The human genome program and space station have raised
similar fears. As one graduate student in biology, poised to embark on an
academic career, reflected: ''I don't want my life's work to be sequencing pairs
100,000 to 200,000 on chromosome 17.'' Nobel laureate Philip W. Anderson of
Princeton, a vocal opponent of the S.S.C., puts it succinctly: ''Science in the
United States is dying of giantism.''

   But is the traditional way of doing science really threatened? Do big
projects drain money away from small laboratories?

   ''Everything you've heard is true,'' says Ian D. Macgregor, deputy director
of the division of earth sciences at the National Science Foundation, which
funds much of the country's basic research. There is indeed less money for
science. In his division, he says, a smaller percentage of requested grants are
being approved, and the average size of a grant has gone down in constant
dollars.

   ''But that has nothing to do with big science,'' he says. Through the 1960's
and 70's, when the field of earth sciences represented small science par
excellence, the funding in his division was level (in constant dollars). Since
1983, a single large project, to study the internal structure of the earth, has
accounted for up to a quarter of research funding. Meanwhile the dollar amount
available for small science remained roughly at its historic level, but the
number of applications for support doubled. Even though the N.S.F. increased the
number of awards by about 10 percent, the success rate for applicants was lower,
and so was the dollar amount allotted for each grant.

   There is no evidence that the money now going into big science would have
been available for more traditional uses. Money for big science (in this case,
at least) was not taken away from other sources, but represented a Congressional
add-on. Similarly, says William T. Oosterhuis, head of the condensed matter
sciences section at the N.S.F., ''There's no reason to believe that the money
from a project like the S.S.C. will go to other scientific projects if the
S.S.C. isn't funded. The next item down on the priority list might be a few more
B-1 bombers, housing, or almost anything else that the Federal Government
does.''

   Leon Lederman makes the same argument. It has always been the case that money
for big projects comes from new sources, he says, adding that proponents of the
S.S.C. ''have been very virtuous. We've always said that if the machine has to
come out of a fixed science budget, we don't want it.''

   Critics agree that the construction costs will not come out of small-science
budgets, but fear that operating costs may.

   But this issue is only a small part of a much larger debate on the S.S.C.
that will soon be taking place in Congress. Whether to go ahead with a
scientific project on the scale of the supercollider is not solely or even
primarily a scientific decision. It is a decision based on the same sorts of
value judgments that go into any other political act. The political nature of
the S.S.C. has been evident throughout the history of the project. Early on, the
Energy Department received 43 proposals from states that wanted this plum
located within their boundaries. One member of the blue ribbon committee formed
by the National Academy of Sciences and National Academy of Engineering to
evaluate the proposals estimated that he had been mailed no less than 750 pounds
of paper. The 43 were pared down to the seven ''best'' sites by the committee,
and then D.O.E. made its selection from among these - a selection that was
announced last Nov. 10. Most observers feel that the political strength of the
Texas delegation in Congress and the strong local support in Waxahachie played a
role in D.O.E.'s choice.

   THERE ARE, I THINK, three general criteria on which a project like the S.S.C.
should be judged, both by Congress and by individuals. These are 1) the prospect
of scientific payoff, 2) the prospect of technological payoff and 3) the
potential effect on the nation's morale and vision.

   I have already outlined the S.S.C.'s potential scientific payoff. There is a
''fail-safe'' feature to the machine in that it will produce energies at which
something important is guaranteed to happen, whether that something is what we
expect or not.

   The question of technological payoff is, I suspect, what interests most
people. There is a simple rule that operates here: basic research always pays
off. The Apollo program, dedicated to landing a man on the moon, was a favorite
whipping boy of the counterculture. ''Why are we spending billions to go to the
moon when there are so many problems on earth?'' was a favorite question then
(as now). Yet economists estimate that for every dollar spent on the Apollo
program, seven dollars in new economic activity was created in the United
States. Similar studies at the accelerator completed at CERN approximately a
decade ago indicate that for every franc spent on the machine, three francs in
new business were generated.

   Richard A. Carrigan, a physicist who has been at Fermilab from its inception,
points out that early on ''we needed superconducting wire in huge quantities. At
that time, there were no manufacturers who could supply it, so we had to take
our material to a series of firms, each of which could carry out one step in the
process. Now, because of the demand we generated, there are many firms who can
produce the wire.'' This wire is used in magnetic resonance imaging techniques,
used for brain scans, so you have the paradoxical (but typical) situation of
advances in high energy physics leading to improvements in the diagnostic
capabilities of your local hospital.

   Should the S.S.C. really lead us to an understanding of the nature of mass,
the consequences could be as great as those that followed the 19th-century
elucidation of the nature of electricity. Dealing with such a possibility is
beyond the realm of any kind of cost-benefit analysis. A similar comment could
be made about the genome project if it should trigger a surge in gene therapy
and the nascent bioengineering industry.

   Finally, we come to the third criterion. This is the least quantifiable, the
''softest'' - but one that is addressed surprisingly often in the debate among
physicists. It has to do with human aspirations, with whether a given project
will produce a gladness, a lightening of the American spirit. It has to do with
what history books 500 years from now will say about our time.

   Each of the three megaprojects fulfills a worthy dream - the freeing of
humanity from its captivity on our planet, the probing of the ultimate nature of
the universe and the understanding of our own genetic make-up. The annual outlay
over the next decade, even for all three, would average just $3 billion.
Americans routinely spend as much on far less worthy ventures - it has been
estimated, for example, that we spent $2 billion betting on last January's Super
Bowl. I believe that all three projects should be carried through to fruition.
They are all splendid investments in America's future.

   When I started researching this article, I was skeptical about the S.S.C. I
was sympathetic to fears about big science, and I was shocked by the high cost.
But the more I looked into the machine and the internal logic of the science
that spawned it, the more positive I became. It really is the next logical step
in this important field of science.

   Construction of the supercollider is expected to take eight years. This means
that if all goes according to plan, by the year 2010 we will have a clear
picture of how the basic forces that govern our universe behave, and we may even
be on our way to harnessing those forces for our own use. We will understand why
things have mass and where the universe came from. And there is always the
possibility that the most exciting thing to come from the machine will be
something no one today can predict or even imagine.

GRAPHIC: Cover drawing; Diagram (Source: Universities Research Association,
Washington) (pg. 24-25); Photo of CERN in Geneva (Mimmo Chiangura/AGF) (pg. 26);
Diagram (Source: Universities Research Association) (pg. 26-27); Photos of two
men in Waxahachie, Texas (Robbie McClaran) (pg. 44); Leon Lederman, head of the
Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Paul L. Mereideth) (pg. 46)


                               44 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1989 Gannett Company Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    April 19, 1989, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1210 words

HEADLINE: Living on the past;
Firms fear inspiration hits only once

BYLINE: John Hillkirk

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.

BODY:

   ''Flash of genius is a wonderful thing if you can pull it off,'' says Sheldon
Buckler. ''But it only happens once in the history of a company.''

   This inability to do it twice plagues the high-tech and biotechnology
businesses. It's been 101 years since George Eastman introduced the Kodak camera
and 51 years since Chester Carlson invented the Xerox copier. This year, the TV
turns 50, and IBM's mainframe computer is 25. The companies that grew into
Fortune 100 giants because of those breakthroughs - Kodak, Xerox, and IBM and
rival mainframe makers - are running out of steam.

   IBM's U.S. sales have declined for two years in a row. The major reason:
Since 1984, U.S. shipments of IBM mainframes, which account for 60% of IBM's
operating profits, have dropped 31%, from 1,500 units to 1,040 units a year.
Unisys, the No. 2 mainframe maker, expects an $ 80 million first-quarter loss
and plans to slash 2,800 jobs this year. Kodak's U.S. earnings dropped 1% in
1988; Xerox, citing weak copier demand, plans to ax 2,000 jobs this year.
Polaroid just escaped a hostile takeover bid by Roy Disney; Control Data, an IBM
rival, is laying off 3,100 and quitting the supercomputer business.

   The bloom also is off the biotechnology rose. Biotech stocks have surged a
bit recently, but Genentech, Wall Street's darling of the early 1980s, has
dropped to $ 17 5/8 , roughly half its 52-week high. Its 1988 profits were flat.
For a decade, biotech - the cloning of natural substances to treat disease - has
promised us miracle cures for cancer and dozens of other illnesses. Yet federal
regulators have approved only seven biotech drugs - all niche products - for
sale.

   As a result, high tech and biotech, -for decades our fastest-growing and most
exciting fields, -are starting to look like just any other industry. Employment
is dropping. Year-to-year growth rates have slipped into the single digits. To
put that in perspective, revenues in the nation's candy-bar industry grow 11% to
12% a year. The personal computer segment's growth is expected to fall below 10%
in 1992.

   Instead of developing magical new products, many high-tech firms are
squeezing slim profits out of old cash cows. They're concentrating their
energies on lawsuits and marketing me-too products to steal each other's market
share.

   In typical fashion, Polaroid sued Kodak for copying its instant film
technology. Then, on April 5, Polaroid attacked Kodak territory by selling 35mm
film. In personal computers, Apple is suing Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard for
copying the look and feel of its Macintosh. That look and feel actually was
developed 15 years ago by Xerox scientists.

   The highly touted product introductions of late - PCs from Digital Equipment
Corp., personal copiers from Xerox, Ektar film from Kodak - are like ''new and
improved'' Tide. ''They're cannibalistic,'' says analyst Kim Ritrievi at
PaineWebber Inc. ''They feed off what was there before.''

   It's not that tech companies just stopped innovating. Computer firms have
made phenomenal advances. Steve Jobs' revolutionary Apple II stored 170
typewritten pages of information on a cassette tape. His new NeXT computer
stores 200,000 pages on a disk the size of today's music CDs.

   But those advances aren't enough, says Regis McKenna, the marketing wizard
behind Apple. He says there are two types of innovation: incremental
improvements and radical changes. Radical changes, -such as the mainframe and
copier, -come along perhaps once in a decade. But since two 1977 breakthroughs -
the cloning of human genes and the Apple II - nothing revolutionary has
happened.

   Dreaming up a magical discovery -and persuading someone to sell it -won't be
easy. Among the obstacles:

   - High-tech leaders are clinging to the past. Kodak Chairman Colby Chandler
refers to the silver-halide crystal in Kodak film as a ''gem that we worship.''
Carl Conti, an IBM senior vice president, says mainframes have ''plenty of life
left.''

   - Most firms develop products in teams, making it hard for one person to
dream up an idea and push it through. Says McKenna, ''It takes 200 signatures to
get a product approved.''

   - The heroes in high-tech these days aren't scientists and engineers with a
creative flash. They're button-down marketing whizzes such as 24-year-old
Michael Dell, who made a $ 94 million fortune by delivering PCs through the
mail.

   - Merger mania has sapped research money. From 1975 through 1985, corporate
R&D spending climbed an average of 5.8% a year. The past three years, there has
been almost no growth at all; R&D spending at firms involved in mergers and LBOs
has dropped 12.8%. Still, several areas look promising:

   - Biomedicine. The National Institutes of Health has launched a $ 3 billion
15-year effort to map the human genome - the instructions inside 100 trillion
cells that determine everything from height and weight to vulnerability to
disease. Scientists hope to use gene therapy to prevent or cure genetic diseases
such as cystic fibrosis and sickle cell anemia.

   - Superconductivity. In 1987, IBM scientists discovered ceramics that turn
superconductive, transmitting electricity with zero energy loss, when
super-chilled. These ceramics could lead to computers 1,000 times faster than
today's and trains that glide at 300 mph above their tracks.

   - Fusion. Two University of Utah scientists say they have achieved nuclear
fusion with a form of water in an ordinary test tube. In theory, the top 10 feet
of Lake Michigan could power the USA for 15,000 years. But Westinghouse
scientists say practical applications are 20 to 30 years away.

   - Computer software. Apple and IBM are working on flat-screen models that can
understand your voice and your handwriting. Doug Lenat of MCC, an Austin, Texas,
research consortium, is programming a computer to understand - as a human does -
the meaning of every word, action and object in an encyclopedia. Programming
efforts such as those are monotonous and time-consuming. Says Alan Kay, Apple's
top scientist, ''Sometimes it takes three years to realize you've done it all
wrong.''

   But computer makers are dependent on programmers' breakthroughs. Says Don
Bellomy of International Data, ''The future of the industry depends upon the
faceless dweebs.''

    TEXT OF GRAPHIC
Counting on old products
High-technology companies are having trouble coming up with new products. Many
companies still are depending on their old inventions for the bulk of their
operating profits:

    Pct. of '88
                 Product                               operating
Company           (year invented)                      profits
  Apple              Personal computer                  100%

(1977)
Cray Research      Supercomputer (1976)               100%
Polaroid           Instant film (1947)                 80%
IBM                Mainframe computer                  55%

(1964)
Kodak              Camera and film (1888)              50%
Xerox              Copier (1938)                       35%

Source: USA TODAY research

GRAPHIC:  color, Source: USA TODAY research (Chart); PHOTO; b/w, Kodak (George
Eastman); PHOTO; b/w, Kodak (folding camera); PHOTO; b/w, Kodak (Chester
Carlson)

CUTLINE: KODAK CLICKS: Founder George Eastman and folding camera introduced in
1890 CUTLINE: XEROX INVENTOR: Chester Carlson spent 20 years developing the
first copier.


                               45 of 59 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1989 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      April 3, 1989, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part 2; Page 3; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1407 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC BIAS?;
MEDICAL STRIDES CARRY WITH THEM A POTENTIAL FOR ABUSE IN MAKING USE OF
TECHNOLOGY

BYLINE: By RICK WEISS, Weiss is biomedicine editor for Science News magazine in
Washington, D.C., from which this story is adapted.

BODY:

   Ellen spent four years getting her doctorate in industrial and chemical
engineering. Now, wincing as a company doctor drew a few drops of blood for her
employment physical, she could hardly contain her excitement about the job she
had been offered at one of the country's foremost metallurgical research
institutes.

   Two days later, the phone call came.

   "You are perfectly healthy," the young doctor said. "But tests have revealed
that you harbor a gene that can result in decreased levels of a blood enzyme,
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. Without the enzyme's protection, you have a
slightly increased risk of developing a red blood cell disease if you come into
contact with certain chemicals in our laboratory.

   "I'm sorry," he said. "The job has been offered to someone else."

Note From Future

   This note from the future illustrates a potential dark side of the biomedical
present. The case histories are hypothetical. But the tests already exist and so
does the threat of genetic discrimination.

   The recent revolution in molecular biology and genetics heralds a new age in
medical science. Ongoing efforts to create a map of the entire human genome --
the DNA blueprint of heritable traits contained in every cell -- promises an
ever-widening range of diagnostic and therapeutic benefits. Recently, scientists
received the first U.S. approval to inject genetically engineered cells into
human patients. Researchers see the procedure as a forerunner of pending gene
therapy experiments that may permanently reverse genetic abnormalities.

   Biochemical cartographers have already located more than 400 genetic
"markers," or signposts of genetic diseases, on all 46 human chromosomes. They
have mapped the exact or approximate locations of genes responsible for muscular
dystrophy, Huntington's disease, some psychiatric disorders and a variety of
cancers.

   But as scientists learn to read the molecular fine print of the genome -- and
to interpret and correct the typographical errors that can predestine an
individual's medical fate -- others express concern about potential abuse of
this technology.

   Citing the need for a more complete review of the social and ethical
implications of genetic research, activist Jeremy Rifkin turned to the courts in
January to halt the first U.S. human gene-transfer experiments.

   "As technology and as different cures become available, there will be immense
pressure on myself and my peers to undergo different forms of treatment," said
Deborah Kaplan of the World Institute on Disability, based in Berkeley.

   "I'm concerned about social pressure, family pressure, pressure from the
medical community and real pressure from the insurance industry" to submit to
genetic alterations, she told the National Institutes of Health Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee.

   Whether such treatments are eventually devised or not, merely testing for
genetic traits carries social and ethical risks, experts say.

   "There are two very broad questions: Who decides whether or not you'll get a
test and what happens to that information," said Thomas H. Murray, director of
the Center for Biomedical Ethics at Case Western Reserve University.

   "Clearly there are going to be these tests. The question is how are we going
to use them and what social limit we're going to put on them," he said.

   Although testing practices are not yet well established, neither are
regulations governing their use. Eventually, policy makers may have to confront
an apparent discrepancy between the reality of genetic variability and the
democratic ideal that all citizens are "created equal." The issue cuts through
existing social mores and legal precedents, encompassing a body of information
the framers of constitutional and early statutory protections could never have
envisioned.

   "Each new (genetic) test is going to raise slightly different ethical
questions," Murray said.

   These questions, which relate to the overall balance between an individual's
rights and those of an employer or insurer, are not new. But as scientists
refine their understanding of the more than 3,000 diseases known to have genetic
components, the questions "are going to come at us much faster," Murray said.

   The Constitution protects citizens from government-inflicted discrimination
based on such immutable characteristics as race. To the extent that the Supreme
Court has ruled on the issue, federal discrimination on the basis of one's
genome would appear equally precluded.

   "If it's the government that wants the information for whatever reason, there
are all sorts of constitutional issues that arise," said Mark Rothstein,
director of the Health Law Institute at the University of Houston. "The
government would seemingly have to make a strong showing to gain access to one's
genetic profile, because it invades the individual's bodily integrity and
privacy."

   However, said Lori B. Andrews of the American Bar Foundation in Chicago, "the
Constitution protects people from the federal government and, in some cases,
from the states, but it doesn't apply to private companies unless there is a
specific statute dealing with the issue."

   "There may be a variety of reasons why an employer may want some of this
information, and the legal issues are very unsettled as to whether the employer
could make participation (in genetic screening) a valid condition of
employment," Rothstein said.

   "Employers are obviously worried about health insurance and health-care
costs," said Lawrence Miike, a project director at the federal Office of
Technology Assessment. "My guess is that a lot of employers, if they had no
restraints on them, would obviously want to do some kind of testing for
increased probability for disease."

   In her book, "Medical Genetics: A Legal Frontier," Andrews cites studies
indicating that industrial physicians sometimes reject job applicants with mild
diseases that have no effect on job performance.

   "The availability of genetic diagnostic technologies now raises questions
about whether laws should be passed protecting people against genetic
discrimination by private entities," she writes.

   Andrews and others also express concern that employers may simply filter out
all but the most genetically hardy applicants, rather than cleaning up an
otherwise unhealthy workplace. Gene mapping and testing "could challenge or
overturn a lot of our traditional legal notions about the role of such things as
occupational health and safety laws," Andrews said.

   Insurance companies too have a substantial financial stake in knowing an
individual's propensity for illness or early death.

   Already some insurers are under fire for requiring AIDS antibody tests as
part of their underwriting procedure. Although testing for acquired immune
deficiency syndrome falls short of screening one's genetic profile, it differs
from standard blood tests in revealing an individual's exposure to a virus that
may cause disease years later.

   Some states -- led by California -- have made it illegal for insurance
companies to require AIDS tests. So some insurance companies now require
specialized white blood cell counts that provide indirect evidence of AIDS
infection.

   "This gives a clue as to what's going to happen in the area of genetics and
how hard it is to prohibit the acquiring of information," Rothstein said. "Maybe
you can ban the use of genetic information, but it's hard to prohibit people
from getting information."

   Meanwhile, underwriters are frightened by the prospect of individuals
performing genetic analyses on themselves and keeping the results secret. The
home diagnostics market in the United States already boasts more than 60
do-it-yourself kits for detecting such conditions as pregnancy and indirect
evidence of colon cancer. Home testing for DNA markers could amplify the effect
of the insurance industry's nemesis -- "adverse selection."

   Adverse selection refers to the probability that people privately aware of a
medical problem are more likely to seek medical insurance. That, insurers say,
can result in their insuring too many high-risk individuals, thus throwing off
the statistical tables upon which they base their charges.

   In the long run, it will fall upon legislators and the courts to codify the
proper use of genetic information. In "Medical Genetics," Andrews writes, "The
legal scheme created to handle genetics will also create the blueprint for a
particular type of society."

GRAPHIC: Drawing, GARY TANHAUSER / for The Times


                               46 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1989 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     March 26, 1989, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: BOOK WORLD; PAGE X9

LENGTH: 1122 words

HEADLINE: Ethics in the Brave New World

BYLINE: Liebe F. Cavalieri

BODY:

   GENETHICS The Clash Between the New Genetics and Human Values

   By David Suzuki and Peter Knudtson Harvard University Press. 384 pp. $ 25

   THE TITLE of this book, a synthetic word, is the same as that of a European
coalition, the Genethic Network; both the book and the network are concerned
with the potential social and ethical problems that are likely to arise from the
uses of genetic engineering. At about the time this book was gestating in 1986,
the Genethic Network was in the throes of organization. I don't believe this is
happenstance. Rather, it shows a maturing of perceptions on both sides of the
Atlantic with regard to genetic engineering. There has been plenty of talk about
the risks and benefits in the past decade, but a public awareness is just now
emerging.

   Why has it taken so long? After all, genetic engineering was born in 1973.
For one thing, the rapidity of scientific advances out-paced public
assimilation. Scientists and entrepreneurs have not helped. On the one hand, the
molecular biologists, in their enthusiasm for their work, tend to be myopic
about its social consequences. This is not unusual among scientists. For them,
science is neutral and they assume that "society" will somehow decide what is
best for it. On the other hand, the entrepreneurs, who see genetic engineering
as a unique opportunity to make large profits, have painted a picture of glowing
benefits with little risk, thereby throwing dust into uninitiated eyes.

   But experience of the exacerbated environmental degradation of the last year
or two and the impairment of human health by exposure to industrial chemicals
and pesticides has made people wary of technological innovation. This has helped
focus public attention on genetic engineering and its problems. So now, a number
of years after genetic engineering came on the scene, people are finally ready
to ponder the issues and to try to calculate the risk/benefit arithmetic.

   Suzuki and Knudtson have performed a public service in writing Genethics for
the lay public. Although they present what is generally termed a "balanced" view
of the risks and benefits, there is ample social, moral and philosophical
discussion to justify cautioning the reader that serious questions about this
new biotechnology remain and, indeed, demand answers before we go full speed
ahead.

   To be able to grasp fully the problems engendered by genetic engineering, it
is necessary to have some notion of the underlying science. Suzuki and Knudtson,
aware of this, have started with a readable primer before taking up genetic
engineering applications and their social and ethical dimensions. Sophisticated
concepts and details of experiments are presented in layman's language without
sacrificing scientific principles. Four chapters are devoted to the basic
material necessary for the understanding of genetics. The presentation of the
material is systematic, spanning the entire gamut from molecules to evolution.
The authors give a clear description of recombinant DNA technology, the guts of
genetic engineering, explaining how the techniques of genetic manipulation make
it possible to add or delete genes and, in general, to shuffle them about among
disparate organisms.

   The book devotes three chapters to the applications of a variety of genetic
techniques to problems of human health. They give a lucid account of the famous
XYY case. Diagnosed in 1961, this was the first time that an extra chromosome (a
large DNA molecule) was reported in a male. Normally, the two sex chromosomes in
males are XY. According to an early scientific paper, the extra Y chromosome was
thought to be the cause of aggressiveness and criminal behavior. The "crime
connection" gained credence and caused a storm of controversy among scientists,
sociologists, psychiatrists and public interest groups. Many scientists claimed
that there was no basis for this conclusion. Suzuki and Knudtson correctly point
out that the data were fragmentary and were blown out of proportion by the news
media and misguided individuals. Our society's insistence on simple, quick
answers, they conclude, was the primary cause for the storm.

   Human gene therapy, currently a hot topic among biomedical scientists, is
discussed in some detail. After a brief description of how genes are manipulated
in attempts at curing genetic diseases such as sickle cell anemia, the authors
discuss the possible medical risks involved. Genetic damage could result if the
replacement gene were incorporated in error at the wrong site, thereby
disrupting the function of a normal gene. Perhaps the most important question to
be considered for future human gene therapy concerns the insertion of genes into
the germ line, that is, the sperm or ovum. Germ line intervention, as it is
called, presents profound moral questions, for in addition to having to decide
the difference between "good" and "bad" genes, the gene surgeon bears the
responsibility for the well-being of all future descendants of his patient. Who
is to decide whether today's "good" gene may not be so in the future? Suzuki and
Knudtson treat the issue sensitively.

   GENETHICS also takes up the question of biological weapons. The public is not
yet aware of the potential devastation that genetically engineered
microorganisms could cause. Recombinant DNA technology has the capacity to
create virtually an infinite variety of novel biological agents potentially as
deadly as AIDS. Developing antidotes for all of these is not feasible, and even
an antidote for one would be a problem: it would require knowledge of the
offensive agent; therefore, the offensive agent would have to be produced first.
This creates a dilemma: "defensive" and "offensive" research cannot be
separated. Thus, a biological defense program in one country may well be
perceived by others as offensive -- a sure way to launch a biological arms race.

   These and other biological questions arising from the crossing of species
barriers and the destruction of genetic diversity have led the authors to
construct a list of nine genethic principles. I will note only the last one.

   "The accumulation of genetic knowledge alone -- however precious in its own
right -- does not guarantee wisdom in our decisions regarding human heredity; if
such knowledge breeds a false sense of human mastery over genes, it can even
lead to folly."

   The Genethic Network is helping the European Economic Commission write
genetic engineering guidelines for its 12 member states. I hope the Commission
members read Genethics and follow its advice.? Liebe F. Cavalieri, a member of
the Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research, is the author of "The
Double-Edged Helix: Science in the Real World."


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, THE DNA'S DOUBLE HELIX AND A DIAGRAM OF ITS REPLICATION,
FROM THE BOOK


                               47 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1989 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            February 24, 1989 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 749 words

HEADLINE: Scripps scientists gain in battle with bacteria

BYLINE: Ann Gibbons, Tribune Science Writer

BODY:

   San Diego scientists have taken an important step in understanding how some
bacteria outwit the body's defenses and cause typhoid fever, blood diseases and
other devastating infections. The scientists, from the Scripps Clinic and
Research Foundation, reported today that they have isolated one of the genes
that allow salmonella bacteria to lurk inside cells of the immune system, which
otherwise should destroy them.

   The team, led by microbiologist Fred Heffron, published its findings in
today's issue of the journal Science. The team was the first to isolate one of
the genes that protect the bacteria from destruction by macrophages, agents of
the immune system. Assessing the importance of the research, Brett Finlay, a
microbiologist at Stanford University, said: "It's very significant, because
this is the first handle we've got on how these bacteria survive in the
macrophages, one of the body's main defenses against bacteria." Finlay said that
"this is the first gene that has been shown to allow the bacteria to hang out
there and to protect" them from the hostile attacks of the immune system. The
research has important implications for many diseases caused by infectious
bacteria, illnesses such as tuberculosis, Legionnaire's disease and typhoid
fever in humans.

   These bacteria also cause a range of diseases in livestock and other mammals.
The research could someday lead to vaccines against those bacterial infections
or to genetic therapies to help treat them in humans and animals. Using the
powerful tools of molecular genetics, the Scripps team studied the salmonella
bacterium, a rod-shaped bacterium that is particularly common in humans and
domestic animals. It comes in many strains, ranging from one that causes food
poisoning to others that trigger typhoid fever and a blood disease.

   Salmonella can be particularly devastating in children and in adults with
weak immune systems, such as those suffering from AIDS and cancer. Although
scientists have known about salmonella since the turn of the century, they have
been puzzled by the way it manages to evade the immune system and survive in the
body. Normally, Heffron said, the phagocytic cells of the immune system "have a
way of destroying bacteria, fungi and other organisms." Humans usually get
salmonella by eating beef, chicken or other food infected with the bacteria.

   In most cases, the bacteria are restricted to the gastrointestinal tract,
where they cause intestinal disorders, more familiarly known as food poisoning.
The illness ends when the bacteria pass through the body, without ever
penetrating the bloodstream. However, some strains of salmonella have the
ability to penetrate the intestine's lining and get into the blood, where they
are taken up by macrophages, which are special white blood cells. These
macrophages are agents of the immune system, where they wander through the
bloodstream and engulf foreign invaders and kill them.

   They are also known as phagocytic cells. However, salmonella and some other
bacteria have developed mysterious mechanisms that allow them to survive in the
hostile environment inside these cells. Once inside these white blood cells, the
bacteria systematically debilitate this branch of the immune system, preventing
it from destroying them.

   The result is that the bacteria eventually cause typhoid fever or a blood
disease that can be fatal in humans. "Phagocytic cells are the first line of
defense in the body, one of the primary components of the immune system,"
Heffron said.

   "When salmonella survives in the phagocyte, it essentially cripples the
immune system." The gene the Scripps team isolated is one of at least 20 genes
inside the salmonella bacterium that allows it to survive inside the
bacteria-killing cells, Heffron said.

   It is one of about 100 genes that work together to make the bacteria cause
disease. Once the bacterium is inside the white blood cells, it somehow senses
that it is inside the hostile environment of a macrophage.

   That turns on a special gene -- the one isolated by the Scripps team -- that
somehow protects the bacterium. The research team now is working to understand
how that gene protects the bacterium and is trying to isolate some of the other
genes in the salmonella that cause disease. Other members of the team at Scripps
include Eduardo Groisman, a post-doctoral fellow in the molecular-biology
department, and Patricia Fields, a former fellow at Scripps who now works at the
national Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                               48 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1989 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           February 23, 1989 Thursday
                                 Fourth Edition

SECTION: Science; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 616 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY `HYPE' ATTACKED

BYLINE: OZ HOPKINS, of the Oregonian Staff\

BODY:

   Thursday, February 23, 1989 GENE THERAPY `HYPE' ATTACKED

   TEXT:

   Nobel laureate Paul Berg is out to diffuse some of the ``hype'' about medical
science's ability to cure certain disorders by making changes in a patient's
cells.

   The quest for ways to treat or prevent disease by altering genetic structure
is thought by many to be the logical outcome of genetic engineering, or altering
genes of an organism, but Berg said gene therapy was premature.

   ``There has been a lot of extended hype about the prospects for gene therapy,
and I think when you examine those prospects carefully and in depth you find
they are ephemeral. They are a long way off, if at all, '' Berg said in a
Portland interview.

   Most of the diseases people have are the consequences of interactions of many
genes, not a single gene, he said, but most people tend to think in terms of
diseases caused by a single gene.

   Science has learned the molecular basis of some of the single-cell diseases
and in some cases has indeed identified the gene that causes the defect, but
diseases caused by multiple gene disease don't follow a strict single-gene
pattern and are in fact the consequence of interaction of many genes with one
another and with their environment.

   At present the only genetic manipulations scientist are even dreaming about
involve those diseases that result from a single defect, Berg said. Diseases or
characteristics that are the consequence of multiple genes are far beyond
science's capability at this time.

   ``The hype is unwarranted. Some of it has been done by the media. Some by
scientists themselves. Some of it because it (gene therapy) has more glamour
than tissue transplants,'' he said.

   Berg, a Stanford University School of Medicine biochemist, received the Nobel
Award in Chemistry in 1980 for his fundamental studies of the biochemistry of
nucleic acids, particularly deoxyribonucleic acid. DNA is the substance in all
cells that transmits the hereditary pattern.

   Berg spoke Wednesday in the Reed College biotechnology lecture series.

   ``People tend to be caught in the enthusiasm of gene therapy. At the same
time they are sort of afraid of what gene therapy will allow people to do, but
in fact there is an alternative -- standard tissue transplant,'' he said.

   ``I think that only in very, very special cases is it possible that a gene
transplant is going to be preferred,'' he said. ``In a certain number of genetic
diseases tissue transplant is working, people are doing it.'' For example,
several genetic defects can be remedied by giving a patient a transplant of
healthy bone marrow cells, he said.

   Problems associated with tissue transplant -- such as the availability of
tissue and organ rejection -- are being overcome more readily than problems
associated with gene transplant, he said.

   Berg's work concerns the mechanism of genes in higher organisms, particularly
the interplay of viral and cellular genes in regulating growth and division. In
addition, he and his colleagues have been active in experiments designed to
explore the chemistry and biology of chromosomes in humans and other mammals in
hope of providing basic knowledge for the prevention, management and cure of
hereditary diseases.

   ``What we are working on is not how to transplant genes, but how to repair a
defective gene,'' he said. The theory is that repairing the natural gene in its
normal location subject to all the normal regulatory controls would not upset
some unknown balance of nature.

   ``We don't yet understand all the factors needed to get a gene to function
properly. If it doesn't function properly you might in fact release a different
disease than the one that you are trying to cure,'' Berg said.

   ILLUSTRATION: Photo of BERG.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2006


                               49 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1989 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    February 19, 1989, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: OUTLOOK; PAGE D3; OUTPOSTS

LENGTH: 2188 words

HEADLINE: Bio-Menace: Genetic Discrimination

BYLINE: Rick Weiss

BODY:

   Ellen spent four years getting her PhD in industrial and chemical
engineering. Now, wincing as a company doctor drew a few drops of blood for her
preemployment physical, she could hardly contain her excitement about the job
she'd been offered at one of the country's foremost metallurgical research
institutes.

   Two days later the phone call came. You are perfectly healthy, the young
doctor said. But tests have revealed you harbor a gene that can result in
decreased levels of a blood enzyme, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. Without
the enzyme's protection, you have a slightly increased risk of developing a red
blood cell disease if you come into contact with certain chemicals in our
laboratory.

   I'm sorry, he said. The job has been offered to someone else.

   When Frank married at 31, he decided to take out life insurance. A swimmer
and avid racquetball player with no previous hospitalizations, he felt certain
that his premiums would be low.

   Weeks later, after a routine physical exam, he was shocked by the insurance
company's response. Sophisticated DNA testing had revealed in Frank's tissues a
single missing copy of a so-called RB anti-oncogene and minor variations in two
other genes. Computer analysis showed the molecular misprints more than tripled
his risk of getting small-cell lung cancer by age 55. His application was
rejected.

   These notes from the future illustrate a potential dark side of the
biomedical present. The case histories are hypothetical. But the tests already
exist -- and so does the threat of genetic discrimination.

   The recent revolution in molecular biology and genetics heralds a new age in
medical science. Ongoing efforts to create a map of the entire human genome --
the DNA blueprint of heritable traits contained in every cell -- promises an
ever-widening range of diagnostic and therapeutic benefits. And just last month,
scientists received the first U.S. approval to inject genetically engineered
cells into human patients. Researchers see the procedure as a forerunner of
pending "gene therapy" experiments that may permanently reverse genetic
abnormalities.

   Biochemical cartographers have already located more than 400 genetic
"markers," or signposts of genetic diseases, on all 46 human chromosomes. They
have mapped the exact or approximate locations of genes responsible for muscular
dystrophy, Huntington's disease, some psychiatric disorders and a variety of
cancers. But as scientists learn to read the molecular fine print of the genome
-- and to interpret and correct the typographical errors that can predestine an
individual's medical fate -- others express concern about potential abuse of
this technology.

   Two weeks ago, citing the need for a more complete review of the social and
ethical implications of genetic research, activist Jeremy Rifkin turned to the
courts to halt the first U.S. human gene-transfer experiments. Rifkin announced
the suit during the January 30 meeting of the NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, which advises the NIH on matters relating to genetic engineering. He
attended the meeting with leaders of advocacy groups for the disabled, including
Evan Kemp Jr., commissioner of the U.S. Equal Opportunity Commission.

   "I'm concerned that as technology and as different cures become available
there will be immense pressure on myself and my peers to undergo different forms
of treatment," said Deborah Kaplan of the Berkeley, Calif.-based World Institute
on Disability. "I'm concerned about social pressure, family pressure, pressure
from the medical community and real pressure from the insurance industry" to
submit to genetic alterations, she told the committee.

   Whether or not such treatments are eventually devised, merely testing for
genetic traits carries social and ethical risks, experts say.

   "There are two very broad questions: Who decides whether or not you'll get a
test and what happens to that information," says Thomas H. Murray, director of
the Center for Biomedical Ethics at Case Western Reserve University. "Clearly
there are going to be these tests. The question is how are we going to use them
and what social limit we're going to put on them."

   The Enemy Within Although testing practices are not yet well established,
neither are regulations governing their use. Eventually policy-makers may have
to confront an apparent discrepancy between the reality of genetic variability
and the democratic ideal that all citizens are "created equal." The issue cuts
through existing social mores and legal precedents, encompassing a body of
information the framers of constitutional and early statutory protections could
never have envisioned.

   "Each new (genetic) test is going to raise slightly different ethical
questions," says Murray. These questions, which relate to the overall balance
between an individual's rights and those of an employer or insurer, are not new.
But as scientists refine their understanding of the more than 3,000 diseases
known to have genetic components, the questions "are going to come at us much
faster," Murray says.

   The Constitution protects citizens from government-inflicted discrimination
based on immutable characteristics such as race. And to the extent the Supreme
Court has ruled on the issue, federal discrimination on the basis of one's
genome would appear equally precluded.

   "If it's the government that wants the information for whatever reason, there
are all sorts of constitutional issues that arise," says Mark Rothstein,
director of the Health Law Institute at the University of Houston. "The
government would seemingly have to make a strong showing to gain access to one's
genetic profile because it invades the individual's bodily integrity and
privacy."

   However, says Lori B. Andrews of the American Bar Foundation in Chicago, "the
Constitution protects people from the federal government and in some cases from
the states, but it doesn't apply to private companies unless there is a specific
statute dealing with the issue."

   "There may be a variety of reasons why an employer may want some of this
information, and the legal issues are very unsettled as to whether the employer
could make participation [in genetic screening] a valid condition of
employment," Rothstein says.

   A 1982 survey by the Office of Technology Assessment found that only six of
366 responding companies used genetic tests on applicants or employees. Those
companies tested for genetic susceptibility to environmental or occupational
hazards associated with the workplace. But another 55 companies stated they
might begin genetic testing within the next five years. A 1988 OTA report,
"Biology, Medicine and the Bill of Rights," says "little is known about whether
the incidence of genetic screening has increased in the last five years." But
other sources suggest such a trend is a near-certainty in coming years.

   Sharing the Risk "Employers are obviously worried about health insurance and
health-care costs," says Lawrence Miike, a project director at OTA. "My guess is
that a lot of employers, if they had no restraints on them, would obviously want
to do some kind of testing for increased probability for disease."

   In her book, "Medical Genetics: A Legal Frontier," Andrews cites studies
indicating that industrial physicians sometimes reject job applicants with mild
diseases that have no effect on job performance. "Employment discrimination
against people with potential health problems has been widespread and is likely
to further increase," she writes. "The availability of genetic diagnostic
technologies now raises questions about whether laws should be passed protecting
people against genetic discrimination by private entities."

   She concedes that genetic tests may someday prove a legitimate means of
screening out some workers with health-endangering sensitivities to particular
workplace conditions. But, Andrews warns, today's genetic profiles do little to
assure an employer that the best person has been hired -- especially when, given
our incomplete understanding of genetics, job applicants at even higher risk may
well be hired simply because their particular genetic weaknesses have not yet
been mapped.

   Andrews and others also express concern that employers may simply filter out
all but the most genetically hardy applicants rather than cleaning up an
otherwise unhealthy workplace. Gene mapping and testing "could challenge or
overturn a lot of our traditional legal notions about the role of such things as
occupational health and safety laws," Andrews says.

   Rothstein notes another interesting twist: Employers, while free to hire the
most capable applicant, cannot discriminate against the handicapped. "It remains
to be seen whether an individual who is currently healthy and asymptomatic but
has an atypical genetic trait might not be covered under the definition of
handicapped under state or federal law," he says.

   Insurance companies, too, have a substantial financial stake in knowing an
individual's propensity for illness or early death.

   Already some insurers are under fire for requiring AIDS-antibody tests as
part of their underwriting procedure. While AIDS testing falls short of
screening one's genetic profile, it differs from standard blood tests in
revealing an individual's exposure to a virus that years later may cause
disease.

   Some states -- led by California -- have made it illegal for insurance
companies to require AIDS tests. So some insurance companies now require
specialized white blood cell counts that provide indirect evidence of AIDS
infection. "This gives a clue as to what's going to happen in the area of
genetics and how hard it is to prohibit the acquiring of information," Rothstein
says. "Maybe you can ban the use of genetic information, but it's hard to
prohibit people from getting information."

   Indeed, Andrews suggests, "increasingly sophisticated genetic diagnostic
tests may force a total rethinking of the concept of health insurance." She
notes that insurance companies already exclude from their coverage -- or at best
charge extra for -- health-care costs associated with preexisting disorders. If
one's genome becomes recognized as a preexisting template for future disease,
genetic predispositions may be excluded from coverage.

   Moreover, as insurance companies learn to make more detailed assessments of
an individual's particular health risks, premiums will probably become
prohibitively expensive for the most at-risk individuals. "Insurance will thus
lose its social value as a means of spreading risk across groups," she
concludes, adding that the apparent injustice of that situation "will provide
the impetus for the development of a national health system."

   "The ramifications for the insurance industry are just startling," Rothstein
says. "I can see 20 or 30 years from now that life insurance policies will be
essentially accident policies, because everything else is foreseeable. The
essence of insurance is you assess a risk against the unknown. If there's no
medical unknown, the only unknown is whether you're going to get hit by a bus,
right?"

   The Selection Factor Meanwhile, underwriters are frightened by the prospect
of individuals performing genetic analyses on themselves -- and keeping the
results secret. The home-diagnostics market in the United States already boasts
more than 60 do-it-yourself kits for detecting such conditions as pregnancy and
indirect evidence of colon cancer. Home testing for DNA markers could amplify
the effect of the insurance industry's arch nemesis -- "adverse selection."

   Adverse selection refers to the probability that people privately aware of a
medical problem are more likely to seek medical insurance. That, insurers say,
can result in their insuring too many high-risk individuals, thus throwing off
the statistical tables upon which they base their charges.

   Today, OTA's Miike says, most home tests monitor chronic conditions, such as
blood sugar levels in diabetics. "But I think it's eventually going to cause a
lot of problems, and I think that it will be an additional pressure on the
insurers. For example, there's an HIV (AIDS antibody) spot test now that, even
though it's not supposed to be used by consumers, is pretty simple to use."
Still, he notes, genetic tests are "a little more complicated, because genetic
disease seems to depend mostly on a combination of factors rather than any one
thing. So those tests are less likely to be done so easily or as cheaply on a
mass scale."

   In the long run, it will fall upon legislators and the courts to codify the
proper use of genetic information. In "Medical Genetics," Andrews writes that
"The legal scheme created to handle genetics will also create the blueprint for
a particular type of society."

   At one extreme, she says, "we could take an approach that would take us back
to feudal times where you're born into your occupation and that type of thing."
Or "we could take a more 'individual rights' approach where people could use
this information individually to make better decisions about things like where
they should live and work."

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, CARY HENRIE FOR TWP


                               50 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1989 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           February 16, 1989 Thursday
                                 Fourth Edition

SECTION: Local Stories; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1043 words

HEADLINE: FUNDS SOUGHT FOR DISEASE RESEARCH

BYLINE: DON HAMILTON, of the Oregonian Staff\

BODY:

   Thursday, February 16, 1989 FUNDS SOUGHT FOR DISEASE RESEARCH

   TEXT:

   Summary: The money would be used for work on a rare disorder that afflicts
the daughters of the state attorney general

   The search for a cure for the rare and lethal disease that afflicts two
daughters of Oregon Attorney General Dave Frohnmayer has taken a new direction,
one that researchers hope could help unlock some secrets of cancer and birth
defects.

   Efforts on behalf of Kirsten and Katie Frohnmayer largely have centered on
finding a genetically compatible bone-marrow donor -- as a transplant is the
only known cure for Fanconi's anemia -- but thousands of people have been
screened without success.

   However, in a new turn last week, the girls' mother, Lynn Frohnmayer, and
about a dozen friends gathered in the family's Eugene home to prepare 6,000
letters in a campaign aimed at raising $100,000 for three researchers. One of
the researchers is exploring gene therapy, a process that was not much more than
a dream five years ago and that could lead to answers to questions about cancer
and birth defects.

   The current fund-raising campaign, the attorney general said, is a race
against time.

   ``We're in the business of buying time and trying to speed science,'' Dave
Frohnmayer said. ``We know we're sitting on a time bomb. This is a life and
death matter, and the speed of the research could be the difference.''

   Half of those afflicted by the rare, inherited condition die by the age of 10
and most die by age 20 although one person is known to have lived past 30.
Kirsten Frohnmayer is 16 and Katie is 10.

   Kirsten was first diagnosed in 1983 as having aplastic anemia, but two years
later doctors discovered it was actually the much rarer Fanconi's, which
inhibits the capacity of the bone marrow to produce red and white blood cells.
Katie was diagnosed with the disease in 1986.

   The girls have been able to lead relatively normal lives. Kirsten is a
straight A student and president of the sophomore class at South Eugene High
School. She skis, debates and plays competitive tennis while being treated with
a small hormone dose. Ultimately, however, she will develop immunities to the
treatment, her father said.

   Katie has been taking steroids to control spots of swelling in her legs
caused by concentrations of white blood cells. Doctors tried to take her off the
steroids recently but were forced to resume the treatment. She remains cheerful
and bubbly but at times is in significant pain.

   Their plight has attracted considerable attention nationally and in England,
where a CBS News story was rebroadcast recently. USA Today did a cover story on
them Jan. 24 and followed a day later with a story on its television program.

   In the new effort, letters are being sent by the Frohnmayers to 6,000 people
and include a picture of Kirsten and Katie. In addition, the letter is being
sent to 105 families of people who have the condition.

   Checks for the current campaign may be sent to Fanconi's Research Fund, 66
Club Road, Suite 300, Eugene, Ore. 97401.

   Beneficiaries of the fund-raising will be Dr. Arleen D. Auerbach of
Rockefeller University in New York, Dr. Blanche Alter of Mount Siani Hospital in
New York and Dr. N.T. Shahidi of the University of Wisconsin in Madison. All
three, the Frohnmayers said in the letter, are world experts in Fanconi's
anemia.

   ``New research discoveries have allowed scientific experts to close in on the
genetic origin of this killer,'' the letter said. ``Gene therapy no longer is a
scientific dream. Other experts have begun exciting projects with new drugs and
substances that may provide life-extending therapies for treatment of the
illness. From the bleak prognosis we first confronted five years ago, we now
have regained real and renewed optimism. But it's a race against the clock.''

   Auerbach, a geneticist, said she was ``very optimistic'' about the
possibility of a breakthrough in her research.

   ``Technology is moving ahead rapidly and the research is accelerating,''
Auerbach said in a telephone interview. ``We hope it would be in time for the
girls, but there are no guarantees.''

   Auerbach is attempting to isolate the gene that triggers the disease. Once
isolated and identified, the gene then would be cloned.

   The new, cloned gene would be administered into bone marrow cells. Then the
cells would be returned to the bone marrow and, if everything went according to
expectations, the newly healthy cells would reproduce, Auerbach said.

   ``I don't want to oversell the gene therapy,'' Dave Frohnmayer said. ``What
is it, two years off? Five years off? But I don't want to undersell it, either.
It opens up whole new areas.''

   Fanconi's anemia is so rare that little research money -- federal or private
-- has been available until recently. Some pediatricians, Frohnmayer said, go
through their entire careers without seeing a case.

   There are two types of the gene, Auerbach said, and this is what leads her to
believe there may be a connection between Fanconi's anemia, and cancer and birth
defects. One type of the gene causes the disease, and the other carries it.

   Those with the carrier version may not get the disease, but they have proved
to be more susceptible to cancers caused by environmental factors, such as
smoking or living near a cancer-causing material, Auerbach said.

   Science has never been able to explain why one smoker, for example, gets
cancer while another does not, when other factors are equal. The answer may lie
in genetics.

   The Fanconi's anemia gene also may help explain why about half the victims of
Fanconi's anemia are born with defects such as additional or missing thumbs and
hearing loss.

   ``If we find the cause of this disease, we might find the causes of cancer
and birth defects,'' Auerbach said. ``This gene seems to have something to do
with that.''

   Once this latest campaign is completed, perhaps in the spring, the
Frohnmayers and the other families plan to establish a formal foundation with
tax-exempt status.

   ``There are things on the horizon that are very promising that weren't there
five years ago,'' Frohnmayer said. ``We have to turn to our friends. Our motto
is: `Fight back. Otherwise you're a victim. If you're losing on one front, open
up another front.' ''

   ILLUSTRATION:     Color Photo by PEGGY SHEKELL

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2006


                               51 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1989 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            February 12, 1989 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-10

LENGTH: 1592 words

HEADLINE: Experts struggle to develop code of ethics, law for genetic science;
Panel appointed by Congress to meet this week to begin considering issues

BYLINE: David Graham, Staff Writer

BODY:

   The most promising achievements of modern genetics could turn out to be
powerful tools for violations of personal privacy and social discrimination,
medical and legal authorities are recognizing. Tests for susceptibility to
genetic disease might allow businesses to deny insurance policies or jobs to
people at risk. And techniques for altering genes to treat disease could lead to
the ability to "design" a person's attributes, such as eye color, height or
intelligence. "That's always the danger of technology.

   It comes with two edges," said Theodore Friedmann, a UCSD expert in genetic
technologies. Escalating knowledge of human genetics has been compared with
American efforts to create the atomic bomb more than 50 years ago, a stunning
scientific achievement whose implications were poorly understood and little
debated beforehand. This week, Friedmann and other experts appointed by Congress
to a Biomedical Ethics Advisory Committee will meet in Washington to begin
considering issues of modern genetics hardly acknowledged by existing law and
moral codes. The questions the committee is likely to broach are wide-ranging,
members and staff say, and include: Who should have access to a person's genetic
information?

   Can employers and insurers require genetic test data, as they do some health
information now? Can they legally deny jobs or insurance policies based on the
test results? And when therapeutic gene transplants -- none of which are
available now -- become practical, who will benefit from them?

   Can they be required by authorities?

   Who decides?

   And how? Friedmann believes technologies to intervene in human genetics will
be used.

   "The question is not should we do it, but how do we go about doing it
properly," Friedmann said in a recent interview. Doctors today can reliably test
for only about a dozen genetic diseases, but research advances suggest the
number will increase.

   While the genetic screening usually is done for couples considering pregnancy
or for a fetus early in its development, the tests could be performed on
children or adults as well. And researchers are working toward correcting
diseases with a clearly identifiable genetic cause by replacing damaged or
missing genes with functional ones, a procedure often known as gene therapy.
Such therapies have been meeting with success in laboratory animal experiments.

   For example, Wen-Hwa Lee, a UCSD professor of pathology, hopes to begin human
clinical trials within a few years using the retinoblastoma gene, which he says
suppresses some types of cancers. Some familiar with genetic technologies have
questioned whether people shown to be at risk for genetic disease will be
stigmatized as a new class of handicapped.

   They ask whether behaviors that can be shown to have a genetic basis should
be treated with gene therapy.

   What of socially undesirable behaviors, such as violence or alcoholism?

   Would making such choices be construed as efforts toward eugenics, improving
or purifying the human race? Friedmann and others on the new 14-member advisory
committee hesitate to offer answers yet and say they still are formulating the
questions. The panel is charged with developing a report on the interwoven
medical, ethical, social and legal issues of genetic technologies for a
congressional Biomedical Ethics Board by March 1990. Congress then could suggest
any legal or regulatory reform it deems necessary, said Robert Cook-Deegan, the
board's acting executive director. The questions the committee discusses may
take on more immediacy if a $3 billion national project to map all of the genes
that comprise a human being goes forward.

   Knowledge of human genetics could accelerate with the project. The federal
government is debating whether to finance the mapping project, which could take
15 years to complete. Almost all of the body's estimated 10 trillion cells carry
two copies of the approximately 50,000 to 100,000 genes that give rise to human
characteristics ranging from eye color to aspects of personality. Some genes are
thought to cause diseases.

   Or disease can arise when a particular gene or group of genes is absent or
damaged, such as the cancers that are associated with a missing retinoblastoma
gene.

   About 4,000 diseases are known to involve genetic defects. Debate over the
future of human genetic engineering was dramatized two weeks ago with the filing
of a lawsuit in federal District Court in Washington, D.C., to stop the first
transfer of genes into people ever approved by the government's National
Institutes of Health. Jeremy Rifkin, president of the Foundation on Economic
Trends, a Washington organization that monitors genetic engineering, sued to
stop an experimental cancer treatment in people that included a transplanted
gene to serve as a biological "marker" allowing scientists to track blood cells.
The NIH approved the experiment planned by National Cancer Institute scientists.

   Still, Rifkin said he wants a citizens' committee, composed of leaders from
labor, disabled, minority and other groups to advise the NIH on each human gene
experiment. "Even if intentions are good, actions can be unfortunate," Rifkin
said in an interview. History is strewn with beliefs of racial superiority and
attempts at racial purity, such as those fostered by the Nazis in the '30s, he
said. Discrimination based on genetic testing already has occurred in the United
States, Rifkin said.

   He cited the exclusion from some military jobs in the 1970s of black
Americans who had sickle cell trait, meaning one of two copies of a
blood-producing gene was defective.

   But the individuals were not likely to develop disease because they still had
one good copy of the gene. A business concerned that a working condition might
contribute to disease in certain individuals might want to exclude those
workers, Rifkin said. "We need legislation that everyone who needs to know about
his own genetic makeup can if he likes and not have that information in the
hands of government and insurance companies and employers," Rifkin said. Others
see a more profound dilemma on the horizon. Many scientists believe that greater
understanding of genes and improved techniques for manipulating them will make
it possible to permanently alter many, if not all, of an individual's human
characteristics, including such attributes as muscularity and intelligence.
These changes would be made in the genes of a developing embryo shortly after
conception in a technique doctors call germ line genetic intervention.

   The altered genes would become a part of the person's permanent genetic
composition, scientists believe. "It's a whole new ball game," said K. Danner
Clouser, a medical ethicist at Pennsylvania State University's Hershey Medical
College. "You're dealing with the building blocks of what makes humans human.

   It looks like we could change human nature...change the building blocks, and
create new beings, and that's just mind-boggling." Clouser helped plan for the
Biomedical Ethics Advisory Committee during a fellowship on the staff of Sen.
Albert Gore Jr., D-Tenn., who was influential in establishing the committee.
While there may be consensus for eradicating a disease from the gene line,
arbitrary changes are tougher to consider, he said. "I think that's where we're
going to have a breakdown of agreement about what to do," Clouser said. In a
world of future genetic intervention, would, Clouser asked, people want to
create a race of blue-eyed boys with blond hair, as the Nazis attempted, or
people with a third eye, or perhaps a breed of strong, dumb workers who would
not balk at subservience? "Is it just so different that we are shocked by it, or
is it profoundly immoral?," Clouser asked.

   "It would change our evaluation of the world, our purposes, our goals." It
may be a decade or two before scientists master technical problems of germ line
gene transfer, said Phillip Sharp, director of the Center for Cancer Research at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and an internationally recognized
microbiologist. "Do you want to start designing man?"

   Sharp asked rhetorically.

   "If you were being totally rational about what's going on, if that decision
were made, you could think about trying it. "In time, there may be interest in
discussing it for reasons some people will find very reasonable.

   The individuals needs to be informed, society needs to think about that."
Friedmann said he hopes for greater public understanding about gene technology.
"Obviously there will be genes identified that affect intelligence and other
factors about human features," Friedmann said.

   "We have to think about it and confront it." Clouser noted that even if the
American scientists refrain from germ line engineering, other nations may pursue
it. He said such change is indeed revolutionary because it overturns assumptions
about humans and their relationship to nature around which religions,
philosophy, moral and political systems, marriage and family structures have
been established. Everett Mendelsohn, a science historian at Harvard University,
says he does not know who will decide such questions or what criteria will be
used.

   What does seem likely, he and others say, is that science will continue to
pursue the possibilities. The situation with genetic technology today is in some
ways analogous to the development of the atomic bomb by the U.S., he said. "We
don't want to get into a situation like that in World War II where science saw a
problem that was technically sweet and said `We'll think about the implications
later,' " Mendelsohn said.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Theodore Friedmann: "There will be genes identified
that affect intelligence and other factors about human features."; PHOTOBY: File
photo

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                               52 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1989 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     February 6, 1989, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 1576 words

HEADLINE: GENETICS;
Paradox in gene therapy debate;
Some disability rights groups fear that genetic treatment could undermine recent
gains in acceptance by society

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe staff

BODY:

    With scientists on the verge of replacing human genes to treat inherited
diseases, a paradoxical backlash is springing up among some of the very people
who seem to have the most to gain.

   Criticism has long swirled around the quickening pace of research to
manipulate genes, the genetic instructions in cells that can dramatically
influence health and illness.

   But scientists say they were not prepared for the activism that has suddenly
surfaced among disability rights groups, much of it critical of genetic
research. Many in that movement say medicine's enthusiasm for preventing birth
defects through prenatal diagnosis and abortion, and its eagerness to develop
high-tech genetic therapies, amount to a slap in the face for people with
handicaps who are leading meaningful lives.

   The rapid growth of the technology "is a statement that disabled people
shouldn't exist," said Deborah Kaplan of the World Institute on Disability in
Berkeley, Calif.

   "We are not all in a big rush to be cured - or prevented," added Anne Finger,
a Los Angeles writer who had polio and suffers from an inherited susceptibility
to asthma. "There is a tremendous amount of pressure" from the medical
profession and society "to have genetic screening and abortions," she said in an
interview.

   Finger, via videotape, and Kaplan, in person, were among disability rights
leaders who joined anti-biotechnology activist Jeremy Rifkin last week in urging
creation of a new committee within the National Institutes of Health to review
the ethical implications of gene therapy.

   Genetic diseases - those caused by flawed genes or chromosomes - affect an
estimated 3 to 5 percent of live births. There are thousands of such diseases,
most with no definitive treatment. Many cause severe mental or physical
disabilities, suffering and sometimes death. A few can be diagnosed before
birth, and scientists hope in the near future to correct a handful of diseases
by replacing missing or defective genes.

   The community of people affected directly or indirectly by genetic diseases
and other disabilities is far from speaking with one mind on the issues. Some
enthusiastically support research; even those principally concerned with rights
of the disabled comprise many factions.

   "At this point there's not one group organized around this issue, because
it's so new," said Marsha Saxton of Brookline, a rehabilitation specialist and
activist, last week.

   Some parents are grateful for prenatal diagnosis because they want to avoid
having another child with a severe inherited disorder, or because a parent
suffers from it. Researchers in gene therapy say desperate parents or
individuals with genetic diseases besiege them for information on when genetic
therapies will be available.

   The point of view of people with handicaps often varies with the type of
disability involved. Cystic fibrosis, a disorder in which the lungs become
obstructed and victims inevitably die young, is the focus of much eagerly
awaited genetic research.

   Dr. Robert Beall, medical director of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, said
the organization does not go agree with demands for restraints on genetic
research. The foundation's concern is for "the 30,000 patients with cystic
fibrosis who struggle every day to survive," he said, and all potential
treatments, genetic or otherwise, should be pursued.

   But Saxton and others say medical science focuses disproportionately on
preventing birth defects and devising genetic therapies, rather than on
improving services to help disabled people live better lives. In reality, "the
benefits of genetic technologies to those who are already born are extremely
remote - decades or more away," said Saxton, 37, who started the Project on
Women and Disability to inform professionals about the realities of disability.

   "We're not against what they're trying to do about terrible genetic
diseases," said Edward Roberts, president of the five-year old World Institute
on Disability. But, he said, many medical specialists present parents with the
worst scenario, creating emotional pressure for termination of affected
pregnancies. Even the Jerry Lewis Telethon for Muscular Dystrophy is "extremely
patronizing" and makes people feel that to have a child with the disorder "would
be the worst thing that could happen," he said.

   Dr. Kathleen Nolan, a bioethicist at the Hastings Center in New York, agreed
that medical developments can create a climate "to have normality very narrowly
defined." Consequently, she said in an interview, someone who had worked hard to
adjust to a handicap might come "to view that self as undesirable, and if a
therapy is devised be pressured to throw that self out in exchange for a new
self that is supposedly better."

   However, she added, a successful effort to slow research on therapies "in
itself could be a type of norm, and would force disabled individuals to accept a
self they may not want to accept."

   Saxton, who was born with spina bifida, a malformation of tissue surrounding
the spinal cord that can be severely disabling, said the "nature of oppression
of disabled is akin to the most severe racism or class oppression."

   She and others believe that changing society's attitudes and developing more
resources for the disabled should take precedence over costly new high-tech
attempts at treatment, or at least receive equal emphasis.

   Saxton has a grant from the state Department of Public Health to educate
genetics specialists about living with handicaps. Like others in the movement,
she says professionals who counsel couples about the risks of birth defects have
seldom had much exposure to disabled individuals, and therefore present a very
negative picture.

   Activists like Roberts and Saxton say even when genetic counselors think they
are being neutral, allowing parents to decide how to act on a prenatal
diagnosis, they unavoidably create pressure to terminate a pregnancy.

   "Because of their work in hospitals, they have a distorted view of the lives
of disabled people," said Saxton.

   "Geneticists have the worst attitudes toward disability that I have ever
felt," said Roberts, 50, who had severe polio as a child that left him dependent
on various devices, including an iron lung at night. He said doctors predicted
he would be a vegetable, but he has married and had a child, founded the first
of what are now 400 Centers for Independent Living and is a well-known figure in
the disability movement.

   Though their wariness of prenatal diagnosis and abortion might suggest an
alliance with anti-abortion forces, Roberts said this is not the case. "They
have asked us to work with them," he said of abortion opponents, "but we have
rejected that - or at least most of us have."

   Those who do genetic counseling sympathize with the views of Roberts and
others and say they are as objective as possible.

   "We try to be neutral," said Dr. Charles J. Epstein, a pediatrician at the
University of California in San Francisco and a member of NIH's Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee, which must approve all genetic therapy projects using
federal funds.

   "The intent is not to do away with disabilities or people who have them," he
said, but to help people understand the risks and consequences of having a child
with a disability. He acknowledged that in some parts of the world, including
some Scandinavian countries, genetic counseling has become linked with public
health policy to create distinct pressure to abort fetuses with some genetic
conditions.

   Psychologist Nancy Wexler of Columbia University in New York, who has
researched how people cope with genetic disease, agreed with the view that
genetic counselors try to avoid judgments.

   "Nobody in their right mind would want these people not to exist," said
Wexler, who is herself at risk of developing Huntington's disease, a fatal
paralyzing condition caused by a mutant gene. But genetic counselors "see a
great deal of suffering of parents and children, and they try to give the people
they counsel a realistic perception, so in some ways they have to say, 'what is
the worst of the worst?' "

   Genetic researchers say they would vastly prefer an alternative to abortion
in dealing with devastating disorders.

   They hope that in the future, gene therapy on individuals or even embryos may
become an effective method of treatment, but the obstacles remain formidable.
Only now, after years of research, are scientists even cautiously approaching
the transfer of genes into human patients. They say it will be decades before
any but the simplest genetic therapies will be at hand.

   Rifkin, who filed suit against the National Institutes of Health to halt the
first authorized insertion of a foreign gene into human patients, told the
committee last week that misguided applications of genetic science have
historically victimized mentally or physically disabled people or those in
"undesirable" ethnic groups.

   A number of disability leaders interviewed said they agree with Rifkin's view
that genetic technology has a potential as awesome as that of nuclear power, and
they voiced a mistrust of scientists.

   "We are opening the door to a technology that is replete with tremendous
dangers," said Finger, the Los Angeles writer. "We may be talking about
possibilities 50 years down the road or 100 years down the road, but
unfortunately we didn't talk about that with nuclear power - we had no idea of
what that could mean to us."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. Activist Debora Kaplan with husband Ralf Hotchkiss, who is
paralyzed from waist down, and adopted son Desmond Kaplan Hotchkiss. / Globe
photo / Jim Gensheimer 2. Activist Marsha Saxton / Globe staff photo / Bill
Greene 3. Dr. Charles J. Epstein / Courtesy / UCSF-David Powers


                               53 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1989 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           February 2, 1989 Thursday
                                 Fourth Edition

SECTION: Science; Pg. E03

LENGTH: 233 words

HEADLINE: FOUR LECTURES ON BIOTECHNOLOGY SLATED AT REED

BODY:

   Thursday, February 2, 1989 FOUR LECTURES ON BIOTECHNOLOGY SLATED AT REED

   TEXT:

   Four speakers will discuss ``Biotechnology: Present and Future Impacts'' in a
series of lectures in Vollum Lecture Hall at Reed College beginning Wednesday,
Feb. 8.

   David J. Green, president of Biotechnology Management Associates of
Winchester, Mass., will open the series at 8 p.m. with a talk on ``Forensic
Applications of DNA Probes.''

   Nobel laureate Paul Berg is scheduled to speak Wednesday, Feb. 22, on
``Genetic Basis of Disease and the Prospects for Gene Therapy.'' Berg received
the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1980 for his studies of the biochemistry of
nucleic acids, particularly recombinant DNA. He is the director of the Arnold
and Mabel Beckman Center for Molecular and Genetic Medicine at the Stanford
University Medical Center.

   On March 22, Denis R. Burger, chairman of the board and executive vice
president of Epitope Inc. of Beaverton, will speak on ``Transfer of
Biotechnology to the Marketplace: From the Detection of AIDS to New Agricultural
Crops.''

   The final lecture will be given on April 19 by Ralph W.F. Hardy, president of
the Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant Research at Cornell University and deputy
chairman of BioTechnica International of Cambridge, Mass. He will speak on
``Biotechnology and the Quality of Life.''

   The lecture series is sponsored by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation of New
York.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2006


                               54 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1989 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    January 31, 1989, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 911 words

HEADLINE: Opponent files suit to halt first human gene implants

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   In an attempt to block the first authorized attempt to implant foreign genes
into human patients, Jeremy Rifkin, a leading critic of genetic engineering
technology, filed suit yesterday, charging that federal officials had rushed
their approval of the experiment two weeks ago.

   Meanwhile, the panel that had authorized the experiment yesterday rejected a
proposal that a new body conduct a broad review of the potential for
discrimination and social abuse from human gene therapy technology. The proposal
was made at a stormy meeting by Rifkin and leaders of disability rights groups.

   Scientists are saying they are on the verge of learning how to correct some
devastating inherited diseases. The day's events brought to a critical point,
however, critics' concerns that this will lead to discrimination or other abuses
against individuals with genetic defects who cannot or who choose not to be
treated.

   Those seeking a broader review process included members of groups called
Disability Focus and the World Institute on Disability.  They said they feared
the experiments signal a new era in which people with genetic disorders might
face discrimination in employment, insurance and other areas.

   Members of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, which approved the
experiment, said that the issues have been reviewed extensively and that many
people with severe genetic diseases are desperate for the experiment to proceed
and succeed. The experiment already has started.

   "Today marks the beginning of an historic debate about human gene
engineering," Rifkin saidduring heated arguments with members of the committee.
"What will be the criteria for good and bad genes? The people in this room are
just not qualified to raise these monumental social issues. We need to broaden
this group."

   But Gerald L. Musgrave of Ann Arbor, Mich., a public member of the panel,
said little likelihood exists for discrimination. Expressing irritation at
Rifkin, he said, "There is no lobby for the public and patients who want the
experiments to go on, while there is one for the opponents - this is an
asymmetry."

   Rifkin, who founded and directs the Foundation on Economic Trends, has gone
to court in the past to delay experiments involving release of genetically
engineered microbes. He said he is not opposed to all gene therapy experiments
but wants a full debate on their implications. He said a broader-based panel -
which he termed a "human eugenics advisory committee" - was needed to consider
proposals for gene therapy experiments.

   Currently, Rifkin said, the proposals are reviewed "within a small
fraternity" of National Institutes of Health "scientists and a few hand-picked
ethicists."

   After a contentious discussion, the committee, which includes scientists,
bioethicists, religious leaders and public members, voted against creating such
a panel. Several members argued that the social consequences of gene therapy
have been considered adequately by various special commissions, the
Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, and the newly reconstituted
Congressional Biomedical Ethics Advisory Committee.

   The lawsuit filed by Rifkin in US District Court for the District of Columbia
contends that NIH officials took improper shortcuts in approving the gene
implant experiment, which was proposed more than six months ago by NIH
scientists.

   The experiment is not gene therapy because it is not an attempt to treat or
cure a genetic disease by replacing defective genetic instructions in a
patient's cells.

   The goal of the experiment, being conducted by Drs. Steven Rosenberg and
Michael Blaese of the National Cancer Institute and W. French Anderson of the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, is to test the safety of gene implants
and to gain information about an experimental cancer treatment.

   Subjects of the experiment are 10 terminal cancer patients undergoing a
treatment in which their immune system cells are removed from the body and
stimulated with the drug IL-2 to attack their tumors.

   Researchers have discovered that some of these immune cells, called tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes, are effective, while others are not. In an effort to
identify which of the cells are potent, the scientists want to insert genes from
bacteria into some of the cells so that they can be tracked as they circulate
through the body. The genes would have no effect on the cancer itself.

   The proposal for the experiment underwent six months of intensive review last
year by the advisory committee and its subcommittee on human gene therapy.  The
committee approved the experiment even though the subcommittee's scientists had
voted to delay until a set of questions had been answered. Those answers were
accepted by the subcommittee only after the committee had already voted to
recommend approval.

   James B. Wyngaarden, NIH director, in a move that he said yesterday was
unusual, subsequently arranged a vote by mail of the full committee. Rifkin's
lawsuit argued that this process violated NIH procedures and eliminated any
opportunity for public comment.

   Rosenberg said the experiment is under way but that the genetically altered
immune cells have not yet been returned to patients' bodies. He said he would
continue on the experiment unless notified by a court to halt work.

   "Twenty cancer patients" in the United States "have died during the time we
have spent discussing this," he said in illustrating the urgency he felt.


                               55 of 59 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1989 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    January 31, 1989, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part 1; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 493 words

HEADLINE: ETHICS PANEL FOR GENE RESEARCH REJECTED

BYLINE: By MARLENE CIMONS, Times Staff Writer

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A federal scientific advisory panel, which earlier this month approved the
first experiments involving the transfer of genetically altered cells into
humans, Monday rejected a proposal to establish an outside review committee to
consider the social and ethical implications of such research.

   Members of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National Institutes
of Health dismissed a recommendation from activist Jeremy Rifkin and a coalition
of disability rights groups, saying that such a panel is "unnecessary" because
"existing mechanisms at NIH can meet these concerns."

   But Rifkin, president of the Foundation on Economic Trends -- a public
interest group that has challenged other genetic engineering research in the
past -- announced that he filed a lawsuit in federal district court here Monday
seeking to halt all human gene therapy experimentation until such a committee is
formed.

   The proposed Advisory Committee on Human Eugenics, Rifkin said, would be
composed of individuals in the fields of civil liberties, disability rights and
occupational health and safety, among others, to advise the director of NIH on
the potentially adverse impact of human genes therapy on "those persons who
might be genetically manipulated."

   Rifkin, speaking to the NIH panel, warned: "This group cannot play God. . . .
We will be back next time and the next time. . . . We'll be back here every
single time. You know we don't go away."

   He added: "If we are not careful, we will find ourselves in a world where the
disabled, minorities, and workers will be genetically engineered. . . . It is a
real and frightening threat."

   But Dr. James B. Wyngaarden, the director of NIH, said in an interview that
the agency "has no interest whatsoever of going into eugenics, of manipulating
genes to improve the human race," adding: "But to have a broader ethical review
is fine. We are moving in that direction already."

   The experiment in question, to be conducted by Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg and
his colleagues at the National Cancer Institute, involves putting a so-called
"marker" gene in cells now being used without markers in an experimental cancer
treatment.

   The therapy, which already has been shown to have some value in treating
melanoma, an often fatal skin cancer, uses white blood cells within the tumor.
The cells are surgically removed from the patient and grown in the laboratory
until there are trillions of them -- then they are reinserted into the patient
to attack the cancer.

   Researchers want to tag the cells with a marker cell so that they can be
monitored after they are returned to the patient.

   The experimental therapy is to be conducted on patients who are expected to
live 90 days or less.

   Rifkin emphasized that he is not opposed to the experiments. "It's the
process that troubles us," he said. "We just want to ensure that the appropriate
social and ethical questions are raised before the experiments are performed."


                               56 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1989 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 30, 1989 Monday

SECTION: SPECIAL: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. PERSPECTIVE-18

LENGTH: 1111 words

HEADLINE: Space telescope, disease research top San Diego scientists' agenda

BYLINE: Ann Gibbons, Tribune Science Writer

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO SCIENTISTS in 1989 will continue to be in the vanguard in areas
ranging from AIDS to genetics to zoology. When the $2 billion Hubble Space
Telescope finally is launched in December, UCSD astrophysicists will be part of
the NASA team on the ground, eagerly waiting for their instrument to focus on
faint objects at the far reaches of the universe. When researchers work with the
first mice infected with the AIDS virus, a team at the Medical Biology Institute
in La Jolla will be among the first to study the deadly disease in an animal
model -- and to experiment with possible treatments. And when scientists study
changes in the Earth's atmosphere, researchers at the Scripps Institution of
Oceanography will be part of a team working on some of the most sophisticated
computer models to predict global warming.

   Although science knows no geographic boundaries, San Diego is unusually rich
in scientific brain power and a leading center for scientific research in the
nation. Local scientists are among the world's leaders in genetics,
neuroscience, cognitive science, oceanography and high-energy astrophysics. They
are testing new genetic therapies that someday could be used to treat cancer and
heart disease in humans, and they are leading the research to understand how
humans think -- a new discipline known as cognitive science. It is difficult, if
not impossible, to predict scientific breakthroughs. But interviews with leading
researchers in a variety of fields point to the these research groups for
important work in the coming year: o AIDS: Researchers at the Medical Biology
Institute in La Jolla announced last week that they were among the first two
research teams to infect special laboratory mice with the AIDS virus, opening
new experimental ground for testing possible AIDS treatments and vaccines. The
La Jolla scientists are planning to start studies in the next three months to
test a variety of treatments on the AIDS-infected mice, ranging from genetic
therapies to anti-viral approaches. In other AIDS research in the region,
scientists will test new drugs similar to AZT in clinical trials with humans
infected with AIDS, said Dr. Douglas Richman, professor of pathology at UCSD
Medical School and the Veterans Administration Medical Center.

   New compounds that are "cousins" of AZT will be tested in humans, as well as
in cultures of cells grown in the laboratory. Researchers also will work to
improve techniques to diagnose the disease directly, rather than by detecting
the body's immune response to the virus. A team led by Jonas Salk also is
working to develop an AIDS vaccine. o COGNITIVE SCIENCE: The University of
California at San Diego has formed the world's first department of cognitive
science, which will enroll its first students this fall and has hired a new
faculty member, Terrence Sejnowski. The science essentially is the "study of
thinking" and researchers look at everything from computers to biological models
to understand how the mind learns and works, according to Jeff Elman, a
professor of cognitive sciences and linguistics. The department will host a
workshop on neural networks in February, to be attended by scientists from
around the nation.

   It also will organize an international conference on cognitive science to be
held in San Diego next winter. o GENETICS and CANCER TREATMENT: UCSD researchers
start the new year with two major breakthroughs announced in December.

   A team led by Dr. Wen-Hwa Lee took a major step toward developing a genetic
treatment for some cancers by proving that a "good" gene exists that blocks
cancer -- a gene that blocked cancer in mice tumor cells and that will be
exploited in research in the next year to see if it can be used eventually to
prevent cancer in humans. Meanwhile, another research team led by Fred H. Gage
transplanted genetically altered cells into rats' brains for the first time,
where they helped damaged brain cells grow -- and prevented them from dying.
UCSD professor Theodore Friedmann, who worked with both groups, said the
breakthroughs take gene therapy out of the realm of rare diseases and put them
into the big league of major diseases, such as cancer, heart disease and brain
disorders.

   The work proves that the most rational way to treat cancer in the future will
be to use genetic therapy to correct defective or missing genes that have caused
disease, he said. The challenge now is to test these therapies in laboratory
animals to prove that they can destroy existing tumors. Teams at Salk also are
among the world's leaders in studying oncogenes, genes that cause cancer.
Meanwhile, Dr. Ivor Royston and colleagues at UCSD's Cancer Center have just
started clinical trials to be among the first in the nation to treat humans who
have lymphoma (cancer of the lymph system) with special custom-made monoclonal
antibodies, called anti-idiotype monoclonal antibodies.

   These genetically engineered antibodies work like magic bullets to carry a
load of radioactive Yttrium directly to tumors where the cancerous cells are
killed but healthy cells are left unscathed. o OCEANOGRAPHY: Scientists at
Scripps Institution of Oceanography will be among the leading research teams
trying to get a handle on how the "greenhouse effect" gases are building up in
the atmosphere, and whether these gases will lead to a global warming, said
Marvin Moss, deputy director of Scripps.

   They will look for signals that tell them a warming is actually under way --
signals that are better indicators than last summer's drought, which probably
was caused by normal variations in the weather. Working with scientists at the
Los Alamos National Laboratory and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, they
will try to improve state-of-the-art computer models that help them simulate the
climate under a variety of conditions. Scientists also are studying the way the
ocean and atmosphere work together to change the climate, including a warming
trend called El Nino. Other researchers will be working with marine organisms to
see if they can be used to help make new drugs from the sea, drugs that could be
used someday in the treatment of cancer and other diseases. o SPACE SCIENCE:
Scientists at UCSD's Center for Astrophysics and Space Science will be busy
preparing for a number of space experiments, including the December launch of
the Space Telescope, said Laurence Peterson, director of CASS. An instrument the
size of a telephone booth on the telescope, called the Faint Object
Spectrograph, was designed at UCSD. In April, a team led by Jim Matteson will
launch an instrument on a balloon in Australia to study the gamma rays coming
from the supernova 1987A.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                               57 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1989, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 609 words

HEADLINE: Transplanting Genes Is Approved To Study Cancer Cells in Humans

BYLINE: By HAROLD M. SCHMECK Jr.

BODY:

   The Federal Government yesterday approved the first federally sanctioned
attempt to transplant foreign genes into humans.

   The first of the gene transplantations will involve cancer patients and is
expected within two or three months.

   The project has been under review by Government agencies for seven months. It
was given final approval yesterday by the National Institutes of Health and by
the Food and Drug Administration, the two Federal agencies required to approve
such research.

Approved for First Time

   ''This is the first time a proposal for gene transfer into humans has
received official approval,'' the N.I.H. said in a statement announcing that the
director, Dr. James Wyngaarden, had signed the approval.

   Gene transplantation in humans has long been a subject of debate but has
never been given Federal approval. Such transplantations were attempted almost a
decade ago, but the scientists involved were censured by the N.I.H. for moving
without Government approval.

   The current transplantation proposal was approved earlier by several advisory
committees of the institutes. Leaders of the proposed research are Dr. W. French
Anderson of the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute, and Dr. Steven A.
Rosenberg and Dr. R. Michael Blaese of the National Cancer Institute.

   In the new project, the scientists will transplant a bacterial gene into
disease-fighting white blood cells that have been taken from cancer patients and
treated in the laboratory to enhance their natural ability to attack cancer
tissue.

   The gene transplants are not intended to affect the cancer treatment, but are
to serve as markers to allow scientists to identify specific cells from among
others of the same types in the patients' bodies. The foreign genes are expected
to help doctors monitor the effectiveness of the cancer treatment.

   The experimental cancer treatment is called TIL Therapy, for tumor
infiltrating leukocytes, the white blood cells involved in fighting cancer.

Help Gauge the Treatment

   The white blood cells containing the transplanted gene would be put back into
the patients from which they came. These would be the only cells that would have
the transplanted gene. The identification of those cells helping to fight off
the cancer could aid doctors in gauging the effectiveness of the cancer
treatment. The researchers say the risk to the patients would be minimal.

   Successful transplantation of the marker genes would also help scientists
gauge how well human genes function after they are transplanted.

   Transplantation of genes into patients is central to the concept of human
gene therapy, long sought as a way of treating some serious hereditary diseases.
In gene therapy, copies of a normal gene would be transplanted into a patient to
serve the biological function that was disrupted or lacking in that patient.

   Unsuccessful attempts at gene therapy were made in 1980 on two patients
suffering from a blood disorder. The attempts, led by American scientists, were
made abroad without Federal approval and led to censure by the institutes.

   The research proposal approved by Dr. Wyngaarden calls for the researchers to
try gene transfers on no more than 10 patients suffering from advanced cancer.
The patients have been informed about the research and its purposes. They have
also been advised that they are not expected to benefit from the transplants
themselves.

   The research protocol was approved last fall by all the required advisory
committees of the N.I.H., but action was delayed by the director because some
data supporting the experiments had been withheld. That material has since been
supplied.


                               58 of 59 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  January 20, 1989, FRIDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 760 words

HEADLINE: GENE TRANSPLANT INTO HUMANS APPROVED

BODY:


   NEW YORK - The federal government approved on Thursday the first federally
sanctioned attempt to transplant genes into humans.  The first of the gene
transplantations will involve cancer patients and is expected within two or
three months.  The project has been under review by government agencies for
seven months.  It was given final approval by the National Institutes of Health
and by the Food and Drug Administration, the two federal agencies required to
approve such research.  ''This is the first time a proposal for gene transfer
into humans has received official approval,'' the National Institutes of Health
said in a statement. It announced that the director, Dr. James Wyngaarden, had
signed the approval.  Gene transplantation in humans has long been a subject of
debate but has never been given federal approval.  Such transplantations were
tried almost a decade ago, but the scientists involved were censured by the
institutes for moving without government approval.  The current transplantation
proposal was approved earlier by several advisory committees of the institutes.
Leaders of the research project are Dr. W. French Anderson of the National Heart
Lung and Blood Institute and Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg and Dr. R.  Michael Blaese
of the National Cancer Institute.  In the new project, the scientists will
transplant a bacterial gene into disease-fighting white blood cells that have
been taken from cancer patients and treated in a laboratory to enhance their
natural ability to attack cancer tissue.  The gene transplants are not intended
to affect the cancer treatment but are intended to serve as markers to allow
scientists to identify specific cells from among others of the same types in the
patients' bodies. The foreign genes are expected to help doctors monitor the
effectiveness of the cancer treatment.  The experimental cancer treatment is
called TIL Therapy, for tumor infiltrating leukocytes, the white blood cells
involved in fighting cancer.  The white blood cells containing the transplanted
gene would be put back into the patients from which they came.  These cells
would be the only ones that would have the transplanted gene.  The
identification of those cells helping to fight off the cancer could aid doctors
in gauging the effectiveness of the cancer treatment. The researchers s ay the
risk to the patients would be minimal.  Successful transplantation of the marker
genes would also help scientists gauge how well human genes function after they
are transplanted.  Transplantation of genes into patients is central to the
concept of human gene therapy, long sought as a way of treating some serious
hereditary diseases.  In gene therapy, copies of a normal gene would be
transplanted into a patient to serve the biological function that was disrupted
or lacking in that patient.  Unsuccessful attempts at gene therapy were made in
1980 on two patients suffering from a blood disorder. The attempts, led by
American scientists, were made abroad without federal approval and led to
censure by the institutes.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1993


                               59 of 59 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1989 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 19, 1989 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-11

LENGTH: 617 words

HEADLINE: Gene switch process said far off;
Potential cancer cure still requires technical advances

BYLINE: David Graham, Staff Writer

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   SAN FRANCISCO -- Potential treatments for cancer, in which defective genes
would be replaced with functional ones, await technical advances that are many
years away -- despite recent experimental successes, scientists studying cancer
cautioned yesterday. A test for genetic susceptibility to cancer is the more
likely initial outcome of efforts toward gene therapy, said John D. Minna, chief
of the National Cancer Insitute's Navy Medical Oncology Branch in Bethesda, Md.
Many scientists have been vigorously pursuing techniques to treat diseases such
as cancer by inserting into a patient's body a functional copy of the defective
or missing gene that has given rise to the disease. A recent study by UCSD
pathologist Wen-Hwa Lee showing suppression of tumor cell growth in a laboratory
dish was a focus of debate about gene therapy by a panel of researchers at the
American Association for the Advance of Science convention here yesterday. Lee
said last December when his experiment was reported that the work was so
promising he expected clinical trials to begin in humans within a few years.
Robert A. Weinberg, of the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research in
Cambridge, Mass., said it is "irresponsible" to talk about and consider clinical
trials of gene therapy in people given the existing understanding of the
technology.

   He said there are too many "technical problems" to overcome even to estimate
when gene therapy might be practical. Weinberg, who like Lee is studying
retinoblastoma gene and its cancer-suppressing abilities, said some details of
Lee's experiment are "murky" and it needs repeating for "credibility," something
Weinberg wants to do. In a telephone interview from La Jolla yesterday, Lee said
he hopes Weinberg will repeat the experiment and added that he has invited
Weinberg to La Jolla to show him how to do it. The UCSD researcher reported in
December that a retinoblastoma gene inserted into a retrovirus and placed into
cancerous cells suppressed the cells' cancerous properties so that when the
cells were injected into mice, no tumors grew. The retinoblastoma gene is
associated with some human cancers of the lung, colon and breast as well as a
rare tumor of the eye. Minna said there are many "ifs" that must be overcome
before clinical trial of a gene therapy technique begins.

   The cancer might be "tricky" and find a way to defeat the added gene, even if
the gene suppresses it initially, Minna speculated. "Tumor cells may try to mess
it up again," Minna said. It also is unclear whether the inserted gene would
reach the tumor as doctors hope, Minna said, and there are questions of side
effects to be considered. Meanwhile, the knowledge that has been gained about
genetics should be applied to evaluating risk of disease, Minna advocated. "That
ultimately may be the best implementation of this," Minna said. People thought
to be at risk for a disease could learn from a molecular analysis of their genes
if those that protect against a particular disease were functional, he said.

   If even one of a person's two copies of a gene is defective, preventive
health measures could be pursued to reduce the risk of damaging the other, Minna
said. People usually have two copies of a gene in each cell in their body, but
sometimes one copy is damaged before birth during embryonic development, he
said. A person who is found, for example, to have only one retinoblastoma gene,
might take special precautions with diet and by avoiding smoking and radon gas
to avoid damaging the second copy of the gene, and so make themselves less
vulnerable to lung cancer. Such tests depend upon knowing which genes cause
which diseases, and this knowledge is limited, Minna said.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007
