
                             801 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                      February 26, 2000 Saturday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 407 words

HEADLINE: 'BIONIC CHIP' CAN CONTROL BEHAVIOR OF A CELL TO STREAMLINE GENE
THERAPY

BYLINE: By Cliff Edwards AP technology writer

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   Don't look for the Six Million Dollar Man just yet, but researchers say they
have found a way to mate human cells with circuitry in a "bionic chip" that
could play a key role in medicine and genetic engineering.

   The tiny device -- smaller and thinner than a strand of hair -- combines a
healthy human cell with an electronic circuitry chip. By controlling the chip
with a computer, scientists say they can control the cell's activity.

   The computer sends electrical impulses to the cell-chip, triggering the
cell's membrane pores to open and activating the cell. Scientists hope they can
manufacture cell-chips in large numbers and insert them into the body to replace
or correct diseased tissues.

   The cell-chip also gives them greater control over the difficult process of
gene therapy because they can more precisely open the cell's pores, said lead
researcher Boris Rubinsky.

   "We've brought engineering essentially into the field of biology," said
Rubinsky, a professor of mechanical engineering at the University of California,
Berkeley, which paid for his research. "We can introduce DNA, extract proteins,
administer medicines, all without bothering other cells that might be around."

   The cell-chip, profiled in the March issue of the journal Biomedical
Microdevices, rests on a long-known phenomenon: Cell membranes become permeable
when exposed to certain voltages.

   Scientists for years have been conducting genetic research in a
time-consuming trial-and-error process of bombarding cells with electricity in
an attempt to introduce foreign substances such as new drug treatments or
genetic material.

   Researchers hope eventually they can develop cell-chips tuned for the precise
voltage needed to activate different bodily tissues, from muscle to bone to
brain. That way, cell-chips could be applied by the thousands to correct a
variety of health problems.

   "In the past, any electricity applied to the cell was like hitting it with a
hammer in the hopes that something would happen, or it would open for us. Now,
we know just how to make it work," Rubinsky said.

   Mauro Ferrari, director of the Biomedical Engineering Center at Ohio State
University, called Rubinsky's invention a "potentially useful laboratory tool in
the early stages of development."

   "It seems to me that we have a ways to go before you'd see a bionic man," he
said, but the ability to program cells quickly could accelerate genetic
research.

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2000


                             802 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                   February 26, 2000, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 425 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST

BODY:


   SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt Jr. sent a letter to 90 members of Congress asking
for about a 30 percent raise for the agency's attorneys and accountants. He said
the Security and Exchange Commission's inability to attract and keep attorneys
because of low pay is "a current and mounting crisis" that "goes to the very
heart of the agency's ability to oversee" the rapidly growing securities
markets. Securities lawyers in the private sector routinely get starting
salaries of $ 125,000 to $ 150,000, Levitt said. The top salary for a
second-year SEC attorney is $ 66,000.



   AT&T and Sprint agreed to cut some minimum monthly fees charged to
long-distance customers and reduce other charges as U.S. carriers try again to
revamp the phone subsidy system. AT&T said it will drop a $ 3 monthly minimum
charge on basic long-distance service and Sprint said it will continue to offer
at least one plan without minimum fees. The firms, along with most large
regional phone providers, also agreed to eliminate the charge for selecting a
long- distance carrier. The plan is aimed at cutting long-distance bills by
trimming fees the carriers pay local companies to complete calls.


   Priceline.com will add gasoline to its online lineup May 20. Savings could be
10 cents to 20 cents a gallon. If the price is accepted, a customer's credit
card will be charged and the person can then go to a participating gasoline
station and use a Priceline.com credit card to complete the purchase.


   Campbell Soup is recalling 168,000 cans of soup after consumers found shards
of a soft drink can that accidentally went through a vegetable dicer. None of
the metal was ingested, the company said. The product, Campbell's Healthy
Request Vegetable Beef Condensed Soup, was distributed in Arizona, Colorado,
Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Missouri, Mississippi, Nebraska, New Mexico, Oklahoma
and South Dakota.


   LOCAL BUSINESS


   Dominion Resources, the parent company of Virginia Power, is bidding $ 686
million for the Indian Point 3 reactor north of New York City and the James A.
FitzPatrick reactor near Oswego, N.Y.


   Human Genome Sciences of Rockville said it had struck a deal allowing it to
use another company's patented technology to develop "naked DNA" treatments.
Some believe such treatments, involving genetic material not encased in a virus
or other carrier, may be a safer form of gene therapy. Human Genome agreed to
give Vical of San Diego, owner of the patent, access to three human genes whose
use as treatments Human Genome controls.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2000


                             803 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                    February 25, 2000, FRIDAY, FINAL MARKETS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 380 words

HEADLINE: 'Bionic chip' can control human cells

BYLINE: BY CLIFF EDWARDS

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   Don't look for the Six Million Dollar Man just yet, but researchers say they
have found a way to mate human cells with circuitry in a "bionic chip" that
could play a key role in medicine and genetic engineering.

   The tiny device -- smaller and thinner than a strand of hair -- combines a
healthy human cell with an electronic circuitry chip. By controlling the chip
with a computer, scientists say, they can control the activity of the cell.

   The computer sends electrical impulses to the cell-chip, triggering the
cell's membrane pores to open and activating the cell. Scientists hope they can
manufacture cell-chips in large numbers and insert them into the body to replace
or correct diseased tissues.

   The cell-chip also gives them greater control over the difficult process of
gene therapy because they can more precisely open the cell's pores, said lead
researcher Boris Rubinsky.

   "We've brought engineering essentially into the field of biology," said
Rubinsky, a professor of mechanical engineering at the University of California,
Berkeley, which funded his research. "We can introduce DNA, extract proteins,
administer medicines -- all without bothering other cells that might be around."

   The cell-chip, profiled in the March issue of Biomedical Microdevices, is
based on a long-known phenomenon: Cell membranes become permeable when exposed
to certain voltages.

   Scientists for years have conducted genetic research in a time-consuming
trial-and-error process of bombarding cells with electricity, trying to
introduce foreign substances such as new drug treatments or genetic material.

   Researchers hope eventually to develop cell-chips tuned for the precise
voltage needed to activate different tissues, from muscle to bone to brain.
Cell-chips then could be applied by the thousands to correct a variety of health
problems.

   "In the past, any electricity applied to the cell was like hitting it with a
hammer in the hopes that something would happen, or it would open for us. Now,
we know just how to make it work," Rubinsky said.

   Mauro Ferrari, director of the Biomedical Engineering Center at the
University of Ohio, said, "The method for opening cells has been around a long
time, but this makes it more exact and easier to do in large throws."

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 2000


                             804 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      FEBRUARY 25, 2000 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 874 words

HEADLINE: VACCINE STUDY TARGETS STROKE BRAIN DAMAGE

BYLINE: Faye Flam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A Philadelphia neurologist has invented a vaccine aimed at preventing brain
damage from stroke.

   Matthew During of Thomas Jefferson University and a team of scientists report
in today's issue of Science that when they gave the vaccine to rats and then
induced a stroke, it appeared to reduce the death of brain tissue by about 70
percent.

   The vaccine is not designed to prevent strokes but is meant to protect the
brain against some of the permanent damage that often leaves people paralyzed or
impaired in their speech or memory.

   Stroke was the third-leading cause of death in 1997, killing 157,791
Americans. About 600,000 Americans suffer strokes each year.

   During said he planned to do more testing in rats and monkeys before
beginning safety trials in people.

   The researchers also reported that the vaccine protected rats from seizures
similar to those experienced by people with epilepsy.

   Usually, vaccines work by inducing the body's immune system to make
antibodies that attack bacteria or viruses. But this vaccine creates antibodies
against a molecule that occurs naturally in the brain - one called the NMDA
receptor.

   The NMDA receptor plays both good and bad roles. It aids in learning and
memory but also helps trigger the ultimate death of brain tissue associated with
stroke. For reasons that are not well-understood, in a stroke, the brain kills
its own cells by setting off a suicidal cascade of chemical changes that depend
on the NMDA receptor.

   In principle, the vaccine would have little effect until the patient actually
had a stroke, said During, who heads a team of scientists from Jefferson and the
University of Auckland, New Zealand.

   The so-called blood-brain barrier, which generally protects the brain from
infection and toxins, would keep the antibodies out most of the time. In a
stroke, however, that barrier lets down, which would allow the antibodies
produced by the vaccine to get in.

   "The potential here is fascinating," said neurologist Wayne Clark of the
Oregon Stroke Center in Portland. But he and other experts said many questions
needed to be answered about the vaccine's effectiveness, safety and usefulness
in stroke prevention.

   Clark, who read the Science paper, said During's vaccine appeared, at least
in rats, to work better than drugs that have been designed to block the same
brain chemical.

   "This is a very thought-provoking work," said Temple stroke expert Jeffrey
Kochan. While he does not see the vaccine as a potential cure for stroke, he
said he was intrigued by the possibility that it might extend the window during
which other existing treatments could be used to salvage brain cells.

   Only in recent years have scientists discovered that during a stroke most
brain cells do not die immediately from oxygen starvation, but remain dormant
for up to three days.

   That allows doctors to use several new drugs that can limit damage if the
patient gets them early enough. A vaccine could buy time for the patient, Kochan
said.

   Still, much of the damage in stroke comes before the blood-brain barrier
breaks down, so the antibodies could take too long to get where they are needed,
said Raymond Swanson, a University of California San Francisco neurologist.

   Oregon's Clark said he could envision such a vaccine being given to patients
about to undergo heart bypass and other surgeries that carry risk of stroke, or
people with medical conditions that put them at risk.

   During, the Jefferson neurologist, calls his invention a "genetic vaccine"
because the drug given to the rats contains the gene for the NMDA receptor.

   The genes are packaged inside a disabled virus, called AAV - which is also
used in gene therapy. The vaccine is swallowed, so that the first step takes
place not in the brain, but in the gut, where the genes go to work commissioning
the body to churn out NMDA receptors.

   Because the body normally only makes NMDA receptors in the brain, these new
ones in the gut are mistaken for foreign invaders, prompting the immune system
to create antibodies that circulate in the bloodstream.

   "It is a very clever set of experiments and very innovative," said Penn
neurologist Marc Dichter, who specializes in epilepsy. "It opens up some very
interesting avenues of research."

   The NMDA receptor has also been implicated in epileptic seizures. During's
team tested the vaccine in rats that were induced to have seizures and found
that it both cut the number of seizures and prevented damage from them.

   Penn's Dichter said he was concerned that carrying an antibody to this
natural component of the brain could lead to trouble akin to what he has seen in
some children who develop an antibody to another part of the NMDA receptor.

   For them, the antibody causes a chronic degenerative condition and seizures
so severe that doctors resort to removing large parts of their brains.

   Others raised concerns over psychological side effects. Experiments with
drugs that block the NMDA receptor have in some cases caused temporary
hallucinations and delusions.

   The antibodies do not cause any visible harm to the rats, During said.

   The rats performed at least as well as untreated rats in mazes and other
tests of learning and memory.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             805 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 25, 2000, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 686 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   Pacific Bell boosts chamber

   Pacific Bell has contributed $50,000 to the San Diego Regional Chamber of
Commerce, becoming the second firm to join the chamber at the "Emerald Plus"
level.  Gateway Computers recently made a similar contribution.  Pacific Bell
ranks as the third-largest private employer in San Diego County, with 6,000
local workers and 3,000 local retirees.

   Triad buys resort in $3 million deal

   San Diego-based Triad Industries Inc. has agreed to buy the 110-acre Live Oak
Springs Resort off Old Highway 80 on the Campo Indian Reservation in
southeastern San Diego County.  Triad will pay $3 million in cash and stock, a
spokesman said.  Escrow is expected to close in 90 days.  The acquisition
includes the Live Oak Management Corp., which operates a grocery store, gas
station, restaurant and bar, motel, mobile home park, RV development project and
a water company.  Combined operations reported gross 1998 income in excess of
$1.6 million.  The property and operations are appraised at $3.6 million.

   Medibuy.com, drugstore.com link

   Medibuy.com has entered a five-year agreement with drugstore.com to develop a
co-branded Web site for home health-care organizations.  Terms of the agreement
were not released.  The launch date and site name has not been decided.  The
site will allow health-care providers to procure equipment and products for home
health-care patients.  Medibuy.com is a San Diego-based company specializing in
business-to-business e-commerce applications for the health-care industry.

   Sequenom makes sale to Boston U.

   Sequenom announced the sale of one of its MassArray systems for genetic
analysis to Boston University's Center for Human Genetics.  The university will
use the system to analyze genetic variations that cause diseases or
predispositions to diseases.

   Invitrogen names operating officer

   Invitrogen named Lewis J. Shuster to its newly created chief operating
officer position.  The Carlsbad biotech said Shuster, 44, has served on its
board since 1998 and was president and chief operating officer of New
Jersey-based Pharmacopeia's Pharmacopeia Laboratories unit.

   Ganeden to move to Ohio

   San Diego-based Ganeden Biotech said it would move to the Cleveland area in
the second quarter.  The company also said it would launch an antifungal lotion
in northern Ohio in late spring.

   Biotech UroGen raises $17 million

   UroGen said it raised $17 million in a private placement at $8.50 a share.
The San Diego biotech said it would use proceeds to continue development of its
gene therapy products for hemophilia and prostate cancer.

   ViaSat pact could reach $6 million

   ViaSat Inc. of Carlsbad received a contract from Lockheed Martin Naval
Electronics and Surveillance Systems to supply 28 systems that allow aircraft to
communicate via satellite.  The systems will be used in P3 aircraft.  The
contract is valued at $3 million, with options anticipated to total $3 million
more over the next three years.  Deliveries are expected to begin this month.

   ICN exploring options

   ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Costa Mesa said it hired the investment banking
firm of Warburg Dillon Read LLC to explore strategic alternatives to increase
shareholder value.  ICN makes and sells a wide range of prescription and
over-the-counter drugs.  The company said the review will focus mainly on the
company's Eastern European operations and the three businesses of ICN's
Biomedicals group.  The company provides no other details.

   Nestle buys PowerBar

   Nestle USA Inc. said it has reached an agreement to purchase nutrition-bar
maker PowerBar Inc. of Berkeley.  The price was not disclosed.

   WORLD AND NATION

   Mortgage rates slip

   Mortgage rates edged down this week after hitting a 3 1/2 -year high the week
before.  The average interest rate on 30-year mortgages slipped to 8.31 percent
from 8.38 percent.  Fifteen-year mortgages fell to 7.92 percent from 8 percent.
On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial
rate of 6.73 percent, down from 6.77 percent.


LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2000


                             806 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            February 25, 2000 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 664 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA Pacific Bell boosts chamber Pacific Bell has
contributed $50,000 to the San Diego Regional Chamber of Commerce, becoming the
second firm to join the chamber at the "Emerald Plus" level.

   Gateway Computers recently made a similar contribution. Pacific Bell ranks as
the third-largest private employer in San Diego County, with 6,000 local workers
and 3,000 local retirees. Triad buys resort in $3 million deal San Diego-based
Triad Industries Inc. has agreed to buy the 110-acre Live Oak Springs Resort off
Old Highway 80 on the Campo Indian Reservation in southeastern San Diego County.

   Triad will pay $3 million in cash and stock, a spokesman said.

   Escrow is expected to close in 90 days.

   The acquisition includes the Live Oak Management Corp., which operates a
grocery store, gas station, restaurant and bar, motel, mobile home park, RV
development project and a water company.

   Combined operations reported gross 1998 income in excess of $1.6 million.

   The property and operations are appraised at $3.6 million. Medibuy.com,
drugstore.com link Medibuy.com has entered a five-year agreement with
drugstore.com to develop a co-branded Web site for home health-care
organizations.

   Terms of the agreement were not released.

   The launch date and site name has not been decided.

   The site will allow health-care providers to procure equipment and products
for home health-care patients.

   Medibuy.com is a San Diego-based company specializing in business-to-business
e-commerce applications for the health-care industry. Sequenom makes sale to
Boston U. Sequenom announced the sale of one of its MassArray systems for
genetic analysis to Boston University's Center for Human Genetics.

   The university will use the system to analyze genetic variations that cause
diseases or predispositions to diseases. Invitrogen names operating officer
Invitrogen named Lewis J. Shuster to its newly created chief operating officer
position.

   The Carlsbad biotech said Shuster, 44, has served on its board since 1998 and
was president and chief operating officer of New Jersey-based Pharmacopeia's
Pharmacopeia Laboratories unit. Ganeden to move to Ohio San Diego-based Ganeden
Biotech said it would move to the Cleveland area in the second quarter.

   The company also said it would launch an antifungal lotion in northern Ohio
in late spring. Biotech UroGen raises $17 million UroGen said it raised $17
million in a private placement at $8.50 a share. The San Diego biotech said it
would use proceeds to continue development of its gene therapy products for
hemophilia and prostate cancer. ViaSat pact could reach $6 million ViaSat Inc.
of Carlsbad received a contract from Lockheed Martin Naval Electronics and
Surveillance Systems to supply 28 systems that allow aircraft to communicate via
satellite.

   The systems will be used in P3 aircraft.

   The contract is valued at $3 million, with options anticipated to total $3
million more over the next three years.

   Deliveries are expected to begin this month. ICN exploring options ICN
Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Costa Mesa said it hired the investment banking firm of
Warburg Dillon Read LLC to explore strategic alternatives to increase
shareholder value.

   ICN makes and sells a wide range of prescription and over-the-counter drugs.

   The company said the review will focus mainly on the company's Eastern
European operations and the three businesses of ICN's Biomedicals group.

   The company provides no other details. Nestle buys PowerBar Nestle USA Inc.
said it has reached an agreement to purchase nutrition-bar maker PowerBar Inc.
of Berkeley.

   The price was not disclosed. WORLD AND NATION Mortgage rates slip Mortgage
rates edged down this week after hitting a 3 1/2 -year high the week before.

   The average interest rate on 30-year mortgages slipped to 8.31 percent from
8.38 percent.

   Fifteen-year mortgages fell to 7.92 percent from 8 percent.

   On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial
rate of 6.73 percent, down from 6.77 percent.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             807 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                     February 24, 2000 Thursday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 638 words

HEADLINE: A SNAPSHOT OF HEALTH CARE IN 2010;
COMPUTER CHIPS, GENE THERAPY AND GREATER RELIANCE ON HEALTH MAINTENANCE
ORGANIZATIONS WILL CHARACTERIZE MEDICINE IN THE NEXT DECADE, A RESEARCH
ORGANIZATION SAYS.

BYLINE: JOHN A. MacDONALD; Courant Staff Writer

DATELINE: WASHINGTON --

BODY:

   Fast forward to 2010. You go to your doctor for a diabetes checkup. He
recommends implanting a fingernail-sized chip under your skin that will trigger
an automatic insulin injection when it's needed from a small reservoir on your
hip.

    The chip, which acts as a sensor, is now being tested by the Food and Drug
Administration and is an example of how futuristic technologies may radically
alter medicine in the next decade, said Wendy Everett, director of health
programs at the Institute for the Future, a private California research
organization. The institute Wednesday published a 217-page report, "Health and
Health Care in 2010."

   In addition to predicting greater reliance on sensors and gene therapy, the
report forecasts that more Americans will be enrolled in health maintenance
organizations, that increasing numbers will lack health insurance and that
patients will become more demanding consumers.

    "While the next decade will see important positive advances in health and
health care, such as increased life expectancy and new medical technologies,
there are several key issues that will still need to be resolved," said Everett,
whose work was sponsored by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the nation's
largest health care philanthropic organization.

    One of the most important issues is the report's forecast of 6.5 percent
annual increases in health care costs. Everett termed the figure "moderate," but
Charles N. Kahn, president of the Health Insurance Association of America, a
trade group, said the figure worried him because it could significantly increase
cost pressures on employers, who pay for the bulk of insured workers' health
care.

    The report assumed that enrollment in HMOs, the least expensive form of
insurance coverage, will increase over the decade by 25 percent, from 78 million
to more than 100 million. Kahn was more cautious, saying that recent trends have
shown consumers want more freedom of choice than most HMOs offer.

    Because of increasing costs, the report predicted the number of uninsured
Americans will continue to rise, from 43 million now to 50 million in 2010.
Access to care will remain problematic, the report said, with many consumers
worried about the coverage they have or being excluded from insurance
altogether.

    Still, the report predicts Congress will enact only incremental changes --
such as greater consumer protections -- in the system that insures working-age
Americans. More sweeping changes are possible in Medicare because of its
long-term financial problems, the report suggests.

    In any case, the report predicts that consumers of all ages will take a more
direct hand in their care. "These new consumers increasingly will engage in
shared decision- making with their physicians," the report said. The Internet
will be a valuable tool, with patients able to ask questions and receive replies
without having to visit their physician's office.

    Most intriguing was the report's discussion of how new technologies could
change health care. Sensors, appropriate for diseases such as diabetes,
hypertension and mood disorders that need constant monitoring, "will set off a
revolution in remote care," Everett said.

    The report predicts the use of wristwatch-like wireless monitors that can
track vital heart, respiration and blood pressure readings, among others, and
can transmit reports to a patient's doctor.

    "Inventing new ways of getting these technologies and the networks that
support them into homes and smaller medical facilities will be an area of focus
over the next 10 years," the report said.

    Everett cautioned, however, that heightened privacy concerns could derail
consumer confidence in new technologies. "Forces in the market will work very
hard to come up with some solutions to this in the next year," she said.


LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2000


                             808 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                   February 24, 2000, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1073 words

HEADLINE: NIH TO ORDER NEW REPORTS ON PAST GENE THERAPY CASES

BYLINE: MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   The National Institutes of Health soon will order scientists who have
conducted gene therapy research to open their old files and report all past
instances of side effects during trials.

   The dramatic federal action comes after recent revelations that gene therapy
researchers violated NIH reporting rules and follows the death last fall of an
Arizona man who was participating in a gene therapy trial. It covers more than
400 trials conducted with more than 4,000 patients during the last decade.

   "This is a major effort and it won't be an easy task," said Lana Skirboll,
director of NIH's office of science policy, which plays a leading role in gene
therapy research. She was one of several NIH sources to confirm the development.

   The new policy will look at the history of gene therapy research--which has
come under increasing national scrutiny in recent months--in an attempt to
identify problematic trends that might have been overlooked, missed or ignored.

   "We don't think we can simply start from here and move on," Skirboll said in
an interview.

   Researchers engaged in trials past and present will receive telephone calls,
followed by letters, alerting them to the new enforcement policy, Skirboll said.
So will their institutions and institutional review boards, the local panels
that review research proposals.

   The reporting crackdown is one of several steps that NIH officials are
undertaking in cooperation with the Food and Drug Administration to tighten
oversight on researchers who disobey requirements on reporting adverse effects,
which can range from the very mild, such as low-grade fevers, to the most
severe, such as liver failure.

   "We want to make sure our message is clear: that the past degree of
noncompliance was unacceptable and . . . we won't tolerate it," Skirboll said.

   The NIH said that it also plans to visit some NIH-funded institutions, not to
find fault but to ensure that researchers understand what is required and to
identify any problems associated with their compliance.

   And a memorandum already has been sent to institutions that conduct gene
therapy research asking them to review their existing policies to ensure that
they comply.

   In a related development, Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D-Los Angeles) released new
information Wednesday showing more apparent reporting lapses by gene therapy
researchers and faulting the NIH for its failure to respond with adequate
oversight.

   Waxman, who obtained his information from records provided to him by the NIH,
asked the agency to explain the way several cases were handled.

   The earliest gene therapy experiments took place at the NIH in 1990, and the
work still is viewed by many as a potentially cutting-edge treatment for a range
of diseases caused by genetic flaws. The approach involves finding ways to
introduce modified genes that will correct or replace defective genes.

   Typically, patients are recommended for research trials by their physicians.
In many cases, but not all, gene therapy--because of its novel nature--is
conducted on patients who may have terminal illnesses and may have failed
conventional therapies. That often makes it difficult when patients die to
determine with any certainty whether the experimental therapy or the underlying
disease was responsible.

   The research has been controversial since the death of 18-year-old Jesse
Gelsinger of Tucson. Gelsinger died in September after receiving experimental
gene therapy for a liver disorder at the University of Pennsylvania's Institute
of Gene Therapy.

   He had volunteered for the experimental treatment with the hope of curing his
rare genetic disorder, ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, which prevents the
liver from breaking down ammonia, a normal byproduct of protein digestion.

   He died after researchers infused a genetically modified virus into his liver
in an attempt to introduce new genes that could correct those responsible for
his ailment.

   Since Gelsinger died, the FDA has determined that the institute violated
several federal regulations in its conduct of the study and halted all gene
therapy trials there.

   Unlike most biomedical research areas, which are monitored solely by the FDA,
the gene therapy field has been subject to unusual joint oversight from both the
NIH and the FDA. And both agencies have been working together in recent months
to cooperatively sharpen their monitoring.

   One of the NIH's chief mandates is to inform the public, while the FDA has
regulatory authority over the trials and can halt them when it finds that there
are problems.

   Notification rules of the two agencies differ. Researchers are required to
report all adverse events immediately to the NIH--even if they seem unrelated to
their experiment. The information is reviewed by the NIH's Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee, whose members often discuss it in public forums.

   Researchers must also notify the FDA of adverse events immediately. But the
urgency applies only to dangerous side effects deemed "unexpected" or "related"
to the therapy. And unlike the NIH, the FDA is not allowed to make the
information public.

   Because of these differences, the NIH has asked an advisory subcommittee to
reassess what should be reported to the NIH and when it should be reported.
Members of the group are expected to discuss their proposals at a meeting next
month.

   At the same time, numerous researchers have acknowledged their failure to
report side effects to the NIH as required. Some have complained privately that
the government's reporting rules are burdensome--and ineffective. And others are
uncomfortable with the NIH's making information public.

   In his letter to the NIH, Waxman cited a 1996 patient death during a cystic
fibrosis gene therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania's Institute of
Gene Therapy--the same facility where Gelsinger died.

   Researchers reportedly told the NIH that they would provide test results to
ensure that the death was not related to gene therapy. "But no results were
apparently provided by the investigator or sought by NIH," Waxman wrote to Dr.
Ruth Kirschstein, acting director of the NIH.

   In a second trial, of terminal lung cancer patients at the M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center in Houston, Waxman questioned why the NIH had taken no action to
investigate the deaths of 38 of the program's 48 patients to make sure that they
were from the illness and not the treatment.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2000


                             809 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                 FEBRUARY 24, 2000 Thursday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 467 words

HEADLINE: REP: 6 PATIENTS GOT WRONG GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The National Institutes of Health mistakenly shipped the wrong gene-based
medicine to a university that administered it to six patients in a gene therapy
experiment, a congressman said yesterday.

   "Providing the wrong medication to patients is an act of inexcusable
incompetence," Rep. Henry Waxman, D-Calif., wrote the NIH in asking what steps
the government was taking to ensure it never happens again.

   Georgetown University spokesman Paul Donovan said yesterday that university
researchers did not catch the error and consequently administered the wrong
medicine to six cancer patients.

   But "all patients were immediately notified and no patient experienced any
adverse effect," Donovan said.

   The National Cancer Institute, the NIH branch that made the error, agreed
that no patients were harmed. They received an experimental gene-based drug that
would not work for their tumors, but that was being prepared for testing in
patients with other types of cancer.

   "There was no safety issue," said Dr. Michaele Christian, NCI's associate
director of cancer therapy evaluation.

   But because drug mixups have the potential to be very serious, she said she
already has taken steps to prevent future errors.

   The problem is the label on these vials of medicine is small and the first
five letters of two drugs' names are identical, setting the stage for an easy
mixup, she explained.

   So NCI is training workers who collect and ship the medicines to doublecheck
the full names, has strengthened the computer system that sorts these drug
orders, and is hunting ways to make the drug labels safer.

   Waxman's discovery of the problem came as part of an investigation into how
the NIH oversees gene therapy, in wake of the September death of an Arizona
teen-ager in a gene therapy experiment.

   Although people dying of incurable diseases have enrolled in gene therapy
studies that proved unable to save them, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger is
considered the first person actually killed by experimental gene therapy.

   Waxman claimed yesterday that NIH's records show no sign the agency
investigated 38 other deaths in two gene therapy experiments. One was a 1996
death in a University of Pennsylvania cystic fibrosis study; the others were
among 38 people with end-stage lung cancer enrolled in a Texas study.

   "This new information . . . suggests that NIH's oversight has been
inadequate," Waxman wrote Dr. Ruth Kirschstein, NIH's acting director.

   But Kirschstein responded that the NIH did investigate - and found the gene
therapy involved to be safe.

   Waxman's questions sparked fury from the Houston biotechnology company that
funded the lung cancer study.

   Those 38 deaths were caused by cancer, not gene therapy, insisted Introgen
Therapeutics vice president Dr. James Merritt.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             810 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     FEBRUARY 24, 2000 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1034 words

HEADLINE: FEDERAL GENE-TEST OVERSIGHT CRITICIZED A HOUSE MEMBER, FAULTING THE
NIH AND FDA, CITED A 1996 DEATH. PENN CALLED THE CRITICISM OUTRAGEOUS.

BYLINE: Shankar Vedantam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Rep. Henry A. Waxman yesterday cited the 1996 death of a cystic-fibrosis
patient who participated in a 1993 gene-therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania as an example of "inadequate" oversight by the National Institutes
of Health.

   The patient's death had not been publicized, although Penn reported it in
1996 to the NIH.

   "I'm very concerned about these latest incidents," said Waxman (D., Calif.),
referring to the death and "lapses in compliance" in trials conducted by other
groups in Texas and Washington, D.C. Thirty-eight of 48 patients died in an M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center trial in Houston, and last year six patients at
Georgetown University were given the wrong medicine.

   Referring to the NIH and the Food and Drug Administration, which monitor
patient safety in clinical trials, he said: "At a minimum, NIH and FDA must
aggressively enforce the law."

   The female cystic-fibrosis patient, who had been treated in the Penn
gene-therapy experiment on Sept. 3, 1993, died on Jan. 6, 1996, shortly after
receiving a lung transplant, according to Penn.

   Because of the 28-month gap between gene treatment and death, university
spokesman Ken Wildes called Waxman's criticism outrageous. He said the virus
used to deliver the corrective gene was destroyed by the immune system within 10
days.

   "This is craziness, this is nuts," he said. "There is nothing whatsoever that
indicates this has anything to do with gene transfer and secondly, we reported
the death" to both the NIH and the FDA.

   In its 1996 letter to the NIH, Penn said it would test the deceased woman's
lung tissue for evidence of the transferred gene. However, Waxman said, the NIH
failed to document whether it received the test results.

   Wildes said he could not confirm that the test results had been sent to the
NIH. "The test results would have said the death was due to complications from
the lung transplant," Wildes said.

   An NIH spokesman who requested anonymity said that all the cases cited by
Waxman were reviewed by NIH-affiliated scientists, who concluded that the
patients were "dying from causes associated with their grave illnesses," not
from gene therapy.

   The fledgling field of gene therapy has been rocked by a series of blows in
recent months, beginning with the death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger in a Penn
trial in September, widely believed to be the first death directly caused by
gene therapy.

   Since then, the Senate and the White House have called for better monitoring
of patient safety and requiring researchers to report adverse events and deaths
to the NIH, in addition to the mandated reporting to the FDA.

   After the NIH issued a call for adverse events last year, officials compiled
a list of 691 cases. Of these, Waxman found that 652 had not been reported to
the NIH in a timely fashion.

   In a strongly worded letter to Ruth Kirschstein, acting director of the NIH,
Waxman complained yesterday that the federal agency had been slow to respond and
said he was "surprised and disappointed by the NIH's lack of cooperation in
sharing information and supplying constructive analysis."

   "The most recent reports raise new questions about the conduct of gene
therapy trials, the lapses in compliance, and the adequacy of federal
oversight," Waxman wrote.

   Waxman said he would advocate moving the gene-therapy watchdog group, the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC), from under the NIH to direct
supervision by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.

   "I believe moving the RAC to the Office of the Secretary may be the best way
of ensuring effective public oversight of this important research," he said.

   Waxman's office said that Penn scientists had written a three-paragraph
letter to Nelson Wivel, director of the NIH's Office of Recombinant DNA
Activities, on March 11, 1996, informing him of the patient's death and the
university's ongoing investigation.

   Wivel left the NIH that year to join Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

   "What we don't know is whether [his leaving] was a factor in NIH not
following up or Penn not responding," said a Waxman staffer who requested
anonymity.

   Penn spokesman Wildes said: "I don't think Dr. Wivel has anything to do with
it. It's outrageous to make a comment like that. It strikes at the man's
integrity."

   Besides the death of the cystic fibrosis trial patient, Waxman charged that
38 patients out of a total of 48 had died in a gene therapy cancer trial at the
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, and that six patients at a Georgetown
University Medical Center gene therapy trial were given the wrong treatment -
after the federal government's National Cancer Institute shipped the wrong
medicine. Waxman also said the NIH had not followed up reports of the deaths in
the Houston experiment.

   "It would seem obvious that there would be vigorous and immediate oversight
of any protocol that results in the deaths of 75 percent of the participating
patients," Waxman told the NIH about the Texas trial.

   "Providing the wrong medication to patients is an act of inexcusable
incompetence," he added about the Georgetown snafu, where the federal
government's National Cancer Institute shipped the wrong medicine.

   James Merritt, vice president of Introgen Therapeutics, which sponsored the
Texas trial, said the patients died because of cancer, not gene therapy. He said
the FDA had reviewed the deaths, concluded that the medicine was safe, and
permitted the company to further test it in several hundred patients.

   Georgetown University spokesman Paul Donovan said none of the patients who
received the wrong medicine at that institution suffered adverse effects.

   Inder Verma, cochair of a RAC group that reviewed the adverse events, said
the scientists had concluded that there was no cause for concern: "The only
thing we could come up with was there was a lack of reporting to NIH."

   Verma termed the attention given to the three incidents "a little
unfortunate. There is an inaccuracy of reporting."

   "That's not conducive to good science," he said. "There may be a backlash
which may not be in the interest of the people."

   * The Associated Press contributed to this article.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             811 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                      February 24, 2000 Thursday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 451 words

HEADLINE: WASHINGTON BRIEFS;

BYLINE: From wire reports

BODY:

   *** Health agency takes heat on gene therapy ***

   WASHINGTON -- Officials at the National Institutes of Health on Wednesday
defended their oversight of the controversial field of gene therapy as a
congressman accused the agency of failing to thoroughly investigate experiments
in which patients may have been harmed. In a letter sent Wednesday to NIH Acting
Director Ruth Kirschtein, Rep. Henry Waxman, D-Calif., scolded the agency for
its "inadequate" regulation of gene therapy, an experimental form of treatment
that has come under intense public scrutiny since the September death of a
teen-age volunteer at the University of Pennsylvania. Criticism of the field
increased this winter amid revelations that researchers had failed to report
hundreds of "adverse events," including many deaths, to the NIH as required by
federal regulations.

   *** Black Secret Service agents seek lawsuit ***

   WASHINGTON -- A group of black Secret Service agents is asking the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission to give them the right to file a class-action
lawsuit that alleges they were denied promotions and key assignments because of
pervasive racial discrimination. The agents and their attorneys intend to
outline their allegations at a news conference today. If the EEOC gives the
go-ahead, they soon could pursue their job-related grievances on behalf of all
black agents in U.S. District Court. The agents took their first procedural step
late Wednesday by formally filing their complaint with the Treasury Department's
equal employment opportunity program. The Secret Service, responsible for
protecting the president and vice president, could become the third major
federal law enforcement agency to have its practices scrutinized in a court
fight.

   *** Food-stamp hopefuls see car law scrapped ***

   WASHINGTON -- President Clinton relaxed rules for food-stamp eligibility
Wednesday so that owning a trusty old car -- say, a '95 Ford Thunderbird about
to hit 100,000 miles -- won't keep a poor family from putting dinner on the
table. Clinton said he will scrap an eligibility rule that counted the value of
all but the oldest, and thus least dependable, cars against a family's assets
when their eligibility for food stamps is calculated. Under existing rules, if a
family has too many assets, it can't get food stamps, the federal coupons that
subsidize grocery bills. "If you want more people to work, you've got to help
them get to work," Clinton said. "The first step is to eliminate the roadblocks
that keep them from getting or keeping a car." The rule change does not require
congressional approval. The White House said it would benefit 245,000 people
over five years.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2000


                             812 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                   February 24, 2000, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 495 words

HEADLINE: Officials Defend NIH Oversight of Gene Therapy

BYLINE: Rick Weiss , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Officials at the National Institutes of Health yesterday defended their
oversight of the controversial field of gene therapy as a House member accused
the agency of failing to thoroughly investigate experiments in which patients
may have been harmed.

   In a letter sent yesterday to Ruth Kirschtein, NIH acting director, Rep.
Henry A. Waxman (D-Calif.) scolded the agency for its "inadequate" regulation of
gene therapy, an experimental form of treatment that has come under intense
public scrutiny since the September death of a teenage volunteer at the
University of Pennsylvania. Criticism of the field increased this winter amid
revelations that researchers had failed to report hundreds of "adverse events,"
including many deaths, to the NIH as required by regulations.

   While much of the initial criticism after the Penn death was aimed at
researchers who broke federal research rules, Waxman and others have been
focusing on possible lapses by regulators at the NIH and the Food and Drug
Administration. Yesterday's letter outlines three cases in which Waxman believes
the NIH allowed mishaps to slip between the regulatory cracks.

   The first involved James Wilson, a leader of the study that led to last
year's death at Penn, who wrote to the NIH in 1996 to report the death of a
volunteer. The letter promised that the results of tests on the dead patient's
tissues would be forwarded to the agency to help clarify the cause of death. But
in documents recently released by the NIH, Waxman could not find any evidence
that such data were ever submitted, or that the NIH ever asked for them.

   In a second case, 38 of 48 terminally ill cancer patients died during a gene
therapy experiment at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston without
apparent intervention from the NIH.

   In a third example, an NIH pharmacy shipped the wrong gene-based experimental
medicine in December to Georgetown University researchers, who injected the drug
into six patients.

   An NIH spokesman said all three incidents "were addressed appropriately" by
the NIH and the FDA, and that the NIH will "respond shortly to Mr. Waxman, in
depth and in writing." The first two cases were among many made public by the
agency in December, she noted, all of which were recently reviewed by a special
ad hoc committee of experts.

   Inder Verma, a gene therapy expert at the Salk Institute in California and
co-chairman of that review committee, said his recollection was that the 1996
death occurred more than two years after the gene treatment and so was almost
certainly unrelated. Of the 38 deaths in the other study, "not a single case
could be attributed" to the treatment, Verma said, although he acknowledged that
unanswered questions remain in three cases.

   The shipment of the wrong drug to Georgetown was not a gene therapy problem
but an apparent "medical error", and it is under investigation, the NIH
spokeswoman said. None of the patients was harmed, she said.


LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2000


                             813 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                  February 23, 2000, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 133 words

BODY:


   An article yesterday incorrectly reported who told then-CIA Director John M.
Deutch in December 1996 that Deutch would need a contract with the agency to
keep his government computers. It was the chief of administration in Deutch's
immediate office, not Richard Calder, CIA deputy director for administration.


   An article on hackers in Friday's Style section incorrectly reported the name
and location of Jeff Fay's employer. It is Infrastructure Defense in Alexandria.


   The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation provided incorrect information for a Feb. 8
article on the suspension of gene therapy experiments at several institutions. A
foundation spokeswoman mistakenly said a cystic fibrosis experiment at Cornell
University had been temporarily halted. No such study was underway.


LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2000


                             814 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 22, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-4:2,7; B-6:1

LENGTH: 817 words

HEADLINE: RICHARD Mc CORMICK; Roman Catholic theologian; 77

BYLINE: NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 The Rev. Richard A. McCormick, for many years the dominant American voice in
Roman Catholic moral theology, especially on the daunting questions of medical
ethics that have emerged in recent times, died Feb. 12. He was 77 and lived at
the Colombiere Center in Clarkston, Mich., a residence of the Society of Jesus.

   The cause was pneumonia, said the Rev. Richard McBrien, a close friend and
colleague at the University of Notre Dame.

   Rev. McCormick, who was the John A. O'Brien professor of Christian ethics at
Notre Dame until last year, influenced the public and several generations of
Catholic theologians with his magisterial grasp of the fine distinctions and
painstaking arguments that Catholic moral theology developed over the centuries.

   He demonstrated the relevance of this tradition to biomedical problems like
in vitro fertilization, surrogate motherhood, abortion, euthanasia, gene
therapy, access to medical care and patients' rights.

   While vigorously representing Catholic moral teachings in public debates,
where he was viewed as a conservative on abortion and euthanasia, he questioned
some of the tradition's absolute norms -- particularly in regard to
contraception, sterilization and other sexual and reproductive issues -- in ways
that drew opposition from some conservative Catholic theologians and Vatican
officials.

   A section of Pope John Paul II's 1993 encyclical "Veritatis Splendor" ("The
Splendor of Truth") rejected an approach to moral reasoning known as
"proportionalism," with which Rev. McCormick was associated.  He contended the
document had misrepresented proportionalists, none of whom would recognize
themselves, he said, in the encyclical's description.

   He defended the place of "conscientious dissent" in the church, provided it
followed an effort to assimilate official teachings, a process he said "must be
prayerful, arduous, reflective, informed."

   Last June, the annual convention of the Catholic Theological Society of
America featured a debate about theological dissent between Rev. McCormick and
the Rev. Avery Dulles, a fellow Jesuit and an elder statesman of American
Catholic theology.

   Although Rev. McCormick had a minor stroke while traveling to Lourdes,
France, he postponed an operation on an occluded artery to participate in the
debate.  When the surgery did take place, in late June, it resulted in another
stroke that left him paralyzed and unable to read or write but clear of mind and
able to speak.

   The Jesuit weekly, America, once described Rev. McCormick as almost
"genetically destined for a career in medical ethics." He was born in Toledo,
Ohio, in October 1922, the son of a physician who served a term as president of
the American Medical Association.  Ordained a priest in 1953, he completed his
doctoral studies four years later in Rome. He had joined the Jesuit order in
1940.

   "He had an enormous influence on Catholic moral theology in the whole world,"
said the Rev. Charles E. Curran, who co-edited 11 volumes of readings in moral
theology with Rev. McCormick.

   That influence began with the "Notes on Moral Theology," a regular survey
tracking publications in English, German, French, Spanish and Italian, which
Rev. McCormick wrote from 1965 to 1984 for the scholarly journal Theological
Studies.  He described and evaluated an enormous body of current thinking on
issues that included divorce and remarriage and nuclear deterrence, as well as
bioethical topics like experimentation on humans.

   In 1973, after 16 years of teaching moral theology to Jesuit seminarians, he
became the Rose F. Kennedy professor of Christian ethics at the Kennedy Center
for Bioethics at Georgetown University.  He joined the faculty at Notre Dame in
1986. He was a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and president
of the Catholic Theological Society of America in 1969-70.

   Besides his scholarly books and articles, Rev. McCormick wrote for a general
readership in Catholic journals like America and Commonweal, on the op-ed pages
of The New York Times and The Washington Post, and even in Sports Illustrated.

   "He was one of the few public theologians in the Catholic church," McBrien
said.  "He made himself available to the press and television, he lectured
before all kinds of audiences, he mediated the conclusions of scholarship to a
wider public."

   By all accounts, Rev. McCormick never tried to construct a major theological
synthesis.

   "He was not a large-scale systems builder," said Daniel Callahan, the
co-founder and former president of the Hastings Center, a research center on
biomedical problems where Rev. McCormick had been a fellow.  "Instead, he did a
lot of very careful, very specific articles pushing forward the frontiers of
ethics in a methodical way."

   Rev. McCormick is survived by three sisters, Carol Sala of Pepper Pike, Ohio,
and Kathleen Brooks and Mary Jo Anderson of Toledo.


LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2000


                             815 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   February 22, 2000, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 950 words

HEADLINE: It's in the genes: Scientists confront money issues

BYLINE: Tim Friend

DATELINE: PACIFIC GROVE, Calif.

BODY:

   PACIFIC GROVE, Calif. -- The field of gene therapy has become
so dominated by commercial investment and potential conflicts
of interest that many scientists question whether current federal
oversight of the research can protect patients from harm or misleading
information.

   Ties binding academic scientists, universities and private companies
also may have contributed to the first death, in September, caused
by an experimental gene injection -- and to the widespread withholding
of information by researchers about the damaging effects of gene
therapy.

   In December, federal officials learned that, out of 691 "adverse
events," 652 were not reported as required to the National Institutes
of Health.


   Without changes in federal oversight and perhaps new rules on
conflicts of interest, more deaths could occur, and information
about risks may continue to be withheld, many experts agree.

   "More and more, clinical investigation in gene therapy is being
done by those with equity interests, severely stressing their
clinical judgment," said Alan Schechter of the National Institutes
of Health (NIH) in Bethesda, Md. "Gene therapy has many of the
worst examples of clinical research that exist."

   Schechter, who helped develop current guidelines on codes of conduct
by federal scientists, was one of 60 scientists, including two
Nobel laureates, who met at a three-day conference last week to
discuss the state of genetic-engineering research.

   The meeting marked a historic reunion of the 1975 Asilomar conference,
where scientists produced a voluntary con-sensus that has since
guided conduct and policy on DNA research.

   Many scientists at the new Asilomar found it distressing to be
faced with the death of Jesse Gelsinger after a quarter-century
of relative safety and integrity in genetic engineering. The group
concluded that a similar type of self-regulation today for gene-therapy
research would be impossible.

   One key reason: Widespread patenting of research brings ties to
industry and dreams of financial bonanzas.

   In a review of a U.S. Patent and Trademark Office database, USA
TODAY found that 30 of 171 federally funded scientists have been
issued patents for various aspects of their gene-therapy research.
James Wilson at the University of Pennsylvania, who led the study
in which Gelsinger died, holds the largest number.

   Rebecca Eisenberg, professor of law at the University of Michigan,
said universities license the patents to existing companies or
back to the researchers, who start their own companies.

   Complex legal documents called material transfer agreements (MTA)
also are routinely shuffled between scientists and lawyers at
universities and in private industry who want to try out the materials
or methods of others. The MTAs delay research and create complicated
business relationships, Eisenberg said.

   The most obvious danger is that scientists could make decisions
based on business interests rather than patient safety. Companies
also could pressure scientists to withhold scientific data.

   Whereas scientists at one time disclosed information freely at
scientific meetings, that same information in a corporate culture
has become increasingly secretive and withheld until patents are
filed and business relationships sealed.

   Leroy Walters, professor of Christian ethics at the Kennedy Institute
of Ethics at Georgetown University, said companies regard information
about harmful effects, like the variety that led to Gelsinger's
death, as among the most valuable and proprietary of all. The
types of adverse events required to be reported to the Food and
Drug Administration and NIH are viewed by business as "driving
down the price of stock and helping competitors avoid mistakes,"
Walters said.

   Nobel laureate David Baltimore, president of the California Institute
of Technology, said researchers "lost their innocence with the
emergence of biotechnology."

   "Today, most senior biologists are entangled with one or many
companies," Baltimore said. "Does it make people so biased they
cannot think properly? I am (on) the board of (biotech company)
Amgen, and I would have to think twice before arguing that drug
prices are unconscionably high."

   Since Gelsinger's death, the extent of private investment in gene
therapy and ties of scientists to the biotechnology industry have
come under closer scrutiny, says Nancy King of the University
of North Carolina-Chapel Hill School of Medicine. King is a member
of the NIH Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC), which oversees
human gene-therapy research for NIH.

   According to NIH, 215 of the 372 human gene-therapy trials registered
with the RAC are paid for exclusively by private industry. Most,
if not all, of those trials are conducted by academic researchers
at universities. Many of the 157 trials financed by NIH also receive
private money, King said.

   How potential conflicts of interest in gene therapy will be resolved
is unclear. Schechter said that any scientist who stands to profit
financially from a study should not be permitted to conduct the
research. Many scientists voluntarily withdraw themselves from
those studies.

   But the solution to restoring public confidence will be more complex,
Walters said.

   Lana Skirboll, director of the NIH Office of Scientific Policy,
said scientists have had guidelines available from NIH to make
the system work. More guidelines would be of questionable value,
she said.

   But, she added, "there will be legislation unless scientists
have open discussions about conflict of interest" and start abiding
by the existing rules.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Sam Ward, USA TODAY

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2000


                             816 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   February 22, 2000, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 455 words

HEADLINE: Conflicting interests compromise safety

BODY:

   Ties by academics to business interests can work in insidious
ways to threaten patient safety.

   Gene-therapy researchers were worried about the potential for
problems in the months preceding Jesse Gelsinger's death at the
University of Pennsylvania. But they remained silent, said Inder
Verma, American Cancer Society professor of molecular biology
at the Salk Institute in La Jolla, Calif. Gelsinger, 18, was the
first person to die from experimental gene injection.


   The concern was over immune system reactions to a type of adenovirus
used to deliver genes into the body, said Verma, who headed last
week's discussion on gene therapy at the Asilomar conference in
Pacific Grove, Calif.

   One of the reasons gene therapy has not worked is because the
immune system attacks and kills the virus when it's injected.
The Penn study involved injecting tremendous numbers of virus
particles directly into an artery.

   "We thought, 'Why are they doing this when such results are obvious
to everybody?' " Verma said. "I wonder why we didn't stand up
at meetings and say, 'Do not do this.' "

   Verma said the answer is that the scientists who would have criticized
the trial at Penn, including himself, have ties to competing companies
and technologies, and their criticism would have been suspect.

   "Conflict of interest makes it less likely that there will be
an outcry of public danger. The gene-therapy situation is a case
in point," said Daniel Kevles of the California Institute of
Technology in Pasadena.

   A four-month investigation by the FDA and reports by Penn scientists
after Gelsinger's death revealed that he died of severe immune
system reactions and subsequent organ failure caused by the adenovirus.

   The FDA determined in December that the Penn team, led by James
Wilson, violated many rules governing gene-therapy research, including
not reporting adenovirus toxicity in other patients, not properly
informing Gelsinger of potentially harmful risks and improperly
including him in the trial. The FDA stopped the study and all
other gene-therapy trials at Penn.

   Since then, at least two other universities have stopped gene
therapy trials, and many other trials are being delayed. The FDA's
investigation has spread elsewhere, including Beth Israel Medical
Center in Boston. The Muscular Dystrophy Association and Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation also have halted gene therapy studies.

   "It will be difficult to repair the damage done to biomedical
research," said Maxine Singer, president of the Carnegie Institution
of Washington (D.C.), a group devoted to basic science research.
"The public perception could extend to other aspects of genetic
technology."

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2000


                             817 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 21, 2000, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 635 words

HEADLINE: GENDER, GENES TIED TO PAIN RESPONSE STUDIES MAY RESULT IN BETTER
TREATMENTS

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Genes and gender explain part of the difference in how people
feel pain, and also why some get more relief from painkillers than others do,
scientists said yesterday.

   These insights are emerging from research that is probing pain at its most
basic levels, genes and proteins, and from computerized imaging of the brain in
action. These studies might yield highly specific new pain drugs with few side
effects, scientists said.   In the meantime, they said, the research is
revealing some of the reasons why methods such as hypnosis and distraction can
be effective pain-reducers.

   When scientists at McGill University in Montreal monitored volunteers' brain
activity using a functional MRI device, they saw that areas that are highly
active when someone was focusing on a painful stimulus were significantly
dampened when the person was distracted by a task, said Catherine Bushnell, a
McGill psychologist.

   "We saw pain signals decreased before they ever got to" a part of the brain
where pain is perceived, Bushnell said. "You really can teach people to reduce
their pain" through distraction or hypnotic suggestion, she said at the annual
meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.

   Even so, some people apparently are genetically programmed to be more or less
sensitive to pain, said other scientists, commenting on both animal and human
research.

   "Females are more sensitive to pain and respond less to analgesics," said
Jeffrey Mogil, a psychologist at the University of Illinois in Champaign-Urbana.
The differences are not large, he said, but have been demonstrated quite clearly
in animals. The scientists said they could only guess at evolutionary reasons
for this, but they said that because of these gender differences, females might
need stronger doses of painkillers. It also has been found that even within
gender, there are individual differences in feeling pain that are linked to
still undiscovered genes.

   These genes explain "why we don't all respond to pain in the same way, and
why, for example, the same dose of morphine works better on some people than
others," Mogil said.

   He described breeds of mice, some of which are exquisitely sensitive to pain
while others are stoic in the face of painful stimuli. In humans, he said,
"whiners may actually be in more pain while macho types aren't."

   In addition, said Mogil, it appears that males and females employ slightly
different brain mechanisms in their response to pain. If true, he said, one
implication might be developing gender-specific painkilling drugs.

   The most daunting area of pain research, the scientists said, is in
understanding and controlling chronic pain. While acute pain is a symptom that
goes away when the cause is resolved, chronic pain is really a disease unto
itself, said Allan Basbaum, chairman of anatomy at the University of California
in San Francisco. "Persistent pain produces changes in the nervous system" so
that the sensation continues long after it has been useful to the person.

   Basbaum said that research has shown that, in cases of people who suffer from
chronic pain, the brain makes proteins that it normally does not manufacture.
That suggests that these proteins could be new targets for drugs that could
selectively obliterate chronic pain without causing side effects. These findings
have drawn molecular scientists to the field of chronic pain research.

   If specific genes are misbehaving in some kinds of chronic pain, then gene
therapy is a potential route of treatment, the scientists said. One strategy
would be to replace or counteract the effect of the genetic pain culprit, they
said. Another might be to give patients genes that cause brain and nerve cells
to make larger amounts of endorphins, a natural painkiller in the body.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2000


                             818 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     February 21, 2000 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: METRO EDITORIAL; Pg. 8B

LENGTH: 158 words

HEADLINE: FERTILITY TREATMENT;
IS MORE AFFORDABLE;
THAN IN THE PAST

BODY:

   I have been the director of an in vitro fertilization service for 17 years. I
agree with the concerns of Lori Andrews ("Making babies and the law," Jan. 29)
regarding the concept of human cloning and the potential misuses of genetic
therapy. I want to make it clear, however, that the vast majority of IVF clinics
devote their activities to, in Andrews' words, "reproductive technologies that
allow couples to make up for a missing ingredient in the normal reproductive
process."

   I would also like to correct the statement attributed to Andrews that
"couples seeking in vitro fertilization pay $44,000 to $200,000 to achieve a
single pregnancy." These costs are based on the success rates of the early
1990s. Today, in clinics such as ours, the success rates have improved to the
point where costs are less than $20,000 per successful pregnancy for couples in
whom the woman is less than 40 years old.

   JAMES M. GOLDFARB, M.D.

   Cleveland

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2000


                             819 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            February 21, 2000 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 60

LENGTH: 486 words

HEADLINE: Genes and gender may determine pain

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The same mechanism that let a Stone Age hunter sprint away from a lion
despite a sprained ankle may help 21st-century scientists find better treatments
for pain, researchers said yesterday.

    They described research that is aimed at nailing down genetic differences
not only in the response to pain, but the perception of pain.

    So far they have found not only that people vary greatly in how they feel
pain, but that men and women seem to have different mechanisms for it.

    "If I can figure out the differences, maybe we can make therapies that will
work better," said Jeffrey Mogil of the University of Illinois in
Urbana-Champaign.

    His studies show that 50 percent of the differences in feeling pain are
genetic. Mogil's team has bred mice that are extremely sensitive to pain or that
are virtually impervious to it. "The differences are just heroic," he said.

    "This is a naturally occurring variation that if we could figure it out, we
could exploit it," Mogil added.

    He suggested that perhaps gene therapy could be used to treat pain, or that
genetic tests could tell doctors in advance which patients will respond best to
a particular medication.

    Mogil told a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science that he has confirmed, in rats and mice, the long-held belief that males
and females feel pain in different ways.

    "Both feel pain, but they are responding differently, by activating
different circuitry in the brain," he said.

    He said the brain cells of males use a different receptor, or chemical
doorway, than those of females to allow opiate drugs to work.

    Evolution could explain this. "We evolved as hunter-gatherers," he said.
"Perhaps men are more adapted to trauma, you know, lion bites and spear points."

    With rats, researchers use objective ways to measure pain. They can put a
rat on a hot plate, for example, and warm it up until the rat shakes a paw.

    But humans consciously control their responses to pain.

    Catherine Bushnell of McGill University in Montreal described how she
objectively measures pain by using functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI)
or positron emission tomography (PET) scans to trace the areas of the brain
being activated.

    She confirms in people what Mogil has seen in mice - that there is a huge
variation in the way people experience pain.

    Bushnell says research suggests that if pain itself cannot be blocked,
perhaps the emotional trauma that it causes can be. "When you do something as
simple as using distraction to change a person's perception of pain . . . there
is a reduction in pain," she said. The MRI images show a correlating reduction.

    However scientists choose to treat pain in the future, they will target one
organ - the brain, said Alan Basbaum, head of the anatomy department at the
University of California San Francisco. "The pain's not in the spinal cord, the
pain's not at the injury site - the pain's in the brain," he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             820 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    February 20, 2000, Sunday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 154 words

HEADLINE: National briefs

SOURCE: Houston Chronicle News Services

BODY:

   Gene therapy and AIDS

    PHILADELPHIA - A newly published AIDS study could open another front in the
battle against HIV infection by showing that gene therapy can be used to stop
infected cells from spreading the deadly virus, researchers said Saturday.

   In a test-tube experiment thought to be the first of its kind, researchers
based at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia were able to block the operation of
the "tat" gene that allows HIV to spread throughout the body from infected
cells.

   Up to now, genetic AIDS research has concentrated on finding ways to help
healthy cells withstand the ravages of HIV that infects an estimated 16,000 new
victims a day, mainly in the developing world.

   But by working with human cells already infected with HIV, the team was able
to reduce the tat gene's virus-replicating functions by 80 percent to 90
percent, according to findings published in the journal Gene Therapy.


LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2000


                             821 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 20, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1818 words

HEADLINE: Biomedicine Is Receiving New Scrutiny as Scientists Become
Entrepreneurs

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

BODY:

   Dr. H. Kirk Hammond, a cardiologist at the University of California in San
Diego, never envisioned himself an entrepreneur. "I'm a blue jeans-wearing,
tieless character," he said.  But when he invented a gene therapy technique to
treat heart disease, he did what any self-respecting academic scientist does
these days: he started a biotechnology company.

   Today, he has one foot in academia and the other in industry. On campus, he
trains doctors and runs a gene therapy lab, financed in part by his company,
Collateral Therapeutics. As its chief scientist, he has drummed up support for a
public offering of stock, and helped design clinical trials for his therapy.

    But there is one bright line that Dr. Hammond says he will not cross: He
will not treat patients who are enrolled in studies of his invention. "I think
it would look bad for me to be involved in any direct way," he says.

   With the biomedical revolution in full swing, academic scientists who lack
industry ties have become as rare as giant pandas in the wild. But as Congress
begins to investigate lapses in federal oversight of gene therapy experiments,
lawmakers, bioethics experts and federal regulators say they are troubled that
so many researchers have a financial stake in companies testing their
discoveries -- companies whose fortunes, with those of the scientist, can rise
and fall on a single product.

   The fear is that the lure of profit could color scientific integrity,
prompting researchers to withhold information about potentially dangerous side
effects or push for experiments that might not be quite safe. Of particular
concern are doctors who enroll and treat patients in clinical studies that are
paid for by the companies they own, a practice that the Food and Drug
Administration says is growing in gene therapy.

   Some universities, including the University of California at San Diego,
simply do not allow it. Even if Dr. Hammond wanted to test his own invention, he
could not do so and keep his university job. But the rules are not the same
across the board.

   Dr. Ronald G. Crystal, a gene therapy researcher at Cornell University's
Weill Medical College, has treated patients in small studies paid for by the
company he founded, Gen-Vec. So has Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner, a scientist at St.
Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston. Dr. Isner, along with the medical center
and two other partners, founded a company called Vascular Genetics, of which he
owns 20 percent. Both doctors declined to be interviewed for this article.

   But both have drawn the attention of members of the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, the National Institutes of Health panel that oversees gene therapy
research. Dr. Crystal was criticized for asking the panel not to disclose that a
heart disease patient had died of an underlying illness during a gene therapy
experiment. And before the panel learned that most gene therapy researchers were
failing to comply with its guidelines to report patient side effects, Dr. Isner
was singled out for failing to do so.

   Dr. Ruth Macklin, a member of the advisory panel and professor of bioethics
at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, said she worried that
researchers with financial conflicts would try to keep information about risks a
secret for fear it would hurt investment in their companies. Dr. Macklin said
she would like the panel to require doctors who own stock or have other
financial interests in companies to disclose those interests on the consent
forms distributed to patients.

   Others, like Dr. David Blumenthal, who directs the Institute for Health
Policy at the Massachusetts General Hospital, would ban the practice outright.
"I'm not comfortable with scientists' owning substantial equity in small firms
that are sponsoring their clinical research," Dr. Blumenthal said. "I think it
creates a conflict of interest, and the conflict is particularly difficult to
justify in cases where patients' welfare may be affected."

   Food and Drug Administration officials are also uncomfortable. Dr. Jesse
Goodman, deputy director of the agency's Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research, said that in a typical clinical trial sponsored by a large drug
company, the company served as a check on the researcher, ensuring that
information about side effects was properly disclosed and that patients were
given clear information about the benefits and risks. But when the company and
the researcher are one and the same, he said, that check is absent. He said the
agency was trying to decide whether additional oversight was needed to protect
patients in such studies.

   Yet the issue of just what is a conflict can get murky. A case in point is
the University of Pennsylvania, where an 18-year-old patient, Jesse Gelsinger,
died in a gene therapy experiment last fall, bringing the current wave of
scrutiny. The principal investigator of the study was Dr. James Wilson, director
of the university's Institute for Human Gene Therapy. He is also the founder of
a biotechnology company, Genovo, in which both he and the university hold stock.

   The relationship is so entangled, said Peter Erichsen, the university's
general counsel, that the university set up two committees to oversee it. Dr.
Wilson cannot sit on Genovo's scientific advisory board and his work as a
company consultant is unpaid. He may not participate in clinical studies paid
for by the company.

   In an interview shortly after Mr. Gelsinger's death, Dr. Wilson said he
agreed with the restrictions. "I think it gets a little bit concerning when the
person who has responsibility for enrolling patients is the scientist who is
driving" the research, he said then. "I think that's a conflict."

   But Genovo contributes one-fifth of the $25 million annual budget at the gene
therapy institute, and in return has exclusive rights to develop Dr. Wilson's
discoveries into commercial products. So while the company did not pay for the
study that cost Mr. Gelsinger his life -- it was financed by the National
Institutes of Health -- Genovo does have an indirect interest in all of Dr.
Wilson's work. Indeed, Dr. Wilson was required to disclose his connection to
Genovo on the "informed consent" document that explained the study's benefits
and risks to patients.

   What effect, if any, such relationships have on the outcome of clinical
studies is difficult to evaluate, said Dr. Mildred Cho, a bioethicist at
Stanford University who has studied conflict-of-interest policies at the 100
largest research institutions in the country. "There is almost never a smoking
gun," she said. "You can't say Jesse Gelsinger died because Jim Wilson had stock
in Genovo."

   Evidence is beginning to emerge, however, that industry ties do color
scientific judgment. In a 1996 analysis of 789 articles in medical journals, Dr.
Sheldon Krimsky, a professor of urban and environmental policy at Tufts
University, found that 34 percent of the authors had a financial interest --
most frequently a patent pending -- in the subject matter being studied.

   No federal regulations govern the specifics of scientists' relationships to
the companies they create. The National Institutes of Health require
universities to set their own policies, but experts say the rules vary widely.

   Twenty years ago, before the revolution in genetics, academia was academia
and industry was industry, and rarely was there any overlap. Now, so many
university scientists have started their own companies that deans of medical
schools no longer talk about eliminating conflict of interest; the current
buzzword for dealing with conflicts is "management." The primary management
tool, university officials say, is disclosure. But that means disclosure to
supervisors -- not to the public.

   Congress has helped fuel the trend of scientists' starting their own
companies. In 1980, it passed the Bayh-Dole Act, a law designed to speed up the
commercialization of academic discoveries. It encouraged universities to patent
inventions, and then assign the rights to those patents to private companies
that could develop them into products.

   Universities like the Bayh-Dole Act because it generates income from
licensing fees and royalties, and because it gives their best scientists
incentive to stay in academia. Scientists like it because it helps them carry
discoveries from the laboratory to the bedside, and because they no longer have
to leave the prestige of academia to earn the money available in industry.

   For some, it has been quite lucrative. Dr. William Haseltine, the chief
executive of Human Genome Sciences in Rockville, Md., founded seven biotech
companies while a professor at Harvard University. "I don't even know how many
millions I've made," Dr. Haseltine said. But, he insisted, "the motivation was
not primarily money."

   "The motivation was the joy of conceiving ideas and reducing them to
practical reality to make a difference in people's lives," he said.

   That, said Dr. Hammond of the University of California at San Diego, was
precisely why he started Collateral Therapeutics. In the late 1980's, he said,
he began looking at patients with heart disease whose bodies had grown new blood
vessels to do the work of the blocked ones. It struck him that there must be a
gene that would promote this beneficial blood vessel growth, and that "it would
be really nice just to be able to put those genes into patients."

   By 1993, he said, he had figured out how to do it. "Back then, I was
completely ignorant of business, and to be honest, quite alienated by business,"
he said. "But I had two young daughters and not a lot of money, a retirement in
my future and I had sense enough to know that what I had discovered was
important."

   The patent was filed in 1995, but the university could not get any companies
interested in licensing it. So Dr. Hammond met with some venture capitalists and
started Collateral Therapeutics. Within months, the company was working with a
German pharmaceutical firm, Schering A.G., which began human tests of Dr.
Hammond's technique in May 1998.

   Even without participating in the clinical trial, the arrangement has been a
delicate balancing act for Dr. Hammond. He takes unpaid leave from his
university job when he is traveling on company business. He accepts payment as a
consultant, but his job as vice president for research is unpaid. Although
Collateral Therapeutics provides research money for his laboratory, he said, the
company does not hold exclusive rights to commercialize his discoveries. And Dr.
Hammond cannot sell his shares in Collateral while human testing is under way,
he said, because the Securities and Exchange Commission prohibits it.

   "It's theoretical money; I can't do anything with it because I'm an insider,"
he said. "The university would love me to sell all of it. They think that makes
me less contaminated in some way. I think that's nonsense."


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. H. Kirk Hammond, a cardiologist at the University of
California in San Diego and the founder of a biotechnology company, at the San
Diego Veterans Hospital, where he does much of his work. (Barbara Martin for The
New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2000


                             822 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            February 20, 2000 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 463 words

HEADLINE: AIDS study touts gene therapy as way to stall disease's spread

BYLINE: David Morgan, REUTERS

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   A newly published AIDS study could open another front in the battle against
HIV infection by showing that gene therapy can be used to stop infected cells
from spreading the deadly virus, researchers said yesterday.

    In a test-tube experiment believed to be the first of its kind, researchers
based at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia were able to block the operation of
the "tat" gene that allows HIV to spread throughout the body from infected
cells.

    Up to now, genetic AIDS research has concentrated on finding ways to help
healthy cells withstand the ravages of the HIV virus that infects an estimated
16,000 new victims a day, mainly in the developing world.

    But by working with human cells already infected with HIV, the team was able
to reduce the tat gene's virus-replicating functions by 80 percent to 90
percent, according to findings published in the journal Gene Therapy.

    That, researchers said, raises the possibility of a new gene therapy
approach capable of supplementing the current drug-based treatment known as
highly active antiretroviral therapy, or HAART, which is used to stop HIV
infection from becoming full-blown AIDS.

    In recent studies, HAART has proved to be a costly drug regimen that poses
serious side effects for HIV patients while delivering questionable results.

    "This is proof of the concept that HIV replication could be inhibited by a
genetic approach, though we're not at 100 percent yet," said Dr. Stuart Starr, a
study co-author and chief of immunologic infectious diseases at Children's
Hospital.

    "Everyone thinks of an antiviral approach, or an immunologic approach (to
HIV). This adds another option into the equation that could become more
important as other options prove not to be totally successful."

    Key to the study was an artificially produced "antitat" gene provided by the
Washington-based Research Institute for Genetic and Human Therapy.

    Children's Hospital researchers used a mouse retrovirus to deliver the
antitat gene into HIV- infected U-1 and ACH-2 cells, which were developed in the
lab from the tissues of living HIV patients.

   They found that when the antitat protein combined with the tat gene, it
successfully inhibited the gene's operation without disturbing healthy cells or
causing toxic side-effects.

    The study, funded by a private foundation, also found that the introduction
of the antitat gene prolonged the survival of immune-system cells called CD4+ T
lymphocytes.

    Starr said researchers have entered preliminary discussions with a New
England-based primate center, where animal experiments could be carried out on
infected macaque monkeys.

    If animal experiments proved successful, the Children's Hospital team would
hope to have a gene therapy treatment ready for human clinical trials in three
to four years.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             823 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    February 19, 2000 Saturday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: ARTS & LIFE; Pg. 024

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: Television; 'Flowers for Algernon' clone is horrible genetic mutation

BYLINE: By MARK A. PERIGARD

BODY:

   If you are looking for happiness, try drilling a hole in your head and
letting your brains seep out.

   That's the message of CBS' "Flowers for Algernon," an icy remake airing
tomorrow at 9 p.m. on WBZ-TV (Ch. 4) that suggests intellect is the root of all
misery.

   Based on a 1959 short story by Daniel Keyes and updated for TV by John
Pielmeier, "Flowers" stars Matthew Modine ("Full Metal Jacket") as a retarded
man receiving a surgical boost to his intelligence with tragic results.

   Modine's Charlie Gordon is a bakery assistant who is the butt of all his
co-workers' torments and too slow to recognize that their pranks are not signs
of affection. Through his special ed class, he volunteers for an experimental
surgical procedure so he can become a "gene-ass."

   Dr. Strauss (Ron Rifkin), a researcher with a Frankenstein complex, has
successfully altered the brain makeup of mice, including the lovable Algernon,
and now he's ready to leap from rodents to humans.

   Not long after, Charlie is able to beat Algernon in his own maze. He's racing
through Shakespeare's "The Tempest" and advanced physics and speaking several
languages. But with his 200-plus I.Q. comes horrible self-awareness.

   "I don't know which is worse," he says. "To not know what you are and be
happy or to become what you always wanted to be and feel like you're alone."

   He becomes an arrogant intellect, and alienates just about everyone except
his patient teacher-love interest Alice (Kelli Williams from "The Practice").
Charlie becomes so educated he is able to see the flaw in the research and
correctly predicts his own doom.

   Not only will he revert, but he will regress to the point where he will no
longer be able to care for himself.

   At a time when gene therapy is making headlines for all the wrong reasons,
"Flowers" serves as a reminder that science doesn't always know best. But unlike
the 1968 film adaptation "Charly," which won star Cliff Robertson an Academy
Award, this version flies at a breakneck pace, sacrificing humanity for
expediency.

   For the story to succeed, Modine's Charlie has to be believable in all his
stages. But his early Charlie comes off as a frat boy who's overstayed his
welcome at the keg party far too long. Bonnie Bedelia is almost unrecognizable
in the minor but key role of his slattern of a mother.

   There's no question about the moral of this version of "Flowers" falls: Dumb
is better. Charlie lectures his doctor, "What you value is intelligence. But the
mind without the heart isn't worth a damn. Charlie Gordon loved people with all
his being. That's all he had. Now my heart is overwhelmed with my head. It's a
question of values, Dr. Strauss. In Charlie Gordon's world, we're the morons."

   This version of "Flowers" retains some of the story's poignancy, especially
in the last 15 minutes. But it may not be the best sign for any film when the
death of a mouse is more important than anything happening with the humans on
screen.

   Photo Caption: OF MICE AND MEN: Matthew Modine, left, and Kelli Williams star
in a remake of 'Charly,' about a man involved in a medical experiment.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2000


                             824 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    February 19, 2000 Saturday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 011

LENGTH: 375 words

HEADLINE: REGION in Brief

BODY:

   Gov requests disaster aid

   Gov. Paul Cellucci asked the Small Business Administration yesterday to
declare the Newton office building destroyed by fire a disaster area and make
businesses there eligible for federal emergency loans.

   At least 29 businesses were displaced or put out of business by the Feb. 9
fire, which killed five people and gutted the four-story building on Route 9 in
Chestnut Hill.

   "These loans will give these business owners a much-needed economic boost and
help them get back on their feet following this devastating fire," Cellucci said
in a statement.

   Hemophilia treatment program reinstated

   Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center reinstated its hemophilia gene therapy
trial Thursday after deciding it does not pose a risk of side effects. The
program was halted earlier this month.

   The trial involved giving hemophiliacs new genes to promote blood clotting.
Hospital officials said they wanted to halt the program to look for potential
problem areas given the concerns raised nationally about gene therapy.

   "Our self-assessment has confirmed for us that we have been very thoughtful
in our past administering and oversight of gene therapy, and that patients in
our care have not experienced side effects directly attributable to gene therapy
," a hospital statement said yesterday.

   Man shot in his car on highway in Lowell

   An unidentified man was shot in the shoulder and the rear window of his car
was shattered on Route 495 southbound in Lowell last night, according to police
and news reports. The man was being treated at Lowell General Hospital.

   In a separate case, a Lowell man who claimed he was shot at Thursday is
facing charges for making a false police report, after foisting a tale on the
cops that prompted them to arrest another man.

   Paul Muise, 23, of Lowell, told police Thursday a man shot at him, shattering
the window of his newspaper delivery truck. Muise gave a plate number and
description of the suspect that led police to arrest Gilberto Rosario, 28, of
Lowell. But police found inconsistencies in Muise's story and found no weapon on
Rosario. When confronted, Muise allegedly confessed that he and Rosario had only
exchanged glances  and that he later broke his window himself.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2000


                             825 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                     February 19, 2000 Saturday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 642 words

HEADLINE: SHOULD THE STATE CLOSE JOHN DEMPSEY HOSPITAL?;
NO. IT'S A VITAL COMMUNITY RESOURCE

BYLINE: David Rowe, M.D.

BODY:

   When I arrived at the University of Connecticut Health Center in 1977, there
were few pediatric specialists. Children with diabetes were treated by adult
endocrinologists; children with cancer were treated by adult oncologists; and
severely premature infants did not survive.

   Children needing specialized care went to New Haven, Boston or New York.
Under Dr. Milton Markowitz's leadership, UConn Health Center initiated programs
for every major pediatric subspecialty.

       By the mid-1980s, Hartford-area children were treated by
pediatric-focused
physician and nurse teams with advanced training and experience in a specific
area.
   These new programs were not moneymaking at the time they were initiated.
Few precedents existed for how to run them.
   Regional hospitals were not willing to develop these unproven programs.
Only the UConn Health Center had the motivation to support, and the ability to
attract, the faculty capable of establishing them. Once the health center
showed the way, regionalized high-risk neonatal and obstetric care became
established in northern Connecticut.
   Community hospital-based professional staffs readily embraced this model of
regionalized care, and today every critically ill newborn receives
state-of-the-art care. Children receive treatment by pediatric subspecialists.
   It was the leadership of the health center that fostered the subspecialty
concept in pediatrics that eventually evolved into the Connecticut Children's
Medical Center.
   How does this view of the 1970s relate to today?
   The next medical revolution will be genetic and molecular medicine. Soon
doctors will apply gene therapy to a range of acquired and inheritable
diseases in children and adults. Already gene therapies for liver, blood,
muscular and vascular disease look promising.
   Gene therapies for AIDS and cancer are being actively investigated. Even
more dramatic progress has been made in treating degenerative diseases of the
brain, spinal cord, bone and joints, using engineered stem cells that can
regenerate lost tissues.
   The other major development is microchip technology. Thousands of genes can
be examined simultaneously to fingerprint an individual's susceptibility to a
disease or to predict their response to a therapy. Cancer, psychiatric disease
and osteoporosis will be treated by therapies custom-designed based on the
individual's unique genetic makeup.
   Who will develop these emerging technologies in the Hartford area? As in
the 1970s, only the UConn Health Center, if it still exists.
   A number of research groups at the health center are working in these
areas, and soon they will be ready to start clinical trials. They will look to
the clinical research unit at John Dempsey Hospital and to its physicians
trained in clinical research to begin these studies.
   Other area hospitals will institute these new therapies only when they are
well developed and good for the bottom line, and that will take 10 to 15
years.
   The vitality of the University of Connecticut Health Center is a regional
responsibility.
   Because the health center was never allowed to develop as a major care
provider, it cannot be expected to compete for the same revenue stream as the
community hospitals. Instead, it must be viewed as an incubator hospital where
new physicians and dentists are trained and new programs are developed in an
environment where profit is not the sole concern.
   It is the place where a Connecticut-born aspiring scientist and physician
and dentist can get modern training rather than playing out that dream in
another state. This is a responsibility that our health care, educational and
political leaders owe to the region for our future physical and economic
health.



COLUMN: PRO & CON

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2000


                             826 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                   February 19, 2000, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 19; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 797 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY CALLED TOO RISKY;
 SCIENCE: CALTECH'S BALTIMORE, A LEADER IN GENETICS RESEARCH, SAYS TECHNIQUE
SHOULD NOT BE TESTED ON PEOPLE.

BYLINE: TERENCE MONMANEY, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

DATELINE: PACIFIC GROVE, Calif.

BODY:


   Caltech president David Baltimore this week voiced one of the most ringing
condemnations by a prominent scientist of human gene therapy, suggesting that it
was premature to be testing the experimental technique in people.

   "I disagree we've had value from gene therapy trials so far . . . " Baltimore
said, referring to the roughly 300 human studies since 1990. No research has yet
reported an entirely successful treatment, and an experiment last fall killed an
18-year-old volunteer, touching off a national debate.

   "A number of us are asking, 'What the hell are we doing putting these things
in people?' " said Baltimore, a Nobel laureate.

   Fittingly, he made his remarks at a symposium here commemorating the 25th
anniversary of a legendary gathering where genetic scientists postponed some
types of recombinant DNA experiments as too risky. Baltimore was a prime mover
behind the 1975 meeting and a coauthor of the influential research guidelines
that grew out of it.

   "There was definitely a resonance to having David be the one to say that,"
said Alexander Capron, a legal scholar and co-director of USC's Pacific Center
for Health Policy and Ethics, which organized the invitation-only, three-day
symposium that ended Thursday.

   More than 60 scientists and scholars from the United States, England and five
European nations attended six often-contentious sessions on controversial
subjects such as genetically modified foods and gene therapy. They also grappled
with the legacy of the meeting 25 years ago at the same place: the state-owned
Asilomar Conference Grounds, a seaside retreat near Monterey.

   Though a scholarly meeting about a meeting may seem hopelessly esoteric, the
significance of the 1975 Asilomar Conference on Recombinant DNA Molecules is
hard to overestimate. It was the first time that leading scientists agreed to
restrict their research because they could not rule out dangers to lab workers
and the public.

   The guidelines that the 140 scientists drew up back then soon became
government policy. Among other things, they deferred genetic engineering
experiments on disease-causing microbes until they found that their experiments
were not likely to produce super bugs that could escape the lab and infect the
public. Moreover, the publicity surrounding the meeting and guidelines sparked
public concern, triggering the recombinant DNA controversy that raged throughout
the 1970s and early 1980s.

   To this day, "Asilomar" echoes with larger meaning in the history of science,
much as "Potsdam" does in political history. Science historians and regulators
even refer to the "Asilomar" process, meaning an effort by scientists to limit
research before the government does it for them.

   Maxine Singer, president of the Carnegie Institution of Washington and a
co-organizer of the 1975 meeting, argued that genetically modified foods would
be more likely to receive public acceptance if agricultural scientists had held
an Asilomar-style conference to forge a unified view on the perceived risks of
those products.

   The question of whether such an approach is ultimately in the public's best
interest provoked much debate this week. The scientists generally argued that
such self-governance was appropriate, but other scholars countered that it
skirted open public dialogue.

   No one disputed that genetics has changed dramatically in the last two and a
half decades. Indeed, high school students now perform the basic recombinant DNA
experiments that once aroused fear.

   But perhaps the most profound change, most of the disparate conferees seemed
to agree, was the rise of commercial biotechnology, a business made possible by
genetic engineering. Although it has been a boon to science and even the
economy, it also threatens the cherished scientific ideals of openness and
independence, many presentations asserted.

   Dr. Alan Schechter, a research physician at the National Institutes of
Health, argued that clinical scientists should not be allowed to have financial
stakes in companies that sponsor studies they conduct. Many biotech companies
compensate outside clinical researchers with stock shares, which can rise or
fall in value depending on a large study's outcome, creating a potential
conflict between the scientists' financial interests and the need to care for
patients dispassionately.

   Patients' rights was a recurring theme. LeRoy Walters, an ethics specialist
at Georgetown University, argued for tougher federal oversight of gene therapy
experiments and full disclosure of "adverse events."

   Harold Shapiro, president of Princeton University and chairman of the
National Bioethics Advisory Commission, argued that federal regulations for
protecting research subjects should be both expanded and simplified.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2000


                             827 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               February 19, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 2; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words

HEADLINE: Concerns on Human Testing Don't Seem to Faze Biotech Investors

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   When 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died last September in a gene therapy
experiment that went awry, shares of Cell Genesys Inc., a gene therapy company,
were selling for about $8. Now they are selling for more than $30. Avigen Inc.,
another gene therapy company, has zoomed from about $11 to $66. And Targeted
Genetics has increased from less than $2 to more than $20.

   Mr. Gelsinger's death has cast a harsh spotlight on gene therapy, raising
questions about whether patient safeguards were neglected in the quest for
profits. The result could be tighter regulations or even, in the worst case for
the industry, a public backlash similar to what is starting to occur against
genetically modified foods.

    But investors hardly seem to care. Shares of virtually all companies
involved in gene therapy have climbed sharply since the controversy arose. Wall
Street seems to be betting that the repercussions will be confined to the
University of Pennsylvania, where Mr. Gelsinger was treated, and to the
particular technology used in his case.

   "I don't think people have really focused on it, to be honest," Meg Malloy,
an analyst with Chase H&Q, said of the controversy. "I don't think it will
create serious barriers. I do think it will slow things down for a while."

   Executives at several gene therapy companies said that while they were
keeping a wary eye on Washington, the controversy had not affected their
companies. "We're really not influenced by what's going on at this time," said
Stephen A. Sherwin, chairman and chief executive of Cell Genesys.

   Behind the rise in gene therapy stocks is the investor frenzy for all of
biotechnology, which is suddenly being viewed as the next big thing after the
Internet. The Nasdaq biotechnology index has more than doubled since the end of
September. "We have a halo effect around biotech right now," said Kurt von
Emster, portfolio manager of the Franklin Biotechnology Discovery Fund.

   The hottest stocks have been those of companies involved in deciphering the
human genetic code. Gene therapy has basked in the fringes of this glow because
once disease-causing genes are found, there will be more opportunities to inject
corrective genes into people as therapy.

   Even if there were no controversy, the current investor enthusiasm for gene
therapy would be surprising. Gene therapy has been the black sheep of the
biotechnology industry because it has not actually cured anyone in more than 300
clinical trials over 10 years.

   But now there are glimmers of progress. Avigen reported recently that gene
therapy tested on three people with hemophilia had reduced the amount of
blood-clotting drug they had to take. Avigen, based in Alameda, Calif., is
planning to sell more stock to the public, a sign that it is not overly
concerned about events in Washington.

   Controversy has swirled around the issue of whether University of
Pennsylvania scientists fully informed Mr. Gelsinger, who suffered from a rare
hereditary disease, about the risks of the treatment. Safety questions have
focused on the adenovirus, a weakened cold virus, that was used to carry the
genes into Mr. Gelsinger's liver.

   Only a few other clinical trials seem to have been directly affected so far.
The Food and Drug Administration temporarily suspended enrollment of new
patients in two gene therapy trials for liver cancer run by the Schering-Plough
Corporation that used an approach similar to the Pennsylvania study. But that
suspension was lifted in December.

   Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston halted a hemophilia trial
financed by Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. earlier this month because of the
controversy, even though the trial was not using adenoviruses. That trial is
resuming also.

   But Schering-Plough is such a big company that delay of two trials would have
little effect on its stock. Transkaryotic Therapies is a small, publicly traded
company, but gene therapy is not its main attraction for investors. Other
companies using the adenovirus, such as Genovo and GenVec, are privately held.

   The one public gene therapy company that does inject adenoviruses into
patients is Collateral Therapeutics of San Diego, which is using gene therapy to
try to grow blood vessels as an alternative to bypass surgery in treating heart
disease. Collateral's stock has been erratic and has risen from $17 at the end
of September to $33 now, a smaller rise than the other gene therapy stocks.

   A company spokeswoman said the controversy has had no effect on Collateral.

   Targeted Genetics, Vical Inc. and Avigen, do not use the adenovirus and have
managed to distance themselves from the controversy. To some extent the
controversy has vindicated their choice of technologies. "They have in a funny
sort of way benefited," said James McCamant, publisher of The Medical Technology
Stock Letter.

   Vical Inc., based in San Diego, injects genes without putting them into any
kind of virus. When the company met with investors last month before issuing new
shares to the public, it was peppered with questions about the controversy.

   "I kept telling them, 'Can you spell nonviral?' " said Alain B. Schreiber,
president and chief executive. Vical ended up raising $125 million, twice as
much as it expected.

   Targeted Genetics and Avigen use adeno-associated viruses, which, despite
their name, are not related to adenoviruses. Cell Genesys does use adenovirus in
efforts to treat lung cancer but it injects the viruses into tumor cells outside
the body, which the company says is a safer technique. Cell Genesys shares have
been driven up by the mushrooming in value of its minority stake in Abgenix, a
biotechnology company not involved in gene therapy.

   Still, while investors seem to be drawing a distinction between the different
techniques of gene therapy, regulators, politicians and the general public might
not. There is already talk of expanding the investigation to trials that used
other techniques aside from adenoviruses. And new regulations might cover all
gene therapy.

   "My concern is the overall general public perception that gene therapy is
dangerous," said H. Stewart Parker, president and chief executive of Targeted
Genetics, based in Seattle. "Have we created the situation where people are
going to be afraid to enter into gene therapy trials?"




   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2000


                             828 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               February 19, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1245 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   INTERNATIONAL   A3-8

Gore Gets Back in Step On Trade Deal With China
Vice President Al Gore felt obliged to write a letter reiterating his support
for the current China trade agreement that President Clinton is trying to push
through Congress. Mr. Gore's letter, to a business group, came a day after he
had reassured union leaders that he would negotiate a tougher trade deal with
China if he were elected president.   A1


   The head of the World Trade Organization, Mike Moore, said he was optimistic
that China could be admitted this year. Mr. Moore also made clear that China
must enter the trade organization before Taiwan did.   A4

U.S. and Russia Missile Talks
The head of Russia's national security council, after visiting with President
Clinton, appeared to open the door slightly to meeting the administration's
desire to deploy a limited national missile-defense system, though he said
Moscow wanted to preserve the essence of the anti-ballistic missile treaty that
the administration is seeking to change.   A3

Talking to Mexico About Oil
Energy Secretary Bill Richardson is to arrive in Mexico today to discuss with
his Mexican counterpart high oil prices and Mexico's new effort to lower prices.

   A1

Charities Linked to Terrorism
Government officials investigating a decade of international terrorist attacks
say they have found a common thread: Islamic charities and relief organizations
that they suspect are being used to move men, money and weapons across borders.
   A5

Big Turnout for Iran Elections
So many Iranians went to the polls for parliamentary elections that officials
extended voting by two hours. The Interior Ministry said final results might
take three weeks.   A3

Hearing in Kosovo Murder
An American sergeant appeared at military a hearing in Kosovo on charges of
murdering and committing indecent acts with an 11-year-old Albanian girl. An
army lawyer said a second American soldier was under investigation in the case.
   A5

World Briefing   A8

NATIONAL   A9-12, 16

Turnout May Hold Key In South Carolina Today
Strategists for Gov. George W. Bush and for Senator John McCain predicted that
the turnout for the Republican presidential primary would far exceed the record
of 276,000 who voted four years ago. With polls showing the race extremely
tight, Mr. McCain's forces believe that the larger the turnout, the better for
their side, because they expect a big share of the votes from Democrats and
independents in the open primary.   A1

Heralding Ventura's Departure
Patrick J. Buchanan said his struggle for the Reform Party presidential
nomination had been aided by the departure from the party of Gov. Jesse Ventura
of Minnesota, who had opposed Mr. Buchanan's switch from the Republican Party.
   A11

U.S. Says Official Was Cuba Spy
A high-ranking immigration official, Mariano M. Faget, 54, was charged in Miami
with spying for the Cuban government, after federal officials said he was caught
in a sting. Mr. Faget, (pronounced fah-HAY) who was born in Havana and left Cuba
in his teens, had access to classified files and the authority to treat
applications for political asylum.   A1

Support for Dam-Breaching
Gov. John A. Kitzhaber of Oregon, a Democrat, said he favored breaching four
large federal dams on the Snake River in Washington State to restore endangered
salmon populations. Such an action is favored by many environmental, American
Indian and commercial fishing groups, but opposed by farmers and others who rely
on the tamed river for barge shipping and electricity.   A9

Big Storm's Disruptions
A winter storm swept the Midwest and parts of the East, snarling traffic,
canceling flights and closing schools with more than 10 inches of snow
blanketing some regions.   A12

U.S. Seeks Death Penalty
Federal prosecutors filed court papers saying they would seek the death penalty
against Buford O. Furrow Jr., a white supremacist accused of shooting five
people in a Los Angeles day care center and of killing a mail carrier last year.

   A12

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Indians Seek Return Of Planetarium Centerpiece
An Indian group in Oregon, citing a federal law intended to preserve and
repatriate Indian artifacts, has filed a claim for the Williamette Meteorite, a
15-ton chunk of space rock that fell to earth in the Pacific Northwest 10,000
years ago and was long revered by indigenous people there. The American Museum
of Natural History, which acquired the meteorite in 1906, has built its new
planetarium around the rock.   A1

Doctor Agrees to a Pause
The head of neurosurgery at Staten Island University Hospital, Ehud Arbit,
agreed to stop practicing medicine while the State Health Department
investigates the death of a patient who was under his care.   B1

Garden Developer's Donations
The state Democratic Party's chairwoman made public records showing that BFC
Partners, which is developing a razed community garden on the Lower East Side,
had made more than $32,000 in campaign contributions to Mayor Giuliani. Mayoral
aides and BFC Partners' owner, Donald Capoccia, said the donations reflected
only a common concern for gay and lesbian rights.   B2

Beliefs   B7

SCIENCE/HEALTH

In Search of Universe's Bulk
Physicists at the University of Rome have offered evidence that they may have
detected a type of particle that is the long-sought "dark matter," which
astronomers believe makes up some 80 percent of the mass in the universe. If
confirmed, the findings could lead to a conceptual breakthrough in physics.   A1


ARTS & IDEAS   B9-22

SPORTS   D1-8

Fireball at Daytona
Two drivers and nine spectators were hurt in the worst multivehicle accident at
Daytona since 1987, when a horrific wreck led officials to impose speed
restrictions. The Daytona 500 is to be run tomorrow.   D1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Leading Stock Gauges Plunge
The Dow, the S.& P. 500 and the Nasdaq dropped about 3 percent, and technology
issues finished much lower, as investors focused on the stark prospect of rising
short-term interest rates, as indicated by the Fed chairman, Alan Greenspan, the
day before.The Dow fell 295.05 points, to 10,219.52, and the Nasdaq lost 137.18
points, to 4,411.74.   C1

The Consumer Price Index, the best-known inflation measure, edged up only 0.2
percent in January -- the fourth straight mild increase.   C1

The United States trade deficit narrowed in December, to $25.5 billion from
$27.1 billion in November, as rebounding economies abroad kindled record demand
for American goods. Still, the trade gap for all of 1999 set a record, $271.3
billion.   C14

Enthusiasm for Gene Therapy
Shares of nearly all companies involved in gene therapy have climbed sharply,
despite the death of a patient involved in an experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania.   C1

Bass May Sell Beer Business
Bass indicated it might be looking to sell its brewing business, Britain's
second largest.   C2

Business Digest   C1

OBITUARIES   A13

EDITORIAL   A14-15

Editorials: South Carolina's showdown; a rebuke for Mr. Mugabe; new looks at the
death penalty.
Columns: Anthony Lewis.

Bridge   B17

TV Listings   B22

Crossword   B18

Weather   A12

Public Lives   A9


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2000


                             829 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                   FEBRUARY 19, 2000, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 665 words

HEADLINE: Russia Accused of Violating Pact With Secrecy on Its Germ Weapons;

Major nations, not terrorists or loonies, called biggest threat

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:
A Harvard biochemist and biological warfare expert charged yesterday that
Russia's widespread network of germ warfare plants remain barred to Western
inspectors despite long-standing agreements with the United States and Britain
to end the secrecy.

    Although all three nations have agreed to exchange visits to the germ war
plants they built during the height of the Cold War, the Russian plants are
still locked in secrecy and the agreements "have foundered and are in abeyance,"
declared Matthew Meselson, who has worked for decades -- both with the CIA and
as an independent researcher -- to end the threat of biological warfare.

    In 1992, Meselson and his wife, Boston College biologist Jeanne Guillemin,
led a team that gained access to the Siberian city of Sverdlovsk, now called
Yekaterinburg, where a secret plant known as Compound 19 had long been suspected
of manufacturing large quantities of deadly anthrax germs to be carried in
multiple "bomblets" encased in powerful cluster bombs.

    A 1979 outbreak of anthrax in the city killed at least 68 people. The Soviet
authorities at the time insisted the deaths were caused by nothing more than
tainted meat. But in 1994, Meselson and Guillemin published a report
establishing that the germs had been spread by an explosion at Compound 19.

    Some former Russian military officials have said that the plant was indeed
making germ warfare agents, but not anthrax.

    Scientists at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, however, have recently
analyzed tissues from some of those killed at Sverdlovsk and have found at least
four different strains of anthrax microbes -- possibly "enhanced" through
biotechnology techniques.

    Meselson made the statements yesterday at an American Association for the
Advancement of Science panel discussion of new trends in "weapons of mass
destruction."

    It was Meselson who first evaluated the environmental impact of the chemical
defoliants that U.S. forces sprayed from the air during the Vietnam War to clear
the secret jungle trails the Viet Cong were using to move their hand-carried
supplies. His conclusions about the environmental dangers of those chemicals
have been heeded by regulators ever since.

    Meselson also later led a scientific team to Laos and Cambodia and
successfully countered charges that the Soviet Union had dropped chemical
warfare agents over those countries. His team proved that the "yellow rain"
contained no toxins at all but was merely pollen granules gathered and processed
by large flights of specialized species of tropical bees.

    Meselson argued yesterday that the use of recombinant DNA, or gene-splicing
-- which has already yielded important new drugs, advances in disease diagnosis
and ultimately may lead to successful gene therapy -- could also yield deadly
new biological weapons.

    He said that "a world in which these capabilities are widely employed for
hostile purposes would be a world in which the very nature of conflict had
radically changed," affording unprecedented opportunities for violence,
coercion, repression or subjugation.

    "Every major technology -- metallurgy, explosives, internal combustion,
aviation, electronics, nuclear energy -- has been intensively exploited, not
only for peaceful purposes but also for hostile ones," Meselson said. "Must this
also happen with biotechnology, certain to be the dominant technology of the
coming century?"

    The United States, along with virtually every other advanced nation, spent
30 years developing some of the world's most menacing biological weapons. In
1969, President Richard Nixon announced the "dramatic and unconditional
renunciation of biological weapons."

    The International Biological Weapons Convention went into force in 1975 and
has been adopted by 140 nations -- but not by Russia. Meselson noted that
although the treaty "has no organization, no budget, no inspection provisions
and no sanctions," it remains a pledge that its signers have apparently obeyed.



LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2000


                             830 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                 February 18, 2000, Friday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 48 SPOTLIGHT ON HEALTH

LENGTH: 565 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY OFFERS HOPE FOR AILING LIVERS

BODY:
WASHINGTON - Genetic manipulation of liver cells is pointing toward a promising
new therapy that might offer hope for the 20 million Americans who suffer from
liver disease.

   Lab experiments restored normal function in rats that had lost 90% of their
livers. The experiments used genetically manipulated cells grown in test tubes,
which rejuvenated failing liver functions.

   The study, to be published in the journal Science, found a way to grow
millions of liver cells, called hepatocytes, and transplant them into rats that
had virtually no liver function. The new liver cells took over the job of the
failing organ.

   "I have no idea when we could use it in humans" because the technique is
still so experimental, said Dr. Philippe Leboulch of Brigham and Women's
Hospital in Boston, chief researcher on the study.

   Leboulch said transplanted liver cells have been used in patients with
failing organs before, but the therapy had limited success because doctors were
unable to isolate enough liver cells.

   Hepatocytes are very difficult to grow in the lab, he said. The new technique
uses a gene to solve this problem. Researchers inserted into lab liver cells a
cancer gene that forced those cells to start reproducing endlessly.

   But before the cells are used to restore liver function, they must be treated
with an enzyme that acts like a "genetic scissors" and deactivates the inserted
cancer gene, halting the rapid growth of new cells.MORE HEALTH NEWSVaccine OKd

   A vaccine to protect babies from meningitis and blood poisoning caused by
pneumococcal bacteria won approval yesterday.

   The vaccine, called Prevnar, also has had some success in preventing ear
infections. But for now, the federal okay does not include that ailment.

   Children under 5 suffer 16,000 pneumococcal blood infections and 1,400
pneumococcal meningitis cases every year. In up to half the cases of meningitis,
children suffer brain damage or hearing loss - and 10% die.

   The vaccine will available within a few weeks and will cost $58 per shot,
said manufacturer Wyeth-Ayerst Labs. A government advisory committee has
recommended that all children under 2 be immunized with Prevnar. Won't shelve
shots The Pentagon yesterday rejected a House panel's call to halt troop
inoculations against anthrax, insisting that the vaccine is safe and the threat
of biological warfare is real.

   Sue Bailey, the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs, said the
Defense Department intends to continue toward its goal of immunizing all 2.4
million members of the military against anthrax - a bacterium that can cause
death within a few days. Pacemaker woes St. Jude Medical, the U.S.'
second-largest manufacturer of pacemakers, said yesterday that some of its
devices could malfunction because of a problematic electrical connection.

   It was the second time in the past month that the St. Paul-based medical
device maker warned of possible defects in its products.

   The company said a defective batch of epoxy could cause a malfunction in
about 10% of the 891 Affinity pacemakers manufactured last summer.

   Problems have been reported in 33 of the devices. No deaths have been
reported, and the company said it didn't recommend that the pacemakers be
removed.

   Patients with the pacemaker "should be monitored closely for unusual
readings," said Laura Merriam, head of investor relations for St. Jude.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000


                             831 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    February 18, 2000, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 434 words

HEADLINE: Test results ease concern child patients exposed to HIV

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: LEIGH HOPPER, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   Preliminary test results have allayed worries that children who received an
experimental tumor vaccine at Baylor College of Medicine and St. Jude Children's
Hospital in Tennessee were inadvertently exposed to the virus that causes AIDS.

   Tests performed on the gene-based medicine used at Baylor "are negative for
any contamination" with HIV or the virus that causes hepatitis C, Baylor
spokeswoman Dorey Zodrow said Thursday.

   Tests on the material from St. Jude were negative as well, the Food and Drug
Administration announced Thursday.

   Last week, researchers from Baylor and St. Jude suspended a gene therapy
experiment on children dying from brain cancer and began notifying parents about
the possibility of infections with the dangerous viruses.

   St. Jude notified federal authorities two weeks ago that they had
inadvertently used untested "seed stock" of the vaccine on two patients.
Subsequent testing of the vaccine showed initial evidence that it may have been
contaminated with HIV and hepatitis C virus.

   The tests were extremely sensitive and prone to giving "false positive"
results, so the FDA performed its own, more reliable set of tests on the
medicine from St. Jude.

   Concern about the Baylor arm of the study was raised because Baylor used a
vaccine derived from St. Jude's seed stock. However, contamination was unlikely
because Baylor's vaccine had been purified and tested several times for
contaminants before it was given to patients, Dr. James Patrick, Baylor vice
president and dean of research, said last week.

   Baylor sent its vaccine to an independent facility for retesting "just to
provide the additional assurance," Patrick said.

   Zodrow said that the results are being sent to the FDA and that she had no
information about whether the experimental therapy will continue at Baylor. St.
Jude officials could not be reached for comment about whether its trial will
resume.

   Six children with neuroblastoma received the treatment at Baylor. Two have
since died of their cancer, a type of brain cancer that is the second most
common childhood malignancy.

   Nineteen children were enrolled in the trial at St. Jude; four of the
patients are still living. The survival rate for recurring neuroblastoma in
children is zero.

   The treatment called for removing the patient's own tumor cells and enhancing
them with an immune system gene inserted by a gene-altered virus. Those cells
were then reinjected into the patient in an effort to rally the child's immune
system against the cancer.

   St. Jude said several patients had shown "promising responses" to the
treatment.


LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2000


                             832 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                    February 18, 2000, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 32; National Desk

LENGTH: 318 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY HIV SCARE A FALSE ALARM, FDA TESTING CONCLUDES

BYLINE: From Times Wire Services

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   The Food and Drug Administration said Thursday that in-depth testing
concluded that gene therapy given to a group of dying cancer patients was not
contaminated with HIV or with the hepatitis C virus.

   Newspapers last week reported that highly preliminary laboratory testing
suggested an experiment at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis,
Tenn., and Baylor College of Medicine in Houston might have exposed children to
the viruses.

   That lab test is prone to errors, the FDA said.

   Most of the children, who had advanced cases of the nervous system cancer
neuroblastoma, have died of their disease since the experiment. After the media
reports, the hospitals tracked down survivors' families to warn them.

   The agency said it is still looking into the circumstances that led to the
contamination scare, including apparent lapses in safety testing and record
keeping at St. Jude and questions about whether federal officials were notified
"promptly" of the potential problem as required by regulations.

   Laura Bowman, leader of the gene therapy study, said last week that she first
became aware of the possibility of contamination last fall. FDA officials said
they weren't informed of the possible problem until this month.

   Separately, the University of Pennsylvania announced Thursday that the dean
of its School of Medicine and founder of the school's troubled Institute for
Human Gene Therapy is leaving.

   William N. Kelley built the gene therapy program from scratch into one of the
largest and most prestigious in the country. The FDA shut the program in January
after an investigation of a teenage patient's death there revealed widespread
violations of patient protection and record keeping rules.

   University officials emphasized that Kelley's departure as dean is unrelated
to the gene therapy institute's woes but was motivated by a need for a new
financial leader.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000


                             833 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     February 18, 2000 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 297 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy project not contaminated

BYLINE:  Washington Post

BODY:

   Washington -- Batches of genetically engineered viruses that were injected
into sick children as part of a gene therapy experiment in Tennessee were not
contaminated with the AIDS or hepatitis viruses as initially feared, according
to follow-up tests conducted by the Food and Drug Administration.

   The finding, released by the FDA late Thursday, puts to rest some of the
concerns raised last week when FDA officials said they had been informed of the
possible contamination by researchers at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
in Memphis.

   But the agency said Thursday it's still looking into the circumstances that
led to the contamination scare, including apparent lapses in safety testing and
record keeping at St. Jude and questions about whether federal officials were
notified "promptly" of the potential problem as required by regulations.

   Laura Bowman, leader of the gene therapy study, said last week she first
became aware of the possibility of contamination last fall. FDA officials said
they weren't informed of the possible problem until this month.

   "We're looking at the whole situation at St. Jude to see what happened when
and how," said Kathryn Zoon, director of the FDA's Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research.

   Zoon said Thursday that the initial test results apparently were "false
positives." She wouldn't give any details of the agency's ongoing effort to
understand why the original safety test documents weren't in order, nor why it
took months for the agency to learn of the brewing problem from Bowman. Bowman
couldn't be reached for comment Thursday.

   St. Jude has been under federal scrutiny since last summer for its handling
of three deaths in a child leukemia experiment and problems with contaminated
bone marrow preparations.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2000


                             834 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     February 18, 2000 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 503 words

HEADLINE: Two research teams report success in growing liver cells

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   Scientists have found an efficient way to grow liver cells that they hope
someday can be used to keep patients alive until they get a liver transplant or
to treat cirrhosis and other fatal liver diseases.

   In today's issue of the journal Science, two research teams report success
with genetically manipulating liver cells in rats and mice to restore liver
function or stave off further damage.

   One team included researchers from the University of Nebraska Medical Center,
which at a radiology meeting in November reported early success with infusing
frozen liver cells into humans to prolong the lives of patients needing
transplants. The experiments involved only a few patients, but in one case, a
patient's liver improved so much, she no longer needed a transplant.

   The experiments illustrate the potential promise of the fledgling field of
gene therapy at a time when it's under unprecedented scrutiny. Investigations
are under way into the death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger from a gene therapy
experiment. And there are reports that six deaths have occurred in gene therapy
experiments in less than two years, though researchers say many of those
patients died from their underlying medical conditions, not the therapy.

   Treatments are desperately needed. About 20 million Americans have liver
diseases, which cause 40,000 deaths each year. Cirrhosis or scarring of the
liver, often from prolonged alcohol abuse, is a leading cause of death.

   Only about 4,000 liver transplants are performed each year, and there is no
technology to rescue someone whose liver is failing, as dialysis does for
failing kidneys and ventricular assist devices do for failing hearts.

   The first study, by the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School
and the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York, showed the role of
telomeres in liver disease development. Telomeres are segments at the end of
chromosomes that shorten each time a cell divides. Loss of telomeres made mice
likely to develop liver disease, they report.

   More importantly, the researchers used gene therapy to restore the telomeres,
and the liver function of the mice improved.

   The technique may carry the risk of spurring cancer from uncontrolled
telomere growth, the researchers write.

   If that is a potential risk, "patients with end-stage liver cirrhosis
awaiting liver transplantation might be ideal candidates" for the treatment
because the liver eventually would be removed when the transplant is performed.
That would minimize potential cancer risk from the transplanted liver cells,
they write.

   The second study, by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Harvard and
the Nebraska scientists, showed a way to mass-produce liver cells in culture,
overcoming a quantity problem that had limited previous research with such
cells.

   They did this by inserting a cancer gene into the liver cells that caused
them to reproduce rapidly, then knocking out the gene before giving the cells to
rats to treat acute liver failure.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2000


                             835 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 18, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 989 words

HEADLINE: Possible New Treatment Found for Serious Liver Disease

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   A possible new approach to treating cirrhosis of the liver, the
seventh-leading cause of death in the world, has emerged from studies of
telomerase, a recently discovered agent that indefinitely prolongs the life of
human cells grown in the laboratory.

   So far the treatment has worked only in mice that have artificially been
given cirrhosis. If it works in people, too, it would offer a new way of
tackling a major, intractable disease, as well as of averting liver cancer, the
leading cause of cancer cases worldwide, 80 percent of which originate from
liver cirrhosis.

    The research is the work of Dr. Ronald A. DePinho, a mouse geneticist at the
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and colleagues, and is reported in today's issue
of Science.

   Dr. Irwin A. Arias, a liver expert at Tufts University, said that the work
was "brilliant" but that any treatment was "a long, long way off."

   Cirrhosis is the scarring of the liver that results when toxins like alcohol
or hepatitis viruses B and C kill the liver cells and exhaust the organ's usual
capacity to regenerate itself. The scarring blocks blood flow and the liver's
ability to function properly, leading to symptoms that can be postponed but not
reversed.

   The mechanism by which the various liver toxins cause cirrhosis is unknown,
but Japanese scientists recently noticed that liver cells from cirrhosis
patients had an anomaly in their chromosomes, the giant DNA molecules in which
the cell's programming instructions are encoded. Specifically, the end sections
of the chromosomes, known as the telomeres, were unusually short. Each time a
cell divides, its telomeres get shorter, as if counting off some permissible
number of divisions, until at a certain minimum telomere length the cell is
thrown into crisis and dies.

   Telomeres are kept long in egg and sperm cells by the enzyme telomerase. But
the telomerase gene is suppressed in most normal cells, and as people age, their
telomeres decrease.

   Scientists supported by the Geron Corporation of Menlo Park, Calif.,
discovered recently that human cells grown in glassware could be made to divide
indefinitely -- becoming in principle immortal -- if given an active copy of the
telomerase gene that builds their telomeres back to youthful length.

   Telomeres in general do not seem to place a limit on human life span.  Their
purpose seems to be as a last ditch defense against tumors, zapping malignant
cells after they have reached their quotas of divisions.

   But some biologists believe short telomeres may be a drawback in diseases
where a cell type is forced to divide unusually often. When Dr. DePinho heard of
the Japanese finding of short telomeres in cirrhosis, he decided to test the
idea in mice by seeing if insertion of the telomerase gene into liver cells
could prevent the development of cirrhosis.

   Mice have very long telomeres, so to obtain animals with telomeres as short
as those of elderly people, he took a strain that lacked the telomerase gene
altogether and bred the mice through several generations.

   Cirrhosis was induced in the short-telomere mice by injecting them with a
liver-poisoning chemical. In addition, one group of mice was injected with a
virus carrying a copy of the mouse telomerase gene. In these mice, development
of cirrhosis was blocked, presumably because the telomerase rescued certain
short-telomere cells from crisis, enabling them to regenerate the liver.

   Because of this finding, Dr. DePinho and colleagues conclude, "It is
reasonable to anticipate that activation of telomerase could inhibit the
development of liver cirrhosis or terminal liver failure in humans."

   If the telomere-shortening system protects against cancer, an artificial
lengthening of the telomeres might raise a cancer risk. In their article, the
authors suggest the telomerase treatment could be tested in patients awaiting a
liver transplant, since the liver was due for removal anyway.

   Dr. Calvin Harley, scientific director of Geron, the company developing
telomerase-based therapies, said Dr. DePinho's work was "a pretty important
first step in establishing that telomere loss can be the trigger of chronic
disease." Geron has also been working on telomere-based treatments for
cirrhosis, but any clinical tests of a treatment are "certainly not less than
two years away," Dr. Harley said.

   Dr. Arias, the Tufts liver expert, interpreted Dr. DePinho's work more
cautiously, saying it was too early even to be sure that short telomeres were
the trigger for cirrhosis. Because many questions remain about the timing of
telomere shortening and the types of cirrhosis in which shortening occurs, "It
is not a good idea to speculate about the therapeutic aspects or suggest that a
clinical trial can be done instantly," Dr. Arias said.

   Dr. DePinho inserted the telomerase gene into mice by piggy-backing it onto a
disabled adenovirus, one of the causes of the common cold. Though the virus
itself is considered pretty harmless, its use in gene therapy has fallen under a
cloud after the death of Jesse Gelsinger, a patient being treated for a rare
metabolic disease at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Dr. DePinho and Dr. Harley said there were many other methods besides
adenovirus for delivering both the telomerase gene and the telomerase protein
itself.

   Besides cirrhosis, several other diseases are thought, though not yet proved,
to be caused by telomere shortening and the depletion of critical cell types.
This include AIDS, ulcerative colitis and various skin and immune-system
disorders.

   In another report in Science, a team of Japanese and American scientists
describe a method for growing enough liver cells in glassware to regenerate the
organ when the cells are injected back into rats. The method depends on first
infecting the cells with tumor gene that makes them divide. The tumor gene can
be completely excised from the cells after they have divided.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000


                             836 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 18, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1256 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   INTERNATIONAL   A3-13

Russian Front Companies Linked to Bank of New York
Two Moscow banks that figure prominently in the Bank of New York case were not
really banks but front companies that aided schemes to funnel money out of
Russia and into illegal accounts at the Bank of New York, bankers and
investigators said.   A1

Torture Reports in Chechnya
Three men seized by Russian troops and imprisoned in northern Chechnya this
winter have told human-rights observers of beatings, torture and rapes that
occurred. The Kremlin denounced the reports as lies.   A12


   Iranians Going to the Polls
Parliamentary elections today will be seen as a referendum on defining the
ideals at the heart of the Iranian revolution, as well the popularity of
President Mohammad Khatami.   A1

Anti-U.S. Rallies in Lebanon
Protesters outside the United States Embassy threw rocks and tomatoes at
Lebanese soliders and police. The protests appeared to have been organized with
the help of Hezbollah, which condemned the United States for statements
supporting Israeli air strikes in southern Lebanon.   A8

India-Pakistan Tensions
India is conducting military exercises about 60 miles from its border with
Pakistan, a month before President Clinton is to visit the region.   A3

Mexico Mental Hospital Report
Long-term patients live in filthy, abusive, dangerous conditions and up to half
are epileptic or mentally retarded and do not even belong in a psychiatric
institution, an international human rights group said.   A5

U.N. Assigns Child Advocates
The United Nations has begun assigning full-time advocates of children to
operations centers abroad, an official said. The move follows reports from an
array of United Nations agencies and private relief groups detailing the plight
of children in an era of civil wars.   A8

The U.N.'s Next Member State
The Security Council cleared the way for Tuvalu, a Pacific island nation of
10,000 people, to become the 189th member of the United Nations. The General
Assembly is expected to admit the country later this year.   A3

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A14-27

Republicans Pursue Votes With Different Approaches
Gov. George W. Bush and Senator John McCain raced across South Carolina with
diverging strategies, two days before their Republican primary showdown. Mr.
Bush pressed a relentless attack on his opponent, while Mr. McCain made a broad
appeal for the votes of Republicans independents and Democrats alike.   A1

Pledge to Labor on China
Labor leaders meeting in New Orleans said that behind closed doors Mr. Gore had
reiterated a pledge that if elected president he would negotiate a tougher trade
agreement with China than President Clinton had.   A27

Pentagon Faulted on Anthrax
A House panel issued a scalding critique of an effort to vaccinate American
troops against the biological agent anthrax, and said the program should be
suspended.   A14

Reacting to Fear of Hackers
The E.P.A. has temporarily taken itself offline after a lawmaker said on his Web
site that its computers were vulnerable to hackers.   A23

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Treating Deadly Liver Disease
A possible new approach to treating cirrhosis has emerged from studies of
telomerase, an agent that indefinitely prolongs the life of human cells grown in
the laboratory.   A18

Tests Rebut 'Terrible Scare'
Reports that some two dozen childhood brain cancer patients in a gene therapy
experiment may have been exposed to viruses that cause AIDS and hepatitis C were
not substantiated, an F.D.A. official said.   A16

Meningitis Vaccine Approved
The F.D.A. approved Prevnar, the first vaccine to prevent a leading cause of
meningitis in infants and toddlers, a day after a panel of scientific experts
recommended against giving it to all children under the age of 5 in part because
of its cost.   A20

An Asteroid, From Up Close
The asteroid Eros, now under study from the NEAR spacecraft, appears to be
composed of dense material and battered by many ancient collisions, scientists
reported.   A20

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-10

Death Leads State to Bar Surgeon From Operating
The state Health Department ordered Staten Island University Hospital to ban any
treatment of patients by its chief of neurosurgery, Ehud Arbit, following the
death of one of his patients. Dr. Arbit is the same doctor fired from Memorial
Sloan Kettering for operating on the wrong side of a brain five years ago.   A1

Recalling Assault on Prisoner
Justin Volpe, left, the former police officer serving 30 years for the
brutalization of Abner Louima, gave his account at the federal trial of three
officers accused of conspiring to cover up the attack. As expected, Mr. Volpe
said a fellow officer convicted in the assault, Charles Schwarz, was not
involved, and he pointed to another officer, Thomas Wiese, who he said had stood
by without intervening.   A1

Lesser Charges in Diallo Trial
The judge in the Amadou Diallo trial granted a request from both sides to let
jurors consider lesser charges in the trial of the four officers accused of
murdering Mr. Diallo.   B6

Anger Over Nuclear Accident
Public officials and citizen groups accused the Nuclear Regulatory Commission
and Con Edison of mishandling events leading up to the radiation leak at the
Indian Point 2 nuclear plant on Tuesday, and then of not notifying the public
properly.   B1

NEEDIEST CASES   B4

SPORTS   D1-8

WEEKEND   E1-38; E39-54

OBITUARIES   C21

EDUCATION

Creationism in a Curriculum
A publicly financed charter school to open in Rochester plans to teach that
creationism is a competing theory to evolution. The plan has drawn opposition
from civil liberties groups.   B1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-20, 22

Putting the Brakes On
The Fed chairman, Alan Greenspan, said the powerhouse economy showed few signs
of slowing despite four interest rate increases in eight months, and he warned
that the central bank would probably raise rates further to avert a buildup of
inflation and to slow down stock markets.   A1

The Nasdaq jumped 121.27 points, or 2.74 percent, to 4,548.92, a record, but the
S.& P. 500 managed only a 0.59-point gain, to 1,388.26, and the Dow lost 46.84
points, to 10,514.57.   C9

Toymaker Sues Ex-Chairman
F.A.O. Schwarz has sued John Eyler, its former chairman and chief executive, for
jumping to the rival Toys "R" Us last month.   C1

A Giant Divides Itself
The world's largest accounting firm, PricewaterhouseCoopers, said it would
separate its auditing and consulting businesses into two or more free-standing
organizations. The move is intended to address market regulators' increasing
concerns and to enhance the ability to compete in the Internet economy.   C8

Improved Energy Technology
The Energy Department and G.E. will announce a major breakthrough in
natural-gas-powered generating plants today that will result in the production
of electricity using 5.3 percent less fuel than the best current technologies.
   C10

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A28-29

Editorials: Bill Clinton's Asian itinerary; a new universe in Manhattan; Michael
M. Weinstein on America's rags-to-riches myth.
Columns: Gail Collins, Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E53

TV Listings   E37

Public Lives   B2

Weather   D8


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000


                             837 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 18, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 426 words

HEADLINE: Tests Rebut 'Terrible Scare' In Gene Study

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 17

BODY:

   Reports that more than two dozen childhood brain cancer patients may have
been exposed to the viruses that cause AIDS and hepatitis C during a gene
therapy experiment turned out to be "a terrible scare," a Food and Drug
Administration official said today.

   The official, Dr. Kathryn Zoon, who directs the agency's Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, said F.D.A. tests had determined that the master batch
used to manufacture the therapy, a corrective gene encased in a weakened cold
virus, was not tainted despite previous results that indicated otherwise.

    "At this point we have determined that the master virus bank was not
contaminated," Dr. Zoon said. While she would not rule out the possibility that
patients in the trial were put at risk, she said the most important testing was
finished and "there is some assurance to patients that the information they were
given about contamination was not correct."

   In an interview today, one of two principal investigators in the study, Dr.
Laura C. Bowman, sounded elated and relieved by the negative results. "We are
exceedingly gratified," said Dr. Bowman, a pediatric oncologist at St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital in Memphis. "Nobody was exposed to any kind of risk
or any kind of infection. I'm really sad for the families for all the grief and
anxiety that the disclosure of a false positive lab result caused."

   In an interview last week, Dr. Bowman said the potential contamination came
to her attention last fall, but she did not notify the F.D.A. immediately
because test results, which indicated the presence of genetic material from the
AIDS and hepatitis viruses, were inconclusive.

   Still lacking final results, she informed the agency on Feb. 4, she said, but
withheld the news from patients' families because she did not want to worry
them. She notified them after receiving an inquiry from the Washington Post.

   The study, conducted at St. Jude and Baylor College of Medicine, has been
placed on hold by the F.D.A., and Dr. Zoon said today that the hold had not been
lifted. She said the agency planned to test some additional lots of the "tumor
vaccine" used in the study, but would not say what, if any, action the agency
might take as a result of its investigation.

   The St. Jude-Baylor study enrolled 25 children with recurrent neuroblastoma,
a type of brain cancer that is universally fatal. Most have since died of the
disease. Dr. Bowman said tonight that she was busy calling patients and their
parents to tell them of the F.D.A.'s results.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000


                             838 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      FEBRUARY 18, 2000 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1185 words

HEADLINE: PENN HEALTH SYSTEM REPLACES ITS TOP OFFICIAL WILLIAM N. KELLEY HAS
BEEN FIRED AS CEO. PETER G. TRABER, CHIEF OF THE DEPARTMENT OF MEDICINE, WILL
TAKE HIS PLACE.

BYLINE: Karl Stark, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   After orchestrating a dramatic run-up in research growth and piling up record
deficits, William N. Kelley is out as chief executive officer of the University
of Pennsylvania Health System and dean of the School of Medicine.

   University president Judith Rodin told Kelley he would be out in a meeting on
Wednesday morning that she described as "extremely cordial." She announced the
move yesterday after meeting with the university's board of trustees and named
Peter G. Traber as Kelley's successor. Traber, 44, had been chief of Penn's
department of medicine since 1997.

   Kelley's departure after 11 years from one of the most prominent posts in
American medicine is another sign of the health system's precarious finances and
the university's resolve to fix them.

   Under Kelley, who will remain as a tenured faculty member, Penn built scores
of laboratories and soared into the top tier of research institutions
nationwide. But Kelley's aggressive buying of physician practices and
acquisition of troubled hospitals led the Penn health system to lose nearly $300
million in the last two years.

   The health system seemed to rebound this year after announcing the
elimination of 2,800 jobs, or 20 percent of its workforce. But Rodin said
yesterday there were no guarantees that the system would reach stability. The
health system accounts for more than half of the university's revenues, and the
medical side needs to continue making difficult changes in its culture to
clamber back to breakeven.

   Several analysts said they believed that the health system's finances must be
worsening for Rodin to have taken such a dramatic step. Rodin disputed that,
saying the health system remained on track to meet its financial goals.

   "We are still in a significant turnaround period," Rodin said. "I'm a
realist. I believe that when we see the final [year-end] numbers, we'll really
know how successful we have been."

   Rodin also denied that she had ousted Kelley because of problems with Penn's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy. The federal government last month suspended
all trials conducted by the institute after an Arizona teenager died during a
gene-therapy trial in the fall.

   Rodin has butted heads with Kelley over the years. Both are known as
strong-willed administrators and they have sometimes clashed, particularly as
the health system's financial woes forced a downgrade last year in the
university's bond rating.

   But Rodin yesterday praised Kelley, saying "our achievements are really
legendary throughout academic medicine, and it's a tribute to his leadership."

   Rodin said she believed the next round of changes could be better achieved by
Traber, a popular and well-respected faculty member.

   Traber acknowledged that more belt-tightening was necessary. "We do have to
change behaviors, but this is a university, and we're about teaching," he said.
"We talk about changing behavior all the time."

   Traber will not be managing alone. The university has asked the turnaround
consultant David Hunter to return to advise Traber in running the institution
with a combined $1.9 billion annual budget.

   Known for its budget-cutting prowess, the Hunter Group last year made about
430 recommendations for Penn to cut costs. Hunter will be brought back to make
sure the cost-cutting continues to meet goals, Rodin said.

   Insiders say Penn still needs to cut supply costs and slash unprofitable
programs. The system also must look at upgrading its computer systems and
improving the finances of its physician practices.

   "The layoffs are easy" by comparison, said one analyst close to Penn. "When
you start affecting programs and doctors' behavior, now you're talking about
stuff that is at the heart of academic medical centers."

   Among those who will be helping Traber make these decisions are Arthur K.
Asbury, a former acting dean of the medical school, and Robert Martin, the
health system's chief operating officer.

   Kelley could not be reached for comment yesterday. He was said to be spending
the weekend at the Outer Banks of North Carolina.

   "As you can imagine, I am disappointed not to be able to see my long-term
plans to full implementation," Kelley wrote in an e-mail yesterday to
colleagues. Kelley said he would remain a tenured faculty member in the
department of medicine.

   Rodin has also asked Kelley to serve as a vice president of health affairs,
monitoring changes in federal and state health-care policy. She said she would
like Kelley to take on fund-raising as well, but he had not yet agreed.

   Kelley became the second chief executive in as many years to be fired by a
major nonprofit health-care organization in the region. Sherif Abdelhak was
fired in June 1998 as head of the Allegheny health system, just weeks before the
system's Philadelphia hospitals declared bankruptcy.

   Word of Kelley's departure drew a wide range of reactions.

   Elsa Ramsden, past president of the Penn chapter of the American Association
of University Professors, praised Kelley for reversing losses when he came to
Penn in 1989.

   "Until he became overzealous, he fixed the bottom line," she said. "He
certainly has, through the weight of his pressure, brought a high level of
[government] funding to the university."

   At the same time, Kelley could be autocratic in his dealings with faculty.
"His line to me was, 'If they don't like it, they can leave. I can replace them
tomorrow,' " Ramsden said. "Tenure did not seem to matter to him very much. If
the faculty member was tenured, he created living circumstances that were so
unbearable that the faculty member left. Faculty got the message, 'Either go
with the program or leave.' "

   Kelley also drew criticism for his ambitious expansion plans in the face of a
worsening health-care market. Penn took over money-losing Pennsylvania Hospital
and Presbyterian Medical Center in recent years, and both facilities experienced
an exodus of staff and revenues that exacerbated losses initially.

   One university trustee who spoke on condition of anonymity said Kelley's
business decisions were a factor in his departure. "We didn't lay off all those
people without real concern by the trustees about how the expansion was handled
and what management decisions were made," the trustee said. "There have been
leadership questions raised for months and months. But we needed to get in there
and take a closer look before we came to any conclusions.

   "I don't think [cutting] is his forte," the trustee continued. "It's very
painful for someone to deconstruct what they have built."

   Other observers said Kelley did well to survive as long as he did. The
average tenure of a medical school dean is 4 1/2 years, partly because many who
take these jobs are older and near the end of their careers, said Jordan Cohen,
president of the Association of American Medical Colleges.

   "It's certainly a very vivid example of the kind of difficulties that major
academic medical centers across the country are experiencing," Cohen said.

   * Inquirer staff writers Stacey Burling and Huntly Collins contributed to
this article.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             839 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   February 18, 2000, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: OBITUARY, Pg. B-6

LENGTH: 521 words

HEADLINE: RICHARD MCORMICK;
CATHOLIC AUTHORITY ON MORAL THEOLOGY

BYLINE: PETER STEINFELS, THE NEW YORK TIMES

BODY:


   The Rev. Richard A. McCormick, for many years the dominant American voice in
Roman Catholic moral theology, especially on the daunting questions of medical
ethics that have emerged in recent times, died on Saturday. He was 77 and lived
in the Colombiere Center in Clarkston, Mich., a residence of the Society of
Jesus.

   The cause was pneumonia, said the Rev. Richard McBrien, a close friend and
colleague at the University of Notre Dame.

   Father McCormick, who was the John A. O' Brien professor of Christian ethics
at Notre Dame until last year, influenced the public and several generations of
Catholic theologians with his magisterial grasp of the fine distinctions and
painstaking arguments that Catholic moral theology had developed over the
centuries. He demonstrated the relevance of this tradition to biomedical
problems like in vitro fertilization, surrogate motherhood, abortion,
euthanasia, gene therapy, access to medical care and patients' rights.

   While vigorously representing Catholic moral teachings in public debates,
where he was viewed as a conservative on abortion and euthanasia, Father
McCormick questioned some of the tradition's absolute norms - particularly in
regard to contraception, sterilization and other sexual and reproductive issues
- in ways that drew opposition from some conservative Catholic theologians and
Vatican officials.

   A section of Pope John Paul II's 1993 encyclical "Veritatis Splendor" ("The
Splendor of Truth") rejected an approach to moral reasoning known as
"proportionalism," with which Father McCormick was associated. Father McCormick
contended that the document had misrepresented proportionalists, none of whom
would recognize themselves, he said, in the encyclical's description.

   He defended the place of "conscientious dissent" in the church, provided that
it followed an effort to assimilate official teachings, a process he said "must
be prayerful, arduous, reflective, informed."

   Last June, the annual convention of the Catholic Theological Society of
America featured a debate about theological dissent between Father McCormick and
the Rev. Avery Dulles, a fellow Jesuit and an elder statesman of American
Catholic theology.

   Although Father McCormick had a minor stroke while traveling to Lourdes,
France, he postponed an operation on an occluded artery to participate in the
debate. When the surgery did take place, in late June, it resulted in another
stroke that left him paralyzed and unable to read or write but clear of mind and
able to speak.

   He was born in Toledo, Ohio, in October 1922, the son of a physician who
served a term as president of the American Medical Association.

   Father McCormick's influence began with the "Notes on Moral Theology," a
regular survey tracking publications in English, German, French, Spanish and
Italian, which Father McCormick wrote from 1965 to 1984 for the scholarly
journal Theological Studies. He described and evaluated an enormous body of
current thinking on issues that included divorce and remarriage and nuclear
deterrence, as well as bioethical topics like experimentation on humans.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2000


                             840 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 18, 2000, Friday

SECTION: OPINION;Pg. B-9:2,7; B-13:1

LENGTH: 940 words

HEADLINE: The promises and problems of gene therapy

BYLINE: Inder M. Verma; Verma is an American Cancer Society Professor at The
Salk Institute in La Jolla.

BODY:
 Jessie Gelsinger was barely 18 years old when he enrolled in a gene therapy
trial to correct a fatal genetic disorder that disrupted ammonia metabolism in
his body.  Jessie's father, Paul Gelsinger, testified at a recent hearing of the
U.S. Senate Subcommittee on Public Health that his son knew he would not reap
the benefits of the clinical trial.  But he thought his experiences might offer
hope for others.  Less than 72 hours after injection of an engineered common
cold virus (adenoviral vector) containing the gene to correct his condition,
Jessie died.

   Since news broke of the first reported death of a patient directly
attributable to gene therapy, the scientific community, federal regulatory
agencies and the U.S. Senate are now asking: Is there sufficient oversight for
patient safety?

   Gene therapy is a form of molecular medicine that has the potential to
influence vast areas of human health during this century.  The basic concept of
gene therapy is simple: introduce a gene whose product has the ability to either
cure or slow down the progression of disease.

   Gene therapy could, in effect, change the practice of medicine by correcting
genetic defects, killing cancer cells, preventing cardiovascular disease,
interfering with the progression of neurological disorders and eliminating
infectious agents.

   Generally two types of approaches have been tried: direct injection of genes
(DNA), and manipulation of disarmed viruses (vectors) as vehicles to ferry
genes.  Of the nearly 375 current gene therapy trials, more than 75 percent
involve the use of viral vectors.

   Though the concept of gene therapy is simple, and the promise bountiful,
success has proved elusive.  The first gene therapy clinical trials on two young
girls deficient in ADA (adenosine deaminase) was carried out less than a decade
ago, and were greeted with great anticipation.  The excitement was genuine but,
regretfully, was accompanied by great hype and unrealistic expectations.  There
were unexpected hurdles.

   During the past decade, however, great strides have been made to overcome
some of the hurdles, sharpening the focus on safety, generating better delivery
vehicles, developing new approaches to combat unexpected immunological
consequences and acquiring a more realistic appreciation of the clinical
end-points.  The scientific community is aware of several tantalizing anecdotes
of success with some genetic diseases and cancer.

   New methods for treating disease pose risks, however, calling for great
vigilance to protect the patient.  The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC),
the Food and Drug Administration and the Office of Biotechnology Activities
(OBA) are all involved in monitoring the safety of patients enrolled in clinical
trials involving gene therapy.

   The RAC, for example, requires investigators to provide proof of safety of
their vectors, preclinical efficacy and toxicity data on animals.  They not only
must answer scientific questions, scientists also must respond to ethical issues
including the use of patient consent forms.

   Before a clinical protocol is approved for filing of an IND, it needs the
approval of the Institute Review Board (IRB), Institute Biosafety Committee
(IBC) and the FDA, which must give the final approval for gene therapy
IND's(investigational new drug). At each step there are clear-cut rules and
guidelines before approvals can be granted.  There also are penalties if
investigators do not conform to the required practices.

   If all the appropriate oversight safety components were in place, how did the
unfortunate events leading to Jessie's death occur?  Clearly the system broke
down.  The FDA has publicly identified several procedural lapses and
irregularities which, if applied, should have raised a red flag to stop
enrollment of patients at the University of Pennsylvania for OTC trials.

   No single cause has yet emerged, but the general consensus is that Jessie's
death was likely due to the toxicity of the administered vector.  Subsequent
reports suggest that some of the serious adverse effects experienced by Jessie
may have occurred before with other patients treated with adenoviral vectors.
But these events were either not reported or under-reported.

   There remains some confusion about procedures for reporting adverse
effects.For example, how will this information be managed and relayed to other
investigators in a timely manner and how will it be made available to the
patients and general public?

   How can the RAC and the FDA ensure that adverse effects will be reported to
the fullest extent?  Is all the information regarding the safety, efficacy,
alternative treatments, and possible financial interests of
scientists/clinicians involved in clinical trials being relayed to the patient
prior to their enrollment in the trial?  Who should relay this information in a
comprehensive manner to the patient -- the primary physician, principal
investigator of the clinical trial -- or should there be a patient's advocate?

   While many of these concerns are common to all clinical trials, they are
particularly relevant to gene therapy where foreign genetic material becomes a
part of the recipient for the rest of his or her life.  Gene therapy offers an
unprecedented modality of medicine with enormous potential, but it is a young
science.

   Tragic incidences like the death of Jesse Gelsinger give reason to pause and
take stock of the progress and pitfalls of the technology.  We must learn from
our mistakes.  But we must continue to move forward to harvest the untapped
potential of this novel technology to reduce the burden of human disease.


GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; JONATHON ROSEN

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2000


                             841 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 18, 2000, Friday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-11

LENGTH: 495 words

HEADLINE: Liver gene therapy works on rats, may one day aid humans; 90 percent
of rodents' organs restored in tests

BYLINE: Paul Recer; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 WASHINGTON -- Genetic manipulation of liver cells is pointing toward a
promising new therapy that one day might offer hope for the 20 million Americans
who suffer from liver disease.

   Laboratory experiments that restored normal function in rats that had lost 90
percent of their livers suggest that the genetic manipulation of cells grown in
test tubes could rejuvenate failing liver functions.

   The study, to be published in the journal Science, found a way to grow
millions of liver cells, called hepatocytes, and then transplant them into rats
that had virtually no liver function.  The new liver cells took over the job of
the failing organ.

   "I have no idea when we could use it in humans" because the technique is
still so experimental, said Dr. Philippe Leboulch of Brigham and Women's
Hospital, the chief researcher on the study.  But he said it offers the promise
of one day helping stave off organ failure in patients waiting for a liver
transplant.

   Leboulch, an assistant professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, said
transplanted liver cells have been used in patients with failing organs before,
but the therapy had limited success because doctors were unable to isolate
enough liver cells.  Hepatocytes are very difficult to grow in the laboratory,
he said.

   The new technique uses a gene to solve this problem.

   Leboulch and his colleagues inserted into laboratory liver cells a cancer
gene that forced those cells to start reproducing without limit, a technique
known as "immortalizing."

   Although the cells multiplied by the millions, they could not be transplanted
because in the body they would be like a cancer, growing out of control.

   To solve this problem, the researchers treated the cells with an enzyme that
acts like a "genetic scissors.  It cut out and deactivated the inserted cancer
gene, halting the rapid growth of new cells.

   The cells were then injected into the spleens of rats whose livers had been
90 percent removed surgically.  About 60 percent of these animals lived normally
after receiving the genetically engineered cells.

   Control animals, which also were missing 90 percent of their livers, did not
receive the manipulated cells and died within three days.

   "This system may do away with the shortage of hepatocytes," Dr. Ira Fox, a
co-author of the study, said in Science.  "You could keep (the cells) in the
freezer and take them whenever you needed, which is not possible with primary
hepatocytes."

   Fox is a liver transplant surgeon at the University of Nebraska Medical
Center in Omaha.

   Dr. Roy Chowdhury, a liver expert at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine
in New York, said in Science that the study results were "very encouraging," but
he questioned whether rats with 90 percent of their livers surgically removed
represented a true model of human liver failure.

   Human liver failure often involves a virus or a toxin that may persist even
after the liver cells are transplanted, he said.


LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2000


                             842 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            February 18, 2000 Friday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. B-9:2,7; B-13:1

LENGTH: 928 words

HEADLINE: The promises and problems of gene therapy

BYLINE: Inder M. Verma, Verma is an American Cancer Society Professor at The
Salk Institute in La Jolla.

BODY:

   Jessie Gelsinger was barely 18 years old when he enrolled in a gene therapy
trial to correct a fatal genetic disorder that disrupted ammonia metabolism in
his body.

   Jessie's father, Paul Gelsinger, testified at a recent hearing of the U.S.
Senate Subcommittee on Public Health that his son knew he would not reap the
benefits of the clinical trial.

   But he thought his experiences might offer hope for others.

   Less than 72 hours after injection of an engineered common cold virus
(adenoviral vector) containing the gene to correct his condition, Jessie died.
Since news broke of the first reported death of a patient directly attributable
to gene therapy, the scientific community, federal regulatory agencies and the
U.S. Senate are now asking: Is there sufficient oversight for patient safety?
Gene therapy is a form of molecular medicine that has the potential to influence
vast areas of human health during this century.

   The basic concept of gene therapy is simple: introduce a gene whose product
has the ability to either cure or slow down the progression of disease. Gene
therapy could, in effect, change the practice of medicine by correcting genetic
defects, killing cancer cells, preventing cardiovascular disease, interfering
with the progression of neurological disorders and eliminating infectious
agents. Generally two types of approaches have been tried: direct injection of
genes (DNA), and manipulation of disarmed viruses (vectors) as vehicles to ferry
genes.

   Of the nearly 375 current gene therapy trials, more than 75 percent involve
the use of viral vectors. Though the concept of gene therapy is simple, and the
promise bountiful, success has proved elusive.

   The first gene therapy clinical trials on two young girls deficient in ADA
(adenosine deaminase) was carried out less than a decade ago, and were greeted
with great anticipation.

   The excitement was genuine but, regretfully, was accompanied by great hype
and unrealistic expectations.

   There were unexpected hurdles. During the past decade, however, great strides
have been made to overcome some of the hurdles, sharpening the focus on safety,
generating better delivery vehicles, developing new approaches to combat
unexpected immunological consequences and acquiring a more realistic
appreciation of the clinical end-points.

   The scientific community is aware of several tantalizing anecdotes of success
with some genetic diseases and cancer. New methods for treating disease pose
risks, however, calling for great vigilance to protect the patient.

   The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC), the Food and Drug
Administration and the Office of Biotechnology Activities (OBA) are all involved
in monitoring the safety of patients enrolled in clinical trials involving gene
therapy. The RAC, for example, requires investigators to provide proof of safety
of their vectors, preclinical efficacy and toxicity data on animals.

   They not only must answer scientific questions, scientists also must respond
to ethical issues including the use of patient consent forms. Before a clinical
protocol is approved for filing of an IND, it needs the approval of the
Institute Review Board (IRB), Institute Biosafety Committee (IBC) and the FDA,
which must give the final approval for gene therapy IND's(investigational new
drug). At each step there are clear-cut rules and guidelines before approvals
can be granted.

   There also are penalties if investigators do not conform to the required
practices. If all the appropriate oversight safety components were in place, how
did the unfortunate events leading to Jessie's death occur?

   Clearly the system broke down.

   The FDA has publicly identified several procedural lapses and irregularities
which, if applied, should have raised a red flag to stop enrollment of patients
at the University of Pennsylvania for OTC trials. No single cause has yet
emerged, but the general consensus is that Jessie's death was likely due to the
toxicity of the administered vector.

   Subsequent reports suggest that some of the serious adverse effects
experienced by Jessie may have occurred before with other patients treated with
adenoviral vectors.

   But these events were either not reported or under-reported. There remains
some confusion about procedures for reporting adverse effects.For example, how
will this information be managed and relayed to other investigators in a timely
manner and how will it be made available to the patients and general public? How
can the RAC and the FDA ensure that adverse effects will be reported to the
fullest extent?

   Is all the information regarding the safety, efficacy, alternative
treatments, and possible financial interests of scientists/clinicians involved
in clinical trials being relayed to the patient prior to their enrollment in the
trial?

   Who should relay this information in a comprehensive manner to the patient --
the primary physician, principal investigator of the clinical trial -- or should
there be a patient's advocate? While many of these concerns are common to all
clinical trials, they are particularly relevant to gene therapy where foreign
genetic material becomes a part of the recipient for the rest of his or her
life.

   Gene therapy offers an unprecedented modality of medicine with enormous
potential, but it is a young science. Tragic incidences like the death of Jesse
Gelsinger give reason to pause and take stock of the progress and pitfalls of
the technology.

   We must learn from our mistakes.

   But we must continue to move forward to harvest the untapped potential of
this novel technology to reduce the burden of human disease.

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; PHOTOBY: JONATHON ROSEN

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             843 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               February 18, 2000, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A9

LENGTH: 645 words

HEADLINE: NATION

BYLINE: From News Services

BODY:


SOUTH

MEMPHIS

Gene tests had no AIDS contamination, FDA says

   Batches of genetically engineered viruses that were injected into sick
children as part of a gene therapy experiment were not contaminated with the
AIDS or hepatitis viruses as initially feared, the Food and Drug Administration
said Thursday.

   The finding puts to rest some of the concerns raised last week when FDA
officials said they had been informed of the possible contamination by
researchers at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis.

   But the agency is still looking into the circumstances that led to the
contamination scare, including apparent lapses in safety testing and record
keeping at St. Jude.

===

EAST

WASHINGTON

Airlines have replaced 18 jackscrew devices

   U.S. airlines have replaced 18 jackscrew devices in the tail sections of
airplanes that the government ordered inspected after an Alaska Airlines plane
nose-dived into the Pacific Ocean, killing 88 people.

   The Federal Aviation Administration reported Thursday that 1,107 planes in
the MD-80, MD-90, DC-9 and Boeing 717 series were subject to the inspections
ordered on the horizontal stabilizer, the tail wing that helps level the
aircraft.

   Earlier, the FAA reported that the inspections had revealed 27 problems.  FAA
spokesman Eliot Brenner said the number was lowered to 22 after federal
regulators discovered that some of the problems reported did not reflect
defects, but "routine wear and tear."

WASHINGTON

FBI expands inquiries into computer hackers

   The number of newly opened FBI computer investigations has quadrupled since
the first electronic commerce sites were attacked last week. Investigators
theorize copycats may have emerged to attack additional but less well-known
Internet sites.

   Attacks have continued into this week, and no one knows if they have ended,
FBI spokeswoman Debbie Weierman said Thursday.

   Two days after the first attack overwhelmed Yahoo on Feb. 7, the FBI had
opened four new investigations of the so-called distributed-deni al-of-service
attacks. Now, the total is "more than 17 new investigations, including more than
13 where the victim suffered a distributed-denial-of-service attack," Weierman
said.

WASHINGTON

Panel: U.S. should improve gene-altered food tests

   The government should improve its testing and monitoring of genetically
engineered crops to ensure they aren't killing butterflies and other harmless
insects, a panel of scientists says.

   The Scientific Advisory Panel, which makes recommendations to the
Environmental Protection Agency, says the crops should be tested on a wider
variety of insects than the four species now done and that the EPA should
require more data from seed companies on the impact of crops in the field.

   About 30 percent of the corn grown in the United States last year was
genetically altered to produce its own toxin, known as Bt, that kills the
European corn borer, a major pest. EPA officials said Thursday that they are
considering the recommendations.

===

WEST

LOS ANGELES

Mayor wants tobacco funds to pay for scandal

   Mayor Richard Riordan recommended Thursday that Los Angeles set aside its
share of the national tobacco settlement - up to $ 300 million - to cover suits
brought by victims of the city's police corruption scandal.

   "This is the best use of these dollars," Riordan said at a news conference.
"Though we have no way of knowing the dollar amount, we must expect and prepare
for tens of millions of dollars of liability."

   City officials have estimated that lawsuits associated with the scandal in
the police department's Rampart Division will cost at least $ 125 million.
Investigators say rogue cops planted evidence, made up testimony, staged crime
scenes and in some cases shot unarmed suspects.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000


                             844 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       February 18, 2000 Friday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 612 words

HEADLINE: FDA SAYS VIRUSES USED ON CHILDREN IN STUDY WEREN'T CONTAMINATED

BYLINE: By Rick Weiss and Deborah Nelson The Washington Post

BODY:

   Batches of genetically engineered viruses that were injected into sick
children as part of a gene therapy experiment in Tennessee were not contaminated
with the AIDS or hepatitis viruses as initially feared, according to follow-up
tests conducted by the Food and Drug Administration.

   The finding, released by the FDA late Thursday, puts to rest some concerns
raised last week when FDA officials said they had been informed of the possible
contamination by researchers at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in
Memphis.

   But the agency said Thursday it still is reviewing the circumstances that led
to the contamination scare, including apparent lapses in safety testing at St.
Jude.

   Laura Bowman, leader of the gene therapy study, said last week she became
aware of the possibility of contamination last fall. FDA officials said they
weren't informed of the possible problem until this month.

   "We're looking at the whole situation at St. Jude to see what happened when
and how," said Kathryn Zoon, director of the FDA's Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research.

   *** Viruses improperly processed ***

   The confusion arose last fall when Bowman discovered that two children in the
St. Jude study, which was testing a gene-based treatment for a central nervous
system cancer, had been treated with viruses that hadn't been properly
processed. That error increased the odds that those batches of viruses might
have contained unwanted viruses as well.

   Worries grew when Bowman couldn't find documentation showing that appropriate
safety testing had been done on the "master batches" of gene-altered viruses
from which the patients' batches had been derived. She decided to test some of
those batches for contamination. Initial tests suggested the presence of HIV-1,
the virus that causes AIDS, and HCV, which causes hepatitis C.

   At that point, Bowman made the controversial decision to hold off informing
parents of the possible problem for weeks or months until more definitive
results could be obtained.

   Zoon said Thursday that those initial test results apparently were "false
positives," a common complication of extremely sensitive molecular assays. She
wouldn't give details of the agency's ongoing effort to understand why the
original safety test documents weren't in order, nor why it took months for the
agency to learn of the problem from Bowman. Bowman couldn't be reached for
comment Thursday.

   St. Jude has been under federal scrutiny since last summer for its handling
of three deaths in a child leukemia experiment and problems with contaminated
bone marrow preparations. It's now one of six research institutions nationwide
operating under special restrictions on human research imposed by the National
Institutes of Health.

   *** Gene therapy leader replaced ***

   Separately, the University of Pennsylvania announced Thursday that the dean
of its School of Medicine and founder of the school's troubled Institute for
Human Gene Therapy is being replaced.

   William Kelley built the university's gene therapy program from scratch into
one of the largest and most prestigious in the country. He recruited James
Wilson to head the program, which the FDA shut down in January after an
investigation of a teen-age patient's death there revealed widespread violations
of patient protection and record-keeping rules.

   University officials emphasized Thursday that Kelley's departure as dean is
unrelated to the gene therapy institute's woes, but was motivated by a need for
a new financial leader. Penn's health system lost $198 million of an annual
operating budget of $1.9 billion, despite treating a record number of new
patients last year.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2000


                             845 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    February 18, 2000, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 734 words

HEADLINE: No HIV in Children's Gene Therapy; Tests Allay Initial Fears of
Contamination in Cancer Treatment

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Deborah Nelson , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Batches of genetically engineered viruses that were injected into sick
children as part of a gene therapy experiment in Tennessee were not contaminated
with the AIDS or hepatitis viruses as initially feared, according to follow-up
tests conducted by the Food and Drug Administration.

   The negative finding, released by the FDA late yesterday, puts to rest some
of the concerns raised last week when FDA officials said they had been informed
of the possible contamination by researchers at St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital in Memphis.

   But the agency said yesterday it is still looking into the circumstances that
led to the contamination scare, including apparent lapses in safety testing and
record-keeping at St. Jude and questions about whether federal officials were
notified "promptly" of the potential problem, as is required by regulations.

   Laura Bowman, leader of the gene therapy study, said last week she first
became aware of the possibility of contamination last fall. FDA officials said
they were not informed of the possible problem until this month.

   "We're looking at the whole situation at St. Jude to see what happened when
and how," said Kathryn Zoon, director of the FDA's Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research.

   The confusion arose last fall when Bowman discovered that two children in the
St. Jude study, which was testing a gene-based treatment for a central nervous
system cancer, had been treated with viruses that had not been properly
processed. That error increased the odds that those batches of viruses might
have contained unwanted viruses as well.

   Worries grew when Bowman could not find documentation showing that
appropriate safety testing had been done on the "master batches" of gene-altered
viruses from which the patients' batches had been derived. She decided to test
some of those batches for contamination. Initial tests suggested the presence of
HIV-1, the virus that causes AIDS, and HCV, which causes hepatitis C.

   At that point, Bowman made the controversial decision--the appropriateness of
which is now being debated by ethicists and federal officials--to hold off
informing parents of the possible problem for weeks or months until more
definitive results could be obtained.

   Zoon said yesterday that those initial test results apparently were "false
positives," a not uncommon complication of extremely sensitive molecular assays.
She would not give any details of the agency's ongoing effort to understand why
the original safety test documents were not in order, or why it took months for
the agency to learn of the brewing problem from Bowman. Bowman could not be
reached for comment yesterday.

   St. Jude has been under federal scrutiny since last summer for its handling
of three deaths in a child leukemia experiment and problems with contaminated
bone marrow preparations.

   It is one of six research institutions nationwide operating under special
restrictions on human research imposed by the National Institutes of Health.

   Separately, the University of Pennsylvania announced yesterday that the dean
of its School of Medicine and founder of the school's troubled Institute for
Human Gene Therapy was being replaced.

   William N. Kelley built the university's gene therapy program from scratch
into one of the largest and most prestigious in the country.

   He recruited James Wilson to head the program, which the FDA shut down in
January after an investigation of a teenage patient's death there revealed
widespread violations of patient protection and record-keeping rules.

   University officials emphasized yesterday that Kelley's departure as dean was
unrelated to the gene therapy institute's woes but was motivated by a need for a
new financial leader. Penn's health system lost $ 198 million on an annual
operating budget of $ 1.9 billion despite treating a record number of new
patients last year. Similar losses are being experienced by other large academic
medical centers due to Medicare cutbacks, reduced payments from insurers and a
growing number of uninsured patients.

   The Philadelphia Inquirer reported last year that Kelley's salary was $ 1.28
million, more than twice what Penn President Judith Rodin earned. Kelley also
holds a broad 1997 patent on a widely used gene therapy technique that was under
study at Penn's gene therapy institute and at many other centers across the
country.


LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000


                             846 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   February 17, 2000, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1593 words

HEADLINE: Investors seek cure for Net blues in biotechs Research, development
fuel sector's surge

BYLINE: Matt Krantz

BODY:

   Move over, Internet bulls. There's a new fad in town: biotechnology.

   Biotech stocks have been growing faster than mutating mold as
Wall Street again embraces the dream of finding magic cures for
maladies persistently plaguing humanity.

   Wednesday, the stream of money into the sector turned into a torrent
as news of an advance in the fight against AIDS helped trigger
an explosive rally that left few biotech stocks untouched.

   On a day the rest of the market struggled, the American Stock
Exchange biotech index surged 12%. Individual stocks did even
better: Protein Design Labs, up 52%; Organogenesis, up 26%; Human
Genome Sciences, up 21%; and Millennium Pharmaceuticals, up 20%.


   Those gains came on top of an already impressive run. The Amex
biotech index is up 38% in February, 53% this year and a stunning
232% during the past 12 months.

   So why the rabid enthusiasm for biotech? Some analysts speculate
that the big losses in many technology and Internet stocks have
driven the fast-money crowd to biotechs in search of the next
Big Thing. Others say that the smart money on Wall Street sees
recent developments as a big step toward curing ailments that
have plagued people for centuries.

   "It's much more exciting to cure a disease than it is to browse
the Internet," says Doug Christopher, analyst with Crowell Weedon.

   Biotech companies have been giving investors real reasons to get
excited. Consider Wednesday's developments:

   * Shares of Human Genome Sciences jumped 33 1/4 to $ 188
after the company said it patented a gene that is linked with
the HIV infection and could eventually lead to a cure.

   * Protein Design Labs stock jumped 69 29/32 to $ 204 1/16
after it struck a $ 1.5 million deal with Fujisawa Pharmaceutical
to develop an antibody for the treatment of inflammatory diseases.
Tuesday, the company raised $ 150 million to be used for experiments.

   * CuraGen saw its shares jump 16 3/4 to $ 193 1/4 one week
after a medical journal reported the firm has diagrammed the proteins
in yeast. Optimists see this as the precursor to mapping the proteins
in humans -- which could unlock groundbreaking cures.

   Times change

   This isn't the first time investors have gotten giddy over the
promise of biotech. In the early 1990s, biotechs soared, but then
investors got trounced as many leading companies failed to deliver
real products.

   Will this round be different? Perhaps. Consider:

   * Computer technology has unleashed new strains of biotech
advances. Now biotech has more to do with bits and bytes than
blood and gore.

   Genomics is a branch of biotech that relies on high-powered computers
to diagram human genes with the goal of finding cures. Leaders
include Incyte, Human Genome Sciences and Gene Logic.

   Then there's proteomics, which uses computers to find what protein
components of genes play key roles in causing or stopping diseases.
Once companies such as Cytogen find such proteins, drugs can be
crafted.

   Chip technology is another emerging sector of biotech. This is
where DNA is placed on silicon chips, much like those used in
computers. This approach makes it easier for scientists to study
the DNA. Leading companies in this area include Affymetrix, Nanogen
and Caliper Technologies.

   * Biotech companies aren't just curing mice in labs. They
are coming up with real products. Leading biotech firms such as
Amgen, Genentech and Chiron are selling blockbuster drugs that
give investors an idea of what to expect.

   "Biotech companies now have products on the market and are showing
they can get FDA approval," says Jeffrey Kraws, analyst at Gruntal
& Co.

   Case in point: Organogenesis, a biotech company that created a
skin material made from two types of human skin cells that it
sells through Novartis. "We're not talking about a product that'll
be sold 10 years from now," Kraws says. "It's real, now."

   * More biotech companies are developing track records,
helping to legitimize the entire industry. For instance, Amgen's
Epogen drug, which treats anemia by stimulating red blood cell
production, has been on sale for more than a decade, says Joe
Dougherty, analyst at Warburg Dillon Read.

   And Genentech has six products on the market and 12 in development,
Dougherty says.

   Mature products such as those give analysts and investors a better
gauge of what to expect from successful research and development,
even at other companies, he says.

   There are more than 200 biotech drugs in late-stage clinical trials,
far more than the 25 that were in pivotal trials when the biotech
market last peaked in 1992, says Jim McCamant, editor of Medical
Technology Stock Letter.

   Market forces, too

   And while the biotech industry is more mature, many on Wall Street
are looking for the next hot investment now that Internet stocks
have cooled.

   Investors who have struck it rich with Net stocks hope for a similar
return from biotechs.

   "What we're seeing is Internet money going to the new health
technologies," says Samuel Isaly, manager of Eaton Vance Worldwide
Health.

   And while biotech stocks aren't cheap, they look like bargains
next to Internet companies. For instance, Amgen's 64 price-to-earnings
ratio pales next to Cisco's 175 P-E.

   There's also lots of money looking for high-growth investments.
Mutual-fund managers looking for stocks with momentum are gravitating
from Internet to biotech stocks, says Elise Wang of PaineWebber.

   Most large funds must have exposure to health care anyway, and
biotech's the only medical sector performing, Wang says. Stocks
of health care services and medical device makers are not, she
says.

   The number of health and biotech funds has exploded, from six
in 1987 to 15 in 1993 and 71 now, Lipper says.

   Tech-fund managers are also jumping into biotech because it uses
some of the same computer technology they're accustomed to with
Internet stocks, Wang says.

   The result: Demand is outstripping supply for biotech shares.
Despite a recent flurry of biotech initial public offerings, such
as Sequenom and Diversa, there are really still a small group
of stocks available, Warburg's Dougherty says.

   But even with all those things going for biotech, investors should
be careful jumping in.

   It'll take many years for many companies to harness the patents
they're now earning, Dougherty says.

   Others worry that investors are blindly running up all biotech
shares. "Investors don't know which companies will (make money)
so they buy them all," McCamant says.

   Just knowing what genes exist is a long way from finding out what
they do in the body -- and whether they can play a role in disease
treatment. It often takes five to seven years once a gene is found
to create a useful drug, McCamant says.

   A furor over gene therapy testing has also erupted after the death
last September of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger. His death was the
first connected with gene therapy testing. Several congressmen
are reviewing gene-therapy testing data for lapses in oversight.

   And even if biotechs can shake off the scrutiny, it's still unlikely
that their shares will top tech's bull run, Eaton Vance's Isaly
says. "With technology you get an immediate product that you
can sell in an instant," he says. "With biotechnology .
. . it often takes 10 years to make a profit."

   Chances are, this is just another biotech rally that'll crash
just as before, says Jeff Swarz, partner at investment firm Eagle
Partners. This is the fourth rally in biotechs in 15 years and
will probably follow the same pattern, he says. "Most biotech
rallies last 12 to 28 months. This one is 14 months old."

   ***

   Contributing: Julie Appleby, Del Jones, James Kim and John Waggoner


   Biotech giants by the numbers
Company (ticker)    1999 revenue    Wed. stock close   12-mo. pct. change   2000

 change
 Products
Amgen (AMGN)        $3.3 billion        $69 7/8      128%               16%

   Anti-anemia drug,Epogen; immune system stimulant, Neupogen; treatments
for hepatitis C and blood and bone disorders.

Genentech (DNA)     $1.4 billion        $166 5/8            166%[+1]
24%

   Heart attack treatment, Activase; breast cancer drug Herceptin;
growth hormones; treatments for cystic fibrosis and non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma.

Imunex (IMNX)       $542 million       $170 15/16           400%
56%

   Rheumatoid arthritis treatment,Enbrel; and leukemia treatments
Novantrone and Leukine.

Chiron (CHIR)       $763 million        $45 1/16             99%
6%

   Proleukin, a treatment for metastatic kidney cancer and melanoma;
pediatric vaccines; and blood tests for HIV and hepatitis.


Genzyme (GENZ)      $635 million        $52 15/16            15%         18%

    Treatments for Gaucher disease and skin and cartilage problems.






    1 - from close following July 20, 1999 IPO

    Source: USA TODAY research



GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, Color, photo illustration by Jim Sergent, USA TODAY; Photo by
PhotoDisc; GRAPHIC, Color, Marcy E. Mullins, USA TODAY, Source: American Stock
Exchange

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2000


                             847 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   February 17, 2000, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 6D - 7D

LENGTH: 4620 words

HEADLINE: ALL-USA COLLEGE ACADEMIC TEAM

BODY:
<>
The 20 members of USA TODAY's All-USA College Academic First Team
were chosen from 828 students nominated by their schools. Forty
more were named to the Second and Third teams. The students were
chosen as representatives of all outstanding undergraduates for
their grades, awards and activities, leadership and ability to
use their academic skills outside the classroom.
<>

   Daniel Baer, 23

   Harvard U.

   * Home: Littleton, Colo.

   * Class: Senior

   * GPA: 3.84

   * Majors: Social studies, Afro-American studies

   * Career goals: Politics, academia, writing

   * Achievements: Helped found SWIRL, Story Writing in Remote
Locations, a literacy program that has spread to four Australian
Aboriginal communities; co-author, high school, college survival
guides; ethnographic research in Ghana; Truman scholar; director,
after-school enrichment program; business manager, Harvard
Political Review; college mascot.


   * Parents: Jeffery Baer and Rebecca Van Buren

   * SWIRL director's comment: "Dan is a problem-solver by
nature, and he willingly shares his energy and enthusiasm."

   Jacob Chacko, 21

   U. of Southern California

   * Home: Rancho Palos Verdes, Calif.

   * Class: Senior

   * GPA: 3.97

   * Majors: Biology, gerontology

   * Career goal: Physician

   * Achievements: Co-founded USC Leadership Academy, a leadership
mentoring partnership with a high school; research on the electrical
activity in neuromuscular junctions in frogs; breast cancer research;
Marshall scholar; resident adviser; soccer team; co-chairman,
Associated Trustee Scholar Steering Committee and Student Health
Advisory Council; Mr. USC; founder, organizer, elementary school
soccer camp.

   * Parents: K.M. "Jacob" and Leela Chacko

   * Professor's comment: "He is strongly motivated to help
others, and he accomplishes this not only by his hard work, but
also by leading and inspiring others."

   Cindi Dennis, 21

   Carnegie Mellon U., Pittsburgh

   * Home: Beaver Creek, Ohio

   * Class: Senior

   * GPA: 3.94

   * Majors: Physics, computer science

   * Career goal: Research scientist

   * Achievements: Co-authored published research on developing
synthesis of magnetic Schiller layers to increase the storage
capacity of computers; designed, built apparatus to measure magnetostriction;
Rhodes scholar; Goldwater scholar; dean's student advisory council;
Carnegie Mellon Leadership Institute; founding member, Students
for the Exploration and Development of Space; licensed pilot.

   * Parents: Wayne and Ruthie Dennis

   * Adviser's comment: "She not only thinks about what she's
told to do, but tests her own hypotheses and is thinking a step
ahead about the next experiment she wants to try."

   Nir Eyal, 21

   Emory U., Atlanta

   * Home: New York

   * Class: Junior

   * GPA: 3.95

   * Majors: Political science, journalism

   * Career goals: Community service, journalism, advocacy

   * Achievements: Founded Emory READ, in which student volunteers
tutor underprivileged children; coordinated founding of similar
programs at other Atlanta campuses; founder, president, Emory
BIGS, a mentoring program; staff writer, school newspaper; fraternity
philanthropy chairman; President's Committee on the Status of
Minorities; cast member, improvisational comedy troupe; newspaper
political correspondent in Cape Town, South Africa.

   * Parents: Victor and Ronit Eyal

   * Adviser's comment: "He is more than a leader; he is
an entrepreneur in human service."

   Ginger Denison, 21

   Furman U., Greenville, S.C.

   * Home: Greensboro, N.C.  * Class: Senior

   * GPA: 3.90 * Major: Environmental chemistry

   * Career goal: Environmental analytical chemist

   * Achievements: Research on removing chromium from radioactive
tank waste, finding that reaction rate of chromium oxidation decreases
as solution ages; track team co-captain and all-conference hurdler;
Truman scholar; Goldwater scholar; established sorority Sober
Driver program; activities chair, American Chemical Society chapter;
Environmental Action Group, Furman Safety Committee, Information
Services Committee; middle school mentor.

   * Parents: Don and Jody Denison

   * Adviser's comment: "Her personality, motivation and
achievement at Furman predict that her future will be as outstanding
as the record she has created as an undergraduate."

   Zachary Friedman, 21

   Johns Hopkins U., Baltimore

   * Home: Beverly Hills, Calif.

   * Class: Senior

   * GPA: 3.94

   * Major: Political science

   * Career goal: Law, public service

   * Achievements: Articles on special interest groups published
in encyclopedia; president, College Democrats of Maryland; White
House summer intern; intern for Sen. Paul Sarbanes, D-Md.; board
member, arts and sciences curriculum committee; designer, constitutional
law Web site.

   * Parents: Stu and Judy Friedman

   * Professor's comment: "He is independent-minded, creative,
and indefatigably curious about the worlds of law and politics."

   Vivian Ka, 22

   City College of

   New York/CUNY

   * Home: Woodside, N.Y.

   * Class: Senior

   * GPA: 4.0

   * Major: Biomedical sciences

   * Career goal: Physician

   * Achievements: Study on integration of Western and Chinese
medicine that included published research on use of Chinese medicine
among Chinese homebound elderly in New York City, grading toxicity
of common Chinese herbs for international database; chapter president,
national committees, American Medical Student Association; initiated
student-run health education program at homeless shelter; fencing
team; teacher, health education at homeless shelters.

   * Mother: Betty Ka; grandmother: Sin Hing Lee

   * Dean's comment: "Perhaps most striking about Vivian
is her quiet, understated manner, which belies the great force
with which she takes on the world."

   S. Eben Kirksey, 23

   New College of the U. of South Florida

   * Home: Rockville, Md.

   * Class: Senior

   * GPA: N/A (narrative evaluations)

   * Majors: Anthropology, biology

   * Career goals: Journalism, teaching research

   * Achievements: Wrote magazine article on cultural miscommunication
of medical mission group in Panama; Marshall scholar; published
ethnographic research in Indonesia; ant behavioral research in
Panama and Costa Rica; soloist, Slavic vocal ensemble; composer,
electronic music performed in concert; Outward Bound leader and
curriculum developer; designed, taught Internet course in Indonesian.

   * Parents: Will and S. Jane Kirksey

   * Dean's comment: "Eben has a seemingly inexhaustible
supply of intellectual and physical energy."

   Amos Jones, 22

   Emory U., Atlanta

   * Home: Lexington, Ky.

    * Class: Senior

   * GPA: 3.75

   * Major: Political science

   * Career goal: Lawyer in urban policy

   * Achievements: Researcher and photographer of historic
black churches of Lexington for exhibition; principal viola, Atlanta-Emory
Orchestra; editor, black-oriented student newsmagazine; Truman
scholar; columnist, editorial page editor, student newspaper;
president of two honor societies; coordinator, residence hall
association intramural sports; deacon, University Worship.

   * Parents: LaMont and Kay Jones

   * Professor's comment: "With the intellect of a political
scientist, the curiosity of a philosopher, and the skill of an
anthropologist, Amos has created a marvelous collection of history
to which the world may now bear witness."

   Andrew March, 23

   U. of Pennsylvania

   * Home: Falmouth, Maine

   * Class: Senior

   * GPA: 3.87

   * Majors: History, political science, Islamic studies

   * Career goals: Scholar, policy adviser

   * Achievements: Scholarly analysis of ethno-separatist
conflict resolution, incorporating research in Kosovo, Northern
Ireland, Bosnia, Palestinian areas; independent election monitor
in Kosovo; co-authored working paper on Kosovo; international
translator, knows 12 languages; Marshall scholar.

   * Wife: Munhtuya Altangerel; son: Tamir Azem March

   * Professor's comment: "The languages he collects and
loves are routes into learning about the worlds that produced
them."

   Rita Ng, 22

   Stanford U.

   * Home: Tracy, Calif.

   * Class: Senior

   * GPA: 3.95

   * Major: Human biology

   * Career goal: Pediatric oncologist

   * Achievements: Presented independent research conducted
in China on effects of cultural attitudes on the treatment of
the elderly; published research on how cultural preparations of
food affect cancer risk; director, Volunteers in Health; organizer,
students who give health screenings for senior citizens; president,
Stanford Premedical Association; Cabinet member, student government;
coordinates cross-cultural medical ethics program.

   * Parents: Ron Kin-Yu and Mamie Louisa Ng

   * Adviser's comment: "Her empathy, enthusiasm, raw intelligence
and work ethic will make her a force in whatever she chooses to
do."

   Matthew Steenberg, 21

   St. Olaf College, Northfield, Minn.

   * Home: Moscow, Idaho Class: Junior

   * GPA: 3.98

   * Majors: Religion and classics

   * Career goals: Ordained clergy, professor

   * Achievements: A primary text translator on international
team working on the Orthodox Study Bible: The Old Testament, a
translation of the Septuagint into modern English for use in Orthodox
churches; writing study notes for the four books he has translated;
founded service producing software to print Hebrew and Coptic
on the Web; Great Books Program student of the year; national
Greek translation awards; president, Oxford University Orthodox
Christian Society; student representative, humanities steering
committee; research in Hebrew; college chapel sacristan; national
devotional publications; taught Visual Basic programming for America
Online and published syllabus online.

   * Parents: Craig and Karin Steenberg

   * Professor's comment: "He is equally at ease deliberating
about the influence of ancient Greco-Roman philosophy on early
Christian theology as he is designing a new Web page for an academic
department."

   Simon Rodberg, 21

   Yale U.

   * Home: New York

   * Class: Senior

   * GPA: 3.88

   * Major: American studies

   * Career goal: Public service journalism

   * Achievements: Founded, co-edited Type, a magazine
distributed free at dining halls, to get students talking about
race and ethnicity; Yale fiction prize; tutor, New Haven Juvenile
Detention Center; Social Justice Network; coordinator, forum for
seniors to discuss their theses; intramural sports captain; articles
published by Salon, The New York Times, The Village
Voice, Culturefront, Student.com, New Haven
Advocate; assisted research on poverty and the media.

   * Father: Leonard Rodberg

   * Adviser's comment: "To those without clout, he lends
not only a voice but also a cutting intellect and a powerful pen."

   Ethan Plaut, 20

   Northwestern U.

   * Home: Evanston, Ill.  * Class: Junior

   * GPA: 3.78 * Major: Formal systems and the arts

   * Career goal: Academic artist

   * Achievements: Created virtual exhibition of his artwork,
music and writing (faculty-web.at.nwu.edu/integratedarts/plaut/eth1.htm)
showing how the works relate to systems such as math, science
and linguistics; created own major exploring arts and systems;
made 90-minute video on applying math theorems to architectural
origami; origami featured in coffee-table book; collaborated on
rap album; student advisory board; Curricular Review Committee;
origami teacher at origami conventions, elementary schools.

   * Parents: Eric and Eloine Plaut

   * Adviser's comment: " 'Creation' for Ethan can mean proving
a problem in math, folding seemingly bland pieces of paper into
glorious shapes or designing computer programs that are accessible
to any viewer."

   Caroline Parler, 23

   U. of South Carolina

   * Home: Columbia, S.C.

   * GPA: 3.976

   * Major: Chemical engineering

   * Career goal: Chemical engineering research

   * Achievements: Choreographer, Taylor-Made, an original
dance work performed by USC Dance Company; presented research
on the chemical properties of new substances and their applications
in science and medicine; Rhodes scholar; Goldwater scholar; soloist,
USC Dance Company; homecoming queen; honor society national leader
of the year; sorority vice president; founding member, West African
dance company; student government.

   * Parents: Dan and Lynn Parler

   * Dean's comment: "Caroline has it all: intelligence,
drive, academic success, leadership, physical prowess, beauty,
grace and a nationally recognized record of social concern."

   Neelaksh Varshney, 21

   U. of Alabama at Birmingham

   * Home: Madison, Ala.

   * Class: Senior

   * GPA: 4.0

   * Major: Electrical engineering

   * Career goals: Physician and scientist

   * Achievements: Created a neural network model of how the
brain processes motion; had article arguing for telemedicine to
help rural communities published in bioethics journal; Rhodes
scholar; National Science Foundation Research Award; student representative,
University of Alabama System Board of Trustees; Mr. UAB; chairman,
honors program steering committee; Council of Student Government
Association Presidents; organized database on Bosnian war crimes
for Physicians for Human Rights; studied HIV mutation rates.

   * Parents: Anil Kumar and Shashi Prabha Varshney

   * Professor's comment: "He has a very rare gift for listening
carefully and building a strong sense of community, thus making
everybody a part of the group and intensifying their commitment."

   Danielle Sered, 22

   Emory U., Atlanta

   * Home: Chicago

   * Class: Senior

   * GPA: 3.98

   * Major: English

   * Career goal: Professor

   * Achievements: Traveled to Ireland to interview more than
a dozen female Irish poets for comprehensive study; interview
with Medbh McGuckian anthologized; Rhodes scholar; poetry, playwriting,
essay awards; founder, director, Emory Women's Alliance; editor
in chief, literary magazine; founder and president, ArtsReach,
teaching conflict resolution, prejudice resolution, AIDS education
through arts in schools and detention centers.

   * Parents: Meir Sered; Emmett and Joan Smith

   * Professor's comment: "Danielle is not an 'activist'
or a dossier-builder but a person of genuine social action."

   Sarvenaz Zand, 21

   Johns Hopkins U., Baltimore

   * Home: Northridge, Calif.

   * Class: Senior

   * GPA: 3.86

   * Major: Biomedical engineering

   * Career goal: Physician

   * Achievements: As director of peer counseling center,
expanded outreach programs to make the center more proactive;
helped create peer counseling program at middle school; directs
sexual-assault-response unit; published papers on using vitamin
D3 analogs to slow cancer tumor growth; designed, taught photography
course at inner-city elementary school; president, biomedical
engineering honor society; hospital volunteer.

   * Parents: Sohrab and Mehran Zand

   * Professor's comment: "She rises rapidly to leadership
in all that she does because of her charming personality and her
deep sense of investment. She leads by example."

   Ying Wu, 22

   New York U.

   * Home: Brooklyn, N.Y.

   * Class: Senior

   * GPA: 3.9

   * Majors: Biology, romance languages

   * Career goal: Physician

   * Achievements: Instrumental in starting SAT prep class
for immigrant students at University Settlement House, where she
volunteers as tutor; won grant to start "College Student for
a Day" program Feb. 24; presented genetic research on the molecular
machinery of genetic transfer of RNA; research on cross-linking
reactions that may cause cancer; Truman scholar; studied Spanish
in Venezuela; environmental essay anthologized; chair, community
service committee; president, Draper Chemistry Society; treatment
counselor, Gay Men's Health Crisis; volunteer care provider for
refugees in Switzerland, people with disabilities in France.

   * Parents: Jieying Franco and Xizeng Wu

   * Supervisor's comment: "She truly cares for others, is
committed to people and their well-being, and is perfectly willing
to help them out at any time."

   Yang Yang, 15

   California State U., Los Angeles

   * Home: San Gabriel, Calif.

   * Class: Sophomore

   * GPA: 3.96

   * Major: Political science

   * Career goal: Journalist or lawyer

   * Achievements: Accepted into college at 13; founded Los
Angeles English Guide, newspaper aiming to teach English to
Chinese youth; launching Pen Times, a Chinese/English monthly
aimed at helping Chinese children in the USA improve their writing;
book,  Yang Yang Experiences America, to be released in
China in March; rookie of the year, school newspaper; board of
directors, honors department.

   * Parents: Meiying Wang and Yinong Yang

   * Editor's comment: "She is, no doubt, brilliant, but
few brilliant people care this much about teaching others."

   <>Second Team<>

   * Sara Bush, Arizona State. GPA: 3.9. Publishing oral history
anthology of Phoenix Chinese community; field research in India;
taught English in China; editor in chief, honors college literary
magazine.

   * Candance Chang, Caltech. GPA: 3.65. Helping develop
an "electronic nose" to detect TNT in land mines; chairs undergraduate
research fellowship student advisory council; concertmistress,
Caltech-Occidental Symphony.

   * Nadarajan Chetty, Harvard. GPA: 4.0. Developing
economic model of corporate investment choice and timing; co-founder,
Harvard Current; working economic papers; published medical
research.

   * Solana Christiansen, Louisiana Tech. GPA: 4.0. Designed
Dorsi-flexion Assist Ankle-Foot Orthosis; founder, string chamber
orchestra; research on laser-assisted micromachining.

   * Pamela Daum, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,Troy, N.Y.
GPA: 3.53. Missions operations assistant, telescience research
on growth of dendrites aboard space shuttle Columbia; chairs female
mentor program; developed satellite monitoring systems.

   * Nancy Fu, Harvard. GPA: 3.6. Research on developing virus
vectors in gene therapy for neurologic dysfunction; president,
Harvard-Radcliffe international medical aid organization; gospel
choir.

   * Erika Harold, U. of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. GPA:
3.93. Spokeswoman for Project Reality, an abstinence-centered
education organization; jury nullification paper won campus research
paper award; vice president, editor and reporter at minority student
newspaper.

   * Sherry Hsu, City College of New York/CUNY. GPA: 4.0.
Research on how pravastatin removes plaque from arteries; medical
school student government; director, Harlem tutoring program;
medical informatics, microbiology research.

   * Randall Johnson, U. of Michigan. GPA: Written evaluations,
coordinated Americans of Color Abroad program to encourage minorities
to study overseas; studied in Chile and Ecuador.

   * Cody Koch, Drake U.,Des Moines. GPA: 4.0. Research on
antibodies' binding sites aimed at multiple sclerosis treatments;
student body vice president; varsity football; founded, chaired
health policy task force.

   * Donovan Maust, College of William & Mary,Williamsburg,
Va. GPA: 3.98. Analysis of maternal, child health programs
of Family Planning Association of India; musical director, a cappella
ensemble.

   * Angie Maxwell, U. of Arkansas. GPA: 3.88. As student
government president, founded safe ride program as part of effort
to create "cab culture" to prevent drunken driving; studied
Arabic in Morocco.

   * Elizabeth McQuinn, U.S. Naval Academy. GPA: 3.93. Wrote
award-winning ocean law research paper on archipelagic sea lane
passage through Indonesia; varsity track; company commander; bagpiper,
pipes and drums brigade.

   * Luke Perry, North Carolina State. GPA: 3.78. Co-founder,
president, Hope for the Homeless non-profit organization; co-founded
campus Hurricane Floyd relief effort; led work teams in Bolivia.

   * Soraya Rofagha, Ohio State. GPA: 3.86. Research on how
herpes cytomegalovirus inhibits normal cell function; student
member, university board of trustees; Truman scholar; Big Sister.

   * Mahesh Shenai, Johns Hopkins. GPA: 3.93. Developed mathematical
model of diseased heart tissue; designing cardiac implant aimed
at reducing heart failure; Goldwater scholar.

   * Jane Stoever, U. of Kansas. GPA: 4.0. Co-founder, president,
Working Against Violence Everywhere; president, commission on
the status of women.

   * Anthony Togliatti, Kenyon College,Gambier, Ohio. GPA:
3.51. Research showing creatine may help protect infants from
seizures during open-heart surgery; brain research aims to help
brain regeneration after stroke; varsity football; volunteer work
in Nicaragua.

   * Lauren Williams, Harvard.GPA: 3.73. Published graph theory
research that characterizes the exact n-step domination graphs
for cycles; Goldwater scholar; violinist in two orchestras; co-founded
national middle school math contest.

   * Luke Zettlemoyer, North Carolina State. GPA: 3.77. Published
eight research papers on intelligent user interfaces, combining
artificial intelligence and human computer interaction; university
task force on copyright and ownership; senior class council.

   <>Third Team<>

   * Travis Baggett, Saint Louis University. GPA: 3.98. Mission
work in St. Louis, the Bronx, Rosebud Lakota Sioux Indian Reservation;
editor, literary journal; chemistry research aimed at fighting
dysentery.

   * Maria Teresa Baquero, U. of Florida. GPA: 3.54. Published
research characterizing SPI-3 gene and discovered its serine proteinase
inhibitory property; president, Women in Science and Engineering,
Undergraduate Research Society.

   * Phillip Barron, U. of Massachusetts, Amherst. GPA: 3.93.
Developed, taught philosophy course for unwed teen mothers; campus
Amnesty International death penalty abolition coordinator; presented
social science papers.

   * Jeremy Lance Brown, U. of Southern Mississippi. GPA:
4.0. Translating contemporary Latin American poetry into English;
Truman scholar; founded political action committee for education
in central Alabama.

   * Jonathan Cerrito, U.S. Naval Academy. GPA: 3.96. Research
on applying neural network control systems to ship's power grid;
varsity sailing; Marshall scholar.

   * Christopher Dorsel, U. of South Carolina. GPA: 3.77.
Co-founded Second Serving, delivering cafeteria leftovers to homeless
shelter; student body vice president.

   * Kyla Hayford, Macalester College,St. Paul, Minn. GPA:
3.78. Published research on biological, political implications
of whaling in the Caribbean; captain, cross-country team; published
diabetes research.

   * Sam Hinkie, U. of Oklahoma. GPA: 4.0. CEO of student-run
start-up business that earned $ 25,000 profit in eight weeks; president,
Student Business Organization, management and marketing club.

   * Esther Huang, U. of Virginia. GPA: 3.9. Found mechanism
by which AT2 receptor functions to lower blood pressure; co-editor
in chief, literary magazine.

   * Patrick Kneeland, U. of Colorado. GPA: 3.98. Co-founded
Restorative Justice program, aiming to foster community, hold
offender responsible, satisfy victims; coordinator, student conflict
resolution service; molecular biology research.

   * Megan Knight, U. of Maryland Baltimore County. GPA: 3.94.
Research on metal in Chesapeake Bay wetlands found role of tides
in metal distribution; Goldwater scholar; president, environmental,
ballroom dance clubs.

   * Amy Lee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. GPA:
4.0. Research on endothelial cell implants in controlling vascular
repair after surgery; Goldwater scholar; president, engineering
honor society.

   * Ariel Levine, Brandeis U.,Waltham, Mass. GPA: 3.71. Research
on normal function of breast cancer gene in early mouse embryos;
founder, co-editor in chief, undergraduate academic journal.

   * Laura Schweer, U. of Nebraska. GPA: 4.0. Creator, coordinator,
peer education program on body image to discourage eating disorders;
president, sorority, honor society.

   * Daniel Shapero, Johns Hopkins U. GPA: 3.88. Helped create
qualitative model of social confict to apply to Middle East conflicts;
founded firm to develop Web sites to help prep athletes through
college recruiting process.

   * Allison Thompkins, Scripps College, Claremont, Calif. GPA:
3.89. Creating database on Hollywood depictions of those with
disabilities; president, Pan African Student Association.

   * Charity Tillemann-Dick, Regis U., Denver. GPA: 3.8. Admitted
to college at 14; founded National Civility Week initiative at
15; shepherded bill supporting initiative through Congress.

   * Eric Tuttle, Caltech. GPA: 4.0. Research on making nanometer-scale
wires from metal-coated DNA molecules; fencing team; theater group.

   * Erin Wimmers, Kenyon College,Gambier, Ohio. GPA: 4.0.
Published research on synthesizing a peptide inhibitor of protein
SHP-2; volleyball team; Goldwater scholar.

   * Sarah Zimbler, U. of Pennsylvania. GPA: 3.86. Helped
develop PENNlincs, in which undergraduates help teach science
in elementary schools; Truman scholar; supervises tutors in 15
public schools.

   <>Honorable mentions<>

   * Alabama: Laticia Bowens, U. of Alabama, Hunstville; Heather
Key, Chere LeBerte, Stephanie Swindle, U. of Alabama; Akilah Martin,
Alabama A&M

   * Arkansas: Robert Jason Reed, U. of Arkansas

   * California: Kristin Donner, California State-Fullerton;
Frank Flowers, U. of Southern California; Florian Merkle, Caltech;
Lewis Walton, Pacific Union College

   * Colorado: April Johnson, U. of Denver

   * Georgia:Robert Casey, Emory; James Ozment, Georgia Tech

   * Illinois:Fatema Esmail, Eastern Illinois U.; Tayo Ihimoyan,
Illinois Institute of Technology

   * Iowa: Henry George, Coe College

   * Maryland:Kristina Melnick, College of Notre Dame

   * Massachusetts:Megan Gerson, Boston College; Forsan Hussein,
Brandeis U.

   * Minnesota:Paul Pearson, St. Olaf College

   * Mississippi:Melanie Schrader, Millsaps College

   * Missouri:Gregory Jones, U. of Missouri-Columbia; Jodi
Johnson, William Jewell College

   * New Jersey:Michael Quinn, Stevens Institute of Technology

   * North Carolina:Jenny Chang, North Carolina State

   * Ohio:Marie Clark, Kent State; Lisa Chatwood, Miami U.;
Melissa Hays, U. of Akron

   * Oklahoma:Stacey Davidson, East Central U.; Jason Sanders,
U. of Oklahoma

   * Pennsylvania:Kristina Herbert, U. of Pennsylvania; Hayley
Iben, Duquesne U.; Rebecca McClaine, Juniata College; Erin Muller,
Lafayette College; Haomiao Zhang, Temple U.

   * South Carolina:Kristofer Neely, Wofford College; Jamie
Sittig, Clemson U.

   * Texas:Jennifer Knight, Southwestern U.; Alene Riley,
Prairie View A[M] Melissa Sky-Eagle, Texas Christian U.

   <>The judges<>

   * Lew Armistead, LA Communications

   * Frank Balz, National Association of Independent Colleges
and Universities

   * Penelope Earley, American Association of Colleges for
Teacher Education

   * Cheryl Fields, National Association of State Universities
and Land Grant Colleges

   * Shanda Ivory, National Association for College Admission
Counseling

   * Gary Marx, Center for Public Outreach

   * Tim McDonough, American Council on Education

   * Iris Molotsky, American Association of University Professors

   * George "Pinky" Nelson, American Association for the
Advancement of Science

   * Sarah Ridley, public humanities programmer

   * Jadwiga Sebrechts, Women's College Coalition

   * Robert Thornton, Housatonic Community-Technical College

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Color, C.J. Gunther for USA TODAY; PHOTO, Color, Robert
Hanashiro, USA TODAY; PHOTO, Color, Gary Tramontina for USA TODAY; PHOTO, Color,
Michael Schwarz, USA TODAY; PHOTO, Color, Patrick Collard, AP, for USA TODAY;
PHOTO, Color, Tim Dillon, USA TODAY; PHOTO, Color, Robert Deutsch, USA TODAY;
PHOTO, Color, R. Scott Martin for USA TODAY; PHOTO, Color, Michael Schwarz, USA
TODAY; PHOTO, Color, Eileen Blass, USA TODAY; PHOTO, Color, Nikitin, AP; PHOTO,
Color, Alastair Grant for USA TODAY; PHOTO, Color, Robert Deutsch, USA TODAY;
PHOTO, Color, Anne Ryan, USA TODAY; PHOTO, Color, Kim Truett, AP; PHOTO, Color,
Blake Sims, AP; PHOTO, Color, Tim Dillon, USA TODAY; PHOTO, Color, Michael
Schwarz, USA TODAY; PHOTO, Color, Robert Deutsch, USA TODAY; PHOTO, Color,
Robert Hanashiro, USA TODAY

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2000


                             848 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  February 16, 2000, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: LETTERS; Pg. A22

LENGTH: 175 words

HEADLINE: LETTERS TO THE EDITOR;
MONEY PRESSURES COMPROMISE GENE THERAPY

BODY:

   The very novelty of the research concepts that guide "gene therapy"
experiments as well as the methods employed in their execution make a mockery of
the possibility of informed consent in these experiments by the subjects of the
research.

   With financial and scientific stakes so high, researchers are likely to
present experimental protocols in an unduly positive light to potential research
subjects and their families, who are eager for any ray of hope they are offered.

    Institutional review boards are also likely to receive overly optimistic
descriptions of projected experiments and get caught trying to balance safety
against the potential for scientific progress. The problem lies less in the
individuals than in the current system of for-profit medical research and health
care delivery. Inflated expectations for the economic and medical benefits of
genetic manipulations make researchers and subjects alike willing to participate
in risky enterprises.

   RUTH HUBBARD

   MARTIN TEITEL Council for Responsible Genetics Cambridge

GRAPHIC: DRAWING, JOHN OVERMYER ILLUSTRATION

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2000


                             849 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    February 16, 2000 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 030

LENGTH: 721 words

HEADLINE: Letters to the Editor; Race card misplayed

BODY:

   The Herald reports ("Feds eye race bias charges in Lawrence school chief
flap," Feb. 4) that the U.S. Justice Department is investigating allegations
that race played a role in this controversy. This is a case of playing the race
card to try and cover up the misuse of funds that should have been spent to
repair one of the poorest school systems in the state. This superintendent and
her advisers have abused the public trust and done more damage to a school
system that could not afford to take another hit from selfish administrators.
Not only have the taxpayers lost money, Lawrence students have lost the
education they deserve. What is happening is not a media lynching, as
Superintendent Mae Gaskins called it; it is justice. -  Kenneth Lavoie, Fall
River

   What's Feder's problem?

   What is Don Feder's problem with John McCain ("And McCain does it best of
all," Feb. 9)? He's harped about the lack of character of the Clinton
administration and now we have a man who demonstrates his sound character day
after day and Don lambastes him. None of the doctrinaire conservatives - Feder
endorsed Steve Forbes while saying he admired Gary Bauer and Alan Keyes - ever
had a chance of election. - James Higgins, Hyde Park

   Gene therapy's risks

   The gene therapy controversy highlights some serious contradictions by
leading institutions that profess to put the interests of patients before
stockholders ("Medical ethicist says halt gene therapy," Feb. 8).

   It's disconcerting that two of the hospitals cited as doing the most trials,
Dana-Farber Partners Cancer Care and St. Elizabeth's, have vowed to continue the
trials despite safety concerns which led to Senate hearings and voluntary
suspensions by other institutions.

   It appears that the best interests of the subjects is inconsequential to the
investments of publicly traded biotech firms. As Boston University ethicist
George Annas said, "When researchers worry more about share values than about
patients, we're in trouble." - Linda DeBenedictis, President, N.E. Patients'
Rights Group, Norwood

   Quotes clarified

   I would like to set the record straight in regard to quotes attributed to me
about constant tension between gays and straight students ("3rd teen charged in
alleged gay attack on peer," Feb. 2).

   I told the Herald that Boston High was a microcosm of a greater society where
a constant tension can exist among gays, lesbians, bisexuals or transgendered
people. At Boston High we deal proactively with this issue through workshops,
anti-discrimination policies and support groups.

   I also was misquoted about the question of exploring personal rage. I said
that we as a society must explore why the perception of someone being gay,
lesbian, bisexual or transgendered could create such a rage that some
individuals would resort to violence. - John W. MacDonald, Guidance Specialist,
Boston High School

   Arrogance means crisis

   Jack Meyers' front-page expose on the old girl network at the Boston Housing
Authority under Sandra Henriquez starts to explain why we have an affordable
housing crisis under the Menino patronage system ("Housing honcho raised her own
salary," Feb. 7). It goes way beyond high prices, luxury overbuilding and lack
of affordable housing stock. Many are afraid to tackle the quagmire because
those in charge use sacred-cow status to deflect investigators. Tenants, in a
tight market, just shut up and tolerate it. Political correctness has given way
to rampant greed, not just at the top but all through the BHA subsidy set-aside
system.   - G. Steven Rose, Boston

   E.R. overreaction

   An emergency room interpreter bill ("Speaking for family; bill targets child
interpreters," Feb. 6)?

   People from Bosnia and Sudan may indeed have difficulty and sometimes might
even feel humiliated. But I'm certain they are aware of how lucky they are that
their medical problems are now limited to communicating in emergency rooms.

   Children have been translating for their immigrant parents for generations.
The touchy-feely social service types who feel "absolutely wrong" asking kids to
translate should get a life. How great are those problems compared to living
under barrages of bombs? Throwing another financial burden on hospitals and more
regulatory power onto the state is a terrible idea. -  George Airasian,
Watertown

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2000


                             850 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

             February 15, 2000, TUESDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; NATION/WORLD BRIEFS; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: Eastern Europeans fight spill of cyanide into river

BODY:


   Work crews pulled out tons of dead fish from the Tisza and Danube rivers
Monday, and Romania rebuffed compensation demands from Yugoslavia and Hungary
for the gold mine spill that contaminated the rivers with cyanide. Romania said
it, too, suffered damage when a dam at the Australian-owned Baia Mare gold mine
in northwest Romania overflowed Jan. 30, sending cyanide into streams that
carried the poison west. Serbia banned the sale of most freshwater fish Monday,
and Hungary warned of long-term ecological damage.

   Weapons expert tries to defuse missile report

   The Pentagon is moving too rapidly toward a recommendation on whether its
national missile defense project is ready for deployment, the Pentagon's chief
weapons tester said Monday. In a report to Congress and Defense Secretary
William Cohen, Philip Coyle questioned Cohen's plan to review the project's
status in June. A June review puts "unrealistic pressure" on the project's
managers, Coyle wrote.

   University pleads case in gene therapy death

   The University of Pennsylvania told the federal government Monday an Arizona
teenager's death from a gene therapy experiment was unavoidable. The Food and
Drug Administration last month suspended the university's gene therapy studies,
citing 18 rule violations in the experiment that killed 18-year-old Jesse
Gelsinger, of Tucson, Ariz., last fall. The university insisted that none of the
alleged violations would have changed Gelsinger's care. Gelsinger was injected
with a virus with genes designed to correct a genetic liver disorder. He
suffered a toxic reaction and died four days later.

   Israel, Syria plot taking a French twist

   Covert contacts through France apparently are under way to try to restart
Israeli-Syrian peace talks that could end the guerrilla war in Lebanon. Israel's
Foreign Ministry Director-General Eitan Bentsur was in Paris over the weekend
for talks with French diplomats, an Israeli official said. Israel uses France to
send messages to Syria and Lebanon.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2000


                             851 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                    February 15, 2000, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 11; National Desk

LENGTH: 89 words

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF / PENNSYLVANIA;
 RESEARCHERS ADMIT GENE THERAPY ERRORS

BYLINE: From Times Wire Reports

BODY:


   The University of Pennsylvania admitted some mistakes in a gene therapy
experiment that killed a teenage volunteer in September, promising improvements
but denying liability for the death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18. The university hopes
to persuade the FDA to reopen its gene therapy program, which regulators
suspended last month after uncovering serious problems in the way researchers
carried out an experimental treatment for a rare liver disorder that led to the
first fatality attributed to the controversial field of medicine.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2000


                             852 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                    February 15, 2000 Tuesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 95 words

HEADLINE: University defends gene therapy studies

BYLINE:  From Journal Sentinel wire reports

BODY:

   Washington -- The University of Pennsylvania told the federal government on
Monday that an Arizona teenager's death from a gene therapy experiment was an
unavoidable tragedy, not the result of research violations.

   The Food and Drug Administration last month suspended all the university's
gene therapy studies, citing 18 rule violations in the experiment that killed
18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson, Ariz., last fall.

   On Monday, the university filed a response with the FDA acknowledging some
"procedural" problems but disagreeing with some of the charges.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2000


                             853 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 15, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Defend Suspended Gene Therapy

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 14

BODY:

   In a vigorous defense of their suspended gene therapy program, officials at
the University of Pennsylvania said today that while there were administrative
lapses they did not in any way contribute to the death of an 18-year-old patient
and amounted to little more than "minor deviations" in bookkeeping.

   In a 28-page written response to the Food and Drug Administration's decision
to shut down all human gene therapy experiments at Penn, scientists there
pledged to draft new procedures that would allow them to track patients in their
studies better. But at several turns, they challenged the agency's assertion of
"numerous serious deficiencies" in their program.

    The researchers maintained that the patient who died, Jesse Gelsinger, was
properly enrolled in the clinical trial, while the F.D.A. said he should never
have been treated. They said every patient in the study "gave clear and
unambiguous consent," while the agency found serious lapses in the way the
explanation of benefits and risks was documented.

   And while the scientists acknowledged that they were two to three months late
in telling the food and drug agency about serious side effects experienced by
other patients, the scientists said they did provide the information, which the
agency could have used to stop the study, six months before Mr. Gelsinger's
death.

   "There were what we believe to be largely minor breaches of filing forms at
particular times, but those in no way contributed to this unfortunate and tragic
event," Dr. Richard L. Tannen, senior vice dean of the university's medical
school, said today in an interview. "Based on our retrospective, careful
in-house review, we have not found any evidence at all that things would have
been changed if these minor deviations had not occurred."

   Dr. Tannen said the university was hoping the report would help persuade the
agency to lift its suspension of gene therapy experiments, but whether that
would happen anytime soon was unclear. A spokesman for the food and drug agency,
Lawrence Bachorik, said only that the agency had received the report and would
review it as part of its investigation.

   "We're still weighing our options and there are many options," he said.

   Although he declined to be more specific, the agency could take a number of
steps, ranging from no further action to issuing a warning letter, or in the
most serious case, prohibiting scientists from participating in future research.

   As far as government officials know, Mr. Gelsinger, who died on Sept. 17, is
the first person killed by gene therapy. His death has triggered intense
scrutiny of the decade-old field and has raised questions about whether federal
oversight is adequate. Earlier this month, the National Institutes of Health
said that gene therapy scientists had routinely ignored federal guidelines for
reporting the side effects for patients.

   And just last week, questions were raised about another study, this one at
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, in which children with brain
cancer may have been inadvertently exposed to the viruses that cause AIDS and
hepatitis during a gene therapy experiment. In that case, the principal
investigator has said the possibility that any children were harmed was
"infinitesimally small."

   But an advocate for patients complained that both the St. Jude scientist and
the Penn response today played down the failings of the experiments.

   "Biomedical researchers have a tendency to trivialize their violations," said
Vera Hassner Sharav, president of Citizens for Responsible Care and Research, a
advocacy group based in New York. "That is precisely why we need independent
checks and balances that are mandated by federal law."

   Dr. Tannen said the Penn report was prepared by university scientists,
including Dr. James Wilson, the principal investigator of the study and the
director of the university's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, and was reviewed
by lawyers.

   No suit has been filed in connection with the death, although Paul Gelsinger,
Jesse's father, has hired a lawyer. The lawyer, Alan Milstein, said today that
he found the university's response "incredible, in light of the findings of the
F.D.A."

   Mr. Gelsinger suffered a fatal immune reaction while participating in a study
of the safety of a treatment for ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, a
hereditary disorder from which he suffered. When the food and drug agency
investigated the experiment, it found 18 failings in the way the scientists
followed rules designed to protect patients from harm.

   Among the most serious accusations was that Mr. Gelsinger should never have
been treated because his blood ammonia levels were too high on the day before
the therapy, an infusion of corrective genes, was administered. But the Penn
scientists said today that Mr. Gelsinger's ammonia levels had fluctuated and
added that there were no specific requirements that they be at a certain level
on the date of the treatment.

   The F.D.A. also found that the researchers waited until after Mr. Gelsinger
died to fill out eligibility forms for the patients in the study, a finding the
Penn team said had been misinterpreted to suggest that the group was covering
its tracks. The Penn team said the forms were developed and filled out as part
of an internal review of the death.

   Those forms will now become standard for Penn gene therapy experiments, said
Dr. Tannen, adding that the university will also develop a manual of standard
operating procedures, a document the F.D.A. said should have been in place all
along. He said he hoped the procedural changes would be complete within the next
month to six weeks. In the meantime, a team of independent scientists, appointed
by Dr. Judith Rodin, Penn's president, is also reviewing the gene therapy
institute's work.

   Asked how the institute, with a $25 million annual budget and some 250
employees, could have operated without such standards, Dr. Tannen said, "It
wasn't that they weren't carefully following what they were doing. It was just
that, in truth, in regard to those issues, they could have done better."



   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2000


                             854 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 15, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NAME: Richard McCormick

SECTION: Section C; Page 27; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

HEADLINE: Richard McCormick, Theologian, Dies at 77

BYLINE: By PETER STEINFELS

BODY:

   The Rev. Richard A. McCormick, for many years the dominant American voice in
Roman Catholic moral theology, especially on the daunting questions of medical
ethics that have emerged in recent times, died on Saturday. He was 77 and lived
at the Colombiere Center in Clarkston, Mich., a residence of the Society of
Jesus.

   The cause was pneumonia, said the Rev. Richard McBrien, a close friend and
colleague at the University of Notre Dame.

    Father McCormick, who was the John A. O'Brien professor of Christian ethics
at Notre Dame until last year, influenced the public and several generations of
Catholic theologians with his magisterial grasp of the fine distinctions and
painstaking arguments that Catholic moral theology developed over the centuries.

   He demonstrated the relevance of this tradition to biomedical problems like
in vitro fertilization, surrogate motherhood, abortion, euthanasia, gene
therapy, access to medical care and patients' rights.
 While vigorously representing Catholic moral teachings in public debates, where
he was viewed as a conservative on abortion and euthanasia, Father McCormick
questioned some of the tradition's absolute norms -- particularly in regard to
contraception, sterilization and other sexual and reproductive issues -- in ways
that drew opposition from some conservative Catholic theologians and Vatican
officials.

   A section of Pope John Paul II's 1993 encyclical "Veritatis Splendor" ("The
Splendor of Truth") rejected an approach to moral reasoning known as
"proportionalism," with which Father McCormick was associated.

   Father McCormick contended that the document had misrepresented
proportionalists, none of whom would recognize themselves, he said, in the
encyclical's description.

   He defended the place of "conscientious dissent" in the church, provided it
followed an effort to assimilate official teachings, a process he said "must be
prayerful, arduous, reflective, informed."

   Last June, the annual convention of the Catholic Theological Society of
America featured a debate about theological dissent between Father McCormick and
the Rev. Avery Dulles, a fellow Jesuit and an elder statesman of American
Catholic theology.

   Although Father McCormick had a minor stroke while traveling to Lourdes,
France, he postponed an operation on an occluded artery to participate in the
debate. When the surgery did take place, in late June, it resulted in another
stroke that left Father McCormick paralyzed and unable to read or write but
clear of mind and able to speak.

   The Jesuit weekly, America, once described Father McCormick as almost
"genetically destined for a career in medical ethics." He was born in Toledo,
Ohio, in October 1922, the son of a physician who served a term as president of
the American Medical Association. Ordained a priest in 1953, Father McCormick
completed his doctoral studies four years later in Rome. He had joined the
Jesuit order in 1940.

   "He had an enormous influence on Catholic moral theology in the whole world,"
said the Rev. Charles E. Curran, who co-edited 11 volumes of readings in moral
theology with Father McCormick.

   That influence began with the "Notes on Moral Theology," a regular survey
tracking publications in English, German, French, Spanish and Italian, which
Father McCormick wrote from 1965 to 1984 for the scholarly journal Theological
Studies. He described and evaluated an enormous body of current thinking on
issues that included divorce and remarriage and nuclear deterrence, as well as
bioethical topics like experimentation on humans.

   In 1973, after 16 years of teaching moral theology to Jesuit seminarians, he
became the Rose F. Kennedy professor of Christian ethics at the Kennedy Center
for Bioethics at Georgetown University. He joined the faculty at Notre Dame in
1986. He was a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and president
of the Catholic Theological Society of America in 1969-70.

   Besides his scholarly books and articles, Father McCormick wrote for a
general readership in Catholic journals like America and Commonweal, on the
op-ed pages of The New York Times and The Washington Post, and even in Sports
Illustrated.

   "He was one of the few public theologians in the Catholic church," Father
McBrien said. "He made himself available to the press and television, he
lectured before all kinds of audiences, he mediated the conclusions of
scholarship to a wider public."

   By all accounts, Father McCormick never tried to construct a major
theological synthesis.

   "He was not a large-scale systems builder," said Daniel Callahan, the
co-founder and former president of the Hastings Center, a research center on
biomedical problems where Father McCormick had been a fellow. "Instead, he did a
lot of very careful, very specific articles pushing forward the frontiers of
ethics in a methodical way."

   Father McCormick was known for his unpretentiousness and his pastoral
instincts. Sidney Callahan, a clinical psychologist and author who is married to
Daniel Callahan, recalled being stunned by a lecture the priest gave and telling
him afterwards, "You know, Dick, you're such a nice guy that I forget how smart
you are."

   Father McCormick is survived by three sisters, Carol Sala of Pepper Pike,
Ohio, and Kathleen Brooks and Mary Jo Anderson of Toledo.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Rev. Richard A. McCormick (University of Notre Dame)


LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2000


                             855 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 15, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1190 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   INTERNATIONAL   A3-16

Russians Seal Grozny And Order Evacuation
Military commanders ordered Chechnya's capital emptied of its surviving
residents and sealed. A senior Interior Ministry officer said the city was too
dangerous for its inhabitants, but the military conceded that the move was also
a precaution against rebel infiltration.   A1

Deal With Laundering Suspects
Two suspects in a federal inquiry into billions of dollars illegally transferred
from Russia through the Bank of New York agreed to plead guilty to
money-laundering charges, people involved in the inquiry said. The suspects,
Lucy Edwards, a former bank official, and her husband, Peter Berlin, were
expected in New York from London today to surrender.   A1


   Afghans Charged in Hijacking
British officials charged 13 Afghans with hijacking the airliner that spent last
week at a British airport with more than 150 people aboard.   A3

Warning on Kosovo Tensions
The two people in charge of the divided town of Mitrovica, a United Nations
administrator and a French general, said they were counting on two foreign
judges to punish extremists after 12 days of violence. Unless the violence
stops, the officials said, ethnic relations may be permanently damaged.   A16

Arms Scandal in Turkey
A growing scandal in Turkey stemming from a crackdown on a religious terror
group has led to accusations that the group may have received weapons from the
government.   A13

Life on the Run
A former governor in Mexico who went underground to avoid arrest on drug
charges, Mario Villanueva Madrid, shown in 1998, is "living like a guerrilla,"
sleeping by day and often moving by night, a journalist who met him recently
said.   A4

Mexican Student Strikers
Scuffles broke out at the Mexican national university as tens of thousands of
students returned for the first official day of classes since a strike started
on April 20.   A6

World Briefing   A10

NATIONAL   A18-25

Tornadoes Kill 22 In Southern Georgia
Twisters descended on southwest Georgia in the predawn hours, killing at least
22 people, injuring more than 100 and transforming subdivisions into wastelands
of debris.   A1

2 Columbine Students Killed
Two sophomores at Columbine High School were found shot to death in a sandwich
shop where one of them worked, near the Colorado school. The police were seeking
to question a man seen leaving the area just before the bodies were found.   A18


Focus on Screw in Jet's Tail
A federal investigator said experts at the N.T.S.B. were increasingly convinced
that a screw in the tail of an Alaska Airlines jet was damaged before the plane
plunged into the Pacific last month and was a factor in problems controlling the
aircraft leading up to the accident.   A25

Social Security Income Limits
House Republicans introduced legislation to let most Social Security recipients
earn as much money as they could without giving up any of their retirement
benefits.   A21

Chafing at Missile Deadline
A top Pentagon official complained of undue pressure to meet an "artificial"
summer deadline for recommending whether to deploy the national missile defense
system.   A25

Experience With Hostile Polls
The chief architect of George W. Bush's presidential campaign, Karl Rove, helped
draft a tobacco-financed push-poll that was used against the Texas attorney
general at the time, a Democrat, to try to stop a planned state lawsuit against
tobacco companies.   A22

Settlement on Voting Places
The South Carolina Republican Party settled a legal challenge brought by
Democrats and agreed to open every available polling place in the state,
including those in heavily Democratic and black areas that were closed in
previous years.   A22

Senator John McCain and Governor George W. Bush appealed to independents and
Democrats to vote.   A22

Bradley Assails Gore on Tactics
Bill Bradley accused Vice President Al Gore of resorting to "outrageous scare
tactics" in criticizing Mr. Bradley's health care plan.   A23

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Officers Take Stand to Tell Their Side in Diallo Killing
Officers Sean Carroll and Edward McMellon testified at their murder trial about
why they believed Amadou Diallo had a gun when they and two other officers on
trial opened fire at him in a vestibule last year.   A1

Study on Bus Pollution
Buses powered by compressed natural gas -- long viewed as the cleanest
alternative to diesel -- are no better for the environment than buses powered by
a combination of diesel and electricity, a study reported.   B1

Trial in Socialite's Death
Prosecutors delivered their opening statement in the murder trial of Sante and
Kenneth Kimes, a mother and son accused of murdering an Upper East Side
millionaire in a scheme to steal her town house.   B3

NEEDIEST CASES   B4

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-12

Rendezvous With an Asteroid
The spacecraft NEAR began circling the asteroid Eros, which is about twice the
size of Manhattan, to become the first man-made object to orbit such a space
rock.   A20

Defending Gene Therapy Work
University of Pennsylvania officials said there were "minor deviations" and
administrative lapses in their suspended gene therapy program, but that none had
contributed to the death of an 18-year-old patient.   A20

Health & Fitness   F7

ARTS   E1-8

FASHION   B7

SPORTS   D1-8

$1 Million Bail for Lewis
A Georgia judge ruled that the All-Pro linebacker Ray Lewis, who faces murder
charges in the fatal stabbing of two men after the Super Bowl in Atlanta, could
be released.   D2

BUSINESS DAY   C1-26

Elevated at Merrill Lynch
The nation's biggest brokerage firm put its chief financial officer, E. Stanley
O'Neal, 48, one of the highest-ranking blacks on Wall Street, in charge of its
14,200-broker force, setting him on a track to be the next chairman.   C1

Barrel of Crude Surpasses $30
The price of crude oil jumped to more than $30 a barrel for the first time since
the Persian Gulf war, and a sharp run-up in gasoline prices this summer looks
increasingly likely.   C1

Bid to Dominate Health on Web
Healtheon/WebMD said it would buy two competitors, Medical Manager and
CareInsite, for $5.2 billion.   C1

Cyberattack Inquiry Progress
Investigators looking into the large-scale Web attacks last week were studying
online conversations secretly monitored by security experts before and during
the attacks.   C2

Stocks Reverse Course
The Dow gained 94.63 points, to 10,519.84; the Nasdaq climbed 23.10 points, to
4,418.55; and the S.& P. 500 closed up 2.82 points, at 1,389.94.   C15

Business Digest   C1

OBITUARIES   C26-27

EDITORIAL   A26-27

Editorials: Albany's snoozing leadership; the truth about Chile; Brent Staples
on the Confederate flag.
Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Gail Collins.

Crossword   E4

TV Listings   E7

Public Lives   B2

Weather   D5


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2000


                             856 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      FEBRUARY 15, 2000 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1154 words

HEADLINE: PENN ADDRESSES FDA'S SHUTDOWN OF GENE THERAPY, CITES AMBIGUITY

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Hoping to lift the federal government's suspension of its gene-therapy
trials, the University of Pennsylvania yesterday delivered a point-by-point
reply to FDA criticisms of an experimental gene-therapy trial in which an
Arizona teenager died.

   The response comes three weeks after the FDA issued a stinging critique of a
Penn trial aimed at testing the safety of a novel gene drug to correct a rare
liver disorder.

   Although it investigated only one trial, the FDA said its review turned up
evidence that Penn's world-renowned gene-therapy program did not have adequate
procedures in place to guarantee patient safety in any trial.

   As a result, on Jan. 21 the agency took the unusual step of shutting down all
trials conducted by Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy and its director,
James M. Wilson. Seven additional trials were affected.

   Penn's 34-page rebuttal to the FDA presented no major new information beyond
what university researchers have already said in defense of the two-year trial
that was voluntarily stopped by Penn after the patient death.

   However, Penn's response presented a much more nuanced picture than that put
forth by the FDA in its criticisms. The university pointed to ambiguity in the
FDA requirements, differing interpretations of those requirements, and the
failure of both the FDA and Penn to correctly read each other's signals about
what was - and was not - to be allowed during the trial.

   In some instances, the Penn team said it moved forward with its own reading
of what was allowable because, while it did not have explicit approval from the
FDA, it did not have explicit disapproval, either.

   In the document, Penn acknowledged numerous deviations from trial protocol or
agreements with the FDA. But the university repeated its earlier assertions that
the lapses had no bearing on the Sept. 17 death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of
Tucson, Ariz., who died four days after being given an experimental gene drug.

   "Most important, we do not believe that any of [the lapses] led to this
terrible tragedy of Jesse Gelsinger's death," said Dr. Richard Tanen, senior
vice dean at the Penn Medical School, in an interview yesterday. "We ought to be
100 percent perfect. We need to improve. But had none of these [lapses]
occurred, it would not have made any difference" in the outcome for Gelsinger.

   Gelsinger, who suffered from a liver disease known as ornithine
transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, was the 18th patient to get an experimental
gene drug. The drug was being tested for its safety.

   His death is still not fully understood. Penn doctors say the youth had an
unusual immune-system reaction to the disabled cold virus used to deliver a
corrective gene, causing his lungs and other organs to shut down.

   Gelsinger is believed to be the first person to die as a direct result of a
gene-therapy experiment. About 4,000 Americans, most in the final stages of
incurable cancer, have undergone experimental gene therapy, which has not yet
been proven effective at curing disease.

   FDA officials yesterday had no immediate comment on Penn's response to the
agency's earlier criticism, which identified 18 specific lapses in the OTC
trial. Had it not been for several of the lapses, Gelsinger might never have
been allowed in the trial, FDA officials have said.

   As part of its response, Penn said it would institute a number of programs to
improve the monitoring of gene-therapy trials.

   The Institute for Human Gene Therapy is to adopt an official list of standard
operating procedures by April 6. And an outside firm is to be hired to make sure
the institute strictly adheres to all regulatory requirements in future
gene-therapy trials, Penn officials said.

   In their reply to the FDA, Penn officials attempted to answer a number of key
issues raised by the regulatory agency. Among them:

   An FDA assertion that Gelsinger should never have been given the gene drug
because his ammonia levels were too high.

   In reply, Penn officials argued that, although the protocol was clear that no
one could be in the trial with an ammonia reading of more than 70 micromolars
per liter - micromolars are units of scientific measurement relating to the
molecular weight of a substance - it was not clear as to when that reading was
to be taken.

   Gelsinger was under the limit when he was screened in June but went over it -
up to 91 - on Sept. 12, the day before he got the gene drug. Penn officials said
they gave him medicine that reduced the ammonia level to 60 four hours after he
underwent gene therapy.

   In any event, the scientists argued, "available scientific evidence does not
establish any causal link" between Gelsinger's ammonia level before infusion
with the gene drug and his death.

   An FDA assertion that Penn, in violation of its agreement with the FDA,
should not have treated Gelsinger with the highest dose of the gene drug until
it had treated two women with the same dose. Just one woman was treated at that
dose before Gelsinger.

   In reply, Penn said that while the FDA was clear about requiring a female to
be treated with any given dose of the gene drug before any male was treated, it
was not clear that two women were to go first.

   And, earlier in the trial, the FDA had given Penn permission to treat just
one woman before a man, Penn officials said.

   In addition, Penn officials said they used their "experienced clinical
judgment" in moving on to Gelsinger after treating just one woman at the highest
dose. Before Gelsinger, there had been no evidence that the men had any more
severe reactions than the women, Penn officials reported.

   An FDA contention that Penn failed to report the deaths of two monkeys to the
federal agency until after Gelsinger had died. The implication drawn by the FDA
criticism was that the trial might have been halted had the regulators known
about the monkey deaths sooner.

   Penn officials said the two monkeys that died were given a different version
of the modified cold virus that the scientists were using as a gene-delivery
vehicle, or "vector." By contrast, the vector used for Gelsinger and other OTC
patients was not fatal to the one monkey in which it was tested as part of the
animal experiment.

   Penn officials said the experiment was not reported to the FDA sooner because
it was being conducted in preparation for an entirely different trial, involving
colorectal cancer patients.

   Penn's response to the FDA is the result of three weeks of fact-finding by
scientists, administrators and lawyers. Much rides on the outcome. If the FDA
accepts the university's response and plan for corrective action, Penn's
gene-therapy program will be able to move forward.

   If the FDA rejects the response, Penn's gene-therapy program, until now the
largest in the nation, could remain in limbo, hobbling its work on diseases such
as cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and various cancers.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             857 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   February 15, 2000, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 530 words

HEADLINE: TEMPLE TOPS FORDHAM, 75-61;
SANCHEZ SCORES SEASON-HIGH 20 POINTS FOR 19TH-RANKED OWLS;
PENN DENIES DEATH LIABILITY;
BUT ADMITS ERRORS IN GENE EXPERIMENT

BYLINE: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS; DEBORAH NELSON AND RICK WEISS, THE WASHINGTON POST

BODY:


   The University of Pennsylvania yesterday admitted some mistakes in a gene
therapy experiment that killed a teen-age volunteer in September, promised
improvements but denied liability for the death.

   The university is hoping to persuade the Food and Drug Administration to
reopen its gene therapy program, which regulators shut down last month after
uncovering serious problems in the way the research team carried out an
experimental treatment for a rare liver disorder that led to the September death
of Jesse Gelsinger, 18 - the first fatality attributed to the controversial
field of medicine.

   In a 36-page unsigned response to the FDA, the university conceded certain
reporting and recordkeeping shortcomings in its research program - most notably
the failure to halt the experiment and notify the agency as required after
volunteers suffered serious side effects from the treatment. Researchers
previously said they gave adequate notice to the FDA.

   The university also outlined changes it was making to more fully assure the
safety of study volunteers and to enhance communication between researchers and
federal regulators. In particular, the university will hire an outside
contractor to help keep track of research paperwork and monitor compliance with
FDA rules, the letter states.

   The university "will work closely with FDA to implement new clinical trial
procedures to improve its monitoring and related practices and to provide
additional patient safeguards to the fullest extent possible," the document
states.

   But the letter disputes the FDA's contention that Gelsinger was ineligible
for the experiment because the Tucson, Ariz. teenager's disease was too unstable
to meet the enrollment criteria at the time of his treatment. Researchers were
justified in thinking the criteria referred to his physical condition at the
time he was enrolled in June rather than when he received his genetic infusion
in September, according to the letter. In any case, the letter states,
researchers reasonably concluded that he was fit enough to participate just
before undergoing the procedure.

   The document repeatedly asserts that none of the university's failings
contributed to Gelsinger's death and that nothing in his medical history could
have predicted his fatal reaction.

   "As deeply regrettable as Jesse Gelsinger's death was, it was simply not
foreseeable based on informed medical judgment and the best scientific
information available at the time," the unsigned letter concludes.

   Richard Tannen, senior vice dean of the university's school of medicine, said
in a telephone interview yesterday that the school recognized the importance of
following federal regulations in clinical research.

   But he also acknowledged that the university's response to the FDA might
reflect anticipation of litigation by the teen-ager's father, Paul Gelsinger,
who recently testified at a Senate hearing that he felt misled and betrayed by
university researchers.

   Reacting to the letter yesterday, Gelsinger's attorney, Alan Milstein, of
Camden, N.J., said, "I find their explanation following the death of a
relatively healthy 18year-old kid incredible."

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2000


                             858 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 15, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-4

LENGTH: 134 words

HEADLINE: Penn officials defend gene-therapy plan

BYLINE: New York Times News Service

BODY:
 WASHINGTON -- In a vigorous defense of their suspended gene-therapy program,
officials at the University of Pennsylvania said yesterday that, although there
were administrative lapses, they did not in any way contribute to the death of
an 18-year-old patient.

   In a 28-page written response to the Food and Drug Administration's decision
to shut down all human gene-therapy experiments at Penn, scientists there
pledged to draft new procedures that would allow them to better track patients
in their studies. But at several turns, they challenged the agency's assertion
of "numerous serious deficiencies" in their program.

   The researchers maintained that the patient who died, Jesse Gelsinger, was
properly enrolled in the clinical trial, while the FDA said he never should have
been treated.


LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000


                             859 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       February 15, 2000 Tuesday, ORLEANS

SECTION: CLASSIFIED; Pg. D14

LENGTH: 212 words

HEADLINE: COLLEGE OFFICIALS DEFEND GENE THERAPY EXPERIMENT

BYLINE: By Sheryl Gay Stolberg 2000, The New York Times

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   In a vigorous defense of their suspended gene therapy program, officials at
the University of Pennsylvania said Monday that while there were administrative
lapses, they did not in any way contribute to the death of an 18-year-old
patient and they amounted to little more than "minor deviations" in bookkeeping.

   In a 28-page written response to the Food and Drug Administration's decision
to shut down all human gene therapy experiments at the university, scientists
there pledged to draft new procedures that will allow them to better track
patients in their studies. But at several turns, they challenged the agency's
assertion of "numerous serious deficiencies" in their program.

   The researchers said the patient who died, Jesse Gelsinger, was properly
enrolled in the clinical trial, while the FDA said he should never have been
treated. They said that every patient in the study "gave clear and unambiguous
consent," while the agency found serious lapses in the way the explanation of
benefits and risks was documented.

   While the scientists acknowledged they were late in reporting serious side
effects experienced by other patients, they said they did provide the
information, which the agency could have used to stop the study before
Gelsinger's death.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2000


                             860 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                   February 15, 2000, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 706 words

HEADLINE: Gene Researchers Admit Mistakes, Deny Liability

BYLINE: Deborah Nelson; Rick Weiss , Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   The University of Pennsylvania yesterday admitted some mistakes in a gene
therapy experiment that killed a teenage volunteer in September and promised
improvements in its program, but denied liability for the death.

   The university is hoping to persuade the Food and Drug Administration to
reopen its gene therapy program, which regulators shut down last month after
uncovering serious problems in the way the research team carried out an
experimental treatment that led to the death of Jesse Gelsinger--the first
fatality attributed to this controversial field of medicine.

   In a 36-page unsigned response to the agency, the university conceded certain
reporting and recordkeeping shortcomings in its research program--most notably
the failure to halt the experiment and notify the FDA as required after
volunteers suffered serious side effects from the treatment. Researchers
previously said they gave the FDA adequate notice.

   The university also outlined various changes it is making to more fully
ensure the safety of study volunteers and to enhance communication between
researchers and federal regulators. In particular, the university will hire an
outside contractor to help keep track of research paperwork and monitor
compliance with FDA rules, the letter states.

   The university "will work closely with FDA to implement new clinical trial
procedures to improve its monitoring and related practices and to provide
additional patient safeguards to the fullest extent possible," the document
states.

   But the letter disputes the FDA's contention that Gelsinger was ineligible to
participate in the experiment because his rare liver disorder was too unstable
to meet the enrollment criteria at the time of his treatment. Researchers were
justified in thinking that the criteria referred to the Tucson teenager's
physical condition at the time he was enrolled in June rather than when he
received his genetic infusion in September, according to the letter. In any
case, researchers reasonably concluded that he was fit enough to participate
just before he underwent the procedure, the letter states.

   The document repeatedly asserts that none of the university's failings
contributed to the 18-year-old's death and that nothing in Gelsinger's medical
history could have predicted his fatal reaction.

   "As deeply regrettable as Jesse Gelsinger's death was, it was simply not
foreseeable based on informed medical judgment and the best scientific
information available at the time," the unsigned letter concludes.

   Richard Tannen, senior vice dean of the university's school of medicine, said
in a telephone interview yesterday that the school recognizes the importance of
following federal regulations in clinical research. "It is not acceptable to
follow the rules and regulations to a level anything less than 100 percent
perfection, and we regret that we haven't done that and we are going to take a
variety of follow-up steps to assure that happens," he said.

   But he acknowledged that the university's response to the FDA might reflect
anticipation of litigation by the teenager's father, Paul Gelsinger, who
recently testified at a Senate hearing that he felt misled and betrayed by
university researchers. "Mr. Gelsinger has indicated that he does have lawyers,"
Tannen said.

   Reacting to the letter yesterday, Gelsinger's attorney Alan Milstein, of
Camden, N.J., said: "I find their explanation following the death of a
relatively healthy 18-year-old kid incredible."

   The university's response represents one of several steps that may influence
how the FDA deals with the university and its Institute for Human Gene Therapy
in the aftermath of Gelsinger's death. Agency officials, who temporarily
suspended the entire gene therapy program on Jan. 21, have said they would await
a formal response from the university before deciding whether to take any of the
various disciplinary actions available, including special restrictions on human
research there.

   The university also has set up two independent panels of experts, one to
investigate its human research generally and one to focus specifically on the
gene therapy institute. Findings from the gene therapy committee are expected in
the spring.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2000


                             861 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 14, 2000, Monday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-8

LENGTH: 613 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy, AIDS virus link explored; Experimental study may have
backfired

BYLINE: NEW YORK DAILY NEWS

BODY:
 NEW YORK -- Nineteen young brain cancer patients may have been exposed to the
AIDS virus while taking part in a human gene therapy experiment at St. Jude's
Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, Tenn., again raising questions about
oversight of the experimental treatments.

   To make matters worse, researchers discovered the problem in December but
waited until last week to report it to government monitors.

   This latest setback for the fledgling gene therapy field, first reported in
The Washington Post, comes less than six months after the death of 18-year-old
Jesse Gelsinger during another gene treatment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   And it follows recent reports that more than 650 deaths and other "adverse
effects" among gene therapy patients were not reported by researchers to the
National Institutes of Health.

   "We are very concerned, because we stand to lose the public's trust, and if
that happens, we all lose," said Dr. Savio Woo of Mount Sinai Medical Center in
New York. He is president of the American Society for Gene Therapy.

   "Not only the investigators will lose, but the public will also lose, because
this is a most promising new avenue of medical research," Woo said.

   The new problems emerged in a clinical study being conducted by Dr. Laura
Bowman at St. Jude's and Dr. Malcolm Brenner at Baylor College of Medicine in
Houston.

   Recent tests on genetically engineered viruses previously injected into
volunteer patients at St. Jude's showed that they may have been contaminated by
HIV-1, the virus that causes AIDS, and by HCV, which causes hepatitis C.

   Though follow-up tests by the Food and Drug Administration may show there was
no contamination, the study has been shut down by the FDA.

   "We really need to determine whether this is a true positive result," an FDA
official said.

   Most of the 25 volunteers taking part in the experiments at St. Jude's and
Baylor have died from their cancer, a brain malignancy called neuroblastoma.

   The surviving patients and their families were not informed of the possible
HIV contamination until Thursday, when the researchers realized The Post knew
about the problem.

   However, in a statement posted on its Web site Friday, St. Jude's said there
is "no evidence that any patient received vaccine that was contaminated."

   "We always planned to inform the parents when the final results are
available," the statement said.  "The incorrect information that has been in the
media over the last 24 hours reinforced the decision made Saturday that the
patients and parents had to be informed immediately so that they had access to
correct information."

   Baylor spokeswoman Claire Bassett stated that none of the six patients
treated there received any of the suspect genetic material.

   There are 157 gene therapy experiments under way in the United States, and
the lag in reporting adverse effects seems endemic to the field.

   Woo said two factors contribute to the underreporting problem.  One is a
widespread belief among investigators that they don't have to report adverse
effects to the NIH unless they are directly related to the gene therapy.

   Yet most of the medical problems that afflict gene therapy patients are
caused by their underlying diseases.  To date, out of about 4,000 patients who
have undergone experimental gene therapy, Gelsinger is the only one whose death
has been officially linked to his treatments.

   Woo also said the NIH and FDA need to come up with "a completely harmonized
set of reporting requirements." Confusion among researchers about what has to be
reported and when and to which agency creates a "breeding ground for breaches of
reporting requirements."


LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000


                             862 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    February 14, 2000, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A16; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

LENGTH: 194 words

HEADLINE: Secrets in Drug Trials

BODY:



   The death of Jesse Gelsinger in the University of Pennsylvania gene therapy
study raises the issue of reporting adverse events in clinical trials [front
page, Jan. 31]. Researchers are required to report adverse events in all
clinical trials for experimental drugs to the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA). Debate rages over whether gene therapy investigators should be required
to report such events to the National Institutes of Health, which can disclose
these events to the public, in addition to reporting them to the FDA, which
cannot.

   This question evades the real issue: the failure of the FDA to disclose
adverse events in all clinical trials. The FDA is charged with preserving the
public health, not with protecting drug companies from investors who might
desert them if they learned that an experimental drug has some toxicity.

   One cannot conduct quality or ethical research in an environment in which
other scientists' experiences are hidden. Denying information can be hazardous;
this may be the real lesson of the Gelsinger episode.

   PETER LURIE

   Deputy Director

   Public Citizen's

   Health Research Group

   Washington



LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2000


                             863 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                 February 13, 2000, Sunday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 806 words

HEADLINE: NEW FEARS ABOUT GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: By DAVID NOONAN SUNDAY NEWS STAFF WRITER

BODY:
Nineteen young brain cancer patients may have been exposed to the AIDS virus
while taking part in a human gene therapy experiment at St. Jude's Children's
Research Hospital in Memphis, once more raising questions about oversight of the
experimental treatments.

   To make matters worse, researchers discovered the potential problem in
December but waited until last week to report it to government monitors.

   This latest setback for the fledgling gene therapy field, first reported in
The Washington Post, comes less than six months after the death of 18-year-old
Jesse Gelsinger during another gene treatment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   And it follows recent reports that more than 650 deaths and other "adverse
effects" among gene therapy patients were not reported by researchers to the
National Institutes of Health.

   "We are very concerned, because we stand to lose the public's trust, and if
that happens, we all lose," said Dr. Savio Woo of Mount Sinai Medical Center,
president of the American Society for Gene Therapy.

   "Not only the investigators will lose, but the public will also lose, because
this is a most promising new avenue of medical research."

   The new problems emerged in a clinical study being conducted by Dr. Laura
Bowman at St. Jude's and Dr. Malcolm Brenner at Baylor College of Medicine in
Houston.

   Recent tests on genetically engineered viruses previously injected into
volunteer patients at St. Jude's showed that they may have been contaminated by
HIV-1, the virus that causes AIDS, and by HCV, which causes hepatitis C.

   Though followup tests by the Food and Drug Administration may show there was
no contamination, the study has been shut down by the FDA.

   "We really need to determine whether this is a true positive result," an FDA
official said. "In many cases where there are positive preliminary findings,
those findings are not confirmed on further testing."

   Most of the 25 volunteers taking part in the experiments at St. Jude's and
Baylor have died from their cancer, a brain malignancy called neuroblastoma.

   The surviving patients and their families were not informed of the possible
HIV contamination until Thursday, when the researchers realized The Post knew
about the problem.

   However, in a statement posted on its Web site Friday, St. Jude's said there
is "no evidence that any patient received vaccine that was contaminated."

   "We always planned to inform the parents when the final results are
available," the statement said. "The incorrect information that has been in the
media over the last 24 hours reinforced the decision made yesterday that the
patients and parents had to be informed immediately so that they had access to
correct information."

   Baylor spokeswoman Claire Bassett stated that none of the six patients
treated there received any of the suspect genetic material.

   There are 157 gene therapy experiments currently underway in the U.S., and
the lag in reporting adverse effects seems endemic to the field.

   Woo said two factors contribute to the underreporting problem. One is a
widespread belief among investigators that they don't have to report adverse
effects to the NIH unless they are directly related to the gene therapy.

   Yet most of the medical problems that afflict gene therapy patients are
caused by their underlying diseases. To date, out of about 4,000 patients who
have undergone experimental gene therapy, Gelsinger is the only one whose death
has been officially linked to his treatments.

   Woo also said the NIH and FDA need to come up with "a completely harmonized
set of reporting requirements." Confusion among researchers about what has to be
reported and when and to which agency creates a "breeding ground for breaches of
reporting requirements."

   Communication between the FDA and the NIH has been flawed. Though gene
therapy has been around for 10 years, the FDA didn't start sending its own
adverse event reports to the NIH until December in the wake of Gelsinger's
death.

   Appearing before a Senate subcommittee earlier this month, Jay Siegel,
director of the FDA's Office of Therapeutics Research and Review, said patient
safety must begin with the researchers.

   "While many of these new gene therapy and biotech products may have yet
unknown risks, they also have potential for tremendous patient benefit," Siegel
said. "When developing these new products, sponsors of clinical trials must
accept responsibility to ensure that participants are not exposed to unknown
reasonable risks and the experimental products are as safe as possible."

   Paul Gelsinger, Jesse's father, addressed the same panel.

   "It looked safe," he said of the experiment that killed his son. "It was
presented as safe. I encouraged my son to do this. But I wasn't given all the
information. And some of the information I was given was not true."

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2000


                             864 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                    February 13, 2000, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; No Desk

LENGTH: 4219 words

SERIES: OVERDOSE OF OPTIMISM. How the media cover medical breakthroughs. First
of two parts

HEADLINE: SUNDAY REPORT;
 MEDICAL MIRACLES OR MISGUIDED MEDIA?;
 NEWS REPORTS ARE FILLED WITH THE LATEST BREAKTHROUGHS, BUT THEY ARE OFTEN
EXAGGERATED BY INEXPERIENCED REPORTERS, OVEREAGER EDITORS AND SELF-INTERESTED
SCIENTISTS.

BYLINE: DAVID SHAW, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   There were times last year when the casual consumer of mainstream news could
have been forgiven for thinking that cures were suddenly being found for an
uncommonly large number of the world's health problems.

   In July, the lead story on ABC's "World News Tonight" touted the results of
research on mice as "the very best news there has been in many years, perhaps
ever, about . . . Alzheimer's disease."

   In August, the St. Louis Post Dispatch and the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel,
among others, published Page 1 stories saying that experiments with mice on
low-calorie diets could, as the Journal Sentinel story put it, "lead to
anti-aging, life-extending drugs" for humans.

   In September, Time magazine published a cover story and the Washington Post
and the Los Angeles Times--among many other newspapers--gave Page 1 play to a
story that said scientists had created a "smarter" mouse, a step that could
lead, various reports said, to "creating baby Einsteins," "boosting human brain
power," "improving human memory" and treating stroke and "human learning
disorders."

   It sometimes seems as if there are Page 1 stories, television news reports
and magazine cover stories almost daily on medical breakthroughs--new treatments
for everything from the flu, obesity and the common cold to cancer, AIDS and
heart disease. In the last two weeks alone, Newsweek published a cover story on
new hope for Alzheimer's patients, the Los Angeles Times published three Page 1
stories on new treatments for AIDS and New York magazine ran a cover story
touting not only "a global conquering of cancer in five to 10 years" but
"breakthroughs in pain management, AIDS research, heart surgery, and more."

   "The media want to have something new . . . something that will catch the
public's eye," says Dr. Dennis Slamon, the director of clinical research at
UCLA's Jonsson Cancer Center, "so it can't just be 'progress has been made.' . .
. It's got to be something really splashy and sexy."

   The news media have become ever more "splashy and sexy" on virtually every
subject they have covered in recent years as they struggle to reverse declining
circulation in an increasingly competitive and clamorous marketplace. But that
approach is particularly risky--indeed harmful--when applied to new treatments
for deadly or debilitating diseases. Studies have shown that the news media are
the primary source of health news for many people, so when stories on new
treatments are exaggerated, they are not only inaccurate, they are harmful.
Doctors say that many patients demand a treatment that they have learned about
from the media, even when that treatment has not been proved effective and
other, more effective treatments are available.

   Exaggerated claims about new treatments also raise false hopes and
expectations among those suffering from the disease and their loved ones, and
that's "a cruel hoax," says Robert Bazell, chief science correspondent for NBC
News. The dashing of false hopes often leads to widespread confusion, cynicism
and depression; some patients may lose faith in all traditional medical
treatments and resort instead to much riskier experimental therapies.

   Moreover, coverage of purported medical breakthroughs may have serious social
and political implications. Stories on cancer cures that turn out not to be
cures have contributed to a drumbeat of coverage about the disease that leaves
people with the fearful impression that we are in the midst of an epidemic; in
fact, death rates from cancer have been declining steadily since 1990.

   "No disease has been 'cured' as repeatedly as cancer has," says Rick Weiss,
who covers science and medicine for the Washington Post.

   'Too Few Caveats'

   Cancer does not kill as many people as heart disease, but the excruciating
pain and wasting away that often accompany cancer make it the disease that
people dread most, so perhaps it's not surprising that it's the disease most
frequently "cured" in the media. A little less than two years ago, for example,
the New York Times triggered a worldwide media frenzy with a Page 1 cancer
"breakthrough" story that featured a quote about curing cancer in two years.

   In the mid-1980s and again in the early '90s, new treatments for AIDS--a
disease long regarded as inevitably fatal--were also greeted by the media with
"too much euphoria and too few caveats," in the words of Marlene Cimons, who has
long written about AIDS and other public health issues for the Los Angeles
Times.

   That coverage contributed significantly to a widespread complacency among
those most at risk for AIDS, says Daniel Zingale, former executive director of
AIDS Action in Washington. "They became more lax in their personal sexual
behavior, they slackened their vigilance, because those headlines made them
think AIDS was curable ."

   On some other diseases, the media often misunderstand or misinterpret basic
science information, so they "tend to exaggerate the implication of a study in
animals and immediately assume that the finding is relevant to people, which is
a big stretch in many cases," says Dr. Jerome Kassirer, former editor of the New
England Journal of Medicine.

   One of the telltale signs of Alzheimer's disease, for example, is the
formation of amyloid plaques that clog the brain. The ABC story reported that
scientists had developed a vaccine that prevents the formation of plaques and
dissolves existing plaques in mice. That was good, solid scientific research.
Mice, however, don't get Alzheimer's disease. The mice used in this research had
been genetically engineered to produce the plaques; they developed no other
Alzheimer's symptoms. Moreover, scientists are not even certain if plaques are a
cause of Alzheimer's disease or a result of the disease.

   The ABC story did include a few brief, obligatory caveats, but the overriding
message was one of excitement over a major breakthrough, and "the minute you
package it as a breakthrough or even suggest that it might have something to do
with humans, you've over-hyped it," says Philip Elmer-Dewitt, assistant managing
editor in charge of medicine, science and technology coverage at Time.

   Cultivating the Media

   Nevertheless, stories about medical cures and breakthroughs have become a
staple in the nation's news media--in part, no doubt, because we have become a
more health-conscious society, more aware of and more anxious about calories and
caffeine, cholesterol and cancer, everything that could affect our well-being
and longevity. At the same time, there has been genuine progress in research
laboratories; medical science is moving forward at a rapid rate on many
frontiers. But not that rapidly--or that dramatically--and rarely do the media
go back and look at the last breakthroughs they heralded to see if they have
fulfilled their promise.

   Overstated accounts of medical findings can create a misguided or premature
groundswell of public support for--or against--government and corporate funding
of certain treatments and research priorities.

   "We can impede our understanding of a disease . . . misdirect our resources .
. . waste 10 years worth of money and energy," says David Murray, research
director of the Statistical Assessment Service, a nonpartisan agency based in
Washington.

   Zingale says that donations to AIDS organizations have declined significantly
since 1996, and federal spending on HIV prevention has stagnated, in large
measure because "medical breakthroughs--the first generation of effective AIDS
treatments--were overstated in a way that wrongly implied 'cure' to many
Americans."

   Why are the implications of medical findings so often--and so
egregiously--overstated in the mainstream news media?

   One answer is that advocates for various patient groups have become more
assertive in their approach to the media, and they have created a journalistic
appetite--and a political imperative--that sometimes distorts the coverage of
purported medical breakthroughs. After decades of neglect, breast cancer and its
treatment have often received front-page play in recent years, but colorectal
cancer will probably kill more people this year than breast cancer, and yet the
media barely noticed--and in many cases ignored altogether--the Food and Drug
Administration's approval in 1996 of a new treatment for colorectal cancer, the
first such treatment to win full FDA approval in more than 40 years.

   Eager for acclaim or research grants or both, anxious to satisfy their
university's publication requirements or simply carried away with enthusiasm
over their discoveries, scientists are often responsible for exaggerated reports
on their findings. Ego plays a major role in this process. Natalie Angier of the
New York Times says a prominent scientist once told her that the only
recognition more important to a scientist than winning a Nobel Prize is getting
his name on the front page of her paper.

   In the case of government scientists--those, say, at the National Institutes
of Health or the National Cancer Institute, among others--this temptation toward
exaggeration may prove particularly irresistible when their budgets are coming
up for congressional approval. Like some advocates for patient groups, they
think that if the public--and the politicians--believe their tax dollars are
producing results, they will be more willing to provide more tax dollars for
more research.

   As pharmaceutical companies and others in private industry increasingly
sponsor medical research, scientists may also overstate their findings because
they want to announce a discovery they can patent and benefit from financially.

   "A lot of research is exaggerated, and that's particularly likely, I believe,
for industry-sponsored research," says Marcia Angell, editor in chief of the New
England Journal of Medicine. Universities and other research institutions may be
similarly guilty, she says. "They know increased publicity can be parlayed into
increased prestige and, often, increased funding."

   Medical researchers, the companies and institutions that finance their work
and hospitals competing for patients have all become much more aggressive about
marketing and media relations in recent years, putting increased pressure on
medical writers trying to sort self-serving hype from legitimate hope.

   "Scientists have become . . . masters of the sound bite. Scientists have
learned how to package information for journalists so they can get the attention
they want,"says Dorothy Nelkin, who wrote the book "Selling Science: How the
Press Covers Science and Technology" and who teaches courses in science and
society at New York University.

   In recent years, scientists have used such pop culture terms as "Doogie
Howser" (to name a mouse), "Sonic hedgehog" (for a gene) and the "werewolf
syndrome" (for a medical condition); that, too, has helped bring added media
attention to those research projects.

   "You do something cute, you do something clever, you sell it a little bit
hard, you give us what you think we want--and to some extent we do want," says
Rick Weiss of the Washington Post, "and you can launch yourself onto the front
page."

   Medical writers everywhere say there has been an explosion in the number of
medical public relations firms in recent years. "We're now being bombarded by PR
people trying to push things--'breakthroughs' by their clients--mostly because
of the profit motive," says Susan Okie, Weiss' colleague at the Post. Some
publicists specialize in providing local television stations with ready-to-air
video touting their clients' drugs. "There's a much greater attempt to
manipulate reporters now," Okie says. "They call and fax and e-mail us and tell
us, 'This is going to be very big. We have a teleconference tomorrow. The Mayo
Clinic researchers will be there. We'll have these experts available.' "

   Okie is a medical doctor as well as a journalist. So are Lawrence K. Altman
at the New York Times, Timothy Johnson at ABC News and several other medical
reporters around the country. Many medical reporters--including a number of
those who work for the country's top newspapers and newsmagazines--either have
graduate degrees in science or have enrolled in special programs on medicine or
science. Johnson has argued that medical writers should be required to study
enough about medicine to "pass some sort of reasonable examination to prove
one's knowledge," but most journalists object to any kind of mandatory
certification or licensing process, and indeed many are the beneficiaries of
prolonged on-the-job training. They have simply worked so many years in their
specialties that they have developed a certain level of lay expertise about
medicine. These savvy medical reporters are not easily manipulated. Thus, many
researchers say that despite its manifest shortcomings, medical reporting is
generally much better today than it used to be, at least in the major cities.
More newspapers and magazines have more and better qualified medical reporters
serving a more sophisticated audience than was the case 25 years ago, when there
were no medical or health sections in the nation's newspapers, and few papers
had more than one medical reporter, if that.

   Lack of Experience

   Even in optimistic accounts of medical research, the better reporters are
careful to include caveats--what journalists call the "to be sure" paragraph.
Thus, Newsweek's Jan. 31 cover story on Alzheimer's disease was billed as "How
Science Is Offering New Hope," but it acknowledged, "Alzheimer's is still hard
to predict. And today's treatments provide only modest symptomatic relief, if
that."

   But many people who cover medicine are relatively inexperienced, general
assignment reporters for local newspapers and television stations; they have
little time or space to report or tell their stories and they often lack even a
rudimentary understanding of the issues they are covering.

   Rich Elbaum, assistant vice chancellor for communications at UC Irvine, says
some local TV reporters come to the university to report a medical story on
their way back from covering an industrial fire in another part of the county.
He recalls one reporter who showed up to report one of the first liver
transplants and, after talking to the patient, was starting to "go live" with
his report when he suddenly remembered to ask Elbaum an important question:
"People have two livers, right?"

   Elbaum just shook his head and said, "No--one."

   On local television in most cities, competition exacerbates the problems of
ignorance and inexperience. Under pressure to deliver ratings, news directors
urge reporters to file human interest stories that are short, snappy, uplifting
and, if possible, sensational; devoid of either caveats or context, the result
is often the equivalent of "AIDS Cured--Film at 11."

   The newest and fastest-growing communications medium, the Internet, can be
even more irresponsible--and more dangerous. Anyone with a modem can create a
Web page on health, medicine or anything else. Typing in the word "medicine" on
just one Internet search engine produces 3,643 separate Web sites; try "medical"
and the number of Web sites jumps to 12,710; "health" yields 20,904. Although
most of these sites lack the peer review required by medical journals and the
editing available to most mainstream journalists, they may still appeal to
desperate patients eager for any possible solution to their medical problems.

   'There's a Pressure'

   But even sophisticated, responsible journalists, working for respected
mainstream news organizations and writing about the research of scientists
determined to be equally responsible, often overstate the implication of the
findings they are reporting and ignore or minimize the caveats and potential
downside of a new treatment.

   "There's pressure to find exciting things and maybe even to emphasize the
most exciting aspects of stories and maybe not paying as close attention as we
might to ambiguities or caveats," says Michael Lemonick, a science writer at
Time magazine.

   This may be the inevitable byproduct of the inherent conflict--the culture
clash--between science and journalism.

   Science is both a methodical and a somewhat messy process, a gradual
exploration of the unknown. It moves slowly, with each study building on the one
before it--brick by brick by brick. Most discoveries are partial improvements,
steps forward (or backward), subtle gradations and even contradictions. There's
seldom a true end point in science. Almost invariably, the breakthrough that's
published today is the final stage in a series of studies that began years,
perhaps decades ago, and it, too, may still be subject to revision by future
studies. Genuine breakthroughs, giant leaps forward--penicillin, for example, or
the Salk polio vaccine--are rare.

   "We could probably ignore 99% of the science news in a given year because its
intrinsic value won't be known for many years or may not be that great," says
Joe Palca, who covers science and medicine for National Public Radio and is
president of the National Assn. of Science Writers.

   In the late 1980s, the media treated each discovery of a gene responsible for
one disease or another as a breakthrough, and these discoveries occurred with
such frequency that many medical writers took to calling their coverage "the
gene of the week syndrome." Identifying a gene was supposed to lead to genetic
therapy--injecting healthy genes into the human body to replace damaged or
defective genes and so cure or prevent any number of deadly, inherited diseases.
That has not happened yet, and indeed last November, the Washington Post
disclosed that six people had died in gene therapy experiments since February
1998.

   "We all overplayed early gene therapy developments," says Joel Greenberg, the
editor in charge of science and medicine coverage at the Los Angeles Times.

   The problem with trying to cover new developments in medicine, says Dr.
Richard Klausner, director of the National Cancer Institute, is that "The whole
concept of a breakthrough is often in the eyes of the beholder and is very
difficult to quantitate. Often there is confusion . . . a lack of distinction
between a scientific advance and a medical breakthrough."

   Avoiding the 'B-Word'

   How big does an incremental advance have to be to qualify as a
"breakthrough"? That may depend on when in the scientific process--where on the
research continuum--the incremental advance occurs. In football, an incremental
gain of one yard on a team's own 20-yard line doesn't usually mean much; but
that same one-yard gain on the opposing team's one-yard line is a
breakthrough--a touchdown. Too often, the news media treat incremental
scientific advances as touchdowns. Although the major newspapers and
newsmagazines increasingly provide coverage of new trends and analyses of
developing stories, news is still their primary responsibility. That's why
they're called newspapers and newsmagazines. They devote enormous resources to
the coverage of discrete events--wars, trials, elections, earthquakes,
games--all of which have measurable outcomes and immediate implications;
something just happened--someone said or did or won or lost something--and
that's news.

   News is a product, not a process, so journalists want results that are
"definitive, dispositive and closed . . . today by 3 p.m.," says David Murray of
the Statistical Assessment Service.

   Top medical writers at newspapers like the New York Times, Washington Post
and Los Angeles Times sometimes try to avoid overplaying new scientific
discoveries by relegating them to roundup columns on inside pages in their
weekly health and science sections, rather than writing long, separate stories
for the main news pages.

   But "the reality of a reporter's life is that you only exist if you're on the
front page," says Robert Lee Hotz, a science writer at the Los Angeles Times,
"and there are several magic catchwords you can use to ensure that you get on
the front page."

   Although "cure" and "breakthrough" are the most likely passports to Page 1,
Hotz says "one step closer to solving" and "on the threshold of" are among
several other phrases guaranteed to get an editor's and reader's attention.

   Hotz says that most experienced science and medical writers try hard not to
use those words inappropriately. Some even deride "breakthrough" as "the
B-word." But Deborah Blum, former medical writer for the Sacramento Bee who
teaches science writing at the University of Wisconsin, says journalists realize
that if they "use all the necessary qualifiers and make it clear to readers that
the study you're writing about is limited and further studies are necessary and
there won't be any medicine available for years and 'caution, caution, caution,'
you'll find your story back next to the classified ads."

   Urging Caution

   Responsible reporting is often the casualty of a conspiracy of
interests--scientists wanting to promote their discoveries by talking to
journalists who want to impress their editors and engage their audience.

   Experienced medical writers are acutely aware of the impact their stories can
have on readers, and for that reason, many say they spend less time trying to
write their stories onto Page 1 than they do trying to persuade their editors
that a given story does not belong on Page 1--or on the cover of their
newsmagazine or in a prominent position in the nightly television newscast.

   "I know a lot of medical writers who have to fight editors who say, 'I can
get you on the front page if you can say thus and so,' " says Boyce Rensberger,
director of the Knight science journalism fellowships program at MIT and former
science writer for the Washington Post and New York Times.

   At most major news organizations, medical stories moved by the wire services
are routinely referred to the medical writers, who often urge caution, saying
that the story is not new or important or definitive or that it could be
alarmist or misleading.

   Editors and news directors, not reporters, make the ultimate decision on what
stories are published and broadcast and on how they are played. Most news
executives say they usually listen to their in-house specialists on stories in
their areas of expertise. But they find some medical stories so compelling--or
so prominently and heavily played in other media--that they insist their
reporters do the stories, too, even if the findings have been exaggerated, if
only to put in context the news reports that readers and viewers may have seen
elsewhere.

   Sometimes, however, it's not the fault of either the reporter or his boss
that there are so many stories of the sort that Rensberger used to characterize
with the mock headline "New Hope for the Dead." Sometimes the fault is not in
the way the story is presented but in the way it is perceived.

   People who are suffering from a deadly disease or who are close to someone in
that situation are desperate for help and often ignore any caveats or qualifiers
included in a story about a potentially promising treatment, no matter how
carefully and responsibly the story is written and presented.

   Laurie Garrett, a medical reporter for Newsday in New York, says she worries
so much about how readers will react to her stories, especially those about
cancer treatments, that "I try to deliberately write in very neutral tones. I
tend to avoid adjectives altogether. I almost dry it out, make my writing bland
so that whatever emotional baggage the reader brings to the story in the first
place is not going to get exaggerated by . . . the tone with which I deliver the
information."

   Christine Gorman of Time remembers arguing with her editors several years ago
when they wanted her to write about a particular cancer study. When the editors
insisted, Gorman reluctantly wrote the piece, taking special care to make clear
the early, tentative nature of the research and emphasizing that no drug had yet
been developed.

   She still received a "heartbreaking letter from a teenager in Northridge . .
. who found out that her mother had metastatic lung cancer," Gorman says. "She
said she was writing to ask me where her mom could get 'that new drug you wrote
about.' I was crushed." Gorman says she reread her story to be sure that she I
hadn't overstated the research. She hadn't. "But when your mom has metastatic
lung cancer, you're going to grasp on any hope there is."


   Smarter Mice, Smarter People?

   Medical research studies based on mice often get big play in the nation's
news media. Scientists worry that journalists sometimes exaggerate the
implications of animal studies and mistakenly assume the findings are relevant
for humans.


   Big News, False Hopes

   Stories on medical "breakthroughs" sometimes seem to be a staple in the news
media. Reports on new treatments for cancer, AIDS and Alzheimer's disease
receive particularly optimistic attention. Many doctors--and some
journalists--worry that the hype sometimes falsely raises the hopes of those
suffering from the diseases.


   *

   Next: Medical journals and secondhand journalism.

   Jacci Cenacveira of the Times editorial library assisted with research for
this story.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Rick Weiss PHOTOGRAPHER: Washington Post PHOTO: Dr. Richard
Klausner PHOTOGRAPHER: Associated Press PHOTO: Laurie Garrett PHOTOGRAPHER:
Newsday PHOTO: Robert Lee Hotz PHOTOGRAPHER: Los Angeles Times PHOTO: Dr. Dennis
Siamon PHOTO: (no caption) PHOTOGRAPHER: Los Angeles Times PHOTO: (no caption)
PHOTOGRAPHER: Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2000


                             865 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     February 13, 2000 Sunday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 144 words

HEADLINE: CORRECTIONS

BODY:

   The Wisconsin Conservatory of Music's Faculty Jazz Ensemble will perform at 3
p.m. today at the Charles Allis Art Museum, but Jacqueline Wooley will not
perform with the group. She was incorrectly included in a calendar listing in
today's Cue section, which was printed in advance.

   In a story last Sunday, the desire by some area municipalities for the
Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District to increase the frequency of
"bypassing" -- dumping untreated sewage into waterways -- was incorrectly
attributed to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. In the same story,
Shorewood resident Lynne Belcher's concern about her basement backing up was
attributed to the wrong date. It was on April 22, 1999.

   The disease neuroblastoma is a central nervous system cancer. It was
incorrectly described in a Washington Post story about gene therapy Friday.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2000


                             866 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    February 13, 2000, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: BOOK WORLD; Pg. X03

LENGTH: 983 words

HEADLINE: Design for Living

BYLINE: Susan Okie

BODY:



   GENOME

   The Autobiography of a Species

   In 23 Chapters

   By Matt Ridley

   HarperCollins. 344 pp. $ 26


   Reviewed by Susan Okie


   By 2002, an international team of scientists is expected to piece together a
readout of the complete recipe for a person. Three billion letters long, the
instructions would fill a stack of books 150 feet high. Even when we have it in
hand, we won't know how to cook with it -- and it will take decades to figure
out what it all means. So why are researchers already so confident that decoding
the genome will be a scientific watershed, a Rosetta Stone likely to teach us
what makes us human?

   Matt Ridley's marvelous new book goes a long way toward answering that
question. Upon an ingeniously simple framework -- one chapter for each of the 23
pairs of human chromosomes -- Ridley has built a sweepingly ambitious work that
tackles, in lucid and often poetic prose, many of the biggest questions in
biology and beyond: How did life begin? What distinguishes us from chimps? What
determines how smart we are? Why are men and women so often at odds? Why are
some people shy and others adventurous? Why do we grow old and die? And (perhaps
the central question) if genes guide our character and behavior, is there such a
thing as free will?

   Despite the book's structure, chapters often have only the most tenuous
connection with individual chromosomes. Instead, under broad themes such as
"conflict," "sex" and "immortality," Ridley sketches the history of modern
genetics and details the hottest discoveries and the most engrossing
controversies in the field. Consider the war between the sexes, which some
researchers suggest is quite literally a battle of the genes. According to this
theory, the large and influential X chromosome (the "female" sex chromosome that
exists in two copies in women) has evolved genetic strategies for attacking the
"male" Y chromosome, because traits that benefit the males of a species are
often disadvantageous for females. In response, the Y has shed or shut down many
of its genes as a means of self-protection, becoming a sort of stealth
chromosome -- the smallest of the human 46 -- with just one powerful gene called
SRY that contains everything needed to make an embryo male. As weird as this
argument sounds, Ridley describes evidence that the battle is being played out
in various species. In the butterfly Acrea encedon, for example, males are so
biologically beleaguered that the sex ratio is 97 percent female.

   A recurring theme in Genome is the misleading distinction between "nature"
and "nurture," which Ridley argues is an overworked dichotomy that ignores the
intricate interplay of genes and environment. Social scientists, he writes, have
often unfairly equated heredity with implacable fate while portraying the
environment as a friendlier, more mutable force molding human health and
character. But genes don't operate in a vacuum: They can both respond to
external influences and act to alter an organism's milieu. Furthermore, "genes
are not there to cause diseases," and the ones that do predispose to illnesses
(such as asthma or sickle cell anemia) have survived in our bodies for a reason
-- often, because they protect against life-threatening infections that
decimated human populations in the past. In a few cases, a single fatal genetic
mutation -- like the one that causes the progressive dementia of Huntington's
disease -- can write "a prophecy of terrifying, cruel and inflexible truth." But
for most core human attributes like personality and intelligence, so many genes
contribute that it's senseless to view ourselves as prisoners of genetic
destiny. "The more we delve into the genome, the less fatalistic it will seem,"
writes Ridley. "The genome is as complicated and indeterminate as ordinary life,
because it is ordinary life."

   Ridley doesn't examine in detail the ethical aspects of new genetic advances
and their implications for future social policy, although his discussions of the
history of genetics, including the eugenics movement and the debate over I.Q.
testing, are thorough and illuminating. On issues such as genetic testing and
gene therapy, he comes down in favor of giving individuals -- but not
institutions, government or society -- the choice of whether to seek and make
use of personal genetic information. Even when a genetic test might reveal a
depressingly high likelihood of developing a disease such as Alzheimer's, Ridley
generally favors making such tests available to people who feel they would
rather know than not know. (Such a test, called the APOE4 test, actually can
help predict future risk of Alzheimer's disease.) Although there may be no way
to fix a potentially dangerous mutation, Ridley argues, carriers of such
mutations may use their knowledge to make decisions about lifestyle or
childbearing or to try an experimental treatment.

   A former editor of the Economist, Ridley is a superb writer whose exquisite,
often moving descriptions of life's designs remind me of the best work of the
late Lewis Thomas. Scorning hackneyed, imprecise metaphors (a gene, he insists,
is nothing like a blueprint), he crafts some of the clearest explanations of
complex biological processes that I have encountered. What's more, he captures
their slippery beauty. Listen to his description of how life evolved:

   "In the beginning was the word. The word proselytised the sea with its
message, copying itself unceasingly and forever. The word discovered how to
rearrange chemicals so as to capture little eddies in the stream of entropy and
make them live. . . . The word eventually blossomed and became sufficiently
ingenious to build a porridgy contraption called a human being that could
discover and be aware of the word itself."


   Susan Okie, a reporter on the national staff of The Washington Post, covers
health and medicine.


LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2000


                             867 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                          February 12, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: NWANEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 220 words

HEADLINE: FDA tests gene drugs for HIV contamination

BYLINE: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   *NW EDITION*
WASHINGTON -- The Food and Drug Administration is trying to determine if
children dying from cancer might have been accidentally exposed to the AIDS
virus in a gene-therapy experiment.
Suggestions that the children were exposed to HIV are highly preliminary, FDA
officials stressed Friday.
But St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis and Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston notified families this week in anticipation of newspaper
reports of the FDA investigation.
The FDA has suspended the gene-therapy study while investigating whether
researchers followed federal safety regulations, including whether they alerted
the government quickly enough to the possible contamination.
"There is no evidence that any of the children who were treated were harmed in
any way," St. Jude hospital said in a statement Friday.
Researchers were hunting a gene therapy for neuroblastoma, a nervous-system
cancer. Babies often survive it, but neuroblastoma is highly lethal when it
strikes older children.  If patients relapse after initial treatment, most die
quickly.
St. Jude hospital studied 20 relapsed children.  two received the batch of
gene-based medicine suspected of possible contamination, the hospital said.
Sixteen of the children have died from their cancers, the hospital said.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2000


                             868 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                          February 12, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 262 words

HEADLINE: FDA tests gene drugs for HIV contamination

BYLINE: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- The Food and Drug Administration is trying to determine if
children dying from cancer might have been accidentally exposed to the AIDS
virus in a gene-therapy experiment.
Suggestions that the children were exposed to HIV are highly preliminary, FDA
officials stressed Friday.
The FDA called the initial contamination testing of the gene-based medicine so
tenuous that it would not have alarmed the children's families by telling them
until confirmatory tests now under way settle the issue.
But St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis and Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston notified families this week in anticipation of newspaper
reports of the FDA investigation.
The FDA has suspended the gene-therapy study while investigating whether
researchers followed federal safety regulations, including whether they alerted
the government quickly enough to the possible contamination.
Researchers were hunting a gene therapy for neuroblastoma, a nervous-system
cancer. Babies often survive it, but neuroblastoma is highly lethal when it
strikes older children.
The worry over possible contamination arose when St. Jude researchers realized
cells used to grow some of the medicine several years ago might not have
undergone proper quality testing. So an outside lab tested samples and found
signs of low-level HIV and hepatitis C contamination.
Those initial tests often give false results and might even mistake the
"adenovirus" used to administer gene therapy for other infectious viruses, FDA
officials said on condition of anonymity.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2000


                             869 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    February 12, 2000 Saturday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 016

LENGTH: 699 words

HEADLINE: Op-Ed; AS YOU WERE SAYING . . .Gene therapy holds hope for illnesses
once 'hopeless'

BYLINE: By Michael Rosenblatt

BODY:

   The current controversy over gene therapy is reminiscent of that which
surrounded recombinant DNA research nearly 30 years ago. Then, as now, research
was put on "hold." Yet in evaluating gene therapies, academic medical centers
are seeking to advance the treatment of life-threatening diseases.

   What is the potential value of gene therapy? There are common diseases, such
as cancer, and rare diseases, such as hemophilia, for which no cure is currently
available. Gene therapy represents the most promising new approach to their
cure.

   Risk is one of the inescapable realities inherent in transforming
experimental approaches into widely available therapies. If you ask patients
with incurable diseases and the doctors who care for them whether they are
willing to assume a certain level of risk in order to realize a potential
benefit for themselves or for future patients, the answer is almost always,
"Yes." Even knowing the risks, patients and families actively seek to
participate in clinical trials. They recognize that experimental therapies are
their only hope.

   The picture is complicated by the fact that it is almost exclusively the
sickest patients, those for whom all other forms of treatment have failed, who
are the subjects of clinical trials with new agents. This is the most acceptable
group on ethical grounds to participate in a therapeutic trial.

   But, very sick patients experience adverse events in the course of their
illness. Layering the trial of an experimental therapy onto the natural course
of disease makes it difficult to conduct trials with "clean" safety outcomes,
especially since researchers are required to report all adverse experiences,
regardless of cause.

   The death of 18-year old Jesse Gelsinger in a clinical trial at the
University of Pennsylvania is tragic and is the only death thus far attributable
to gene therapy. Gelsinger received an adenovirus-based treatment. Other gene
therapies make no use of adenovirus. When journalists imply that all serious new
adverse events are due to the therapy, they damage the opportunity for rational
evaluation of potential life-saving treatments.

   The United States is blessed with resources that enable us to undertake the
challenge of developing gene therapy in a safe and responsible way. We have
talented dedicated physicians working in academic medical centers. Prior to use
in patients, new agents are evaluated in the laboratory specifically for safety.
Clinical research efforts are closely monitored by human studies committees
chartered on ethical precepts. In fact, academic medical centers are the only
institutions where advances such as gene therapy can be made. This is one of the
reasons that patients seek out "teaching" hospitals.

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration is the most expert organization in the
world at overseeing the clinical trials of experimental therapies. Their efforts
have assured the American public that the collection of therapies available to
us is the safest and most effective in the world. Our National Institutes of
Health is fulfilling its mission by funding the translation of recent advances
in biomedical research, such as genetics, into new therapies. Multiple layers of
oversight have been built intentionally into clinical trials in order to assure
safety. With rare exception, this oversight has been effective.

   The public's concerns about safety and stewardship of gene therapy are
reasonable and understandable. We need to preserve an atmosphere in which gene
therapy and its risks can be rationally evaluated. What is really at stake is
our ability to determine whether a new approach to therapy will benefit people
who have no other hope.

   Dr. Michael Rosenblatt is interim president of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center and Harvard's dean for academic programs at CareGroup. As You Were Saying
is a regular feature of the Boston Herald. We invite our readers to contribute
pieces of no more than 600 words. Mail contributions to the Boston Herald, P.O.
Box 2096, Boston, MA 02106-2096, fax them to 617-542-1315 or e-mail to
oped@bostonherald.com. All submissions are subject to editing and become the
property of the Boston Herald.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2000


                             870 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                February 12, 2000, Saturday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 478 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH NEWS YOU CAN USE

BODY:
New test IDs savable brain tissue, study sez

   WASHINGTON - A new way of checking patients for brain damage after a stroke
could help doctors identify who would benefit most from being treated quickly
with a new clot-busting drug, researchers told a meeting of the American Stroke
Association in New Orleans.

   The tests combine a simple magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan with a set
of tests for cognitive function, such as naming objects, reading words and
matching words to pictures.

   "The method looks as though it will let us identify patients who still have
salvageable brain tissue," said Johns Hopkins University's Dr. Argye Hillis, who
led the study.

   A drug called Activase can help break up a blood clot in a person suffering a
stroke, but it has to be given within a three-hour "treatment window" or the
blood-starved cells die.   AIDS link is probed in kids' cancer deaths

   WASHINGTON - The Food and Drug Administration is trying to determine whether
children dying from cancer might have been accidentally exposed to the AIDS
virus in a gene-therapy experiment.

   St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis and Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston this week notified families about the probe. The FDA
suspended the gene-therapy study at both hospitals while investigating whether
researchers followed safety regulations and alerted the government quickly
enough.

   Researchers were testing gene therapy for neuroblastoma, a cancer of the
nervous system. St. Jude hospital gave two of 20 children in one study a batch
of gene-based medicine suspected of possible contamination, the hospital said.
Sixteen of the children have died from their cancers, the hospital said.

   Researcher: Mozart died of heart failure

   BALTIMORE - The healthy 35-year-old came down with a sudden and violent
illness. After two weeks of fever and swelling, he slipped into a coma and died.

   The case is that of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, whose swift death in 1791 left
historians perplexed and led to theories that he might have been poisoned by a
jealous rival. Now, more than 200 years later, a researcher has concluded that
he died of heart failure due to rheumatic fever.

   Standard references have attributed his death to a return of the rheumatic
fever he suffered twice in childhood, combined with excessive bloodletting,
common medical practice then.

   But competing theories have persisted, including the hypothesis fanned by the
play and movie "Amadeus" that Mozart was murdered by composer Antonio Salieri.

   Dr. Faith Fitzgerald, of the University of California-Davis, presented her
findings yesterday at a conference sponsored by the University of Maryland
School of Medicine. She noted that there was an epidemic of rheumatic fever in
Vienna when he died. Rheumatic fever is now treatable with antibiotics, but
epidemics were common in 18th-century Europe.


LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2000


                             871 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   February 12, 2000, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 756 words

HEADLINE: HIV exposure called questionable

SOURCE: Staff, Associated Press, Washington Post

BYLINE: LEIGH HOPPER, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; This story contains
material from the Associated Press and the Washington Post.

BODY:

   Baylor College of Medicine and St. Jude Children's Hospital in Tennessee have
suspended a gene therapy experiment until a Food and Drug Administration
investigation shows whether children dying from cancer were accidentally exposed
to the virus that causes AIDS.

   Suggestions that the children were exposed to HIV are highly questionable,
FDA officials stressed Friday. "The FDA is taking it seriously, but it still
remains unconfirmed," an FDA official said.

   In fact, the FDA called initial contamination testing of the gene-based
medicine so preliminary that it would not have alarmed the children's families
by telling them until confirmatory tests now under way settle the issue.

   It could take up to two weeks to determine if the patients were exposed to
the dangerous virus, the FDA said. However, a Baylor spokeswoman said she
expects test results within a week.

   "We don't anticipate it's going to be any longer than that," said Claire
Bassett, vice president for public affairs at Baylor.

   Bassett said Baylor contacted parents Thursday night about the possible
problem. "They thanked us for the information and asked us to keep them
updated," she said.

   The incident has again raised questions about the relatively young field of
gene therapy and its ability to protect patients adequately and comply with
federal regulations. Baylor currently has 20 other gene therapy trials under
way.

   In January, the FDA shut down the University of Pennsylvania's prestigious
gene therapy program after an agency investigation uncovered multiple lapses in
patient protection that may have contributed to the death of an 18-year-old
volunteer - the first death attributed to gene therapy.

   Baylor scientist Malcolm Brenner initiated the study of a gene-based "tumor
vaccine" for neuroblastoma, a nervous system cancer, in 1995 at St. Jude in
Memphis, where he worked until 1997. He continued the work at Baylor, where he
serves as director of the Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, bringing a portion
of the vaccine from St. Jude with him.

   Last week, Baylor was informed that St. Jude notified federal authorities
that they had inadvertently used untested "seed stock" of the vaccine on two
patients. Subsequent testing of the vaccine showed initial evidence that it may
have been contaminated with HIV and hepatitis C virus.

   "However, that has nothing to do with what's going on at Baylor College of
Medicine," said Baylor vice president and dean of research Dr. James Patrick on
Friday.

   Patrick explained that when the vaccine is developed from the seed stock, it
is tested at every stage for contaminants including HIV and the hepatitis C
virus. The purified batch created at St. Jude was called Batch 7. When Brenner
came to Baylor, he amplified, repurified and retested a portion of Batch 7 to
create a new supply of the vaccine.

   Researchers at St. Jude continued using Batch 7 as well, Patrick said, but at
some point reverted to using the untested seed stock until St. Jude's lead
researcher, Laura Bowman, noticed the mistake. An outside lab tested samples and
found signs of low-level HIV and hepatitis C contamination.

   "At this time, there is no evidence of any harm to any patients," St. Jude
officials said in a statement. "Several had promising responses (to the
treatment)."

   Patrick said the evidence of contamination at St. Jude is most likely the
result of sensitive tests which are prone to false positives. The FDA is
conducting its own tests to determine whether the medicine actually was
contaminated and is investigating whether researchers notified the government
quickly enough when they saw signs of possible contamination.

   Although Baylor is confident about the safety of its therapy, researchers
volunteered to stop the trial, retest its batches of vaccine and wait for
additional information, Patrick said.

   "Whenever you have children who are sick and there's any concern whatsoever,
it's absolutely critical to double-cross the T's . . . just to provide the
additional assurance," Patrick said.

   Bassett said none of the parents "to my knowledge" have requested that their
children be tested for HIV. Six children received the therapy; two have since
died from their cancer, Bassett said. She said Baylor would not recommend HIV
testing of the patients unless the FDA studies show evidence of contamination.

   Nineteen children with neuroblastoma were enrolled in the trial at St. Jude;
four of the patients are still living. The survival rate for recurring
neuroblastoma in children is zero.


LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2000


                             872 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                   February 12, 2000, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 14; National Desk

LENGTH: 753 words

HEADLINE: FDA INVESTIGATES POSSIBLE GENE THERAPY CONTAMINATION

BYLINE: MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   In yet another blow to experimental gene therapy, the Food and Drug
Administration said Friday that it has launched an investigation into whether
trials at two research centers accidentally exposed young cancer patients to the
viruses that cause AIDS and hepatitis C.

   The agency also suspended the studies for the treatment of children with
brain cancer at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, Tenn., and
Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.

   "We are taking this very seriously," said one FDA official who requested
anonymity.

   The agency is conducting its own tests on samples of gene-based medicine,
which uses a special virus known as an adenovirus to transmit the engineered
genes. At issue is whether this virus somehow became contaminated, either
through manufacturing or in the laboratory.

   Researchers at St. Jude apparently learned through independent testing of the
possible problem and notified the FDA on Feb. 4.

   The families of the children treated were to have been notified within the
last several days, but the FDA official said that none of the patients yet "has
been tested for HIV, as far as I know."

   He added: "We are very concerned about the potential impact of this news on
parents and families and are working to ensure that they are informed as quickly
as possible."

   The children were being treated for neuroblastoma, a brain cancer. The
experiment involved removing a patient's own cancer cells, modifying them with
an immune system gene and then inserting them back into the patient to try to
stimulate the immune system to attack the cancer.

   Many of the children since have died of cancer, the researchers said.

   In a statement issued Friday, St. Jude said: "There is no evidence that any
of the children who were treated were harmed in any way by the vaccine."

   A Baylor spokeswoman said that the contaminated samples apparently came from
St. Jude and that none had been found in the therapy administered to children at
Baylor.

   The FDA stressed that the findings were preliminary and that the sensitivity
of the test used--known as polymerase chain reaction, or PCR--often produces
"false positive" results.

   The agency, working with the National Institutes of Health, which funds such
research, is "not only testing the material but investigating exactly how these
clinical trials were conducted," the FDA official said. It could take up to two
weeks before results are available, the FDA said.

   An Arizona teenager, who was treated at a program at the University of
Pennsylvania last fall, was the first reported death in the gene therapy field.

   Federal regulators looking into the death of 18-year-old Jessie Gelsinger of
Tucson found numerous violations by university scientists and halted all gene
therapy programs being conducted there.

   "When Penn reported this death, many people in gene therapy said, 'It's just
a Penn problem,' but in my view, where there's smoke, there is tremendous fire,"
said Arthur Caplan, a medical ethicist who heads the Center for Bioethics at
Penn. "Gene therapy has been pushing the frontiers hard and there are problems."

   Gene therapy researchers, working at what is widely regarded as the cutting
edge of treatment for many disorders, attempt to replace or repair damaged or
missing genes with healthy ones. Hundreds of gene therapy studies are underway,
involving nearly 3,000 patients.

   But regulators are taking a fresh look at the field, particularly in the
aftermath of revelations by the National Institutes of Health that hundreds of
deaths and side effects among patients in gene therapy trials had gone
unreported, despite rules that call for the FDA and NIH to be notified.

   "We are extremely concerned about some researchers and institutions failing
in their responsibility to fully comply with guidelines and regulations," said
another FDA official. "We must be absolutely sure we do not allow the race for
effective therapies to undermine patient protections."

   FDA officials emphasized that they are not looking to send a collective chill
through the gene therapy research community. "At this point, we're focused on
this particular investigation to determine what went on," the second FDA
official said.

   However, he added, "clearly, those who conduct trials and do not follow rules
do harm to the gene therapy field and other patients who might benefit. . . .
It's important for researchers to take their responsibilities seriously. It's in
everyone's best interest to comply."

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2000


                             873 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               February 12, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 589 words

HEADLINE: Doctor Says Harm to Children Is Unlikely in Questioned Study

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 11

BODY:

   Faced with questions about whether more than two dozen childhood brain cancer
patients may have been exposed to the viruses that cause AIDS and hepatitis C
during a gene therapy experiment, the scientist conducting the study said today
that the chance that any children were actually harmed was "infinitesimally
small."

   Dr. Laura C. Bowman, a pediatric oncologist at St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital in Memphis, said that if the therapy the children received was tainted,
it was probably contaminated by genetic snippets of virus, not whole virus
particles that could cause an infection.

    "We doubt very much that it was really a virus," Dr. Bowman said. "But
obviously we are pursuing it."

   A Food and Drug Administration official said today that it might take as long
as two weeks for agency laboratories to determine whether the therapy was
contaminated.

   Researchers first learned of the possible problem in the fall but did not
report it to the agency until Feb. 4, and are only now notifying families. In an
interview, Dr. Bowman said she had been waiting for conclusive evidence about
whether the therapy was tainted. She said that she did not want to worry
patients needlessly and that the Institutional Review Board at her hospital
concurred with that decision.

   Asked if the researchers' behavior was improper or in violation of federal
rules, the agency official said: "We're in the middle of an investigation. We
can't say at this point."

   The inquiry is likely to intensify questions about gene therapy research,
which has been under scrutiny since an 18-year-old patient at the University of
Pennsylvania died in September. Last month, the F.D.A. shut down all gene
therapy experiments at the university..

   The brain cancer experiment took place at St. Jude and Baylor College of
Medicine. Twenty-five patients were enrolled, beginning in 1995. Of these, Dr.
Bowman said, all but 8 have died of their underlying disease, a type of
childhood brain cancer that is universally fatal.

   The majority of the patients were treated at St. Jude and ranged in age from
4 to 17. The F.D.A. has ordered both institutions not to enroll any more
patients in the experiment.

   In gene therapy, scientists try to use healthy genes to prevent or cure a
variety of illnesses, from rare inherited disorders to heart disease and cancer.
The brain cancer experiment involved a "tumor vaccine" that was made by
inserting a tumor-suppressing gene into a weakened cold virus, adenovirus. This
cocktail, called a vector, was injected under the skin of the arm.

   Dr. Bowman said she treated her last patient in March. Last fall, she said,
St. Jude began an effort to build "a very stringent quality assurance program."
As part of that effort, a quality control specialist learned that two patients
had been given a tumor vaccine that was inadvertently manufactured from
adenovirus taken directly from a master batch.

   A subsequent in-house investigation found that neither the St. Jude
laboratory nor the industry laboratory that provided the master batch had
screened it for the viruses that cause AIDS and hepatitis C, Dr. Bowman said.
Such screening is required by the F.D.A. Samples from the batch tested "weakly
positive," Dr. Bowman said. But such tests are extremely sensitive and often
give "false positive" results, experts say.

   "I don't think this is real," said Dr. Savio Woo, president of the American
Society for Gene Therapy, which represents researchers. "But of course, we are
going to have to wait for the tests."

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2000


                             874 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               February 12, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1322 words

HEADLINE: News Summary

BODY:


   INTERNATIONAL   A3-8

British Again Rule Ulster; I.R.A. Moves on Disarming
Britain suspended the power-sharing government of Catholics and Protestants in
Northern Ireland because of the Irish Republican Army's refusal to begin
disarming. But in a last-minute surprise, the head of the independent panel on
disarmament said I.R.A. contacts had presented a broad outline that he said
showed "the real prospect of agreement."   A1

Decision Awaited on Afghans
A jet chartered to fly home former hostages of a hijacked Afghan airliner
arrived in Britain, but officials said they were uncertain how many of the 150
or so passengers wanted to return to Afghanistan.   A6


   Anti-Immigrant Rioting in Spain
Anti-immigrant violence roiled the southern coast of Spain this week. Moroccan
farm workers said hundreds had been beaten and scores of shanties had been set
afire. Many immigrants fled to nearby hills.   A3

Serbs Push Out Albanians
Serbs continued to threaten ethnic Albanians who live among them on the north
side of Mitrovica, Kosovo, despite the presence of several hundred added
peacekeeping troops.   A6

The Destruction in Grozny
Since Russian forces seized the Chechen capital last week, refugees have
trickled back to try to rebuild their lives, but they have found damage so
extensive that some have thrown up their hands in despair.   A1

More Attacks in Middle East
Shiite Muslim guerrillas killed another Israeli soldier, the seventh in less
than three weeks, and Israeli warplanes responded with air strikes at suspected
guerrilla targets in Lebanon. The renewed hostilities came just after headlines
in Israel pronounced an easing of the heightened violence. A five-country
meeting in Lebanon that had been convened to calm tensions was disrupted.   A4

Focus of Vote in Zimbabwe
Five million people will go to the polls this weekend to vote on a new
constitution, but the outcome will be seen as a referendum on the only leader
whom Zimbabwe has known, President Robert Mugabe. Opponents of the proposal say
the document will only solidify the president's power and erode the economically
struggling country's already diminished standing with foreign investors.   A6

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A9-13, 16

Ex-C.I.A. Director Helped Former Aide During Inquiry
John M. Deutch, a former director of central intelligence, recommended a top
C.I.A. official for a high-paying job at Citibank as she was monitoring an
internal investigation into whether he had mishandled classified information,
according to records and interviews.   A10

Ventura Quits Reform Party
Gov. Jesse Ventura of Minnesota, the Reform Party's highest-ranking elected
official, said he was resigning from the party over his growing dissatisfaction
with its "hopelessly dysfunctional" leadership and the prospect that the party
would nominate for president Patrick J. Buchanan and might have the former Klan
leader David Duke as a member.   A1

Battling Over Records and Ads
Gov. George W. Bush offered a list of what he said were contradictions between
Senator John McCain's words and actions, while Mr. McCain, campaigning in New
York City, pledged to end television advertisements that belittle Mr. Bush's
character.   A12

Law License at Risk
A committee of lawyers in Arkansas was said to have begun moving forward on
complaints that could result in the removal or suspension of President Clinton's
law license.   A9

School Board Limits Clubs
The school board in Orange County, Calif., under orders from a federal judge to
allow meetings of a gay tolerance club at a high school, voted to limit clubs at
elementary and middle schools to those related to studies, in a bid to block gay
support groups at lower grade levels. Rules for high school clubs were
tightened.   A9

Colorado Gun Bill Rejected
A measure to require private firearms dealers at gun shows to make the same kind
of background checks that licensed dealers perform narrowly failed in the
Legislature.   A9

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Assurances Offered on Patients
The scientist who conducted a gene therapy experiment, responding to questions
about whether childhood brain cancer patients had been exposed to the viruses
that cause AIDS and hepatitis C, said chances were "infinitesimally small" that
anyone had been harmed.   A16

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Blast Rattles Wall Street; Terrorism Is Not Suspected
A small explosive packed inside a military ammunition can shattered windows in
two Wall Street towers just hours before workers began thronging to their jobs
in the financial district. There were no serious injuries, but the police shut
down a two-block stretch of Wall Street during the morning rush. The mayor said
there was no indication that the blast was the work of terrorists.   B1

College Tuition and Tax Relief
Hillary Rodham Clinton pledged that as a senator she would push to make up to
$10,000 a year in college tuition costs tax deductible, saying the rising costs
of higher education had outpaced family income and existing financial assistance
programs.   B5

Mayor Giuliani affirmed that he was in the race, despite the lack of a formal
announcement. "Give me a break," he told reporters pressing the matter. "I'm
running."   B5

Deadly Staten Island Fire
A fire that officials said might have been deliberately set in a residence
killed three recent immigrants and injured three other people.   B3

Disfigured Patient Settles Suit
The woman whose doctor carved his initials into her skin after he delivered her
baby by Caesarean section has settled a lawsuit against the doctor and dropped
her claim against the hospital. The woman will receive $1.75 million, according
to people involved in the settlement talks.   B3

Religion Journal   B6

NEEDIEST CASES   B7

ARTS & IDEAS   B9-20

2 Co-Winners of Lincoln Prize
"Abraham Lincoln: Redeemer President" and "Runaway Slaves: Rebels on the
Plantation" will share the $20,000 prize.   B11

FASHION   B7

SPORTS   D1-8

Baltimore Linebacker Indicted
A grand jury in Atlanta indicted Ray Lewis of the Ravens on murder charges in
the fatal stabbings of two men outside a nightclub.   D6

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Dow Down 11.1% From High
The Dow fell 218.42 points, or 2.1 percent, to 10,425.21, which is 11.1 percent
below its record of 11,722.98, on Jan. 14. The Nasdaq fell 90.18 points, to
4,395.45, while the S.& P. 500 dropped 29.71 points, to 1,387.12   C1

Wall Street Executive Pay
Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, the biggest securities firm as measured by capital,
paid its top two executives more than $26 million each in salary, bonus, stock
and options last year. Merrill Lynch paid its top executive $29.3 million.   C1

British Bank Battle Ends
Royal Bank of Scotland defeated Bank of Scotland in their struggle for control
of National Westminster Bank, Britain's third-largest bank. NatWest's board
recommended Royal Bank's bid of $36.3 billion to NatWest shareholders.   C1

Discount Fare Rule Relaxed
Northwest Airlines is eliminating the overnight Saturday stay that it and the
airline industry have generally required for discounted, 14-day advance purchase
fares.   C14

Business Digest   C1

OBITUARIES   B8

Roger Vadim
The French film director who turned Brigitte Bardot into a star and sex symbol
in the first of his more than 20 movies, "And God Created Woman," was 72.   B8

EDITORIAL   A14-15

Editorials: Northern Ireland's reversal; wrestling free in Minnesota; the
profiteers of elder care; a wise pause on dietary supplements.

Columns: Frank Rich, Anthony Lewis.

Bridge   B18
TV Listings   B20
Crossword   B18
Weather   B19
Public Lives   A9


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2000


                             875 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      FEBRUARY 12, 2000 Saturday D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 461 words

HEADLINE: A GENE TEST PROBED FOR HIV LINK WHILE TRYING NOT TO ALARM PARENTS, THE
FDA IS LOOKING INTO A GENE-THERAPY TEST INVOLVING A FEW YOUNG CANCER PATIENTS.

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration is trying to determine if a small group of
children dying from cancer might have been accidentally exposed to the AIDS
virus in a gene-therapy experiment.

   Suggestions that the children were exposed to HIV are highly questionable,
FDA officials stressed yesterday.

   In fact, the FDA called initial contamination testing of the gene-based
medicine so tenuous that it would not have alarmed the children's families by
telling them until confirmatory tests now under way settle the issue.

   But St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, Tenn., and Baylor
College of Medicine in Houston said they had notified families this week, before
newspapers published reports on the investigation.

   "It may all be a false alarm," said Sen. Bill Frist (R., Tenn.), a physician,
after speaking with FDA and St. Jude's researchers.

   The FDA has suspended the gene-therapy study while investigating whether
researchers followed federal safety regulations.

   But Dr. Laura Bowman, the lead researcher at St. Jude's, said FDA officials
have not told her they suspect any violations. She said she regretted
frightening parents without evidence that any children were harmed. "To induce
that kind of grief when it may be a lab error I think is unconscionable," she
said.

   Researchers were using gene therapy for neuroblastoma, a nervous-system
cancer. Babies often survive it, but neuroblastoma is highly lethal when it
strikes older children. If patients relapse after initial treatment, most die
quickly.

   St. Jude's gave the gene therapy to 19 relapsed children; 15 of them have
died from their cancer. Only two received the batch of gene-based medicine
suspected of possible contamination, and they are among the cancer fatalities,
the hospital said. One of the four cancer survivors, however, has opted for
precautionary HIV testing.

   There has been no sign of contamination in the gene-based medicine given to
six children at Baylor, said spokeswoman Claire Bassett. Two of those children
have died of their cancer.

   The concern arose when Bowman realized cells used to grow some of the
medicine used at St. Jude's might not have undergone proper quality testing. So
an outside lab tested samples and found signs of low-level HIV and hepatitis C
contamination.

   Those initial tests often give false results, and might even mistake the
adenovirus that is used to administer gene therapy for other infectious viruses,
FDA officials said.

   Indeed, this testing is so tenuous that when it is used on donated blood,
donors are never told they might have HIV until better tests confirm it.

   The FDA began strict confirmatory testing Thursday. It hopes to know within
two weeks whether the children's therapy was contaminated.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             876 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  February 12, 2000, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-12

LENGTH: 411 words

HEADLINE: FDA INVESTIGATES GENE EXPERIMENT FOR POSSIBLE HIV CONTAMINATION

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   The Food and Drug Administration is trying to determine if children dying
from cancer might have been accidentally exposed to the AIDS virus in a gene
therapy experiment.

   Suggestions that the children were exposed to HIV are highly preliminary, FDA
officials stressed yesterday.

   In fact, the FDA called initial contamination testing of the genebased
medicine so tenuous that it would not have alarmed the children's families by
telling them until confirmatory tests now under way settle the issue.

   But St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis and Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston notified families this week, in anticipation of newspaper
reports of the FDA probe.

   The FDA has suspended the gene therapy study while investigating whether
researchers followed federal safety regulations, including whether they alerted
the government quickly enough to the possible contamination.

   "There is no evidence that any of the children who were treated were harmed
in any way," St. Jude hospital said in a statement yesterday.

   Researchers were hunting gene therapy for neuroblastoma, a nervous system
cancer. Babies often survive it, but neuroblastoma is highly lethal when it
strikes older children. If patients relapse after initial treatment, most die
quickly.

   St. Jude studied 20 relapsed children. Two received the batch of gene-based
medicine suspected of possible contamination, the hospital said. Sixteen of the
children have died from their cancers, the hospital said.

   There has been no sign of contamination in the gene-based medicine given to
six children at Baylor, said spokeswoman Claire Bassett. Two of those children
have died of their cancers.

   The worry over possible contamination arose when St. Jude researchers
realized cells used to grow some of the medicine several years ago might not
have undergone proper quality testing. So an outside lab tested samples and
found signs of low-level HIV and hepatitis C contamination.

   Those initial tests often give false results, and might even mistake the
"adenovirus" used to administer gene therapy for other infectious viruses, said
FDA officials, speaking on condition of anonymity.

   Indeed, this testing is so tenuous that when blood donations undergo it,
donors are never told they might have HIV until better tests confirm it.

   The FDA began strict confirmatory testing Thursday. It hopes to know within
two weeks whether the children's therapy was contaminated.

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 2000


                             877 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                      February 12, 2000, Saturday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: Genetic therapy probed

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard


BODY:  WASHINGTON - The Food and Drug Administration is trying to
determine if children dying from cancer might have been
accidentally exposed to the AIDS virus in a gene therapy
experiment.


    Suggestions that the children were exposed to HIV are highly
preliminary, FDA officials stressed Friday.


    In fact, the FDA called initial contamination testing of the
gene-based medicine so tenuous that it would not have alarmed the
children's families by telling them until confirmatory tests now
under way settle the issue.


    But St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis and Baylor
College of Medicine in Houston notified families this week, in
anticipation of newspaper reports of the FDA probe.


    The FDA has suspended the gene therapy study while investigating
whether researchers followed federal safety regulations, including
whether they alerted the government quickly enough to the possible
contamination.


    "There is no evidence that any of the children who were treated
were harmed in any way," St. Jude hospital said Friday.


    Researchers were hunting gene therapy for neuroblastoma, a nervous
system cancer. Babies often survive it, but neuroblastoma is highly
lethal when it strikes older children. If patients relapse after
initial treatment, most die quickly.


    St. Jude hospital studied 19 relapsed children. Two received the
batch of gene-based medicine suspected of possible contamination,
the hospital said. Sixteen of the children have died from their
cancers, the hospital said.


    There has been no sign of contamination in the gene-based medicine
given to six children at Baylor, said spokeswoman Claire Bassett.
Two of those children have died of their cancers.


    The worry about possible contamination arose when St. Jude
researchers realized cells used to grow some of the medicine
several years ago might not have undergone proper quality testing.



LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2000


                             878 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                February 12, 2000, Saturday, THREE STAR EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 12

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: FDA INVESTIGATES GENE THERAPY FOR POSSIBLE AIDS CONTAMINATION

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   * The cases involved children dying of cancer. The chance that any were
infected with the AIDS virus is very low, officials said.

   The Food and Drug Administration is trying to determine if children dying
from cancer might have been accidentally exposed to the AIDS virus in a
gene-therapy experiment.

   Because the threat of contamination is so tenuous, the agency said it would
not have alarmed the children's families by telling them until tests now under
way settle the issue.

   But St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis and Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston notified families this week, in anticipation of newspaper
reports of the FDA investigation.

   The FDA has suspended the gene therapy study while investigating whether
researchers followed federal safety regulations, including whether they alerted
the government quickly enough to the possible contamination.

   "There is no evidence that any of the children who were treated were harmed
in any way," St. Jude hospital said in a statement Friday.

   Researchers were using gene therapy to treat neuroblastoma, a nervous system
cancer. Babies often survive it, but neuroblastoma is highly lethal when it
strikes older children. If patients relapse after initial treatment, most die
quickly.

   St. Jude hospital studied 20 relapsed children. Two received the batch of
gene-based medicine suspected of possible contamination, the hospital said.
Sixteen of the children have died from their cancers, the hospital said.

   There has been no sign of contamination in the gene-based medicine given to
six children at Baylor, said spokeswoman Claire Bassett. Two of those children
have died of their cancers.

   The worry over possible contamination arose when St. Jude researchers
realized cells used to grow some of the medicine several years ago might not
have undergone proper quality testing. So an outside lab tested samples and
found signs of low-level HIV and hepatitis C contamination.

   Those initial tests often give false results, and might even mistake the
"adenovirus" used to administer gene therapy for other infectious viruses, said
FDA officials, speaking on condition of anonymity.

   Indeed, this testing is so tenuous that when blood donations undergo it,
donors are never told they might have HIV until better tests confirm it.

   The FDA began strict confirmatory testing Thursday. It hopes to know within
two weeks whether the children's therapy was contaminated.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2000


                             879 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                      February 12, 2000 Saturday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 206 words

HEADLINE: DOCTOR SAYS CONTAMINATION UNLIKELY IN GENE EXPERIMENT

BYLINE: By Sheryl Gay Stolberg 2000, The New York Times

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Faced with questions about whether more than two dozen childhood brain cancer
patients may have been exposed to the viruses that cause AIDS and hepatitis C
during a gene therapy experiment, the scientist conducting the study said Friday
that the chance that any children were actually harmed was "infinitesimally
small."

   Dr. Laura C. Bowman, a pediatric oncologist at St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital in Memphis, Tenn., said that if the therapy the children received was
tainted, it was probably contaminated by genetic snippets of virus, not whole
virus particles that could cause an infection.

   "We doubt very much that it was really virus," Bowman said.

   A Food and Drug Administration official said Friday that it may take as long
as two weeks for agency laboratories to determine whether the therapy was
contaminated.

   Researchers first learned of the possible problem in the fall but did not
report it to the agency until Feb. 4 and are only now notifying families. In an
interview, Bowman said she had been waiting for conclusive evidence about
whether the therapy was tainted. She said she did not want to needlessly worry
patients, and the Institutional Review Board at her hospital concurred with that
decision.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2000


                             880 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                   February 12, 2000, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 134 words

BODY:


   An article yesterday about gene therapy incorrectly described the disease
neuroblastoma as a brain cancer. It is a central nervous system cancer.

   A chart comparing the features of tax preparation software in yesterday's
Fast Forward section should have indicated that Microsoft's TaxSaver software
can not handle state returns. It also should have said that the Windows 95, 98
and NT versions of H&R Block's Kiplinger TaxCut can handle D.C. returns.


   An item in Thursday's Fairfax Weekly gave incorrect information about free
clinics on how to install child safety seats. Child seats will be checked at
Sheehy Ford, 6727 Loisdale Rd., Springfield, from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. Tuesday, and
at Kip Killmon's Tysons Ford, 8201 Leesburg Pike, Vienna, from 10:30 a.m. to 6
p.m. Wednesday.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2000


                             881 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 11, 2000, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A26

LENGTH: 343 words

HEADLINE: MONITORING GENE STUDIES

BODY:

   Many devastating diseases are caused in whole or in part by genes that are
defective or even absent. While medical researchers have found non-genetic ways
to keep a disease like cystic fibrosis at least temporarily at bay, they yearn
to treat this and other ailments by correcting the basic genetic flaw.

   But gene therapy may be at a turning point. After years of experiments with
no clear successes, the whole approach is under scrutiny because a young patient
died in a trial he should not have been participating in.   It would be
regrettable if the current review in Washington of how such trials are monitored
leads to a broad moratorium on this line of research. Scientists expressed that
concern this week after Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center suspended a
gene-therapy trial with hemophilia patients and a cystic-fibrosis research
foundation halted enrollment into its gene-therapy trials. Unlike a Beth Israel
gene-therapy cancer trial that was stopped last year after three deaths, the
trial for hemophilia had no such problems.

   Because gene therapy is so new and often relies on viruses to transport
normal genes into target cells, there is more than usual concern that
researchers not cut any procedural corners. But corners were cut, with a tragic
result, in a trial at the University of Pennsylvania last fall. An 18-year-old
boy with a rare, gene-based liver disease died after his body was overwhelmed by
a virus serving as a transporter of genes. An investigation showed experimenters
had broken rules of the trial's protocol and not gained genuine informed consent
from the boy or his family.

   By all means, the procedures of all such trials should be reviewed
constantly, and the federal government might be wise to tighten the requirements
for reporting on ongoing experiments. But it would be a grievous mistake to stop
gene-therapy trials that have not had problems. Properly conducted experiments
could still lead the way to breathtaking advances against diseases that strike
cruelly at the building blocks of life.

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2000


                             882 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                 February 11, 2000, Friday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 34 SPOTLIGHT ON HEALTH

LENGTH: 606 words

HEADLINE: RISK OF FATAL STROKE IS HIGHEST FOR BLACKS

BODY:
ATLANTA - Blacks ages 35 to 54 are four times more likely to die of a stroke
than their white counterparts, the government said yesterday.

   Hispanics, Asians, Native Americans and Alaska natives also are at greater
risk, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported. The racial gap
narrowed sharply at older ages, suggesting that younger minorities are not
getting the message about the risk factors, said Carma Ayala, an epidemiologist
at the centers.

   "Many people believe stroke is an older person's disease," she said. The
centers also cited lack of access to health care and mistrust of doctors as
reasons for the gap. Obesity, smoking, diabetes, lack of exercise, poor diet and
high blood pressure are strokes' major risk factors.

   A separate study found that even if middle-age people get their blood
pressure under control, their risk of stroke later in life increases.

   "It's not just the blood pressure you have now," said Boston University's Dr.
Sudha Seshadri, who presented the study yesterday to the American Stroke
Association in New Orleans.

   "This study is important, because it shows that a risk factor is in effect
over a lifetime," said Dr. Ralph Sacco of Columbia Presbyterian hospital. MORE
HEALTH NEWSRemedy's peril

   St.-John's-wort, a popular herbal remedy used to relieve mild depression, can
interfere with drugs used to treat HIV-infected people and heart transplant
patients, new research shows. Scientists said the findings add to growing
concerns that the herb may interact dangerously with prescription medicines.

   Two studies published this week in The Lancet medical journal in London found
St.-John's-wort dulls effectiveness of the HIV medicine indinavir and the
transplant drug cyclosporin, used to suppress patients' immune systems so their
bodies don't reject the new organs.

   Eye ills' cause

   A protein key to building new blood vessels is responsible for the eye
problems that plague people with diabetes, researchers said yesterday. They said
the protein, called VEGF, may one day be blocked with drugs or gene therapy -
good news for patients with diabetic retinopathy.

   Diabetic retinopathy is a leading cause of blindness among young people. It
develops when blood vessels in the retina, the light-sensitive part of the eye,
are damaged by disease, causing a deficiency of oxygen. A team at Johns Hopkins
University and Ciba Vision found that while VEGF does not work alone in this
process, blocking it may be enough to stop it.

   Brain overload

   Brains of the seriously sleep-deprived work harder and can turn to a normally
inactive region for some help, according to a study published yesterday in the
journal Nature.

   Researchers from the University of California at San Diego found that when
students took a word memory test after 35 hours without sleep, the prefrontal
cortex became even more active.

   The brain appears to respond differently to sleep deprivation depending on
what it is trying to do. When sleep-deprived students were asked to solve math
problems, researchers found no signs of compensation.

   Fetuses at risk

   A single drinking binge by a pregnant woman can be enough to permanently
damage the brain of her fetus, according to a new Washington University study
appearing in today's journal Science.

   The study indicates that rats, and presumably humans, are most susceptible to
alcohol-related neurological damage during a period when developing brain cells
are furiously building the connections needed for memory, learning and thought.

   In humans, this brain growth spurt starts in the sixth month of gestation and
continues for two years after birth.

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2000


                             883 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    February 11, 2000, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 652 words

HEADLINE: Scientists waited to tell of possible HIV exposure

SOURCE: Staff, Washington Post

BYLINE: LEIGH HOPPER, RICK WEISS, DEBORAH NELSON; Houston Chronicle Medical
Writer Leigh Hopper contributed to this story.

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Researchers discovered in December that they may have
accidentally exposed more than two dozen young cancer patients to the virus that
causes AIDS in a gene therapy experiment but did not inform federal regulators
until last week.

   Only when it became clear that the potential problem was about to become
public Thursday did researchers at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in
Memphis and Baylor College of Medicine in Houston start contacting patients and
their parents about the possible infections.

   Preliminary tests on the gene-based medicine that was administered to young
volunteers at St. Jude suggest that the treatment may have been contaminated
with HIV-1, the virus that causes AIDS, and HCV, which causes hepatitis C, the
researchers and federal officials acknowledged Thursday.

   Baylor scientist Malcolm Brenner initiated the study while at St. Jude, where
he worked until 1997, and has continued the work at Baylor.

   The medicine used at Baylor was originally derived from the same "seed stock"
as that used at St. Jude. After the seed stock reached Baylor, however, it was
processed to meet all FDA-mandated tests for safety and purity, according to a
Baylor statement issued Thursday night.

   The vaccine passed additional tests at Baylor at all stages of development to
screen out possible infectious contaminants such as HIV or the viruses that
cause hepatitis B and C, according to the statement.

   "(Brenner) is not responsible for the research that is going on at St. Jude
hospital," said Claire Bassett, vice president of public affairs at Baylor. "He
very much believes this is all going to be proven to be negative, when all the
final tests are completed."

   Although two successive tests have so far found evidence of contamination,
scientists and government officials emphasized Thursday that the scare might
prove to be a false alarm. The tests that have been performed so far are
extremely sensitive and prone to giving "false positive" results on the kinds of
samples used. New and more reliable tests are being conducted by the Food and
Drug Administration. In the meantime, the study at St. Jude has been terminated.

   "We discussed with the FDA our procedures at Baylor, and we elected at that
time to suspend all use of the (medicine) in question until the FDA can
determine whether additional testing should be performed to verify there is no
contamination," Baylor said.

   In the wake of several other recent revelations about the failure of several
gene therapy research institutions to report patient deaths and illnesses
properly, the incident again raises questions about the fledgling field's
ability to protect patients adequately and comply with federal regulations.

   Scientists involved in the new case described a series of oversights and
mistakes dating to 1995 that led to the current alarm. The treatment was
designed for patients with neuroblastoma, a brain cancer that is the second most
common childhood malignancy. It called for a patient's own tumor cells to be
removed and enhanced with an immune system gene inserted by a gene-altered
virus. Those cells were then reinjected into the patient in an effort to rally
the immune system against the cancer.

   Laura Bowman, the study's principal investigator at St. Jude, said she was
reviewing the laboratory's quality control program last fall when she discovered
that the two most recent volunteers - a child and a teen treated a year ago -
received genetically engineered viruses that had not been processed correctly.
That lapse could increase the odds of contamination with foreign viruses.

   Bowman looked for documentation showing that the original 1995 "master batch"
of cells, in which the engineered viruses were grown, had been properly tested
for contaminating viruses, such as HIV. She could not find any evidence that
those tests had been performed as required.











LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2000


                             884 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     February 11, 2000 Friday FINAL EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 347 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy believed tainted with AIDS virus

BYLINE: RICK WEISS AND DEBORAH NELSON Washington Post

BODY:

   Washington -- Researchers discovered in December that they might have
accidentally exposed more than two dozen young cancer patients to the virus that
causes AIDS in a gene therapy experiment, but did not inform federal regulators
until last week.

   Only when it became clear that the potential problem was about to become
public Thursday did the researchers at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in
Memphis and Baylor College of Medicine in Houston start contacting patients and
their parents about the possible infections.

   Preliminary tests on the gene-based medicine that was administered to young
volunteers suggest that the treatment may have been contaminated with HIV-1, the
virus that causes AIDS, and HCV, which causes hepatitis C, the researchers and
federal officials acknowledged Thursday.

   Although two successive tests have so far found evidence of contamination,
scientists and government officials emphasized Thursday that the scare might
prove to be a false alarm. The tests that have been performed so far are
extremely sensitive and prone to giving "false positive" results on the kinds of
samples used.

   New and more reliable tests are being conducted by the Food and Drug
Administration. In the meantime, the study has been terminated.

   In the wake of several other recent revelations about the failure of several
gene therapy research institutions to report patient deaths and illnesses
properly, the incident again raises questions about the fledgling field's
ability to protect patients.

   Scientists involved in the new case described a series of oversights and
mistakes dating to 1995 that led to the current alarm. The treatment was
designed for patients with neuroblastoma, a brain cancer that is the second most
common childhood malignancy.

   All the volunteers were close to death from recurrences of their cancers,
said Laura Bowman, the study's principal investigator at St. Jude. Only four of
20 patients she treated are alive today, she said. Of six treated at Baylor,
four are alive. All the deaths were from cancer, the researchers said.

CORRECTION-DATE: February 13, 2000 Sunday

CORRECTION:
The disease neuroblastoma is a central nervous system cancer. It was incorrectly
described in a Washington Post story about gene therapy Friday.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2000


                             885 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     February 11, 2000 Friday FINAL EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 347 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy believed tainted with AIDS virus

BYLINE: RICK WEISS AND DEBORAH NELSON Washington Post

BODY:

   Washington -- Researchers discovered in December that they might have
accidentally exposed more than two dozen young cancer patients to the virus that
causes AIDS in a gene therapy experiment, but did not inform federal regulators
until last week.

   Only when it became clear that the potential problem was about to become
public Thursday did the researchers at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in
Memphis and Baylor College of Medicine in Houston start contacting patients and
their parents about the possible infections.

   Preliminary tests on the gene-based medicine that was administered to young
volunteers suggest that the treatment may have been contaminated with HIV-1, the
virus that causes AIDS, and HCV, which causes hepatitis C, the researchers and
federal officials acknowledged Thursday.

   Although two successive tests have so far found evidence of contamination,
scientists and government officials emphasized Thursday that the scare might
prove to be a false alarm. The tests that have been performed so far are
extremely sensitive and prone to giving "false positive" results on the kinds of
samples used.

   New and more reliable tests are being conducted by the Food and Drug
Administration. In the meantime, the study has been terminated.

   In the wake of several other recent revelations about the failure of several
gene therapy research institutions to report patient deaths and illnesses
properly, the incident again raises questions about the fledgling field's
ability to protect patients.

   Scientists involved in the new case described a series of oversights and
mistakes dating to 1995 that led to the current alarm. The treatment was
designed for patients with neuroblastoma, a brain cancer that is the second most
common childhood malignancy.

   All the volunteers were close to death from recurrences of their cancers,
said Laura Bowman, the study's principal investigator at St. Jude. Only four of
20 patients she treated are alive today, she said. Of six treated at Baylor,
four are alive. All the deaths were from cancer, the researchers said.

CORRECTION-DATE: February 13, 2000 Sunday

CORRECTION:
The disease neuroblastoma is a central nervous system cancer. It was incorrectly
described in a Washington Post story about gene therapy Friday.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2000


                             886 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 11, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1160 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   INTERNATIONAL   A3-15

Freed Jet Passengers Request Asylum in Britain
British officials said 21 people aboard a hijacked Afghan airliner had been
arrested in connection with the hijacking, which ended early yesterday, and that
some of the suspects were expected to seek asylum in Britain. Of the 150 or so
passengers, 60 adults and 14 children have already requested asylum, apparently
in an effort to flee the repressive Taliban regime in Afghanistan.   A1


   Iraq Refuses U.N. Access
Iraq said it would not allow United Nations arms inspectors back into the
country to reinstate a disarmament program halted in December 1998, on the eve
of air strikes.   A5

Fighting Eases in Lebanon
A flare-up in fighting subsided, allowing people in northern Israel to emerge
from bomb shelters, and the United States called a meeting of a monitoring
group.   A10

Suharto Named as Suspect
The Indonesian government named former President Suharto a suspect in a
corruption inquiry and summoned him for questioning on Monday. His lawyers said
he was too ill to attend.   A1

Beijing Detains Sect Members
At least 2,000 followers of the banned Falun Gong spiritual movement have been
detained in China during the past week, according to a Hong Kong human rights
group.   A14

Changing of a Guard in Kosovo
British peacekeeping forces took over guard duties on a bridge in the ethnically
divided town of Mitrovica, replacing French troops that had been accused of
failing to protect ethnic Albanians and Serbs.   A3

Ambush by Chechen Rebels
Chechen rebels attacked two military trains and pulled the Russians into one of
the fiercest battles since abandoning Grozny, the Chechen capital, Russian
officials said.   A11

French Corruption Inquiry
A French prosecutor has asked that former Foreign Minister Roland Dumas,
together with a past mistress and six other people, stand trial on corruption
charges stemming from a sex-and-kickback scandal.   A3

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A16-28

House Passes Bill to Cut Taxes for Married Couples
The House voted, 268 to 158, for a Republican-sponsored bill to cut taxes for
married couples by $182 billion over the next decade, brushing aside the Clinton
administration's position that any such tax cut should be far smaller.
Republican leaders in the Senate plan to bring up their own legislation this
year.   A1

Lott Forces Confirmations
Senator Trent Lott, the majority leader, pushed through the confirmation of two
federal judges, ending an insurrection by other Republicans who had vowed to bar
consideration of any Clinton judicial nominee.   A25

Senate Acts on Waste Site
The Senate voted to begin setting the rules for turning Yucca Mountain, in
Nevada, into a permanent radioactive-waste disposal site, but the president is
expected to veto the bill.   A16

McCain on Education
Senator John McCain assailed teachers' unions and "self-serving union bosses" in
calling for an experimental voucher program, merit pay for teachers, and judges
who would allow voluntary prayer and the Ten Commandments in schools.   A26

Police Scandal Widens
The Los Angeles district attorney said an investigation had found that more than
40 people were wrongly imprisoned and in several cases shot because of police
misconduct.   A16

1,100 Planes to Be Inspected
Damage was found in a tail mechanism on two Alaska Airlines jets. The F.A.A.
told airlines to examine the mechanisms on all MD-80 series and similar planes,
like MD-90's, DC-9's and Boeing 717's.   A28

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Gene Experiment in Doubt
As many as 20 children with brain cancer may have been accidentally exposed to
the viruses that cause AIDS and hepatitis C during a gene therapy experiment at
hospitals in Houston and Memphis, an administration official said.   A20

NASA Advisory Panel Warning
Shortages of skilled engineers and little past efforts to replace them may pose
safety problems as the shuttle flight rate increases.   A18

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Defense Experts Dispute Prosecution on Diallo Shots
Two experts called by the defense testified that the bullet that tore through
Amadou Diallo's aorta and spinal cord was among the last of 19 that struck him,
contradicting a prosecution expert, who had said it was among the first. The
timing is an issue because prosecutors assert that the police officers continued
firing after Mr. Diallo fell.   B3

A New Brooklyn Bridge Park
The Port Authority agreed to allow its almost 80 acres of prime waterfront below
Brooklyn Heights to be developed as public parkland.   B1

Bidding Goodbye in Rome
Cardinal John O'Connor, 80, who is ailing and preparing to step down as the
archbishop of New York, had a private farewell audience with Pope John Paul II
at the Vatican.   B5

NEEDIEST CASES   B4

FASHION   B11

Another Runway Protest
An anti-fur protest disrupted a fashion show in Bryant Park, for the third day
in a row.   B11

EDUCATION

Casting Call for Regents
People seeking appointment to the Board of Regents appeared before a New York
state legislative panel seeking to fill seven vacant seats.   B1

SPORTS   D1-8

Griffey to Cincinnati
The Reds acquired Ken Griffey Jr. from the Seattle Mariners for a bargain
package of players and an even bigger bargain financially.   D1

Indictments Sought in Atlanta
The police said they would seek murder indictments against Ray Lewis, the
Baltimore Ravens linebacker, and two other men in the killings of two men after
the Super Bowl.   D1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-20

Interest in Bonds Sags
Wall Street dealers and traders, feeling whipsawed by uncertainty over the
government's plan to buy back some long-term debt with the budget surplus,
shunned a Treasury auction of $10 billion in new 30-year bonds, leaving the
government with the least demand ever at such a sale.   C1

The Nasdaq rose 122.39 points, to 4,485.63, and the S.& P. 500 climbed 5.13
points, to 1,416.83. But the Dow fell 55.53 points, to 10,643.63.   C8

Hunt for Cyberattackers
Law enforcement and computer experts said attacks on big Web sites appeared to
have been the work of more than one person or group. Network service providers
and investigators were studying packets of data that had paralyzed the sites.
C1

The Justice Department said tougher criminal penalties might be needed to fight
e-commerce attacks.   C5

Business Digest   C1

WEEKEND   E1-32; E33-46

OBITUARIES   B9-10

EDITORIAL   A30-31

Editorials: Hacker attacks on the Internet; an African Pinochet; Eleanor
Randolph on Mrs. Clinton's campaign.
Columns: Gail Collins, Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E45

TV Listings   E31

Public Lives   B2

Weather   D8


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2000


                             887 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 11, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 467 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Might Have Exposed 20 Children to Lethal Viruses

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 10

BODY:

   As many as 20 children with brain cancer may have been accidentally exposed
to the viruses that cause AIDS and hepatitis C during a gene therapy experiment
at hospitals in Houston and Memphis, a Clinton administration official said
tonight.

   The Food and Drug Administration was notified last Friday about the possible
problem by researchers at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis,
which had been running the experiment for the past two and a half to three years
with scientists at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston. The F.D.A. is
investigating, said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.

    The children were given a gene therapy "vector" -- a corrective gene,
encased in a weakened cold virus -- that may have been tainted. But whether they
were exposed to the AIDS or hepatitis viruses remains unclear.

   "The F.D.A. has a sample of the material, is testing it, and it may be a few
days before we have any preliminary findings," the official said.

   Earlier tests suggesting that the vector may have been contaminated could
turn out to be false, the official said. Nonetheless, he added, "This is a
serious concern."

   He said the F.D.A. had taken "immediate action" but declined to be specific.
Typically, the agency suspends experiments when safety problems emerge.

   It was also unclear whether patients and their families were immediately
informed. A report in Friday's issue of The Washington Post quoted researchers
involved in the experiment as saying that they had learned of the possible
problem in December, but did not begin informing patients and their families
until after federal regulators were notified. In an interview tonight, the
administration official said the institutions involved "had been working to
inform the patients."

   The therapy was to test a treatment for children with neuroblastoma, a form
of brain cancer, and involved the use of a corrective gene encased in a weakened
cold virus, adenovirus. That same virus was used in a gene therapy experiment
that killed an 18-year-old patient, Jesse Gelsinger, at the University of
Pennsylvania last September.

   The death has prompted increased scrutiny of the therapy, a 10-year-old field
in which scientists are trying to prevent, or treat, diseases by giving patients
healthy genes to make up for deficient ones. Last month the F.D.A. halted such
research at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Also since the death, federal officials have learned that gene therapy
researchers were routinely failing to follow government rules requiring them to
report side effects to the National Institutes of Health. When the institutes'
officials surveyed scientists using the adenovirus, they found that only 39
"adverse events" had been reported in more than 600 that should have been.



   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2000


                             888 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2000 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                           February 11, 2000, Friday

SECTION: Late City Final; Pg. 024

LENGTH: 190 words

HEADLINE: CANCER KIDS MAY HAVE BEEN GIVEN AIDS VIRUS

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- Researchers may have accidentally exposed more than two dozen
young cancer patients to the virus that causes AIDS in a gene therapy
experiment, it was reported today.

   The Washington Post said the possible exposure was discovered in December,
but not reported to regulators until last week -- when it became clear it was
going to become public.

   The experiment was conducted on kids at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
in Memphis and Baylor College of Medicine in Houston starting in 1995.

   Preliminary tests indicated the gene-based medicine -- given to patients with
neuroblastoma -- may have been contaminated with the HIV virus.

   The patients' own tumor cells were removed and enhanced with an immune system
gene. Those cells were then reinjected into the patients in an effort to rally
the immune system.

   One of the researchers speculated that some HIV-infected blood in the
laboratory was accidentally splashed on the viruses. Another said it was
possible some contaminating viruses may have become mixed with the study
viruses.

   Most of the children in the study died of cancer.Post wire services.


LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2000


                             889 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   February 11, 2000, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-18

LENGTH: 581 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY TRIAL HAD HIV TAINT;
WARNING WAS DELAYED TO PATIENTS, REGULATORS

BYLINE: RICK WEISS AND DEBORAH NELSON, THE WASHINGTON POST

DATELINE: WASHINGTON -

BODY:


   Researchers discovered in December that they may have accidentally exposed
more than two dozen young cancer patients to the virus that causes AIDS in a
gene therapy experiment, but did not inform federal regulators until last week.

   Only when it became clear that the potential problem was about to become
public did researchers at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis and
Baylor College of Medicine in Houston start contacting patients and their
parents yesterday about the possible infections.

   Preliminary tests on the genebased medicine that was administered to young
volunteers suggest that the treatment may have been contaminated with HIV-1, the
virus that causes AIDS, and HCV, which causes hepatitis C, the researchers and
federal officials acknowledged yesterday.

   Although two successive tests have so far found evidence of contamination,
scientists and government officials emphasized yesterday that the scare might
prove to be a false alarm. The tests that have been performed so far are
extremely sensitive and prone to giving "false positive" results on the kinds of
samples used. New and more reliable tests are now being conducted by the Food
and Drug Administration. In the meantime, the study has been terminated.

   In January, the FDA shut down the University of Pennsylvania's prestigious
gene therapy program after an agency investigation uncovered multiple serious
lapses in patient protections that may have contributed to the death of an
18-yearold volunteer - the first death attributed to gene therapy. National
Institutes of Health officials later revealed that hundreds of deaths and other
"adverse events" in gene therapy trials had gone unreported, despite federal
rules that require immediate reporting.

   The new case also adds to St. Jude's troubles with the National Institutes of
Health, which was already investigating the medical center' handling of patient
deaths in a different clinical study. St Jude's has also had prior problems with
bacterial contamination of some bone marrow preparations.

   The treatment was designed for patients with neuroblastoma, a brain cancer
that is the second most common childhood malignancy. Laura Bowman, the study's
principal investigator at St. Jude, said she was reviewing the lab's quality
control program last fall when she discovered that the two most recent
volunteers - a child and a teenager treated a year ago - received genetically
engineered viruses that had not been processed correctly. That lapse could
increase the odds of contamination with foreign viruses.

   Bowman looked for documentation showing that the original, 1995 "master
batch" of cells, in which the engineered viruses were grown, had been properly
tested for contaminating viruses, such as HIV. She couldn't find evidence that
those tests had been performed as required. In November, she sent some of the
lab's gene-altered viruses grown from that "master batch" to an outside lab for
testing. Those tests twice indicated the presence of DNA from HIV and HCV. When
further test results were slow in coming, she said, she decided to contact the
FDA last week.

   Both Bowman and Malcolm Brenner, who initiated the study while at St. Jude
and has continued the work at Baylor, said tests on viruses for contaminating
viruses are notoriously prone to false positives, and they doubt the results are
accurate. More accurate follow-up tests are being conducted on the cells upon
which the viruses were grown.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000


                             890 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     February 11, 2000 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 751 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS FEAR THEY EXPOSED KIDS TO HIV

BYLINE: By RICK WEISS and DEBORAH NELSON; WASHINGTON POST

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Researchers discovered in December that they may have accidentally exposed
more than two dozen young cancer patients to the virus that causes AIDS in a
gene therapy experiment, but did not inform federal regulators until last week.

   Only when it became clear that the potential problem was about to become
public yesterday did the researchers at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in
Memphis and Baylor College of Medicine in Houston start contacting patients and
their parents about the possible infections.

   Preliminary tests on the gene-based medicine that was administered to young
volunteers suggest the treatment may have been contaminated with HIV-1, the
virus that causes AIDS, and HCV, which causes hepatitis C, the researchers and
federal officials acknowledged yesterday.

   Although two successive tests have found evidence of contamination,
scientists and government officials emphasized yesterday that the scare might
prove to be a false alarm.

   The tests that have been performed so far are extremely sensitive and prone
to giving "false positive" results on the kinds of samples used.

   New and more reliable tests are now being conducted by the Food and Drug
Administration.

   In the meantime, the study has been terminated.

   In the wake of several other recent revelations about the failure of several
gene therapy research institutions to report patient deaths and illnesses
properly, the incident again raises questions about the fledgling field's
ability to protect patients adequately and comply with federal regulations.

   In January, the FDA shut down the University of Pennsylvania's prestigious
gene therapy program after an agency investigation uncovered serious lapses in
patient protections that may have contributed to the death of an 18-year-old
volunteer - the first death attributed to gene therapy. National Institutes of
Health officials subsequently revealed that hundreds of deaths and other
"adverse events" in gene therapy trials had gone unreported to that agency,
despite federal rules that require such events to be reported immediately.

   Scientists involved in the new case described a series of oversights and
mistakes dating to 1995 that led to the current alarm. The treatment was
designed for patients with neuroblastoma, a brain cancer that is the second most
common childhood malignancy. It called for a patient's own tumor cells to be
removed and enhanced with an immune system gene inserted by a gene-altered
virus. Those cells were then reinjected into the patient in an effort to rally
the immune system against the cancer.

   Laura Bowman, the study's principal investigator at St. Jude, said she was
reviewing the laboratory's quality control program last fall when she discovered
that the two most recent volunteers - a child and a teenager treated a year ago
- received genetically engineered viruses that had not been processed correctly.
That lapse could increase the odds of contamination with foreign viruses.

   Bowman looked for documentation showing that the original, 1995 "master
batch" of cells, in which the engineered viruses were grown, had been properly
tested for contaminating viruses, such as HIV. She could not find any evidence
that those tests had been performed as required.

   In November, she sent some of the lab's gene-altered viruses grown from that
"master batch" of cells to an outside laboratory for testing. Twice those tests
indicated the presence of DNA from HIV and HCV. When further test results were
slow in coming, she said, she decided to contact the FDA last week.

   Both Bowman and Malcolm Brenner, who initiated the study while at St. Jude
and has continued the work at Baylor, said tests on viruses for contaminating
viruses are notoriously prone to false positives, and they doubt the results are
accurate. More accurate follow-up tests are being conducted on the cells upon
which the viruses were grown.

   If the master batch does prove to be contaminated with deadly viruses,
Brenner said, it may be that some HIV-infected blood in the laboratory somehow
got accidentally splashed on the viruses. Alternatively, Bowman said, some
contaminating viruses may have become mixed with the study viruses when the
immune system gene was first inserted.

   All the volunteers were close to death from recurrences of their cancers,
Bowman said. Only a handful of 20 patients she treated are alive today, Bowman
said. Of six treated at Baylor, four remain alive. All the deaths were from
cancer, the researchers said.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2000


                             891 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            February 11, 2000 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 719 words

HEADLINE: Genetic science must be governed by a higher code

BYLINE: Lawrence Hall

BODY:

   Medical science tells us our lives are governed by our genes. And that is an
issue all of us will have to grapple with in the years to come.

    A group of Canadian doctors, for example, contends that suicide is linked to
a defective gene. Royal Ottawa Hospital researchers spent 10 years studying the
brains of 120 Hungarians who killed themselves.

    They discovered a mutation in the gene for a serotonin receptor, a protein
that transmits brain signals. The researchers contend the risk of suicidal
behavior is more than doubled among those with the defective gene. They say the
defect may also be linked to the high rate of suicide among schizophrenics.

   The findings suggest that there is no basis for the common belief that
suicide is the result of a moral failing.

    "This is very meaningful," says Dr. David Bakish of the research team. "It
suggests that some people may be biologically predisposed to suicidal thoughts
and that suicide, so often stigmatized, is hardly a character flaw."

    "Individuals who carry the (mutation) are at a higher risk when a situation
that triggers their suicidal tendencies will occur," says Dr. Pavel Hrdina, who
co-wrote the study. "This is a warning sign, an early marker."

    The implications of this finding are enormous. It could lead to a "suicide
test" that could determine if a depressed person is at risk. Such a test, the
researchers believe, could become available within two years.

    Any such test is fraught with Orwellian dangers. People with the genetic
suicide marker could be denied life insurance or be discriminated against in the
workplace.

    Studies reveal that up to 15 percent of workers identified as at risk of
developing a genetic condition have been asked questions about this on job
forms. Ten percent of these people said they were denied jobs or fired as a
result of a genetic condition as employers tried to avoid extra health care
costs.

   Earlier this week, President Clinton signed an executive order barring
federal agencies from using genetic information in any hiring or promotion
decisions. Sometime this year, Congress will consider legislation extending
genetic employment protections to the private sector.

    Genetics is a spooky science. It conjures up images of scientists playing
God with their own brand of natural selection. They could manipulate the genetic
code and perform miraculous feats in gene therapy. Medical scientists hold out
hope for patients suffering from diseases like AIDS, cancer and cystic fibrosis.

   But therapy can go wrong. Last week, a congressional committee heard from the
father of a teenager who suffered from a rare liver disease and died during a
gene therapy experiment. He said he was not informed of the potential dangers to
his 18-year-old son.

    "Some of the information I was given was not true," Paul Gelsinger, of
Tucson, Ariz., said, criticizing scientists at the University of Pennsylvania
who performed the therapy.

    This week, a Boston medical center suspended gene therapy tests involving
implanting genetically altered cells into patients with hemophilia, an inherited
bleeding disorder.

    Genetic engineering raises a constellation of issues concerning ethics,
religion and privacy. One example is the recent sale of the genetic codes of
Icelanders. The U.S. company DeCODE bought the "rights" to the DNA codes of
Iceland's entire population.

    The company, headquartered in Iceland, paid $13 million. The national
medical database, to be constructed by DeCODE, would belong to Iceland's
National Health Service but would be licensed to the company for 12 years.

    A company official said the similarity in the genetic makeup of Icelanders
makes it easy to identify defective genes. He said the firm plans to sell its
information, with the government making a profit.

    "In this blueprint is written information that dictates both strengths and
weaknesses," says Dr. Kari Stefansson, the company president. "And I am
absolutely convinced that discovering this information, and a mounting knowledge
after this information, is going to revolutionize health care, not only in
Iceland but revolutionize it worldwide."

    The sale is not without its detractors, mostly physicians and human rights
groups.

    "Icelanders have got a new God and this new God is the market," says Gunnar
Ingi Gunnarsson of the Reykjavik Medical Center.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             892 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    February 11, 2000, Friday, Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 907 words

HEADLINE: Gene Test Errors Went Unreported; Scientists Took Months To Disclose
Patients' Possible HIV Exposure

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Deborah Nelson, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:



   Researchers discovered in December that they may have accidentally exposed
more than two dozen young cancer patients to the virus that causes AIDS in a
gene therapy experiment, but did not inform federal regulators until last week.

   Only when it became clear that the potential problem was about to become
public yesterday did the researchers at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in
Memphis and Baylor College of Medicine in Houston start contacting patients and
their parents about the possible infections.

   Preliminary tests on the gene-based medicine that was administered to young
volunteers suggest that the treatment may have been contaminated with HIV-1, the
virus that causes AIDS, and HCV, which causes hepatitis C, the researchers and
federal officials acknowledged yesterday.

   Although two successive tests have so far found evidence of contamination,
scientists and government officials emphasized yesterday that the scare might
prove to be a false alarm. The tests that have been performed so far are
extremely sensitive and prone to giving "false positive" results on the kinds of
samples used. New and more reliable tests are being conducted by the Food and
Drug Administration. In the meantime, the study has been terminated.

   In the wake of several other recent revelations about the failure of several
gene therapy research institutions to report patient deaths and illnesses
properly, the incident again raises questions about the fledgling field's
ability to protect patients adequately and comply with federal regulations.

   In January, the FDA shut down the University of Pennsylvania's prestigious
gene therapy program after an agency investigation uncovered multiple serious
lapses in patient protections that may have contributed to the death of an
18-year-old volunteer--the first death attributed to gene therapy. National
Institutes of Health officials subsequently revealed that hundreds of deaths and
other "adverse events" in gene therapy trials had gone unreported to that
agency, despite federal rules that require such events to be reported
immediately.

   The new case also adds to St. Jude's troubles with the National Institutes of
Health, which was already investigating the medical center for its handling of
patient deaths in a different clinical study. St. Jude also has had problems
with bacterial contamination of some bone marrow preparations.

   Scientists involved in the new case described a series of oversights and
mistakes dating to 1995 that led to the current alarm. The treatment was
designed for patients with neuroblastoma, a brain cancer that is the second most
common childhood malignancy. It called for a patient's own tumor cells to be
removed and enhanced with an immune system gene inserted by a gene-altered
virus. Those cells were then reinjected into the patient in an effort to rally
the immune system against the cancer.

   Laura Bowman, the study's principal investigator at St. Jude, said she was
reviewing the laboratory's quality control program last fall when she discovered
that the two most recent volunteers--a child and a teenager treated a year
ago--received genetically engineered viruses that had not been processed
correctly. That lapse could increase the odds of contamination with foreign
viruses.

   Bowman looked for documentation showing that the original, 1995 "master
batch" of cells, in which the engineered viruses were grown, had been properly
tested for contaminating viruses, such as HIV. She could not find any evidence
that those tests had been performed as required.

   In November, she sent some of the lab's gene-altered viruses grown from that
"master batch" of cells to an outside laboratory for testing. Twice those tests
indicated the presence of DNA from HIV and HCV. When further test results were
slow in coming, she said, she decided to contact the FDA last week.

   Both Bowman and Malcolm Brenner, who initiated the study while at St. Jude
and has continued the work at Baylor, said tests on viruses for contaminating
viruses are notoriously prone to false positives, and they doubt the results are
accurate. More accurate follow-up tests are being conducted on the cells upon
which the viruses were grown.

   If the master batch does prove to be contaminated with deadly viruses,
Brenner said, it may be that some HIV-infected blood in the laboratory was
accidentally splashed on the viruses. Alternatively, Bowman said, some
contaminating viruses may somehow have become mixed with the study viruses when
the immune system gene was first inserted.

   All the volunteers were close to death from recurrences of their cancers,
Bowman said. Only a handful of 20 patients she treated are alive today, she
said. Of six treated at Baylor, four are alive. All the deaths were from cancer,
the researchers said.

   "Four of the 20 are still alive, but I'm going to call all 20 parents. These
are 20 families that I know and love," Bowman said.

   Bowman said AIDS testing of surviving patients would probably be recommended
only if further tests confirm the contamination. But she and Brenner said that
when researchers found out yesterday that The Washington Post had learned of the
problem, they decided to contact patients' families immediately.

   FDA officials yesterday said that in addition to conducting tests on the
viruses, the agency is looking into the possible laboratory problems and the
timing of the reporting.


CORRECTION-DATE: February 12, 2000

CORRECTION:
An article yesterday about gene therapy incorrectly described the disease
neuroblastoma as a brain cancer. It is a central nervous system cancer.

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2000


                             893 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     FEBRUARY 9, 2000 Wednesday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 177 words

HEADLINE: PRESIDENT ORDERS GENE-THERAPY REVIEW MOVE-UP

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   President Clinton ordered an expedited review yesterday of guidelines for
gene-therapy research in the aftermath of reports that some researchers failed
to explain carefully enough to patients the risks involved.

   The September death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, a patient in a gene-therapy
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania, triggered a government
investigation, the suspension of other gene-therapy trials at Penn, and a Senate
hearing last week. Some gene-therapy tests elsewhere have also been suspended.

   Clinton asked Health and Human Services Secretary Donna E. Shalala to
instruct the Food and Drug Administration and the National Institutes of Health
to "accelerate their review of gene therapy and guidelines."

   "I want to know how we can better ensure that this information about the
trials is shared with the public," he said. "I want to know whether we need to
strengthen requirements on informed consent."

   Gene therapy seeks to repair or replace abnormal genes in seriously ill
patients by transferring normal genes into the body.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             894 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  February 9, 2000, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. A-19

LENGTH: 746 words

HEADLINE: DYING FOR THE CURE;
GENE THERAPY, THE GREAT MEDICAL LEAP FORWARD, TAKES A HUMAN TOLL

BYLINE: ELLEN GOODMAN

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:


   Sometimes it's hard to tell the hype from the hope. For a decade now, gene
therapy has been described as the Promised Land of modern medicine. When we get
there, we'll be able to cure disease by changing our genetic makeup.

   In his State of the Union address, the president talks about "miraculous
improvements" and "precision therapies." In quarterly reports, biotech firms
talk about their race for the cure. At conferences, scientists talk as if
success were a tantalizing breakthrough away.

   But to get from the promise to the land, we have to cross a vast territory of
human experimentation. And today that territory looks more like the Wild West
than the desert.

   Last fall, Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old with a genetic liver disorder, won
a tragic distinction. He became the first human known to have died from
experimental gene therapy. The prestigious program at the University of
Pennsylvania where Jesse volunteered had so many lapses that the FDA shut it
down.

   Since then, the reports have escalated. It turns out that gene therapy
researchers across the country had failed to file reports on nearly 700 serious
"adverse events" when they occurred. In Boston, we now know that three of the
first six patients in one experiment died and a seventh fell seriously ill. In
Philadelphia, a volunteer in the experiment that killed Gelsinger says she was
never told her liver had suffered a bad reaction.

   The ethical questions raised by gene therapy are not really so different from
other human experiments. Before we use people we are supposed to ask: Is this
research ready and important enough for human trial? Can we make sure that the
subjects know what they are getting into? When is consent truly informed?

   But the hype and the hope behind gene therapy have added additional pressure.
At what point does the push for a cure overwhelm the need to protect patients?
Do we need brakes?

   At a Senate hearing, there were sounds of both urgency and caution. A young
man with cystic fibrosis worried out-loud about anything that would slow down
the research. "My battle with C.F. is a race," he said, "Don't let me lose that
race when the finish line might be just around the corner." At the same time, a
tearful father called his son Jesse's death, "an avoidable tragedy from which I
will never recover."

   Paul Gelsinger said he and Jesse were "misled" into volunteering. They
consented, but consent isn't just a piece of paper; it's a process of informing
someone so they know the degree of risk. But many never get the whole story.

   In real life, there is a dance of denial between researcher and subject. The
researchers who are true believers stay in step with the subjects who are
looking for hope. "You have a series of self-deceptions," says ethicist George
Annas. "Subjects deceiving themselves, researchers deceiving themselves, the
public looking the other way, hoping for help."

   This is true when the research is done, as it often is, on terminally ill
patients whose judgment may be clouded by desperation. And true when scientists
spin the story, airbrushing candor in the interest of science.

   The system, as it is, relies on the good faith of researchers. But however
faithful, there is almost inevitably some conflict of interest between
researcher and patient.

   We worry, and we should, when the conflict is financial. At the least, a
patient should know if the researcher has a stake in the outcome. But the prize
may be Nobel as well as financial. Indeed, altruism, ego and money all point
equally to the need for an outside eye.

   At the hearing, Tennessee's Sen. Bill Frist said that Gelsinger's death had
"sobered us all." There are always risks in research. But in our new sobriety we
can enforce the current guidelines and pull together the bits and pieces of
government regulation that are scattered from the FDA to the National Institutes
of Health.

   Will this slow the race? There is a different price you pay for overdrive. As
Dartmouth's Ronald Green says, "Every cutting of ethical corners carries a
price. It's a backlash against the research. Even when . . . the risks are
minimal, people may be unwilling to be involved."

   For the past 10 years, gene therapy has had few successes. We still look for
instant cures from the lab to the medicine cabinet. But this is a long road, and
we need safeguards on the way from the promise to the land.

   Ellen Goodman is a syndicated columnist for The Boston Globe.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2000


                             895 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

             February 09, 2000, Wednesday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 480 words

HEADLINE: Problems found in kids born too soon

SOURCE: Compiled from Times Wires

DATELINE: CHICAGO; SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:


   Children born extremely prematurely, weighing 2 pounds or less at birth,
experience significant learning difficulties that persist into their teenage
years, a study found.

   The researchers and experts not involved in the study said the findings
should make parents, doctors and educators aware of the risks such children face
and the need for them to get help early.

   Prematurity is on the rise, partly because of an increase in multiple births
and in older women having babies. Also, medical advances enable an increasing
number of even the tiniest babies to survive.

   Premature babies are known to run a higher risk of problems such as cerebral
palsy, mental retardation and vision and hearing trouble. The latest findings
bolster previous research linking prematurity to more subtle cognitive problems
that may be permanent.

   Dr. Saroj Saigal, a professor of pediatrics at McMaster University in
Hamilton, Ontario, followed 150 premature babies, who were born in Ontario
between 1977 and 1982, into their teens. Her study, published in the February
issue of the journal Pediatrics, found that academic difficulties that existed
at age 8 continued into the teens.

   Gene therapy

   experiments halted

   A Harvard-affiliated medical center and two patient advocacy groups have
temporarily halted gene therapy experiments because of concerns raised by the
September death of a Tucson teenager undergoing treatment at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston decided last week to suspend
its gene therapy program, while the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation and Muscular
Dystrophy Association have placed a hold on three human gene experiments they
are sponsoring.

   Representatives of all three institutions cited general safety concerns about
gene therapy that surfaced in the months after the death of Jesse Gelsinger at
Penn, rather than any specific problems with their own experiments.

   Awareness billboards

   show mastectomy scars

   SAN FRANCISCO - Controversial breast cancer awareness ads - some of them
showing bare-chested women with mastectomies - will get a public viewing on
billboards in San Francisco.

   The ads, considered so shocking that sign companies and transit agencies
decided last month to censor them in San Francisco and nearby cities, were
picked up by billboard company Eller Media. The firm announced Monday that it
will put up the ads for free as a public service gesture.

   "Advertising needs to be used to promote social change," Eller representative
Michael Colbruno told the San Francisco Examiner.

   The ads are part of a campaign by the Breast Cancer Fund.

   One ad shows a bare-chested woman in a sexy pose with scars where her breasts
used to be. The others show women with single mastectomies. The ads are made up
to look like a Cosmopolitan magazine cover and Calvin Klein perfume and
Victoria's Secret ads.


LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2000


                             896 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                   February 9, 2000, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A19; THE FEDERAL PAGE

LENGTH: 826 words

HEADLINE: Clinton Targets Misuse of Gene Data; Anti-Bias Order Covers Agencies

BYLINE: Justin Gillis, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Seeking to allay deep public fears that advances in gene science could lead
to discrimination, President Clinton today barred federal agencies from using
genetic information to discriminate against employees. He called on Congress to
pass a law applying the same rule to private employers.

   Clinton praised researchers who are racing to unravel the human genetic code,
saying the knowledge they are uncovering will become the foundation of medical
progress. But he said that same progress poses a new challenge.

   "The fear of misuse of private genetic information is already very widespread
in our nation," Clinton said in a speech yesterday at the American Association
for the Advancement of Science. "Americans are genuinely worried that their
genetic information will not be kept secret, that this information will be used
against them."

   The fear centers on the possible use employers and insurers might make of
genetic tests showing that people are at risk of developing a disease or passing
the disease gene on to their offspring. Every person carries genes that may
dispose him or her toward some ailments, including common diseases of aging such
as cancer and heart attacks. A few people carry genes that virtually guarantee
they will contract a serious disorder during their working lives.

   Few such gene tests have come into wide commercial use, and only a smattering
of discriminatory incidents have been reported around the country, but privacy
advocates fear that could change as more tests are developed.

   Congress has already barred insurers writing large group policies from using
genetic tests as a basis for discrimination. But that does not apply to some
types of insurance, and there are no national rules regulating what private
employers can do with gene tests.

   About 30 states have passed laws banning genetic discrimination in insurance,
and a handful have extended the policy to employment.

   Not everyone who tracks the issue is convinced the country is on the verge of
a wave of discrimination. Philip Reilly, an expert on genetic issues at the
Eunice Kennedy Shriver Center in Waltham, Mass., said in years of studying the
issue he has yet to see a clear-cut case of discrimination. "There is extremely
little evidence to support this as a realistic threat," he said.

   Still, there is wide agreement that the fear of discrimination, if not the
reality of it, is altering people's behavior. One study said many women with a
family history of breast cancer were reluctant to have genetic tests that could
help them safeguard their health because they feared the results would fall into
the wrong hands.

   Clinton made clear yesterday that he was not trying to discourage genetic
tests. To the contrary, he said, banning discrimination would actually make
people more likely to consent to such tests.

   Sharing a stage with Francis Collins--director of the National Human Genome
Research Institute, the agency that is unraveling the genetic code--Clinton
emphasized his support for the new biology. He recounted the time, in his youth,
when the nation deployed Jonas Salk's vaccine against polio, with parents
watching in "nail-biting anticipation" as science removed a huge fear from their
lives. He predicted similar progress in the new century against other scourges.

   A bill pending in Congress would ban genetic discrimination by private
employers. Clinton, who has spoken repeatedly on the subject of genetic privacy
since 1997, offered his explicit support today for that bill. Before an audience
that included biologists, doctors and a few members of Congress, he signed an
executive order barring federal agencies from using genetic records in their
employment decisions.

   The order covers about 2.8 million federal civilian workers.

   "By signing this executive order, my goal is to set an example and pose a
challenge for every employer in America," Clinton said, "because I believe no
employer should ever review your genetic records along with your resume."

   Clinton also called on the Food and Drug Administration and the National
Institutes of Health to hasten a review they have undertaken of gene therapy
tests, a controversial field of medicine that was roiled recently by the
disclosure of unreported deaths and other adverse reactions in clinical trials.

   "I want to know how we can better ensure that this information about the
trials is shared with the public," Clinton said. "I want to know whether we need
to strengthen requirements on informed consent. If we don't have full confidence
in these trials people won't participate, and then the true promise of genetic
medicine will be put on hold."


   Staff writer Charles Babington contributed to this report.

    President Clinton and Francis Collins, director of the National Human Genome
Research Institute, appear for announcement of executive order prohibiting
federal agencies from discriminating on the basis of genetic tests.

LOAD-DATE: February 09, 2000


                             897 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 8, 2000, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 885 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY RESEARCHER DEFENDS TRIALS

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

   The widening debate over the safety of gene therapy has been fueled by "an
amazing series of events" that are essentially unrelated and should not lead to
shutting down human clinical trials without cause, said a Harvard scientist and
longtime leader in the field.

   Richard Mulligan, a former MIT and Whitehead Institute biologist who now
heads the Harvard Gene Therapy Initiative, has been a voice of caution in taking
gene therapy to human patients, and has worried that undue haste could not only
harm volunteers but discredit the field.   But yesterday, Mulligan said he was
surprised that Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center had decided to suspend a
trial of gene therapy in hemophilia patients that appears to have been running
smoothly and had been federally approved.

   "I do not think a moratorium on gene therapy experiments is warranted at this
point," said Mulligan, who has no oversight in the medical center's research and
said he had little information about it.

   Nevertheless, he added, "The silver lining of (the debate) is that it will
help reset the course of research."

   Starting with an unexpected patient death last fall, the episode "definitely
opened up a wound that probably needed to be opened up: that is, to more
carefully define the goals for the field and how to proceed."

   The aim of gene therapy is to treat diseases by replacing malfunctioning
genes in cells or adding new genes to cells that direct them to make a healthly
protein that is missing or abnormal. Many rare diseases, such as cystic
fibrosis, are caused by a single mutant gene; more common ones like cancer and
heart disease involve many altered genes and environmental factors.

   The snowballing controversy was touched off by the death last September of an
18-year-old volunteer in a gene therapy trial headed by Dr. James Wilson of the
University of Pennsylvania. Wilson was a postdoctoral fellow in Mulligan's
laboratory at MIT.

   Following the patient's death, federal investigators reported a number of
flaws in the UPenn researchers' conduct of the trial, including failing to
inform patients completely about the risks and benefits and omitting mention of
monkey deaths in preclinical studies.

   More recently, officials of the National Institutes of Health revealed that
more than 600 instances of "adverse events" in gene therapy trials had not been
reported to an NIH advisory committee. Among the events were the deaths of three
terminally ill gene therapy volunteers at Beth Israel Deaconess, which hospital
officials say were unrelated to the therapy.

   Cutting to the central issues, Mulligan said yesterday in an interview, the
death at UPenn really stemmed from "poor conduct" in a clinical trial; it was
not essentially a gene therapy failure. And the failure to report adverse events
to the NIH, he said, was more because of confusion about the requirements than
an intent to conceal problems. Mulligan said it was highly unlikely that there
was "an organized conspiracy" of hundreds of scientists to flout the reporting
requirement.

   "If you look at everything, it's an amazing series of events that are
somewhat unrelated" and doesn't suggest that gene therapy research is shoddy and
poorly regulated, Mulligan said.

   The suspended trial at Beth Israel Deaconess was to have involved 12 patients
with hemophilia, the bleeding disorder caused by a genetic lack of an enzyme
that is crucial to blood clotting. Unlike the trial at UPenn, this one didn't
rely on bioengineered viruses carrying genes into the body. Instead, the
researchers removed a small sample of skin cells, grew them into millions in the
laboratory, and inserted the new genes using an electric shock to open the
cells.

   Then, a hypodermic syringe-full of the modified cells was injected into
tissue inside the abdomen. The genes caused the cells to produce the missing
enzyme, called factor VIII.

   The trial was sponsored by Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge, which
developed the method. It is known as "ex vivo" gene therapy because the gene
transfer is performed outside the body, in contrast with "in vivo" therapy when
genes are inserted into cells inside the body.

   Yesterday, Kevin Kelley, a product manager at New England Biolabs in Beverly
whose son has hemophilia, said he has closely followed this and other gene
therapy experiments in hemophiliac volunteers and was mystified by the
suspension of the trial.

   The Transkaryotic Therapies ex vivo method, said Kelley, "is far and away the
safest approach being developed." He added that the company's scientists, as
well as the researchers at Beth Israel Deaconess, "have been amazingly concerned
with patients' safety."

   "I don't see any good reason why this trial should be stopped" if there have
been no safety problems, Kelley said.

   Mulligan, who 20 years ago pioneered modifying viruses to carry genes into
cells, is based at Children's Hospital and heads what he calls a "virtual gene
therapy" in which investigators from Harvard Medical School and its affiliated
hospitals participate. He said he has no "gatekeeper" function regarding gene
therapy trials that are now in progress, but that the Gene Therapy Initiative he
heads is planning to set up an "organized activity" to oversee gene therapy
research throughout the Harvard system.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2000


                             898 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     February 8, 2000 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 018

LENGTH: 510 words

HEADLINE: Medical ethicist says halt gene therapy

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   A leading medical ethicist yesterday called for a voluntary moratorium on all
gene therapy experiments after questions were raised about the safety of the
trials at Senate hearings last week.

   "The most reassuring thing to happen would be for the gene therapists to call
a moratorium," said Boston University's George Annas.

   Failing that, the FDA should shut them all down, he said.

   One Boston hospital has already halted its gene therapy trials, but two
others vowed yesterday to continue with their experiments.

   The gene therapy controversy erupted in September following an experiment
gone wrong at the University of Pennsylvania, where an 18-year-old boy died of
the gene therapy itself.

   The trial was shut down by the FDA soon afterward.

   Even before that, a gene therapy trial being conducted on cancer patients at
Boston's Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center was voluntarily suspended.

   Last summer's suspension came after a series of adverse events, including two
deaths that the hospital said were the result of the patients' underlying
illness, not the gene therapy itself.

   Last week, following the Senate hearings, BI-Deaconess halted yet another
gene trial, this one involving patients with hemophilia. No deaths reportedly
were involved.

   "Patient safety is the No.1 goal of our institution," said Dr. Michael
Rosenblatt, BI-Deaconess interim president.

   "It is very clear that over the past couple of weeks a national discourse has
developed on the subject of gene therapy," he said. "We've decided to press the
pause button. We don't have to rush ahead with this."

   Other gene therapy trials in Boston are continuing, however.

   Hospitals doing the most are Dana-Farber Partners Cancer Care and St.
Elizabeth's.

   At Dana-Farber-Partners, spokesman Steve Singer said there are more than a
dozen trials under way, and plans are to keep going with them.

   "We have seen no adverse effects that would warrant the closing of the
trials," he said.

   While there have been some deaths, he said, all were attributable to the
patients' underlying illness.

   At St. Elizabeth's, spokeswoman Sonia Hagopian said the gene trials led by
Dr. Jeffrey Isner will also keep going.

   "Our research continues," she said. "At this point, there's no reason for us
not to. The FDA has oversight over our trial and they've given us no indication
there's any reason not to."

   Annas said many of the trials are unlikely to be stopped voluntarily because
of the involvement of publicly traded biotech firms.

   "A lot of these companies may have too much at stake," he said. "They may
think it's wrong for their stockholders. But that reveals a major problem we
have. When researchers worry more about share values than about patients, we're
in trouble."

   Annas noted that few of these studies promise to help the subjects, since
they are all in Phase One trials, designed to test safety, not efficacy.

   "These people think they're getting something out of it," he said. "That's
the only reason a sick person will volunteer. They're at the end of their
ropes."

LOAD-DATE: February 08, 2000


                             899 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 8, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Page 7; Column 1; Health & Fitness

LENGTH: 1141 words

HEADLINE: A New Technology That Colors the World (Sort of)

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

DATELINE: TUSTIN, Calif.

BODY:

   Bill Cunerty, a college teacher and coach in Southern California, has always
had trouble picking color-coordinated clothes and socks that match. And like
many "colorblind" people, he tells the color of a traffic light by its position,
not its hue.

   But Mr. Cunerty has been trying out new glasses that, he says, allow him to
distinguish colors better. "For me this has been like watching 'The Wizard of
Oz,' " he said. "The first half is in black and white, and the second half is in
color."

    The glasses, made by ColorMax Technologies Inc. of Tustin, were approved by
the Food and Drug Administration in November, becoming the first lenses
specifically authorized for color deficient vision.

   But many experts caution that such lenses do not make people see colors as
people with normal vision do. And while the lenses can help people tell some
colors apart, they can make it harder to distinguish other colors.

   The federal agency has already warned ColorMax not to exaggerate its claims
for its $700 lenses. The agency says that the technology is merely a variation
of a century-old idea and that the lens coatings are no different from what is
found on some sunglasses that have that colored mirror look.

   But Steven E. Faith, an optometrist in Livermore, Calif., who has been
selling the lenses, said the technology "definitely works," in that people are
able to distinguish colors better. He and others said the lenses had practical
value for certain people, like electronics workers who need to tell red wires
from green ones but do not care whether the wires look red or green.

   True colorblindness is extremely rare. But about 8 percent of American men
and 0.5 percent of women have some deficiency in color vision, usually
difficulty distinguishing red from green.

   For many of these people, the problem is so mild that they are not even aware
of it unless they take a color vision test. But inadequate color vision can
block people from being pilots and from getting jobs in certain areas of law
enforcement, the military and transportation.

   Poor red-green color vision is mainly an inherited condition controlled by a
gene on the X chromosome, which is why it is mainly in men. (Since women have
two X chromosomes, a defective color vision gene on one will usually be
compensated for by a good gene on the other.)

   The eye has three sets of cones that perceive color: one sensitive to blue
light, one to green and one to red. Most colors are a combination of these, so
when a person sees something, the three types of cones are stimulated by
different amounts. The brain uses this information to determine the color.

   In some people with color deficiencies, one set of cones does not work. But
in most cases, the cones work but respond to shades of red and green that are
too close to each other in wavelength, giving the brain less ability to
distinguish between them.

   The lenses cannot fix this problem. Rather, they try to change the color of
light entering the eye.

   Red lenses, for instance, let in red light but block out most blue and green
light. A green object viewed through a red lens will appear darker because light
from it is not getting to the eye, thus allowing it to be distinguished from a
red object. This allows someone to pass a color test in which a number is
written as a pattern of green dots on a background of colored dots.

   And if a person cannot distinguish between, say, an orange and a greenish
yellow, filtering out green will change the appearance of the greenish yellow
while not affecting the orange much, allowing them to be distinguished.

   James Clerk Maxwell, the Scottish physicist, provided red and green lenses
for a colorblind colleague as far back as 1850. And for about the last three
decades, some people with color vision problems have used red tinted contact
lenses.

   The problem is that by blocking all the blue and green light, such lenses
make it harder to tell blues, greens and violets apart. The lenses also reduce
the overall amount of light coming into the eye, so, like sunglasses, they are
not recommended for use at night.

   "Over all, they make your color vision worse, but they can help you
distinguish certain colors," said Dr. Wayne A. Verdon, an assistant professor of
clinical optometry at the University of California at Berkeley.

   ColorMax says its lenses are more selective in blocking out light and more
tailored to the individual patient's color vision problem, with 10 varieties
available.

   The company is guarded about its technology and its origins. ColorMax is a
publicly traded company but is controlled by Kimrose Holdings, a privately owned
company in Hong Kong. Julie Kim, a director of the California company and
daughter of one of the Kimrose executives, declined to provide information about
Kimrose. Donald Hansen, ColorMax president, is an optometrist in Iowa, one of
seven in the nation offering the ColorMax lenses.

   Somewhat similar lenses are being sold in other countries and are coming to
the United States. These include glasses developed by Coloryte, a Hungarian
company with an office in Norcross, Ga., and the Chromagen contact lens
developed in Britain and offered by Fichte Eye Associates in Amherst, N.Y.

   Dr. Jay M. Cohen, a professor at the State University of New York College of
Optometry in Manhattan, said many patients ordered plain pairs of tinted lenses
for $20 rather than the ColorMax lenses for $700. ColorMax is "a little better,
but it's not $700 better," Dr. Cohen said.

   Other patients, after trying the ColorMax lenses, decide they would rather
stick with the more monochromatic world they are used to.  The biggest demand
comes from people who want certain jobs for which color vision is required.
Danny Molvik, a college student in Las Vegas, said he wanted to pursue a
military career and liked his ColorMax glasses. "Everything's more bright, a lot
fuller," he said.

   But the glasses may be of limited use to him: most organizations that require
color tests, like the Federal Aviation Administration, do not allow people to
use the lenses for the test. They see a difference between being able to pass
the test and having adequate color vision.

   If the newest lenses prove better than the old ones, pressure could mount to
change such restrictions. But so far, people with color vision problems do not
seem to have formed strong groups to push for access to jobs or to demand that
signs, publications and computer screens be understandable to people with weak
color vision.

   Dr. Lindsay T. Sharpe, a professor of ophthalmology at University Eye
Hospital in Tuebingen, Germany, says that people have espoused all sorts of
unproven treatments for colorblindness, including cobra venom. Since
colorblindness is a genetic problem, he said, the best long-term hope for a cure
is gene therapy.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart: "Seeing Seurat Through Rose-Colored Glasses"
About 8 percent of the male population is colorblind, the majority having
difficulty seeing red and green. New lenses are available that help the viewer
distinguish between these colors.

NORMAL VISION -- When looking at A Sunday on La Grande Jatte,the viewer sees a
wide range of colors and tones.

COLORBLINDNESS (approx.) -- Below: The viewer sees a narrower range of colors.
Left: Corrective lenses do not actually restore red and green but increase
contrast, making colors more distinct.

(Sources: Dr. James Bailey, ColorMax)

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2000


                             900 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 8, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Page 6; Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 622 words

HEADLINE: Hospital in Boston Halts Gene Therapy Research

BYLINE: By PHILIP J. HILTS

DATELINE: BOSTON, Feb. 7

BODY:

   Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston has temporarily suspended a
gene therapy experiment to permit further discussion of the issues underlying
such work after a young man's death last year in a similar trial in
Pennsylvania.

   Dr. Michael Rosenblatt, interim president of the hospital, said there have
been no problems associated with the experiment, which involved 12 patients with
hemophilia. But Dr. Rosenblatt said the climate of uncertainty suggested that
"we should push the pause button for a time." He added: "We decided to say,
let's review this, we don't have to hurry here. There is no information or
medical or scientific event that is grounds for stopping the trial, but why not
slow things down a bit?"

    The suspension follows a decision on Jan. 21 by the Food and Drug
Administration to shut down all gene therapy experiments at the University of
Pennsylvania after an 18-year-old man in a gene therapy experiment there died.
The action by the agency and the unexpected death of the relatively healthy
patient in the Penn experiment have generated nervousness across the field of
gene therapy. After that incident, members of a committee at the National
Institutes of Health found that scientists were not routinely reporting problems
with gene therapy experiments.

   There have been about 300 gene therapy experiments in the United States over
the past decade, experts estimate. Some scientists have said it was not clear
that they were required to report to the National Institutes of Health
committee.

   Last summer at Beth Israel, in a different gene therapy experiment, three of
the first six patients enrolled died, and those deaths were not reported to the
N.I.H. Since that time, said Dr. Rosenblatt, Food and Drug Administration
officials who looked at the experiment said the three deaths were unrelated to
the research. The patients enrolled in the study, as is traditional in early
experiments with a treatment, were the sickest of cancer patients, those not
expected to live for more than a few weeks to a few months in any case.

   Dr. Richard Mulligan, director of the gene therapy program at Children's
Hospital in Boston and chairman of the Harvard Gene Therapy Initiative at all
the Harvard-affiliated hospitals, said in a telephone interview today that other
hospitals have not taken so cautious an approach, and that in most cases it was
not needed.

   "This field has developed with a lot of baggage because of the hype
surrounding it," Dr. Mulligan said. "It is counted among the most promising of
all areas of medical research because, if it works as a general matter, there
are few human diseases or disorders that could not use the therapy."

   In principle, the treatment uses healthy genes to counteract the effects of
diseased ones, or fresh genes to produce specially high levels of
disease-fighting chemicals in the body. In the hemophilia experiment, cells were
taken from the patients, and genes to make a key blood clotting factor were
inserted into the cells. They were then put back into the patients in hopes they
would produce the missing factors.

   Dr. Mulligan said that while some nervousness has developed in the field, it
is not because there are significant problems with the research, but rather
because one experiment was apparently conducted badly, and that event was
magnified by the failure to report to N.I.H.

   "But through it all," Dr. Mulligan said, "the field is very much benefiting
from a resetting of the course, from a reduction in hype, and a return to the
appreciation of the core scientific values, and the realization that the conduct
of clinical experiments can have tragic consequences if people are not careful
to conduct them properly."

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2000


                             901 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      FEBRUARY 8, 2000 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 954 words

HEADLINE: NEWS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   In the Nation

   Gene-therapy tests halted at three facilities

   Boston's Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center last week suspended
gene-therapy tests because of safety concerns arising from the death of Jesse
Gelsinger, 18, last year in a similar program at the University of Pennsylvania.
The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation and Muscular Dystrophy Association also placed a
hold on human gene experiments they are sponsoring at Cornell University Medical
College and Ohio State University. Beth Israel officials said they had
encountered no problems in their trial, in which genetically altered cells were
implanted into patients with hemophilia, an inherited blood disorder.

   Piece of jet may have broken off before crash

   Radar data show that a piece may have broken off an Alaska Airlines jet
seconds before it plunged into the ocean on Jan. 31 near Anacapa Island, Calif.,
sources close to the investigation said yesterday. Investigators suspect that
the piece fell from the tail section of the MD-83 jet just before the crash that
killed 88 people. Meanwhile, an Alaska Airlines MD-80 jet made an emergency
landing last night at San Francisco International Airport after sparks were seen
flying from an engine. No one was hurt. In an eerie coincidence, the jet had
come to San Francisco from Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, and was supposed to fly on
to Seattle, the same route as Flight 261, which crashed last week. Passengers
were put on another flight to Seattle.

   Trial begins for Clinton-Gore fund-raiser

   At the start of a trial in Washington for a former Clinton-Gore campaign
fund-raiser, the Justice Department said yesterday that Maria Hsia, a Los
Angeles immigration consultant, had concealed the source of more than $100,000
in illegal donations during the 1996 election campaign. Hsia's lawyer, Nancy
Luque, argued that Hsia was the victim of "a smear job" by federal prosecutors.
Hsia faces five felony counts of causing various Democratic campaign treasurers
unwittingly to file false reports with the Federal Election Commission.

   4 killed when 2 small planes collide over L.A.

   Two small planes collided over Los Angeles and fell to the ground yesterday,
one of them crashing in flames on a golf course and the other into trees near
busy Interstate 5. All four people aboard were killed. Neither plane had
reported problems, a Federal Aviation Administration spokeswoman said.

   Rubin to step down as State Dept. spokesman

   James P. Rubin, the voice of the State Department and a trusted adviser to
Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright, will leave his job in April and will
be succeeded by Richard Boucher, a spokesman for three of Albright's
predecessors. Rubin, 39, did not say what he would do next. His wife, CNN
reporter Christiane Amanpour, is based in London and is pregnant with their
first child, due next month.

   Sen. Kennedy to stay in hospital for a few days

   Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D., Mass.) is suffering from a flulike illness and
will remain hospitalized for the next several days, spokesman Will Keyser said
yesterday. Kennedy, 67, was admitted to Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington
on Sunday.

   In the World

   Indonesian leader would pardon ex-army chief

   Indonesian President Abdurrahman Wahid said yesterday that he would give a
full pardon to former army chief Gen. Wiranto if he were found guilty by any
future war-crimes tribunal for the brutal crackdown in East Timor last year.
Wahid reiterated that he wanted Wiranto, and any other accused member of his
cabinet, to resign until the tribunal cleared them of any wrongdoing.

   Russia agrees to cut plutonium production

   Russia has agreed to stop making plutonium out of fuel from its civilian
power reactors as part of a deal aimed at safeguarding nuclear fuel that could
make weapons, the U.S. Energy Department said yesterday. In return, the Clinton
administration will give Russia $100 million to safeguard nuclear materials and
conduct research. The deal amounts to the first major attempt to secure Russia's
huge civilian stockpile of plutonium.

   Another challenge to Pinochet's release

   Opponents trying to block Augusto Pinochet's release argued again yesterday
that the British government has unfairly prevented them from seeing a medical
report that said the former Chilean dictator was mentally unfit to stand trial
in Spain on charges of human-rights abuses. Lawyers for Belgium and six
human-rights groups appealed to a three-judge panel of the High Court in London.
Last week, a High Court justice dismissed the challenge.

   More peacekeepers approved for Sierra Leone

   The U.N. Security Council voted yesterday to nearly double the 6,000
peacekeepers in Sierra Leone and give them broader authority to ensure security
in the West African nation. The peacekeepers are to monitor a cease-fire signed
by the government and rebel forces in July, and disarm the rebels.

   Pakistan test-fires a new missile

   Pakistan test-fired a new surface-to-surface missile yesterday that officials
said improves accuracy and can hit targets 60 miles away. A statement said the
missile can carry a variety of warheads; it did not say whether that includes
nuclear warheads.

   Bombs on buses in Sri Lanka injure at least 51

   Bombs exploded on two buses in Bibile in southeastern Sri Lanka yesterday,
wounding at least 45 passengers and six bystanders, the military and witnesses
said. Police have blamed the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam for recent
bombings.

   30 killed in military-helicopter crash in Angola

   An overloaded military helicopter crashed and burst into flames shortly after
taking off Saturday from southern Angola, killing 30 people, officials said
yesterday. Twelve people survived the crash.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             902 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     February 8, 2000 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: EDITORIALS & FORUM; Pg. 9B

LENGTH: 858 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH RISKS MUST BE MADE CLEAR TO PATIENTS

BYLINE: By Michael Kirsch

BODY:

   Tuskeegee, Ala., summons shameful memories of medical abuse that occurred
decades ago here in our own country. In this infamous experiment, American
citizens infected with syphilis were observed without treatment in order to
monitor the disease's destructive course even after effective therapy became
available.

   More recently, from 1944 to 1974, unsuspecting Americans were secretly
subjected to radiation in similar unethical experiments. Could such ethical
travesties occur today? Sadly, despite our purported devotion to patients'
rights and ethical medical practice, abuses continue.

   In the last year alone, premier medical institutions have been cited for
serious ethical lapses. In response to numerous allegations, the director of the
National Institute of Mental Health proposed an oversight committee to review
psychiatric experiments that posed substantial risks to study participants. The
committee was concerned about controversial practices such as withdrawing
psychiatric medication from patients who would be observed for recurrent
psychoses and other symptoms. Some suicides resulted and numerous studies were
suspended. Although many researchers disputed the government's findings, one
wonders how these impaired individuals could have provided meaningful informed
consent and why they would have done so.

   Similarly, two leading New York City research centers were cited for ethical
infractions and lax oversight on medical experiments on hyperactive children.
Federal officials were concerned about the risks of injecting these kids with
fenfluramine (now banned) and about whether their parents were truly informed
about the experiment. Luckily, none of the children were harmed.

   Last month the Food and Drug Administration declared a moratorium on gene
research at a Philadelphia medical center after a young man died after
experimental gene therapy. The FDA questioned the patient's medical eligibility
for the study and the informed-consent process. In addition, the researchers did
not report that previous animal subjects had died.

   At individual research centers, an institutional research board is the last
layer of protection for human experimental subjects. These boards, charged with
protecting patient safety, have been accused of ethical nonchalance themselves.
They have been cited for conflicts of interest involving board members and for
inattention to informed consent. A major southern medical center had all 2,000
human experiments temporarily shut down by federal officials in response to
inadequate board oversight.

   The Office of Protection from Research Risks reviews human experiments and
institutional research board practices to ensure that they conform to
established ethical standards. This federal committee has the task of reviewing
nearly 20,000 experiments with the equivalent of three full-time employees. This
is a Chihuahua, not a powerful watchdog.

   I did not comb through a century of archival material to cite the above
abuses. All occurred in the past year. Surely, there is much more to come. These
examples prove the existence of ongoing abuse, but they do not quantify its
extent. Imagine what we don't know.

   Protections against deliberate or inadvertent abuse of human subjects were
codified in the Nuremberg Code and later affirmed in the Declaration of
Helsinki. Society embraced these ethical constructs in the wake of the heinous
medical atrocities committed during World War II.

   Despite the chilling history, informed consent has become trivialized. It is
often regarded by medical researchers as a mechanical ritual, an automatic
springboard for patients into medical experiments. If patient protections are
eroding only a few decades after Nuremberg, then what can tomorrow's patients
expect?

   Informed consent should never be viewed as a means to an end. The doctrine of
informed consent is a patient's right to understand fully the material risks,
potential benefits and alternatives to the proposed experiment. When this right
is abridged, then medical research suffers an ethical casualty. The cost of
tainted research is to sacrifice medical research's most valued asset - the
public trust. As more ethically tarnished acts become publicized, who will want
to contribute financially to research, let alone participate in medical studies?

   Why do good people behave with ethical indifference? Because the interests of
patients and researchers are not aligned. Patients consenting to new treatments
want a chance to get well. Investigators want to generate new knowledge.

   Researchers must be vigilant of this critical conflict of interest, which
must always be decided in the patient's favor. Whenever the patient loses, a
slippery slope is created which, in its most extreme example, leads back to the
1940s.

   The public and the medical research community are involved in a symbiotic
relationship. Though both benefit, patients' rights must be paramount. If the
research establishment remains ethically adrift, then we will not trust it. If,
however, it serves as our guardian and advocate, then we will risk life and limb
in great work that will help us all. "

COLUMN: A FORUM OF OPINION & IDEAS

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2000


                             903 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       February 8, 2000, Tuesday , METRO

SECTION: METRO / SOUTH TEXAS; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 812 words

HEADLINE: METRO BRIEFS


SOURCE: Compiled from staff reports

BODY: Southbound I-37 traffic


    detouring at Pleasanton





    Southbound traffic on Interstate 37 may be diverted for several
hours today around a highway construction project north of
Pleasanton in Atascosa County, according to the Texas Department of
Transportation.


    The work is part of a three-year road-rebuilding project.


    Two northbound lanes have remained open in the current phase. One
southbound lane has been open most of the time.


    But southbound traffic during the weekend was diverted around
Pleasanton.


    The 20-mile detour may continue for several hours today, officials
said.


    Southbound motorists will leave I-37 at FM 3006 north of
Pleasanton, go west to U.S. 281 South, turn south through
Pleasanton, then go back onto I-37 south of Pleasanton.


    Investigators trying


    to identify body





    The body of a man apparently shot to death was discovered early
Monday near Walsh Road and South Zarzamora Street, the Bexar County
Sheriff's Department reported.


    The man, believed to be between 20 and 30 years old, appeared to
have been shot several times, homicide Lt. Bud Baker said.


    He had been dead from six to eight hours when a passer-by found the
body about 8:15 a.m., Baker said.


    Investigators late Monday were attempting to learn the man's
identity and contact relatives.


    The man was described as wearing a dark shirt, white jeans and
boots.


    Diesel spill suspected


    at Comal Springs





    Officials said Monday they are starting an aggressive
water-sampling program at Comal Springs after a recent sampling
revealed traces of petroleum hydrocarbons, apparently from a spill
of diesel fuel in the aquifer's recharge zone last month.


    Minute traces of the hydrocarbons were detected in water samples
taken Jan. 24, 26 and 28 at Comal Springs and Hueco Springs, but
samples collected from Comal Springs last Tuesday revealed no
traces, said Greg Ellis, general manager of the authority.


    He said the detected levels were far below the public health
standard and that no effect on endangered species living in the
springs is anticipated.


    Although no definite link exists between the detections and the
Jan. 14 spill of an estimated 2,692 gallons of diesel at a Dyno
Nobel Inc. explosives mixing site four miles from the springs,
Ellis said the authority began the aggressive sampling program as a
precautionary measure.


    That spill occurred after a valve was accidentally left open. The
leak was discovered Jan. 17 and reported to the Texas Natural
Resource Conservation Commission on Jan. 18.


    Dyno Nobel hired a contractor who began digging up the contaminated
soil and rock, but some of the diesel may have followed cracks into
the aquifer's water table some 230 feet below, officials said.


    Casino night planned


    for Israeli hospital





    The San Antonio chapter of Hadassah, a women's volunteer charitable
organization, will hold a casino night to benefit gene therapy
programs at an Israeli hospital.


    Genes & Gems, the group's 53rd annual donor dinner, is scheduled
for 6:30 p.m. to 10 p.m. Sunday in the auditorium of the Jewish
Campus at 12500 N.W. Military Highway.


    The event will include a kosher deli buffet dinner, casino games, a
cash bar and silent auction.


    Barbara Rabin, a registered nurse who is national chairwoman of the
Nurses Council of Hadassah, and Linda Block, regional adviser to
the organization, will speak.


    Proceeds will go to the Goldyne Savad Institute of Gene Therapy and
the Mother & Child Center at the Hadassah Medical Center near
Jerusalem.


    A minimum donation of $75 is required. For reservations, call
344-0750 or 525-1852.


    Basketball player gets


    5 years for elbowing foe





    A former South San Antonio High School basketball player was
sentenced to five years in prison Monday for assaulting another
player during a game last year.


    Tony Limon, 19, was charged with aggravated assault-serious bodily
injury for elbowing East Central guard Brent Holmes late in the
first half of the Jan. 15, 1999, game. Holmes was taken from the
court bleeding from the nose and mouth and sat out the rest of the
game.


    Limon was suspended for the rest of the season after the incident,
for which no foul was called.


    Limon's attorney, James Rodriguez, said his client applied for
probation in the case. Judge Mark Luitjen in the 144th District
Court handed down the prison term.


    Last March, Limon got four years' probation for a burglary,
Rodriguez said.



LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2000


                             904 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               February 8, 2000, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A4

LENGTH: 666 words

HEADLINE: NATION

BYLINE: From News Services

BODY:


MIDWEST

CLEVELAND

Jury selection begins in 3rd Sheppard trial

   Jury selection got under way on Monday in the third trial connected with the
murder that inspired the TV show and movie "The Fugitive".

   Prosecutors said the jury could be seated by the end of the week with opening
arguments beginning as early as Friday. Dr. Sam Sheppard was accused of
murdering his then-pregnant wife and sentenced to prison. He served 10 years of
the sentence before the U.S. Supreme Court declared the trial unconstitutional
because of the media circus that accompanied it. He was acquitted at a retrial
in 1966 and died four years later.

   Sheppard's son, Sam Reese Sheppard, has filed a wrongful imprisonment suit
against the state of Ohio and his attorneys must prove the late osteopath
innocent.

ST. LOUIS

Danforth sets meeting for test on Waco siege

   Special Counsel John C. Danforth has tentatively scheduled a meeting in St.
Louis next week to finalize details of a test to determine if flashes on an
infrared tape are proof that government agents fired at the Branch Davidians
during the 1993 siege at Waco, Texas. The Branch Davidians say the flashes are
from government guns. The government denies it.

   J. Michael Bradford, U.S. attorney in Beaumont, Texas, said Monday that all
of the parties will probably gather in St. Louis on Feb. 15 or 16 to iron out
the last details of the scientific test. The test is scheduled for the first or
second week of next month in Texas.

EAST

WASHINGTON

Plumbing leak is blamed in failed interceptor test

   A simple plumbing leak foiled last month's test of an experimental
interceptor that is central to the Pentagon's effort to develop a national
missile defense system at a cost of $ 12.7 billion over the next six years,
investigators have concluded.

   The conclusion suggests that no fundamental scientific flaw caused the
interceptor to miss its target, a dummy warhead streaking over the Pacific. But
the failed intercept attempt has forced a delay of at least several weeks in the
next test of the anti-missile system - now scheduled tentatively for the second
half of May.

WASHINGTON

Hospital, groups suspend gene therapy experiments

   A Harvard-affiliated medical center and two patient advocacy groups have
temporarily halted gene therapy experiments because of concerns raised by the
death in September of a teen-ager from Tucson, Ariz., who was undergoing
treatment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston decided last week to suspend
its gene therapy program. The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation and the Muscular
Dystrophy Association have placed a hold on three human gene experiments they
are sponsoring.

   Representatives of all three institutions cited general safety concerns about
gene therapy that surfaced in the months after the death of Jesse Gelsinger,
rather than any specific problems with their own experiments.

WASHINGTON

Trial starts for former Clinton-Gore fund-raiser

   Allegations of Democratic fund-raising abuses in 1996 reverberated in a
federal courtroom Monday as Maria Hsia, a former longtime fund-raiser for Vice
President Al Gore, went on trial on charges of violating election laws.

   Jurors were told by chief prosecutor Eric Yaffe that Hsia "willfully and
deliberately" concealed the source of illegal political donations to the
Clinton-Gore re-election campaign from a Buddhist temple in Hacienda He ights,
Calif., "to advance her own business and political interests."

   But Nancy Luque, Hsia's defense attorney, argued that Hsia was not
responsible for inaccurate campaign finance reports filed with the Federal
Election Commission in 1996 and that "she never lied to anybody or caused anyone
to lie." If convicted on five charges of causing false statements to be filed
with the election commission, Hsia, 49, could face a maximum prison term of 25
years and more than $ 1 million in fines.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2000


                             905 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    February 8, 2000, Tuesday, Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 754 words

HEADLINE: More Gene Therapy Experiments Are Suspended; Hospital, Patient Groups
Cite Safety Concerns

BYLINE: Deborah Nelson, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   A Harvard-affiliated medical center and two patient advocacy groups have
temporarily halted gene therapy experiments because of concerns raised by the
September death of a Tucson teenager undergoing treatment at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston decided last week to suspend
its gene therapy program, while the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation and Muscular
Dystrophy Association have placed a hold on three human gene experiments they
are sponsoring.

   Representatives of all three institutions cited general safety concerns about
gene therapy that surfaced in the months following the death of Jesse Gelsinger
at Penn, rather than any specific problems with their own experiments.

   "The reason that we decided to temporarily hold our clinical trials is that
we put patient safety first," Michael Rosenblatt, interim president of Beth
Israel Deaconess, said yesterday. "We want to benefit from the national
discourse."

   Gelsinger's was the first death attributed to gene therapy, a 10-year-old
science that has attempted--so far without success--to treat cancer, AIDS and
inherited diseases by altering people's genetic makeup.

   Since then, the Food and Drug Administration temporarily suspended Penn's
gene therapy program after uncovering numerous safety lapses in the clinical
trial that killed Gelsinger; the National Institutes of Health discovered that
gene therapy researchers elsewhere had failed to promptly report more than 600
illnesses and deaths among gene therapy volunteers to the agency as required;
and Sen. Bill Frist (R-Tenn.) initiated hearings last week on whether the
federal government's oversight of gene therapy is adequate.

   The decision by Beth Israel Deaconess came less than a week after The
Washington Post reported that the hospital had failed to immediately notify the
NIH about three deaths and one serious illness among the first seven volunteers
in another gene therapy experiment involving terminally ill cancer patients.
Both Rosenblatt and the researcher said they did not know they were supposed to
notify the NIH, which makes such information public, in addition to the FDA,
which does not.

   Federal regulations require researchers to report all deaths and serious
illnesses among gene therapy volunteers to the NIH regardless of whether they
are caused by the gene therapy, the underlying illness or something else. In
this case, the lead researcher decided that earlier health problems caused the
three deaths shortly after treatment, but that the therapy likely caused high
fever and severe heart problems in a surviving volunteer. The medical center
suspended the experiment following the serious illness last summer and had
planned to restart it this month with an improved protocol.

   Now, however, Rosenblatt said, the experiment won't resume until he gets some
sort of signal from the FDA and the NIH that they consider gene therapy safe and
will continue to support it. In addition, he said, he has stopped the one other
gene experiment at the medical center, involving hemophilia patients, even
though there have not been any deaths and only one serious but unrelated illness
eight months after treatment.

   NIH and FDA officials are exploring whether they need to improve the way gene
therapy experiments are approved and conducted, as well as whether they should
change the way adverse events are reported to the public.

   "What we will be looking for is a reaffirmation of the commitment [to gene
therapy] from these agencies," Rosenblatt said.

   Representatives of the Muscular Dystrophy Association and Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation also said they are waiting to see what comes out of regulators'
discussions and the Senate hearings before proceeding.

   The Muscular Dystrophy Association stopped an experiment it is sponsoring at
Ohio State University that used a genetically engineered virus manufactured at
Penn. The study was the first, long-awaited gene experiment on people with
muscular dystrophy.

   The FDA action against Penn had already stopped one of the two gene
experiments sponsored by Cystic Fibrosis Foundation that used the same type of
altered virus that killed Gelsinger. Ronald Crystal of Cornell University
Medical College suspended the other one at the request of the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation.

    Sen. Bill Frist (R-Tenn.), center, greets gene therapy trial participant
Eric Kast, left, and Paul Gelsinger, father of a teenager who died during a gene
experiment, at a hearing last week.

CORRECTION-DATE: February 23, 2000

CORRECTION:
The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation provided incorrect information for a Feb. 8
article on the suspension of gene therapy experiments at several institutions. A
foundation spokeswoman mistakenly said a cystic fibrosis experiment at Cornell
University had been temporarily halted. No such study was underway.

LOAD-DATE: February 08, 2000


                             906 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 7, 2000, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1183 words

HEADLINE: BETH ISRAEL HALTS TRIAL OF GENE THERAPY CITES NATIONAL DEBATE OVER
SAFETY

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center has suspended its remaining human gene
therapy trial, citing growing concerns about the safety of the procedure.

   Medical center officials said they made the decision last week not because of
any known problems with the study, in which genetically altered cells were
implanted into patients with hemophilia, but because the safety of all gene
therapy research has come under scrutiny following a death in a Pennsylvania
trial last year.   "We are temporarily halting [the trial] because there is a
national discourse on this and we would like to benefit from it," said interim
president Dr. Michael Rosenblatt.

   Announcement of the suspension occurred a week after it was revealed that the
medical center halted a different gene therapy trial last summer after three of
the first six patients died and that those deaths had not been properly reported
to the National Institutes of Health.

   The hospital said that the reporting failure was inadvertent and that
researchers had informed another government agency, the Food and Drug
Administration, of the deaths as required. Officials at the hospital also said
an internal review had concluded that at least two of the deaths were not
related to the treatment.

   Gene therapy, one of the most promising fields of medical science, attempts
to repair or replace broken genes in seriously ill patients by transferring
normal genes into the body. It could be used to treat disorders as rare as
cystic fibrosis or as common as cancer, researchers say.

   But the challenge has proved more difficult than expected. After more than
300 human experiments in the past decade, there has been no clear-cut success in
gene therapy. Getting the foreign genes safely into the body and maintaining
their function for more than a short time are two major hurdles.

   The death last September of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger at the University of
Pennsylvania triggered a government investigation, the suspension of eight gene
therapy trials there, and a Senate hearing last week on regulation of the field.
Senator William Frist, Republican of Tennessee, said after the hearing that the
current regulatory system had failed and change was needed.

   Believing Gelsinger's case might not have been an isolated event, the NIH
asked hospitals and research facilities nationwide for more detailed information
on gene therapy and received almost 700 reports of serious adverse events during
the experiments. They had not been reported, as is required, to the National
Institutes of Health's recombinant DNA advisory committee.

   Despite the debate and the slow progress, scientists and drug and biotech
companies remain bullish that in the long term, gene therapy will become a
potent part of medicine's arsenal.

   "We are still enthusiastic and optimistic about it," said a spokeswoman for
Biogen, the Cambridge biotech firm, which invests in gene therapy research
through Genovo, a Philadelphia gene therapy firm.

   Even though the Boston area is a hotbed of genetic science, area researchers
have been exceptionally cautious about beginning human gene therapy, saying the
field lacks a solid scientific foundation. However, a number of trials are under
way.

   For example, an official of Genzyme Science of Framingham said last week that
the company is conducting two gene therapy trials - one aimed at growing new
blood vessels in patients' legs affected by blocked circulation and one in
cancer - and plans to begin others shortly.

   The largest number of gene therapy trials in Boston are under way at
Dana-Farber Partners Cancer Care, a joint venture of Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Massachusetts General Hospital, and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, said
Greg Koski, head of human research affairs for Partners Health Care.

   The deaths at Beth Israel Deaconess all involved terminally ill cancer
patients undergoing gene therapy.

   The remaining clinical trial at the medical center involved patients with
hemophilia, the inherited bleeding disorder. They received implants into their
abdomens of laboratory-grown cells fitted with a gene that makes the
anticlotting protein, Factor VIII. Hemophiliacs do not make sufficient Factor
VIII.

   Six of a planned 12 patients received the implants over the past two years,
said Dr. Richard Selden, founder and president of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.
of Cambridge, which sponsored the trial. He said there had been one "serious
adverse event" during the trial, but it was because of "the underlying
condition" of the patient, not the therapy itself.

   A medical center spokeswoman said the event was an abnormal heart rhythm
eight months following the treatment and that the patient was briefly
hospitalized.

   Rosenblatt, the interim president, stressed that the episode was properly
reported and that the FDA had given the study approval.

   The gene therapy community is struggling with issues of ethics, informed
consent, and regulation. Scientists say the field still lacks some of the basic
tools - namely, safe and effective gene transporters, called "vectors," to carry
genes into patients' cells.

   Many vectors are modified viruses, and it was such a virus that triggered a
fatal reaction in Gelsinger, who died Sept. 17 at the University of
Pennsylvania. He had volunteered for the trial to test the potential treatment
for a rare liver disease. Gelsinger had the disease, but was doing well on
conventional treatment.

   Other vectors, both viral and nonviral, all have their drawbacks - some are
thought riskier, some cannot carry a very big gene, some can take genes only
into cells that are dividing.

   Even when genes can be transferred into patients' cells, they often function
only temporarily then fail.

   "We're back to a lot of those old questions that were with us at the very
beginning," said Dr. Theodore Friedmann, director of human gene therapy at the
University of California at San Diego, one of the early gene therapy
researchers.

   "We've learned a lot, but we are still in the position of not knowing the
best vectors" to use or which diseases to be targeted first.

   The first authorized gene therapy experiment was conducted a decade ago, when
government scientists took immune cells from two young girls and added genes to
make a key protein the girls lacked. Because of a genetic defect, the girls had
almost no immunity against infection. The gene-altered cells were put back into
their blood streams, in hopes that they would produce the missing enzyme, which
is necessary to build normal immune defenses.

   Although the girls did well, they also received a conventional treatment, and
the overall results were ambiguous.

   Since then, gene therapy has been tried for cystic fibrosis, hemophilia, many
forms of cancer, a rare children's disease called Canavan disease, sickle cell
anemia, and others. The attempts to treat cystic fibrosis by having patients
inhale a mist of gene-carrying viruses ran afoul of the body's stout defenses:
the immune system erupted in an inflammatory response that destroyed the viruses
and could have been harmful to the patients.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2000


                             907 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       FEBRUARY 7, 2000 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 1846 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY'S DUBIOUS ALLY

BYLINE: Faye Flam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Perhaps nothing has become as synonymous with futuristic medicine as gene
therapy. But, as brought home by the recent death of a young research subject at
the University of Pennsylvania, the dangers are still not well understood.

   The investigation into the death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger revealed that
it probably wasn't the genes he was getting that caused his death. Rather it
appears that the death was the result of the delivery vehicle for those genes -
in this case a virus modified so it wouldn't cause an infection.

   Gelsinger, Penn researchers reported, died of a massive immune response to
the virus, causing a cascading inflammation response that attacked his internal
organs and destroyed his lungs. No one knows why his response was so severe.

   About a quarter of the approximately 400 human gene therapy experiments
nationwide use the same type of virus - a cold virus or adenovirus, modified to
make it less infectious.

   Although the federal agencies that oversee gene therapy - the Food and Drug
Administration and the National Institutes of Health - both approved the use of
the adenovirus in all these gene therapy trials, some researchers say the
adenovirus is too unpredictable.

   Until a lot of questions are answered, they say, it should only be used in
volunteers who are near death, unlike those in the Penn trial, headed by gene
therapy pioneer James Wilson. Most had a had a mild form of a rare liver
disease, called OTC, that is a killer of young babies.

   Specifically, critics of the adenovirus say that not enough is known about:

   how safe dosages in animals translate into safe dosages for humans;

   whether there's a certain sudden threshold beyond which the patient becomes
overwhelmed;

   whether the disabled virus can reconfigure itself to become a threat.

   Meanwhile, many gene therapy laboratories have moved away from the
adenovirus, opting instead for other viruses as well as schemes for getting
genes into a cell without using a virus at all.

   In many ways, what gene therapists are doing is attempting to manipulate
nature at a fundamental level by commissioning a formidable enemy - a virus - to
infiltrate the inner sanctum of human cells - the nucleus - where strands of DNA
store the genetic code.

   The viruses are used as vehicles, or "vectors" for getting new genes into
cells. In nature, viruses make a living by inserting their own genes into the
cells of other creatures, so it seemed like a natural idea to take out some of a
virus' own genes and add strands of human DNA carrying pieces of the code that
are missing or damaged in people with cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy, or a
host of other diseases.

   The viruses are supposed to be genetically altered so they can't multiply in
the patient and cause an infection, but it's hard for scientists to guarantee
that the viruses will stay inactive.

   "We have limited understanding about the biology of these agents - these are
not benign agents we can manipulate at our own will and disregard the underlying
biology," said Robert Malone of the University of Maryland, who is pursuing gene
therapy through alternative means.

   "FDA doesn't have that much expertise in this," he added. "We're all on the
bleeding edge."

   A cold virus may not sound dangerous, but patients in gene therapy trials can
get dosed with trillions of viral particles - tens of thousands of times more
than anyone would ever harbor in an ordinary infection.

   Because gene therapy in its current form is grossly inefficient, scientists
need to give massive doses of virus in order to get just a few genes
successfully implanted. But in such high quantities, even a cold virus sets off
the human immune system, causing inflammation that, in animal studies, has been
fatal.

   In monkeys, high enough doses of the virus trigger death through a kind of
septic shock. And there was a warning flag for humans several years ago when a
volunteer in a gene therapy trial for cystic fibrosis had a brief toxic
reaction.

   "There was adequate literature to show the adenovirus was a problem - even
from [animal studies in] Wilson's own lab," said Malone. "The writing was on the
wall for five years."

   Wilson declined to be interviewed.

   His laboratory used the adenovirus because it was at the time the best virus
available to get genes into the liver, where patients with the liver disease
needed them.

   Matthew During, who does gene therapy at Thomas Jefferson University
Hospital, is using the technique with a different virus to battle diseases of
the central nervous system - ALS (Lou Gehrig's disease) and a devastating
childhood killer called Canavan disease.

   During said that that deaths in medical experiments rarely get this kind of
scrutiny. He said he's still outraged over the death of a 9-month-old who would
have been in one of his gene therapy trials for Canavan disease. Instead, the
baby's parents decided to try a risky bone marrow transplant in the hope of some
improvement.

   "If the child had died in gene therapy we'd be all up in arms," he said. And
yet, there are lots of children dying from lethal doses of drugs or from other
more conventional treatments, he said.

   Last month, FDA shut down all gene therapy trials at Penn after an
investigation found a number of places where Wilson failed to comply with
previously agreed-upon protocols.

   During said he believed that if the FDA were to shine a bright enough
spotlight on any experiment, it would find similar violations.

   What at first seemed baffling about Gelsinger's death was that the 17
patients before him had gotten incrementally larger doses without apparent harm.
The patient right before him, a woman with a milder form of the disease, got the
same dose Gelsinger received.

   There were indications of possible problems along the way. Several patients
who preceded Gelsinger showed signs of temporary toxic reactions - measured by
the buildup of chemicals signaling the death of liver cells. In recent months,
at the request of the NIH, gene therapy researchers from around the country have
reported 691 cases of adverse reactions during trials using the adenovirus that
previously had not been made public because of FDA secrecy laws. It's not clear
how many of those incidents were due to virus.

   At this primitive stage in the science of gene therapy, scientists have no
clear guidelines about how much virus they can give patients without an
unreasonable danger of an adverse reaction.

   The adenovirus doesn't appear to behave the way ordinary drugs do. Tests of
adenovirus given to monkeys hinted that a tiny increase in dose could cause a
massive change in response, some researchers say. The response may remain mild
until some critical point is reached, after which the response becomes
catastrophic, like a river that meanders along to suddenly become a waterfall.

   Scientists call this abrupt change a "shoulder effect."

   As is standard for toxicity studies, Wilson started with small amounts of the
virus, believed to be far below any danger level based on animal studies. He
treated groups of three with nearly identical doses, and then increased it by
factors of three for each subsequent group. But that might have been too fast,
say others who have worked in gene therapy.

   In previous adenovirus studies with animals, "We had hints of a shoulder
effect," said Inder Verma, a gene therapy researcher at the Salk Institute in La
Jolla, Calif.

   Another problem is that scientists are not sure they can calculate safe
dosages based on the person's weight.

   Maryland's Malone said that the field is divided into two camps over whether
body weight should figure into interpreting animal studies and applying them to
humans.

   In one camp are those who argue that the dose given to patients should depend
on their body weight. Under such an assumption, doctors should be safe in giving
doses comparable to those that killed monkeys, provided the dose the humans got
per body weight was still much smaller.

   Weight-dependent dosing works for drugs that distribute themselves through
the body. The other camp believes for adenovirus, trouble may stem from the
initial concentration of the virus where it's delivered - in Gelsinger's case,
the liver. The toxicity is "local" as Malone puts it. The dose given to
Gelsinger per pound of body weight was 50 times less than the lethal dose for
monkeys. But, given his much heavier body weight, the total number of viruses
injected into his liver was comparable to the lethal level for monkeys tested
with a similar adenovirus.

   Another problem that plagues gene therapy is the possibility that viruses
will revert to a more infectious form. The whole principle behind using these
viruses safely relies on the scientists' ability to disarm them. They do this by
removing a section of DNA known as E1, thought essential for the virus'
reproduction.

   But once researchers have disarmed the viruses, it becomes hard to grow them
in the laboratory. Trillions may be needed to get therapeutic genes into a
patient. So scientists employ "packaging cells" that contain the proteins the
viruses need to reproduce themselves but can't make in their disabled form.

   The packaging cells get removed before the gene therapy is given to patients,
but if any stray packaging cells are left, a virus can, on a rare occasion, pick
up its missing reproductive genes and become capable of causing a massive
infection.

   Some of these problems may be overcome by using other vehicles for carrying
therapeutic genes. A safer candidate appears to be a misleadingly named
adeno-associated virus (AAV). AAV is not a form of adenovirus, but a sort of
parasite virus that needs both host cells and adenovirus, to survive. Alone, AAV
is not a human pathogen, and so it appears to slip by the immune system without
causing inflammation.

   But, like the adenovirus, AAV doesn't appear to be the universal answer for
gene therapy. For one thing, it's too small to carry large therapeutic genes.

   Many scientists think the future lies in methods that don't use a virus.
Malone cites work at the University of Pittsburgh on "naked DNA" - genes that go
right into the cells without a virus.

   Jefferson's During has used a type of synthetic virus - genes encased in a
plastic-like material, a "liposome-polymer complex" - for some of his trials. It
was less efficient than using a virus, he said, but at least it wasn't harmful.

   But now, he said, he's moving to AAV, which looks more promising.

   The adenovirus may still have some uses - especially for cancers, where the
object is get tumor cells to take up a gene that is used to kill them. In that
case, the immune system's attack in "infected" cells might help fight the
cancer.

   Other researchers are looking at the AIDS virus, HIV, which can be modified
in ways that seem to work well for some kinds of gene therapy - and might be
employed against AIDS itself.

   "It's not a case where we'll get one vector and we can do whatever we want,"
said Malone. "It will be a disease-by-disease battle."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND DIAGRAM;
PHOTO
Human gene therapy experiments frequently make use of an adenovirus, modified to
make it less infectious.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             908 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

              February 07, 2000, Monday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; EDITORIALS; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 481 words

HEADLINE: Scrutinizing gene therapy

BODY:


   Gene-therapy experiments hold enormous promise for eliminating inherited
illnesses, replacing damaged tissue and ultimately curing diseases such as
cancer, AIDS and diabetes. When not abused, this revolutionary science,
involving the transplant of properly coded genes to replace defective ones, has
the potential to enhance - and even extend - human life. Yet its application
also raises ethical dilemmas that deserve far more public debate than they have
received thus far.

   Officials at the National Institutes of Health deserve credit for advancing
this medical debate and for proposing rules that promise to make gene therapy
safer for patients. In a recent letter to Congress, NIH Acting Director Ruth L.
Kirschstein wrote candidly about the dangers associated with genetic research,
including the federal government's past problems overseeing gene therapy
experiments.

   Kirschstein admitted the agency has done a poor job of tracking patients
involved in gene-therapy experiments and has failed to enforce rules requiring
scientists to report information about harmful side effects. To remedy the
problem, the institute has begun immediate inspections of laboratories that
conduct genetic research. It also will expand education of scientists about the
rules for reporting gene-therapy mishaps.

   Gene therapy has grown explosively from its advent in 1990. However, despite
the initiation of hundreds of studies and a growing financial investment by
biotechnology companies hoping to profit from the new procedures, the field has
yet to document its first success. In fact, gene therapy has come under
increasing criticism in recent years by some scientists and ethicists who argue
it is moving ahead too quickly, jeopardizing patients.

   In one particularly troubling case, the federal government was forced to halt
all human gene-therapy experiments involving a prominent researcher at the
University of Pennsylvania. An investigation into the September death of a
teenager there found the school's prestigious program in disarray.

   Investigators at the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said they found
numerous violations of federal research regulations and shortcomings in the
protection of human subjects at the university's Institute for Human Gene
Therapy. The university couldn't provide investigators with proof that
volunteers in the study had been eligible to participate or had been adequately
warned of the risks.

   With so much at stake in gene-therapy experiments, such abuses simply cannot
be tolerated. The NIH has performed a public service by stepping up its scrutiny
of gene-therapy research and by demanding full and immediate disclosure of all
potential problems associated with such treatments. Rigorous oversight by the
federal government is the only way to prevent another tragedy such as the one
that occurred at the University of Pennsylvania.


LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2000


                             909 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        February 7, 2000 Monday, ORLEANS

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1064 words

HEADLINE: HOPE OR HYPE?;
CHRISTOPHER REEVE'S 'SUPER WALK' DISQUIETS DOCTORS, DISABLED

BYLINE: By David Cuthbert Staff writer

BODY:

   "To me, it was just another Super Bowl million-dollar commercial," said Perry
Tillman, of the paralyzed Christopher Reeve's digitally enabled virtual reality
walk. The instantly controversial ad drew astonishment and some criticism from
medical professionals and disabled patients.

   "I've been a paraplegic for 34 years," said Tillman, "and I know the
importance of hope. But you can spend your life hoping."

   "It's nice to give hope to victims of spinal cord injuries," said Dr. Robert
D'Ambrosia, chairman of the LSU Health Sciences Center Department of
Orthopedics. "But something like this happening anytime soon is far- fetched. I
think with gene therapy we're going to clear up some cancers in this century,
but I do not see this kind of thing happening."

   D'Ambrosia said this opinion was shared by a number of his colleagues in the
American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons, of which he is president. "We had
people down here from the academy doing some public education filming," he said,
"and all of us were talking quite extensively about this among ourselves, and
the general feeling was that this puts far too much false hope out there. You
can do all kinds of things on a computer, but a computer is not a human person."

   The dramatic ad, for Nuveen Investments, shows Reeve -- paralyzed since a
1995 horseback riding accident -- rising out of a chair and walking to stand
onstage with other people who have been "cured" of spinal cord injuries by
medical research. The inference is that such an occurrence is imminent.

   The commercial that debuted Super Bowl Sunday caused a flood of inquiries
from people who took it not as an inspirational message, but at face value. They
wanted to know where they, or injured relatives, could avail themselves of
Reeve's apparent miracle healing. Reeve has defended the ad as representing
"something that can actually happen . . . with money and talent focused on
spinal cord repair." Others feel the spot is misleading, even harmful.

   "I have extremely polarized feelings about this," said Dr. Moshe Solomonow,
LSU professor of orthopedics and director of bioengineering. "On the one hand, I
am delighted that he (Reeve) is trying to draw attention to this devastating
disability. On the other hand, it is very difficult for patients sitting there
watching it, who don't know they are talking about the very long-term future.

   "All people need motivation. Despite his disability, Chris Reeve is still
flying all over the world, and now they see him walking. Most of these people
are not Christopher Reeve. They are sitting there on Irish Bayou with this
problem that burdens them and their entire family. They do not need false hope
or the demoralizing effect it can bring."

   Solomonow has been working on an LSU research project that has successfully
given limited mobility to paraplegics. "It involves a leg brace and electrical
stimulation to the muscles," he said. "It allows them to stand up, frees them
from the wheelchair. They can't do fancy stuff, but it gets them up, which is
important, because there are 16 different medical complications from the
physical stagnation these patients face, including urinary tract infections,
respiratory and circulatory problems, bones that become too fragile. . . . Just
being able to stand up pumps the blood, builds up muscle and bone mass and the
heart and lungs improve."

   Solomonow says some 240 patients have availed themselves of this treatment.
"We've had patients from South America, Europe, Australia . .  ."

   So doesn't this justify, to some extent, Reeve's optimism?

   "You have to crawl before you can walk," cautions D'Ambrosia. "This is a more
realistic treatment for paraplegics -- where two extremeties are affected --
than for quadriplegics, where all four extremities are affected." He added that
high-profile procedures featured on TV news magazines -- where wires have been
implanted into muscle and patients "walked" briefly -- did not hold up in the
long run. The experiments resulted in infections, fractures and broken bones.
"Again, unrealistic expectations were raised," he said.

   Solomonow's work, centered at Touro Infirmary, has had paraplegic patients
ambulatory for hours at a time, said D'Ambrosia. "They walk like tin soldiers,
but they can get in and out of a car and sometimes negotiate stairs."

   "God knows, everybody wants a cure for spinal cord injuries," said Dr. Robert
Mipro, chief of physical medicine and rehabilitative services at the Veterans
Affairs Medical Center of New Orleans. "But no one in this field sees that
happening in the immediate future. It's not on the horizon.

   "You know, people didn't usually even survive spinal cord injuries until
after World War II. So many things have been done and continue to be done in the
area of improving life for these patients. I know several who lead very rich
lives."

   He counts Tillman among that number.

   "I was in a helicopter crash in 1966 in Vietnam," said Tillman. "My spinal
cord damage was complete -- 'crushed, damaged, destroyed' were the words used to
describe my injury. I have no feeling beneath my navel.

   "I'm in a wheelchair 100 percent of the time."

   But his disability hasn't stopped him.

   "I finished Xavier in '71," said Tillman, "became an accountant and just
retired after 28 years with the USDA in their finance center. I drive a car with
hand controls, my wife Diane and I have been married for 10 years, I'm active in
veterans' organizations and we go to Hawaii every year. We're going again in
April; I'll send a picture to your Travel section.

   "I think when you have a situation like this, you should listen to what your
doctor says to you. If your injury is what they call 'incomplete,' that means
something, some sort of partial recovery may be possible at some point. But
'complete' means something, too. And to me, it meant a challenge. It meant, 'Get
going with what you've got.'

   "Back in the '60s, disabled folks needed help in the areas of accessibility
and transportation. I found the more I got involved in that, the less involved I
was with myself.

   "And I'd do things like drive to California -- just to prove to myself I
could do it.

   "You can be hoping something will change tomorrow, and the day after
tomorrow, and pretty soon that's all you're doing.

   "I say, 'Get on with it.'

   "That's hard to say -- and harder to do."

GRAPHIC: A misstep?  Christopher Reeve digitally rising to the occasion on a
Super Bowl commercial suggested to some viewers that a cure for spinal cord
injuries was imminent.  VIDEO CAPTURE BY AP

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2000


                             910 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 6, 2000, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. G7

LENGTH: 747 words

HEADLINE: ELLEN GOODMAN;
THE DOWNSIDE OF GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: By ELLEN GOODMAN, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Sometimes it's hard to tell the hype from the hope.

   For a decade now, gene therapy has been described as the Promised Land of
modern medicine. When we get there, we'll be able to cure disease by changing
our genetic makeup.    In his State of the Union address, the president talks
about "miraculous improvements" and "precision therapies." In quarterly reports,
biotech firms talk about their race for the cure. At conferences, scientists
talk as if success were a tantalizing breakthrough away.

   But to get from the promise to the land, we have to cross a vast territory of
human experimentation. And today that territory looks more like the Wild West
than the desert.

   Last fall, Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old with a genetic liver disorder, won
a tragic distinction. He became the first human known to have died from
experimental gene therapy. The prestigious program at the University of
Pennsylvania where Jesse volunteered had so many lapses that the FDA shut it
down.

   Since then the reports have escalated. It turns out that gene therapy
researchers across the country had failed to file reports on nearly 700 serious
"adverse events" when they occurred.

   In Boston, we now know that three of the first six patients in one experiment
died and a seventh fell seriously ill. In Philadelphia, a volunteer in the
experiment that killed Gelsinger says she was never told her liver had suffered
a bad reaction.

   The ethical questions raised by gene therapy are not really so different from
other human experiments. Before we use people, we are supposed to ask: Is this
research ready and important enough for human trial? Can we make sure that the
subjects know what they are getting into? When is consent truly informed?

   But the hype and the hope behind gene therapy have added more pressure. At
what point does the push for a cure overwhelm the need to protect patients? Do
we need brakes?

   At a Senate hearing Wednesday there were sounds of both urgency and caution.
A young man with cystic fibrosis worried out loud about anything that would slow
down the research. "My battle with CF is a race," he said.  "Don't let me lose
that race when the finish line might be just around the corner." At the same
time, a tearful father called his son Jesse's death "an avoidable tragedy from
which I will never recover."

   Paul Gelsinger said he and Jesse were "misled" into volunteering. They
consented, but consent isn't just a piece of paper; it's a process of informing
someone so they know the degree of risk. But many never get the whole story.

   In real life there is a dance of denial between researcher and subject. The
researchers who are true believers stay in step with the subjects who are
looking for hope. "You have a series of self-deceptions," says ethicist George
Annas. "Subjects deceiving themselves, researchers deceiving themselves, the
public looking the other way, hoping for help."

   This is true when the research is done, as it often is, on terminally ill
patients whose judgment may be clouded by desperation. And true when scientists
spin the story, airbrushing candor in the interest of science.

   The system as it is relies on the good faith of researchers. But however
faithful, there is almost inevitably some conflict of interest between
researcher and patient.

   We worry, and we should, when the conflict is financial. At the least, a
patient should know if the researcher has a stake in the outcome. But the prize
may be Nobel as well as financial. Indeed, altruism, ego, and money all point
equally to the need for an outside eye.

   At the hearing, Tennessee Senator Bill Frist said Gelsinger's death had
"sobered us all." There are always risks in research. But in our new sobriety we
can enforce the current guidelines and pull together the bits and pieces of
government regulation that are scattered from the FDA to the National Institutes
of Health. We need to monitor human experiments carefully, to follow up and
report.

   Will this slow the race? There is a different price you pay for overdrive. As
Dartmouth's Ronald Green says: "Every cutting of ethical corners carries a
price. It's a backlash against the research. Even when there are no risks or the
risks are minimal, people may be unwilling to be involved."

   For the past 10 years, gene therapy has had few successes. We still look for
instant cures from the lab to the medicine cabinet. But this is a long road, and
we need safeguards on the way from the promise to the land.

GRAPHIC: DRAWING, BARRIE MAGUIRE ILLUSTRATION

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000


                             911 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                February 6, 2000, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. B2

LENGTH: 594 words

HEADLINE: FIRST, DO NO HARM

BODY:


INFORMED CONSENT

   IN Los Angeles, inner-city children are given measles vaccine linked to
deaths in Africa. Their parents aren't told it's an experiment. On a Sioux
Indian reservation, children are offered a free hepatitis A vaccine. The word
"experimental" is dropped from consent forms because "it scared off a lot of
people." In New York, healthy black and Hispanic elementary school children are
promised toy-store gift certificates for taking a potentially life-threatening
drug.

   And in Philadelphia, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger is enrolled in a gene
therapy experiment. He is not told that two monkeys given the same treatment
died. He doesn't know he has serious liver damage that makes him ineligible for
the trial. He is not told that two patients have already had serious side
effects reported to the federal government, or that two others had similar
reactions that went unreported for fear the study would be shut down.

   He does not even know that, despite its promise, gene therapy has never
actually cured anyone of any disease. So Mr. Gelsinger agrees to be injected
with genetically modified viruses. Four days later, on Sept. 17, 1999, he dies
of massive organ failure.

   Prompted by Mr. Gelsinger's death, Congress last week opened hearings on the
safety of gene therapy. They are asking the wrong question. The problem isn't
gene therapy. Lax though the government's oversight of gene therapy protocols
has been -- and last week, the National Institutes of Health admitted it failed
to protect patients -- the risks are no greater than with any other type of
research.

   The problem is informed consent. Or rather, it is the epidemic disregard of
patients' fundamental right to know the risks and benefits of research in which
they participate.

   On Jan. 21, when federal regulators halted all human research at the
University of Pennsylvania, where Mr. Gelsinger was treated, medical researchers
described the action as rare and the problems as an aberration. In fact, they
have occurred with increasing frequency.

   In June, the Department of Health and Human Services concluded that the
nation's system for protecting research subjects was breaking down. By now, that
should be obvious.

   During the last year, human trials have been shut down at Duke University
Medical Center; the University of Illinois-Chicago; the University of
Alabama-Birmingham; and the Veterans Administration Greater Los Angeles Health
Care system.

   At a time when drug company trials are increasingly conducted in private
doctors' offices, not at universities, The New York Times has documented abuses
that include physicians paid thousands of dollars for every patient they
enrolled in experiments. Some doctors falsified medical records so unknowing
patients would appear to qualify.

   The Boston Globe has investigated drug trials involving patients hospitalized
for mental illness. At least one patient died in such a trial.

   And a chilling 1996 Cleveland Plain Dealer analysis of 4,154 Food and Drug
Administration inspections found that in 53 percent of them, patients were not
told they were getting experimental drugs or treatments.

   Among them was a 64-year-old Philadelphia grandmother who was unknowingly
injected with a gasoline additive to determine if it would dissolve her
gallstones. It killed her instead.

   Every day, new therapies based on human experimentation save thousands of
desperately ill people. Their value is incalculable.

   But they're not worth more than the lives of inner-city school children or
Jesse Gelsinger.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2000


                             912 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        February 6, 2000 Sunday, ORLEANS

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. E2

LENGTH: 210 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY CURES SEVERAL RAT GENERATIONS

BYLINE: The Dallas Morning News

BODY:

   Florida researchers have cured high blood pressure in three generations of
rats with a single injection of a therapeutic gene.

   The scientists, from the University of Florida's College of Medicine, say the
new research is proof that an artificially introduced beneficial gene can get
passed on from parent to offspring. But they also noted that the notion of
changing the genetic makeup of future generations of people raises troubling
ethical issues.

   The new study appears in the latest issue of Circulation Research: Journal of
the American Heart Association. The scientists injected some genetic material,
or DNA, that was inserted in a harmless virus particle. The DNA was designed to
interfere with the action of a hormone that raises blood pressure, explained
Florida researcher Mohan Raizada.

   The scientists injected the DNA-containing virus into the bloodstream of rats
naturally prone to high blood pressure. After the injections, the DNA
incorporated into the animals' own genetic makeup, and the rats' blood pressure
went down.

   What was surprising, Raizada said, was that the rats' "children" and
"grandchildren" also carried the therapeutic gene. That means the originally
injected DNA had made its way into the rats' sperm and eggs.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2000


                             913 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   February 05, 2000, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 635 words

HEADLINE: Insulin shot may lose sting;
New treatment eliminates needle

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - A technique that allows insulin hormone to be stored in cells
and then released as needed by a pill eventually may offer a treatment for
diabetes that does not require daily injections, researchers say.

   The experiments, thus far, have been performed only on mice, but researchers
say a system using an implanted insulin gene may be ready for human testing
within two years.

   In a study published Friday in the journal Science, researchers at Ariad
Pharmaceuticals in Cambridge, Mass., and at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center in New York said the cell engineering technique was able to control
diabetes in a group of laboratory mice and is now being tested on larger
animals.

   Tim Clackson, senior author of the study, said that the technique causes
insulin, or some other protein, to clump inside a cell with another protein,
forming a molecule that is too large to leave the cell.

   A drug, given as a pill, breaks up the clump, allowing the insulin to flow
into the blood stream in a way that mimics the spurt of hormone normally
secreted by the pancreas.

   "The amount of protein (such as insulin) that gets released is directly
related to the amount of drug that is given," said Clackson. "The more drug you
give, the more protein gets released into circulation."

   In diabetes, the technique theoretically would allow a patient to precisely
control insulin levels in the blood by a pill. Many diabetics now must control
insulin levels by injection.

   A common type of diabetes is caused by the failure of the pancreas to produce
an appropriate amount of insulin to metabolize glucose, or sugar, levels in the
blood stream. Normally, the pancreas releases insulin in response to the
detected level of glucose.

   Dr. Richard Furlanetto, scientific director of the Juvenile Diabetes
Foundation, said the experimental technique "is very clever science" but might
fall short.

   "To be truly useful, it would have to be coupled to a system that would
release the hormone in direct response to the levels of glucose in the blood,"
said Furlanetto.

   However, Furlanetto said the technique could be very useful in treating
conditions that require periodic secretion, or pulsed release, of some needed
protein, such as growth hormone.

   In the experiment, Clackson and his colleagues inserted into laboratory cells
genes that produce insulin and a protein that naturally clumps, or aggregates,
with insulin. Once inside the cells, the genes produce the two proteins. They
form clusters that are too large to pass through pores in the walls of the cell
compartments.

   The engineered cells were then injected into the muscles of mice that are
diabetic and normally develop high levels of glucose in the blood.

   When these mice were fed a drug that caused the protein clusters to split
apart, insulin was released into the bloodstream and glucose levels dropped to
normal.

   In control mice, which had the engineered cells but were not given the oral
drug, insulin did not appear in the bloodstream and glucose levels stayed high.

   "The insulin stays in the compartments of the cell and has no toxicity or
adverse effects. It just sits there," Clackson said. "Only when the animal
receives the drug do the aggregates break apart and then flow into the
circulation."

   Clackson said the experiment was only a "proof of concept" for the technique.
The next step is to transfer genes directly into body muscle cells, a common
gene therapy technique.

   Although the initial target of the research is diabetes, Clackson said the
protein clustering technique could also be used to deliver any protein that the
body needs in spurts. For instance, the technique could be used to administer
growth hormone, or proteins that would provide pain relief, appetite control or
correct brain chemistry, he said.


LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2000


                             914 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                    February 5, 2000, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 7; Editorial Writers Desk

LENGTH: 512 words

HEADLINE: PUT LIGHT ON GENE THERAPY;
 THE SECRECY AROUND NEW AND RISKY PROCEDURES MUST BE ELIMINATED FOR THE SAKE OF
PATIENTS AND SCIENCE.

BODY:


   Gene therapy, a procedure in which defective copies of a gene are replaced
with new working copies, is the most promising frontier in medicine, offering
hope of a cure for diseases like cancer and AIDS.

   The death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger following gene therapy last year,
however, serves as a reminder that the therapy's promise is still far from
assured. Despite 300 clinical trials on about 6,000 patients since 1990, gene
therapy has so far failed to cure a single one.

   Earlier this week, Congress held a hearing to explore whether researchers are
fully informing patients like Gelsinger of the hard facts. Testimony from
medical ethicists and genetic researchers made clear that many researchers are
falling short in their duty to explain the technique's speculative nature and
medical risks. At the hearing, Jesse's father poignantly described an ordeal
that medical ethicists say has become all too common. Gelsinger said he was not
told that the therapy, wherein a common cold virus bearing normal genes was
injected into his son's liver, could lead to hepatitis, liver damage and even
death. Nor, Gelsinger said, was he informed that the therapy stood no chance of
curing his son's condition, a rare genetically related liver disorder that is
not fatal.

   At the root of the problem are rules putting gene therapy oversight solely in
the hands of the Food and Drug Administration, which keeps all gene therapy
rules and records confidential. The secrecy deprives the public, scientists and
gene experts outside the FDA of information they need to assess the therapy's
adverse effects.

   Competitive pressures have left some researchers and biotechnology industry
executives reluctant to disclose evidence of patient harm to government
regulators, especially regulators outside the FDA who are legally obliged to
make the evidence public. But for a field as new and uncertain and potentially
perilous as gene therapy, there is simply no call for such secrecy.

   That's why the Clinton administration should require gene researchers to
promptly and fully report serious effects, especially patient deaths, not only
to the FDA but to the agency that houses the government's top gene therapy
experts--the National Institutes of Health. At a recent meeting, scientists of
the NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee said they were aware of only 5% or
6% of 691 adverse effects that gene therapy researchers had confidentially
reported to the FDA in the past decade.

   Meanwhile, Wall Street investors are lavishing money on the gene researchers.
Billions of dollars now flow each year to gene researchers who appear ready to
leapfrog past basic research and develop profitable, blockbuster therapies.
Investment pressure like this is encouraging some researchers to hype their gene
therapy's benefits and to downplay risks that could lead patients to drop out of
their clinical trials.

   By compelling broader public disclosure of gene therapy risks, the Clinton
administration could help ensure that patients are put ahead of potential
profits.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2000


                             915 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       February 5, 2000 Saturday, ORLEANS

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B7

LENGTH: 711 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY CAN BE DEADLY

BYLINE: Ellen Goodman is a syndicated columnist for The Boston Globe.

BODY:

   Sometimes it's hard to tell the hype from the hope.

   For a decade now, gene therapy has been described as the Promised Land of
modern medicine. When we get there, we'll be able to cure disease by changing
our genetic makeup.

   But to get from the promise to the land, we have to cross a vast territory of
human experimentation. And today that territory looks more like the Wild West
than the desert.

   Last fall, Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old with a genetic liver disorder, won
a tragic distinction. He became the first human known to have died from
experimental gene therapy. The prestigious program at the University of
Pennsylvania where Jesse volunteered had so many lapses that the FDA shut it
down.

   Since then, the reports have escalated. It turns out that gene therapy
researchers across the country had failed to file reports on nearly 700 serious
"adverse events" when they occurred.

   In Boston, we now know that three of the first six patients in one experiment
died and a seventh fell seriously ill. In Philadelphia, a volunteer in the
experiment that killed Gelsinger says she was never told her liver had suffered
a bad reaction.

   The ethical questions raised by gene therapy are not really so different from
other human experiments. Before we use people we are supposed to ask: Is this
research ready and important enough for human trial? Can we make sure that the
subjects know what they are getting into?

   But the hype and the hope behind gene therapy have added additional pressure.
At what point does the push for a cure overwhelm the need to protect patients?
Do we need brakes?

   At a Senate hearing Wednesday, there were sounds of both urgency and caution.
A young man with cystic fibrosis worried out loud about anything that would slow
down the research. "My battle with CF is a race," he said, "Don't let me lose
that race when the finish line might be just around the corner." At the same
time, a tearful father called his son Jesse's death, "an avoidable tragedy from
which I will never recover."

   Paul Gelsinger said he and Jesse were "misled" into volunteering. They
consented, but consent isn't just a piece of paper; it's a process of informing
someone so they know the degree of risk. But many never get the whole story.

   In real life, there is a dance of denial between researcher and subject. The
researchers who are true believers stay in step with the subjects who are
looking for hope. "You have a series of self-deceptions," says ethicist George
Annas. "Subjects deceiving themselves, researchers deceiving themselves, the
public looking the other way, hoping for help."

   This is true when the research is done, as it often is, on terminally ill
patients whose judgment may be clouded by desperation. And true when scientists
spin the story, airbrushing candor in the interest of science.

   The system, as it is, relies on the good faith of researchers. But however
faithful, there is almost inevitably some conflict of interest between
researcher and patient.

   We worry, and we should, when the conflict is financial. At the least, a
patient should know if the researcher has a stake in the outcome. But the prize
may be Nobel as well as financial. Indeed, altruism, ego and money all point
equally to the need for an outside eye.

   At the hearing, Tennessee's Sen. Bill Frist said that Gelsinger's death had
"sobered us all." There are always risks in research. But in our new sobriety we
can enforce the current guidelines and pull together the bits and pieces of
government regulation that are scattered from the FDA to the National Institutes
of Health. We need to carefully monitor human experiments, to follow up and
report.

   Will this slow the race? There is a different price you pay for overdrive. As
Dartmouth's Ronald Green says, "Every cutting of ethical corners carries a
price. It's a backlash against the research. Even when there are no risks or the
risks are minimal, people may be unwilling to be involved."

   For the past 10 years, gene therapy has had few successes. We still look for
instant cures from the lab to the medicine cabinet. But this is a long road, and
we need safeguards on the way from the promise to the land.

   * * * * * * *

   Ellen Goodman is a syndicated columnist for The Boston Globe.

COLUMN: ELLEN GOODMAN

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2000


                             916 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                  FEBRUARY 4, 2000 Friday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 499 words

HEADLINE: PENN HEALTH PREZ NOT QUITTING BUT HOSPITAL SYSTEM STILL HEMORRHAGING $

BYLINE: Gloria Campisi, Daily News Staff Writer, Staff writer Mark Meltzer
contributed to this report.

BODY:

   Amid a firestorm of controversy over gene therapy and huge financial losses,
the University of Pennsylvania's health system has strongly denied persistent
rumors that its chief executive officer is being eased out.

   Health system spokeswoman Lori Doyle said rumors from at least three sources
that Dr. William N. Kelley was quitting the health system are "absolutely not
true," in the "near term."

   According to the sources, it was the health system's loss over the past two
years of about $300 million, not controversy over the death of a patient in
Penn's gene therapy program, that targeted Kelley.

   A woman who answered the phone at Kelley's home Wednesday said he was
traveling and could not be reached. Kelley's contract expires in the fall of
next year.

   Controversy also is bubbling over a study that could lead to the university
legally distancing itself from financial responsibility for its health system,
which includes the flagship Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania,
Pennsylvania Hospital, Presbyterian Medical Center and Phoenixville Hospital.

   Penn's trustees were expected to discuss the study at their meeting Feb. 17
and 18, but that could be put off until their next meeting in June, said
university spokesman Kenneth Wildes.

   No vote will be taken by trustees at this month's meeting, university Provost
Robert L. Barchi told about 500 medical faculty at a meeting Tuesday. "I can't
control what the trustees discuss," he said yesterday.

   "Even if it were, it would only be the next step in discussing a series of
options, which would include the faculty in complete and extensive discussions."

   He wouldn't detail the study panel's suggestions, although establishing the
hospitals and Penn's network of medical practices as a separate, nonprofit
corporation is said to be among them.

   Penn would not be the first university to overhaul its relationship with its
hospitals. Many of the institutions are reeling from reimbursement cuts by
Medicare, Medicaid and private health insurers.

   Robert M. Dickler, an offical of the Association of Medical Colleges, said a
"limited number" of teaching hospitals had been purchased by for-profit hospital
corporations, like the bankrupt Allegheny Health System in Philadelphia. A large
number have "merged or affiliated or entered into some type of joint venture
relationship with other health-care providers, usually nonprofits," he said.

   Wildes said the health system has met its bills from reserves, without
siphoning off money from the university, and appears to be beginning a recovery,
after laying off 2,800 employees.

   The Penn layoffs were recommended by a consulting firm. At the time, Kelley
told the New York Times, "What is happening today is the invisible destruction
of the great academic medical centers. We will be more efficient and able to
deliver care at a lower price but . . . our ability to develop the medicine of
tomorrow is going away."

   Send e-mail to campisg@phillynews.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Kelly

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             917 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                       February 3, 2000, Thursday ,FINAL

SECTION: TELEGRAPH ,3A

LENGTH: 749 words

HEADLINE: Health agency pledges to boost gene therapy trials oversight; More lab
inspections, other measures planned, Senate subcommittee told

BYLINE: Gary Dorsey

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   A National Institutes of Health official acknowledged yesterday that
researchers routinely fail to report problems in gene therapy trials, and
pledged that the agency would step up oversight of the medical experiments.

    "We are deeply concerned about the under-reporting of serious adverse events
to the NIH, and we are taking steps to better understand and address the
problem," said Amy Patterson, director of the NIH office of biotechnology
activities.

    NIH will begin more inspections of research labs and will find ways to
ensure that more information about side effects in clinical trials is made
public, Patterson said.

    Speaking before a Senate subcommittee, Patterson joined academics, Congress
members and other health authorities in an inquiry prompted by the death in
September of Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year- old who participated in a gene therapy
trial at the University of Pennsylvania.

    His death, believed to be the first directly caused by an experimental gene
therapy, prompted an investigation by the Food and Drug Administration. The
agency found that Penn had violated rules designed to protect patient safety and
shut down its gene therapy program two weeks ago.

    Throughout the hearing, health officials and senators offered condolences to
Gelsinger's father and vowed that the boy's death would not be in vain.

    Paul Gelsinger led off the hearing, saying he and his son had been misled by
researchers at the university when they signed up for a therapeutic trial to
treat a genetic liver disorder. Jesse suffered from a mild form of the disease.
Both father and son were told in July, Gelsinger said, that a patient in the
clinical trial had shown a 50 percent improvement. In December, he said, he
learned that the patient had not improved at all.

    Gelsinger also said he learned only after his son's death that several other
patients suffered liver damage during the experiments and that monkeys had died
during animal trials.

    "If you have people putting their lives on the line, they have a right to
have access to the research," Gelsinger said. "I was under the impression that
this was a field that was progressing. But I was mistaken.  It was an
experiment."

    After the death became public last fall, NIH contacted all genetic therapy
projects under its jurisdiction. The agency discovered that of 691 instances of
serious side effects among people involved in gene therapy experiments over the
past seven years, only 39 had been reported immediately, as required by law.

    Sen. Bill Frist, a Tennessee Republican, pressed federal health officials to
explain what he repeatedly pointed to as a "breakdown" in oversight.

    Patterson of the NIH said that researchers do understand the institutes'
guidelines for reporting health problems during genetic trials because they are
often stated and recapitulated.

    "They should know," she said, concluding that many had simply violated
federal guidelines.

    While the NIH and FDA are reevaluating their practices to ensure better
oversight, Jay Siegel of the FDA said that most of his agency's inspection
efforts occur right before drugs come to market, not during clinical trials. The
reason, he said, is a "resource issue. "

    Jesse Gelsinger's death raises questions about the complexity of genetics
research, said Frist, who is a physician and chairman of the Senate Subcommittee
on Public Health. Regulators must reconsider what it means to give informed
consent, how to protect the privacy of patients who do not want their health
problems revealed, how to ensure their safety, and how to address the desire of
industry to protect proprietary information.

    Despite the hoopla generated when the field of gene therapy emerged a decade
ago, rapid scientific advances have been accompanied by "great hype and
unrealistic expectations," said Inder M. Verma, director of the genetics lab at
the Salk Institute, who also testified yesterday.

    Approximately 6,000 people have participated in gene therapy trials, but no
one has been cured of any disease.

    "The excitement was genuine," Verma said. But since then, " there were
unexpected hurdles and the immunological consequences were unforeseen. Did we
start too soon? Should we have done more animal model studies? Was there
adequate preclinical data?"

    Tragic incidents like the death of Jesse Gelsinger, he concluded, "give a
reason to pause and take stock of the progress and pitfalls of the technology.
We must learn from our mistakes."


LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2000


                             918 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                   February 03, 2000, Thursday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLES, Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1020 words

HEADLINE: CHECK IT OUT

BYLINE: PAULA VOELL; News Staff Reporter

BODY:


   It's the little things in life that bug us.

   Here's a chance to get a good look at some of them and learn how our lives
can be affected when they get up close and personal.

   Learn more at the just opened "Microbes: Invisible Invaders ... Amazing
Allies" at the Buffalo Museum of Science, which introduces visitors to the
unseen world of microbes, including viruses, bacteria, fungi and protozoa.

   "We want to let kids know that some are good, some are bad and some are just
hanging out," said Dr. Randall Kaye, director of pediatric health for the Pfizer
pharmaceutical company. He was in Buffalo last week when the exhibit opened,
after stints at the Smithsonian Institution and the Peggy Notebaert Nature
Museum in Chicago. "It's fun and interactive and kids get some good
information."

   First, they have to get past a somewhat scary animated character that awaits
them in a darkened area mimicking the bone-filled catacombs of Paris. The caped
figure identifies himself as a doctor, but his appearance is more of a looming
mythical creature with a long beak. His beaked mask contains herbs, flowers and
spices, which in the 1400s were believed to protect against disease. A tombstone
stands nearby as a reminder that nothing helped once the bubonic plague appeared
-- 56 million Europeans died between 1340 and 1420.

   Closer to home and within the memory of some is a display depicting the
effects of polio.  One photo, blown up large enough to use as a backdrop, shows
a large room with nurses in white uniforms attending patients in iron lungs,
which helped them breathe. A small yellow iron lung and a sign "Keep Off This
Street" serve as further chilling reminders of how many children were affected
and a warning of how infectious this disease is.

   In the "Microbial Universe," eight microbes are turned into hologram form,
and the little beasts that give us runny noses and life-threatening illnesses
can be seen in all their colorful and dangerous beauty. The room itself is a
wonder with black velvet walls and microbes, blown up to amazing proportions,
glowing in fluorescent pink, purple and green. It's also a spot where visitors
can view images from an electron microscope and a light microscope to see the
causes of HIV, rabies and ebola.

   Not surprisingly, the most interest is in the games section, where children
engage in mortal combat with fast-moving microbes.  There is a video game where
they blast the invaders out of the air. And there is a virtual reality game with
lively competition as players try to out score each other by whacking attacking
microbes with a ping pong paddle.

   Then they can explore the kitchen with its blue refrigerator and pink stove,
a setting that looks as if it comes out of the pages of a comic book. It's here
where they learn about helpful microbes.

   "Next time you take a bite of pizza, you can thank the microbes," one sign
says, informing visitors that microbes raise the dough for the crust and
contribute to making the cheese.

   At the last stop, there's a chance to put on some 3-D glasses and watch a
movie that describes advances in gene therapy and the creation of synthetic
drugs.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2000


                             919 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

             February 03, 2000, THURSDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 273 words

HEADLINE: Teen's father: Gene therapy's risks hidden

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The father of a teenager who died after being injected with experimental
genes said he and his son were not informed of the true risks and the serious
side effects that could be caused by the treatment.

   Paul L. Gelsinger of Tucson, Ariz., said that before he let his son
participate in a gene therapy experiment, he was not told that a monkey had died
in a similar experiment and that another patient had had serious side effects.

   Gelsinger's son, 18-year-old Jesse, died at the University of Pennsylvania in
September after being injected with genes designed to correct an inherited liver
disease. Jesse was recruited for the experiment because he was born with
ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency syndrome, a liver disorder.

   "It looked safe. It was presented as being safe," Gelsinger testified
Wednesday at a Senate subcommittee hearing. "Since it would benefit everybody, I
encouraged my son to do this.

   "I was misled," he added. "That's what hurt the most. This was not as it was
presented."

   He said one of the study's principal researchers had a financial interest in
the new treatment.

   Jesse Gelsinger went into a coma and died within hours, becoming the first
patient whose death was directly linked to experimental gene therapy. Two weeks
ago, the FDA shut down Penn's program.

   The testimony came in a hearing by the Senate Health, Education, Labor and
Pensions Committee's panel on Public Health, which is investigating patient
safety in gene therapy clinical trials.

   The hearing follows reports that some researchers failed to tell the National
Institutes of Health about some patients' serious side effects.

GRAPHIC: CHICAGO SUN-TIMES WIRES

LOAD-DATE: February 03, 2000


                             920 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                February 3, 2000, Thursday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14 SPOTLIGHT ON HEALTH

LENGTH: 391 words

HEADLINE: GENE VICTIM DAD: I WAS IN DARK

BODY:
WASHINGTON - The father of an Arizona teenager who died after being injected
with experimental genes said he had not been told of the true risks and serious
side effects of the treatment.

   Paul Gelsinger of Tucson said that before he let his son Jesse participate in
a gene therapy experiment, he was not told that a monkey had died in a similar
experiment and another patient had had major side effects.

   Jesse Gelsinger died at the University of Pennsylvania in September after
being injected with genes designed to correct an inherited liver disease. Jesse,
18, was recruited because he had been born with ornithine transcarbamylase
deficiency syndrome, a liver disorder.

   "It looked safe. It was presented as being safe," Gelsinger testified at a
Senate subcommittee hearing. "I encouraged my son to do this . . . I was misled.
That's what hurt the most."

   Jesse went into a coma and died within hours, the first fatality directly
linked to experimental gene therapy.

   Yesterday's hearing followed reports that researchers are failing to report
some serious health conditions experienced by patients taking part in gene
therapy trials. Congress is deciding whether to increase supervision of the
trials.MORE HEALTH NEWSAIDS drug dose may drop

   SAN FRANCISCO - Powerful new AIDS drugs in development should help relieve
one of the biggest problems of treatment - the pill burden.

   Over the past four years, new treatment combinations have revolutionized AIDS
care, changing HIV infection from a death sentence to a disease that is
treatable. However, patients must adhere to a tedious and exacting schedule of
downing pills, often more than 20 a day, or risk developing killer mutant
versions of the virus.

   Drugmakers are working on new drugs that require much smaller doses as well
as better versions of the old standbys that can be taken less frequently.
Experts say it may be possible to reduce the pill burden to just four tablets
taken once a day.

   "We are not so far from that, maybe in the next couple of years," said Dr.
Eugene Sun, head of anti-viral drug research at Abbott Laboratories.


   Superstarch fights disease

   A special starch that resists being broken down in the digestive tract may
help treat cholera and other diseases marked by severe diarrhea, researchers
reported in today's New England Journal of Medicine.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2000


                             921 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                      February 3, 2000 Thursday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 723 words

HEADLINE: OVERSIGHT OF GENE THERAPY QUESTIONED

BYLINE: JOHN A. MACDONALD; Courant Staff Writer

DATELINE: WASHINGTON --

BODY:

   Paul Gelsinger feels betrayed. He advised his son Jesse to participate in a
genetic therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania that took the
18-year-old's life.

   "He was excited to help," Gelsinger said, recounting that researchers told
him the experiment would not help his son's liver disease but could benefit many
others. Jesse was never warned he could die, Gelsinger said.

   "As serious as my concerns are with the Penn trial, I have equally great
concerns regarding the federal oversight of gene therapy as an American
citizen," Gelsinger, of Tucson, Ariz., told a Senate Health and Education
subcommittee Wednesday.

   The subcommittee, beginning an investigation into federal oversight of gene
therapy experiments, has found lapses. "Clearly, our oversight system is
failing," said Sen. Bill Frist, R-Tenn., the subcommittee chairman.

   Gelsinger's testimony raised issues that lawmakers are only beginning to
examine: Why have researchers failed to comply with federal reporting
requirements involving serious incidents? Are patients and their families fully
informed of the risks of participating? Do researchers have an incentive to hide
information from patients, their families and the government?

   Gene therapy is a field of experimental medicine that attempts to cure
inherited diseases by changing the patient's genetic makeup. Jesse Gelsinger's
death in September is believed to be the only one tied directly to a gene
therapy experiment.

   "The number and lack of proper reporting of adverse events associated with
gene therapy, the secretive nature of gene therapy research and the motivations
behind the race for results are what trouble me most," Paul Gelsinger said.

   Some of those conducting tests do not provide a full picture of the risks to
participants, he said. "I learned after Jesse's death that Penn had removed from
the information they gave Jesse and me any reference to deaths of monkeys, which
had previously appeared in their documents."

   Had he known that animals had died, Gelsinger said, his advice to his son
would have been different. Some researchers, he believes, are withholding
critical information in hopes experiments will lead to profitable new treatments
for diseases.

   "When lives are at stake, and my son's life was at stake, money and fame
should take a back seat," Gelsinger said, his voice nearly cracking.

   Officials at the National Institutes of Health, which pays for many of the
experiments, and the Food and Drug Administration, which approves them, told the
subcommittee that in the wake of Jesse Gelsinger's death they have received
belated reports of 691 serious side effects resulting from genetic experiments.

   The reports came in after federal officials reminded researchers they are
required to report fatal or serious events immediately. All but 39 of the new
reports had never been seen before.

   Amy Patterson, director of the NIH Office of Biotechnology Activities, said
her agency "recently became aware there was widespread noncompliance" with
federal reporting requirements.

   The University of Pennsylvania project has been suspended, and Patterson and
Jay P. Siegel, director of the FDA Office of Therapeutics Research and Review,
said they are looking for improvements in their procedures.

   Among other things, Siegel said, the FDA intends to tighten compliance with
regulations, improve regulatory research and provide additional guidance to
researchers. But he said the agency does not have the money or staff to track
the step-by-step procedures of researchers working on more than 200 federally
approved genetic therapy projects.

    Eric Kast, who has participated as a volunteer test subject in several
genetic therapy projects, told the subcommittee he would walk away if he learned
that animals involved had died.

   The biotechnology industry was "surprised and deeply disturbed to read recent
reports of regulatory violations" in the Pennsylvania project, said H. Stewart
Parker, speaking for BIO, the Biotechnology Industry Organization. He said
experiments must be regulated in a "rigorous but efficient manner," adding that
government agencies already provide strong oversight.

   Asked by Frist if he thinks the government is doing its job to protect people
in genetic experiments, Gelsinger said: "It's doing it now; it didn't then."


LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2000


                             922 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   February 03, 2000, Thursday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: YO; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 155 words

HEADLINE: DIJA BANERJEE;
St. John's School

SOURCE: D. Fahleson / Chronicle

BODY:

   Age: 14.

   Awards: Won several writing awards, MENSA member.

   Fave school subject: English.

   Fave place in Houston: Barnes and Noble bookstore.

   Fave actor: Mike Myers.

   Fave author: Amy Tan.

   How do you spend your Friday nights?: I usually just try and relax after a
long school week.

   Nicest thing someone ever did for you: My parents set up a surprise birthday
party for me on my 13th birthday.

   Happiest moment: When I won my first writing competition in the fourth grade.

   Saddest moment: When my gerbil became catatonic.

   Hippest phrase among your friends: Cool.

   Plans for after high school: I would like to become a doctor dealing with
gene therapy. In my spare time, I will write.

   One thing you would change about yourself: Nothing. I am content with the way
I am.

   What are you most excited about in the future? Technological advances.

   Fave pair of shoes: Black, leather and extremely comfortable to walk in.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Dija Banerjee (color); D. Fahleson / Chronicle

TYPE: Biography

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2000


                             923 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                           February 3, 2000 Thursday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. G2

LENGTH: 2597 words

HEADLINE: Wellness calendar

BODY:

   Spotlight event

   Women and heart disease

   Physicians from Indiana Heart Associates' physicians will discuss risk
factors and symptoms of heart disease and how menopause affects heart health in
three classes:

   7 p.m. Tuesday in Community Hospital East, multi-service rooms I-III, 1500 N.
Ritter Ave.

   7 p.m. next Thursday at Community Hospital South, 1402 E. County Line Road.

   7 p.m. Feb. 15 at Community Hospital North, third-floor multi-service rooms
I-III, 7250 E. Clearvista Parkway.

   Free cholesterol screenings will be offered to early arrivals. Class fee: $5.
Information: (317) 841-2342.

   Health programs

   Plastic surgery: Dr. Jean Loftus of Cincinnati will sign copies of her book,
The Smart Women's Guide to Plastic Surgery, at 7 p.m. today, at Barnes & Noble
Bookseller, 14709 U.S. 31 N., Carmel.

   CPR classes: The Family Health and Wellness Series at Ruth Lilly Health
Education Center, 2055 N. Senate Ave., will train adults in cardiopulmonary
resuscitation from 6 p.m. to 10 p.m. today (adult CPR), next Thursday (infant
and child CPR), Feb. 17 (automatic external defibrillator), Feb. 24 (pet CPR),
Feb. 26 from 8 a.m. to noon (adult CPR) and from 1 p.m. to 5 p.m. (infant and
child CPR). Younger participants will learn the importance of a healthy
lifestyle by discussing nutrition, exercise, rest, dental care and safety. Fee:
$30 for adults, which includes American Red Cross certification, and $3 for
children. Call (317) 924-0904.

   CPR for professionals: Hancock Memorial Hospital and Health Services, 801 N.
State St., Greenfield, will offer cardiopulmonary resuscitation courses for
medical professionals and other adults this week. Classes for rescuers,
including emergency medical technicians, paramedics, nurses, lifeguards and
dental hygienists, will be from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturday. Fee: $60. Classes on
how to perform adult, infant and child CPR and first aid will be from 6 p.m. to
10:30 p.m. Monday and next Thursday. Fee: $45. Call (317) 468-4506

   Asthma management: Susan Neves of Buteyko Asthma Education will discuss
controlling asthma and allergies with the Buteyko method at 7 p.m. Monday in
Wild Oats Market, 1300 E. 86th St. Call (317) 824-0328 or (877) 278-4623.

   Diabetes management: Alliance Home Health Care and Apothecary Solutions will
present a free program on managing diabetes from 10 a.m. to 11 a.m. Monday, in
Summit Place West, 55 N. Mission Drive, and from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. Feb. 11,
in Green Tree, 8800 Spoon Drive. Call (317) 581-1100.

   Taking care of the whole you: Alliance Home Health Care and Apothecary
Solutions will present a free program, "Taking Care of The Whole You," from 2:30
p.m. to 3:30 p.m. Tuesday, in Forum at the Crossing, 8505 Woodfield Crossing
Blvd. Call (317) 581-1100.

   Introduction to Feldenkrais: Innovation Therapy Services will offer a class
on Feldenkrais, a method of exercise that increases muscle awareness and allows
for easier movements, from 7 p.m. to 8 p.m. next Thursday, in the Broad Ripple
Library, 1550 Broad Ripple Ave. Call (317) 257-8340.

   Hip and knee replacement: Dr. Richard W. Eaton will offer a lecture on hip-
and knee-replacement surgery at 6 p.m. next Thursday, at Hancock Memorial
Hospital and Health Services, 801 N. State St., Greenfield. Call (317) 355-2663,
ext. 306.

   Women's forum: Dr. Nancy Branyas will present "Preventing Your Heart Attack
in the New Millenium," the second in a series of lectures, from 9:30 a.m. to 11
a.m. Feb. 12, in Women's Hospital, 8111 Township Line Road. Fee: $7 in advance;
$10 at the door. Call (317) 554-6775.

   Tell-A-Friend: The American Cancer Society will sponsor "Tell-A-Friend," a
breast cancer education and early detection program Feb. 14. Hoosiers are asked
to call five female friends 40 or older and urge them to get a mammogram. Call
(317) 347-6670, ext. 3010.

   Mini Medical School: Indiana University School of Medicine will present Mini
Medical School, which explains health and science issues in laymen's terms, from
7 p.m. to 9 p.m. Tuesdays from Feb. 15 to March 21. Lectures will be in
University Place Conference Center at IUPUI. Topics will include gene therapy,
plastic surgery, sleep, ophthalmology, anesthesia, and medical "informatics."
Fee: $45 for series. Registration: (317) 274-4501.

   Alzheimer's disease: The Alzheimer's Association will give a program, "What
You Need to Know," at 7 p.m. Feb. 15, at St. Vincent Hospital, Professional
Building, Suite 105, 8402 Harcourt Road. The program focuses on what to do after
diagnosis, how to plan for the future and where to go for information and
services. The First Timers Education Program, focusing on legal and financial
issues, is at 6:30 p.m. Feb. 24, at Meridian Street United Methodist Church,
5500 N. Meridian St. Reservations: (317) 575-9620.

   Labor coaches: Wishard Health Services is seeking volunteers 18 years or
older to serve as doulas, or labor coaches, for women giving birth at Wishard
Hospital. A training program meets from 6 p.m. to 9 p.m. Feb. 16 and 23, and
from 9 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. Feb. 19. Call (317) 630-7552.

   Detecting vision loss: St. Francis Hospital will offer "Here's Looking at
You, Babe!" a workshop designed to train parents of infants, toddlers and
preschoolers to recognize early symptoms of visual weakness, at 7 p.m. Feb. 15,
at St. Francis South Campus, Conference Room 1, 8111 S. Emerson Ave. The
workshop will teach ways to stimulate your child's visual strengths and future
learning skills. Call (317) 865-5865.

   Family health symposium: Ameritech and Ruth Lilly Health Education Center
will present a family health symposium, "Surviving the Maddening Yet Magical
Middle-School Years," March 4, in the Westin Hotel. The half-day session is
designed to inspire and empower middle-school students and adults by providing
tools and ideas for making healthy lifestyle choices. Lunch is included. Keynote
speakers will be Sean Covey, author of SevenHabits of Highly Effective Teens,
and Kimberly Kiberger, co-author of Chicken Soup for the Teenage Soul. Tickets:
$30 for adults, $20 for students 18 and younger. Pre-registration is required;
call (317) 924-0904.

   Osteoporosis series: Free classes for women who have osteoporosis or concerns
about the bone disease will be from 12:30 p.m. to 1:30 p.m. March 22, at St.
Francis South Campus, Conference Room 1, 8111 S. Emerson Ave. Call Celebrating
Women at (317) 865-5865.

   Women's conference: The Indiana Branch of the American Medical Women's
Association will present the third annual "Woman to Woman" conference on women's
health from 7 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. March 25, in the Indianapolis Marriott North
Hotel. Topics include hormone therapy, the breast cancer gene, and spirituality
and medicine. Cost: $30 per person, which includes lunch. Call (317) 580-1556.

   Health fairs and screenings

   Blood sugar and blood pressure: Hancock Memorial Hospital and Health Services
will offer cholesterol, blood sugar and blood pressure screening from 8 a.m. to
11 a.m. Friday. The traditional screening of total cholesterol measurement is
$8. A new screening method, which provides LDL and HDL cholesterol breakdowns,
costs $25 and requires a 12-hour fast. Call (317) 469-4506.

   Blood pressure: Bloomington Hospital offers free blood pressure screenings
for members of the Mall Pacers walking group, from 7:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m.
Wednesdays, at College Mall, 2896 E. Third St., Bloomington, in front of
Lazarus. Call (812) 353-9300.

   Mind-body-spirit

   Your committed relationship: Dr. Bernard Baca and the Rev. Shermie Schafer,
will present a workshop, "Your Committed Relationship: A Path to Healing and
Wholeness," from 6 p.m. to 8 p.m. Monday, in the Wellness Community, 8465
Keystone Crossing, Suite 145. Call (317) 257-1505.

   Life Balance: The National Institute for Fitness and Sport, 250 University
Blvd., will offer Life Balance, a four-week course exploring alternative
therapies for lowering stress and maintaining a healthy lifestyle, from 6 p.m.
to 7:30 p.m. next Thursday through Feb. 24. Topics will include vegetarian
eating, environmental concerns, power yoga and journal writing. Fee: $65 for
NIFS members, $85 for nonmembers. Call (317) 274-3432, ext. 239.

   Fitness and exercise classes

   Ice skating lessons: Free ice skating lessons will be offered from 1:30 p.m.
to 2:30 p.m. Saturdays at Indiana/World Skating Academy, Pan American Plaza, 201
S. Capitol Ave. The 20-minute lessons are free, but participants must pay
admission to the public skating session, from 1:15 p.m. to 3:15 p.m. Fee: $3.75
for those 12 and older; $3 for children 5-11, $2.50 for children 4 and younger.
Skate rental: $2.25. Call (317) 237-5555 or www.iwsa.org.

   Older adult exercise: Easter Seals Crossroads, 4740 Kingsway Drive, is
offering an older adult exercise program from 10:30 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. Tuesdays
and Thursdays. Fee: $5 per session. Call (317) 466-2008.

   Ryu-Te: Classes in Rye-Te, an ancient "life protection" art from Okinawa and
China, will be offered from 7 p.m. to 9 p.m. Mondays and Wednesdays, in the
Quail Creek Fitness Facility, 4529 E. Edgewood Drive. Cost: $45 a month (eight
classes) for those 14 and older; $55 for families. Call (317) 726-1999.

   Line dancing: Country/western line-dancing classes meet from 7 p.m. to 10:30
p.m. the first, third and fourth Tuesday monthly and the second week of the
month on Monday, at Veterans of Foreign Wars Fort Harrison Post, 6525 N. Lee
Road. Fee: $3. Beginners welcome. Call (317) 823-6180.

   Kripalu Yoga: A beginning Kripalu yoga class meets from 6:30 p.m. to 7:45
p.m. Thursdays, in Christ United Methodist Church, 8540 U.S. 31. Enter through
side door. Fee: $10 per session, $51 for six weeks. Call (317) 889-0565.

   T'ai chi: Bloomington Hospital offers a free t'ai chi class for members of
Mall Pacers walking group from 8:30 a.m. to 9 a.m. Thursdays, in front of
Lazarus in College Mall, 2896 E. Third St., Bloomington. Call (812) 353-9300.

   Kung Fu: Classes in Seven Star Praying Mantis Kung Fu meet from 6 p.m. to
7:30 p.m. Mondays and Wednesdays, in Zion Educational Building, 8921 E. Troy
Ave. Fee: $25 per month for those 11 and older; $35 per month for families. Call
(317) 780-8711 or (317) 875-0012.

   Senior exercise: Indianapolis Senior Citizens' Center, 708 E. Michigan St.,
offers a free STRETCH class from 10 a.m. to 11 a.m. every Thursday. Open to the
public. Call (317) 263-6272.

   Nutrition, weight management

   Eating disorders: Free, anonymous screenings for anorexia, bulimia and
binge-eating disorders will be available at 1,200 sites nationwide Feb. 14 to
Feb. 18. Screenings include a questionnaire, presentations and consultations
with health experts. Call (800) 284-5100.

   Weigh-Rite: Livrite Fitness Centre, 6220 N. Butler St., will start a 12-week
weight-loss program at 6:30 p.m. Tuesday. The program will consist of medical
analysis, dietitian consultation and fitness assessments. Fee: $295.
Registration: (317) 257-1004.

   Physician-monitored weight management: Free seminars on medical advances in
the treatment of obesity and the Piatek Program, created by Dr. Jay Piatek, are
available by appointment at the Piatek Institute for Weight Management, 745
Beachway Drive. Call (317) 243-3000.

   Seasoned Slimmers: A support group for people who wish to lose weight or
maintain body weight meets from 10 a.m. to 11 a.m. Mondays, at the Senior
Citizens' Center, 708 E. Michigan St. Weigh-in is at 9:30 a.m. Fee: 50 cents
weekly. Call (317) 263-6272

   Bicycling

   Indy Bicycle Motocross: Practice is from 6 p.m. to 9 p.m. Tuesdays and
Thursdays, at Midwest Indoor BMX, Michigan Avenue and Sherman Drive. Fee: $3.
Racing starts after sign-up and practice from 10 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. Sundays.
Fee: $10, points only; $12, if competing for a trophy. Indy BMX Hotline: (317)
327-7225.

   Running, walking and hiking

   Mini-Marathon training: Tuesday is the last day to register for the Indy
Runners and Walkers 2000 Mini-Marathon Training Program. Call (317) 873-1436.

   Groundhog 7: A 7-mile run sponsored by the Indy Runners club begins at 1 p.m.
Sunday, at Clay Junior High School, 5150 E. 126th St. Volunteers are needed for
the event. Call (317) 388-9211.

   Jordan YMCA Mini-Marathon Training Program: Saturday is the last day for
runners and walkers to register for the Y's training program for the
Indianapolis Life 500 Festival Mini-Marathon. Fee: $30 for members; $50 limited
members. Call Jordan YMCA, 8400 Westfield Blvd., at (317) 253-3206.

   Senior walking group: Walkers will meet at the Indianapolis Senior Citizen's
Center, 708 E. Michigan St., at 10 a.m. Feb. 15 and Feb. 29, for walks to
different Downtown locations. Free . Call (317) 263-6272.

   Fun Runs: Meet at the Monon Trail, at Kessler Boulevard East Drive, at 6 p.m.
Thursdays for 3- to 7-mile runs. Call (317) 253-0848.

   Support groups

   Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: A group for people with amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (Lou Gehrig's disease) will meet at 6 p.m. today, at Indian Creek
Church, 6430 S. Franklin Road. Shawn Pogue will discuss fighting the winter
blues. Call ALS Assocation of Indiana at (888) 508-3232.

   Alzheimer's disease: The Alzheimer's Association will offer support group
meetings for caregivers at 3 p.m. Tuesday, in St. Christopher Episcopal Church,
1440 W. Main St., and at 1 p.m. Wednesday at the Alzheimer's Association, 9135
N. Meridian St., Suite B-4. Call (317) 575-9620.

   Healthy heart: Community Hospitals North and East groups will have a combined
meeting at 1 p.m. Tuesday, at Community Hospital North Professional Building,
7250 Clearvista Pkwy. Dick Crum, radio show host and horticulturist, will speak.
Patients, families and friends are welcome. Call (317) 849-0723.

   Mental illness: The National Alliance for the Mentally Ill, an organization
for those with mental illness and their families, will meet at 7:30 p.m.
Tuesday, in Second Presbyterian Church, 7700 N. Meridian St. Susan Ball will
discuss the psychologist's role in treating anxiety disorders. Call (317)
283-2645.

   Red Mask: The Red Mask Foundation's support group for those with severe
facial flushing will meet at 7 p.m. Tuesday. Call (317) 380-6275 or (877)
741-6275.

   Cancer: Partners in Wellness' group for cancer patients and their caregivers
meets at 1 p.m. Wednesday, at Wishard Hospital, Myers Building, 1001 W. 10th St.
Free transportation available; call Little Red Door Cancer Agency at (317)
925-5595.

   Macular degeneration: The impact of vision loss on friends and family of
visually-impaired people will be the focus of the Macular Degeneration Group's
meeting at 10 a.m. Feb. 12, in St. Vincent Hospital, Cooling Auditorium, 2001 W.
86th St. Reservations: (317) 843-8340.

   Neuropathy: The Dorothy Helmer Neuropathy Support Group of Indianapolis will
meet from 1 p.m. to 2 p.m. Feb. 17, in Marquette Manor, 8140 Township Line Road.
Call (317) 875-9700, ext. 122.

   Kids connect: The Wellness Community, 8465 Keystone Crossing, Suite 145,
sponsors a support group for children who have a parent or family member with
cancer. The group will meet from 4:30 p.m. to 6 p.m. the fourth Wednesday of the
month. Reservations: (317) 257-1505.

   Fibromyalgia and chronic pain: Bevins Chiropractic's support group for those
with fibromyalgia and chronic pain meets at 12:30 p.m. Feb. 22, and the fourth
Tuesday of each month, in Hildebrandt's Fitness Center, 1808 E. Conner St.,
Noblesville. Call (317) 770-0735.

   Domestic violence: Breaking Free Inc. offers free support groups in eight
Indianapolis neighborhoods for survivors of domestic abuse. Call (317) 923-4260.

   Neuromuscular diseases: The Muscular Dystrophy Association offers free
support groups for individuals and their families affected by any of 40
neuromuscular diseases. Call (317) 824-4800.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2009


                             924 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                    February 3, 2000, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 19; National Desk

LENGTH: 401 words

HEADLINE: FATHER MISLED ON DANGERS OF SON'S THERAPY, HE SAYS;
 HEALTH: ARIZONA MAN TELLS SENATORS HE WAS 'FAIRLY NAIVE' TO TRUST DOCTORS ON
GENE EXPERIMENT. TEEN DIED DURING TREATMENT HERALDED BY MANY AS PROMISING.

BYLINE: From The Washington Post

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   His voice trembling with emotion, the father of the teenager who died during
a gene therapy experiment in September told a rapt Senate subcommittee Wednesday
that the University of Pennsylvania scientists who conducted the research
oversold its potential benefits and underplayed its risks.

   A disillusioned Paul Gelsinger of Tucson told senators he had come to the
painful conclusion that he was "fairly naive" to have trusted the study's
principal investigators, one of whom had a financial interest in the new
treatment.

   "It looked safe. It was presented as safe. I encouraged my son to do this,"
Gelsinger told the Health, Education, Labor and Pensions subcommittee on public
health at a packed hearing on federal oversight of gene therapy. "But I wasn't
given all the information. And some of the information I was given was not
true."

   Gelsinger's comments, made with two of his lawyers sitting nearby, marked a
significant shift in tone from previous statements of support for the doctors
who led the experiment--a change of heart he attributed to recent revelations
about serious safety lapses by the research team.

   The hearing, called by Sen. Bill Frist (R-Tenn.), was the first to address
the quickly growing field of gene therapy since 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger's
death, and it came just two weeks after the Food and Drug Administration shut
down Penn's gene therapy program for lapses the agency uncovered there. The
hearing also addressed recent revelations that many gene therapy researchers
have not been properly reporting deaths and illnesses of study volunteers to the
National Institutes of Health.

   Regulation of gene therapy "is not working, it is failing," said Frist, a
heart surgeon, at the close of a four-hour hearing that included lengthy
questioning of government overseers. "Now we have to decide what we're going to
do."

   Representatives of the FDA and the NIH told the subcommittee they are
searching for ways to improve public accountability in the 10-year-old but still
unproven field, which shows great promise for treating diseases by changing
people's genetic makeup. They told the committee they have no explanation for
the agencies' recent discovery that just 39 of the 691 deaths and illnesses
suffered by volunteers in one type of gene therapy experiment over the last
seven years were reported to the NIH promptly as required by federal rules.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2000


                             925 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                    February 3, 2000, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 25; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 700 words

HEADLINE: OBITUARIES;
 DR. JAMES NEEL; STUDIED A-BOMB VICTIMS

BYLINE: MYRNA OLIVER, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Dr. James V. Neel, human genetics pioneer who headed studies of the survivors
of Nagasaki and Hiroshima for the Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission after World
War II and was one of the first scientists to realize the importance of genetics
in diagnosing and treating disease, is dead at 84.

   Neel, who founded the nation's first academic department of human genetics in
1956 at the University of Michigan and chaired it for 25 years, died Tuesday of
cancer at his home in Ann Arbor, Mich., university officials said.

   He studied the atomic bomb survivors and their offspring for more than 40
years for the Casualty Commission and its successor, the Hiroshima-based
Radiation Effects Research Foundation, concluding in 1988: "There isn't any good
news coming out of atomic war, but the genetic consequences may not be as great
as we thought at one time."

   His lifetime of research led him to believe that human genes are more
resilient to many problems than formerly perceived.

   Neel's studies of the Japanese led him to conclude, for example, that
consanguineous marriages--those between first cousins or even closer blood
relatives--were less likely than believed to produce children with genetic
illnesses ranging from diabetes to congenital blindness and deafness. In the
Japanese survivors, he found that 10.5% of children of the marriages of close
relatives died by age 10 compared with 9% of children from unrelated parents.

   "There are ill effects, but they've probably been exaggerated in the past,"
Neel told The Times in 1993. "You can make a very good argument that inbreeding
is not a bad thing. The problems are more sociological than biological. Perhaps
mutations are not as deleterious as we thought, or genetic material is more
forgiving."

   Neel was the first scientist to recognize the genetic basis for sickle cell
anemia, leading to its becoming the first described "molecular disease."

   And in 1962, Neel introduced the "thrifty gene" theory to genetics, stating
that the inherited genes that cause such diseases as diabetes, obesity and high
blood pressure stem from early mankind's need to forestall starvation by
conserving calories and salt.

   His work included not only the Japanese study but also genetic studies of the
remaining hunter-gatherer tribes in Brazil and Venezuela.

   "Jim Neel was a true visionary in xow genetics would one day be used not only
to determine the cause of disease, but also to treat it," said Dr. Allen S.
Lichter, dean of the University of Michigan Medical School in a statement.

   Neel offered his own observations about the human genetics field he helped
create and develop in his autobiography, "Physician to the Gene Pool: Genetic
Lessons and Other Stories" published in 1994.

   A New Scientist magazine reviewer echoed others in complaining that Neel told
very little about himself in the book, but praised him for providing "an
invaluable bird's-eye view of the development of human genetics over the last 50
years and insight into its current and future problems."

   In his book, Neel made major suggestions for the future: control population,
improve the environment, conserve resources, increase genetic counseling and
permit abortion, be wary of overemphasizing longevity at the expense of the
young; and let expensive gene therapy take a back seat to other priorities.

   A native of Hamilton, Ohio, Neel earned a bachelor's degree from the College
of Wooster in Wooster, Ohio, and a doctorate and a medical degree from the
University of Rochester in Rochester, N.Y. He joined the University of Michigan
faculty in 1946 and officially retired in 1985, although he continued his
research for many years.

   Among his many awards were the National Medal of Science, the Smithsonian
Institution Medal, the Allen Award from the American Society of Human Genetics
and election to the National Academy of Sciences.

   Neel is survived by his wife of 56 years, Priscilla, one daughter and two
sons, a sister and three grandchildren.

   Memorial contributions can be made to the James V. Neel Fund, University of
Michigan Medical School, Department of Human Genetics, Box 0618, 4708 Medical
Science II, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0618.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2000


                             926 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                    February 3, 2000 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 142 words

HEADLINE: Father says he, son didn't hear of gene risks

BYLINE:  From Journal Sentinel wire reports

BODY:

   Washington -- The father of a teenager who died after being injected with
experimental genes said Wednesday that he and his son were not informed of the
true risks and the serious side effects that could result.

   Paul L. Gelsinger of Tucson, Ariz., said that before he let his son
participate in a gene therapy experiment, he was not told that a monkey had died
in a similar experiment and that another patient had had serious side effects.

   Gelsinger's son, Jesse, 18, died in September at the University of
Pennsylvania after being injected with genes designed to correct an inherited
liver disease.

   "It was presented as being safe," Gelsinger told a Senate subcommittee.
"Since it would benefit everybody, I encouraged my son to do this."

   The researchers have said that the teen's reaction to the injection was
unexpected and unexplained.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2000


                             927 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 3, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 712 words

HEADLINE: Senators Press For Answers On Gene Trials

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 2

BODY:

   Under pressure from Congress to explain lapses in oversight of gene therapy,
federal health officials acknowledged today that they could not be certain
whether experiments had hastened, or possibly caused, the deaths of patients
other than the 18-year-old man who died at the University of Pennsylvania last
fall.

   "Most gene therapy trials are done in people with life-threatening or
terminal illnesses," Dr. Jay P. Siegel, a Food and Drug Administration official,
told a Senate subcommittee. "Patients in those trials die. It is usually not
possible to make a definitive determination" about what role gene therapy played
in the deaths.

    Dr. Siegel made his remarks at a packed three-and-a-half-hour hearing before
the subcommittee on public health that covered a variety of topics, including
whether scientists had been truthful in informing patients about the risks of
gene therapy why why the F.D.A. and the National Institutes of Health had not
shared information with each other. The two agencies monitor the research.

   At the conclusion, Senator Bill Frist, the Tennessee Republican who is
chairman of the subcommittee, declared that the system for protecting patients
was broken. "It's a multisystem failure," Mr. Frist said, adding, "we may have
just touched the tip of the iceberg on."

   Among those testifying today was Paul Gelsinger, the father of Jesse
Gelsinger, 18, whose death on Sept. 17 has been the only one, as far as
government officials know, directly attributable to gene therapy. In an
impassioned, at times tearful, speech, Mr. Gelsinger, who had defended the Penn
researchers as "ethical men," said he now feels he had been naive to have
trusted them.

   He called for an independent patients' advocate to be present at discussions
when risks are explained to patients considering taking part in medical
experiments, known as informed-consent sessions. He also attacked the influence
of money from biotech companies in the race to making gene therapy work.

   Mr. Gelsinger described the death of his son as "an avoidable tragedy from
which I will never recover."

   On Jan. 21, the F.D.A. shut down all gene therapy experiments at Penn, citing
"numerous deficiencies" in the way the clinical trial was run, including serious
lapses in informed consent. The Penn scientists did not testify today, but the
university's president, Dr. Judith Rodin, sent a letter saying Penn takes the
agency's charges "extremely seriously" and will respond as soon as possible.

   In gene therapy experiments, scientists are trying to use DNA to correct a
wide variety of inherited disorders, as well as cancer and heart diseases.
Despite the technology's promise, the the 10-year-old field has had relatively
few successes, and now Mr. Gelsinger's death may well slow the pace of research.

   Today, representatives of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation said that in
December they took the precautionary step of suspending two experiments in gene
therapy that used adenovirus, a deactivated cold virus that was used in the
study that killed Mr. Gelsinger. One of those experiments was being conducted at
Pennsylvania.

   One cystic fibrosis patient, Eric Kast, of Norman, Okla., told senators he
worried that if the science slowed down too much, a cure would come too late for
him. At 33, Mr. Kast said, he has lived one year longer than the average life
expectancy for someone with his disease. "My battle with C.F. is a race," he
said. "Don't let me lose that race when the finish line might be just around the
corner."

   Much of today's discussion focused on why scientists have routinely ignored
federal guidelines to report experiment side effects in patients to the National
Institutes of Health. In examining all 93 experiments that used adenovirus,
officials from the institutes recently discovered that of 691 side effects, only
39 had been reported immediately to the institutes, as federal rules require.

   Dr. LeRoy Walters, a bioethics professor at Georgetown University who
testified today, offered one explanation: In 1996, the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, the institutes' panel that oversees gene therapy, lost its authority
to approve all research protocols. The result, he said, is that scientists no
longer take the committee seriously.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2000


                             928 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                 FEBRUARY 3, 2000 Thursday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 364 words

HEADLINE: WASN'T TOLD GENE WORK WAS RISKY, DAD SAYS HIS SON, 18, DIED IN PENN
EXPERIMENT

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The father of a teen-ager who died after being injected with experimental
genes said he and his son were not informed of the true risks and the serious
side effects that could be caused by the treatment.

   Paul L. Gelsinger, of Tucson, Ariz., said he was not told that a monkey had
died in a similar experiment and that another patient had had serious side
effects.

   Gelsinger's son, Jesse, 18, died at the University of Pennsylvania in
September after being injected with genes designed to correct an inherited liver
disease. Jesse was recruited for the experiment because he was born with
ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency syndrome, a liver disorder.

   "It looked safe. It was presented as being safe," Gelsinger testified
yesterday at a Senate subcommittee hearing. "Since it would benefit everybody, I
encouraged my son to do this.

   "I was misled," he added. "That's what hurt the most. This was not as it was
presented."

   Jesse Gelsinger went into a coma and died within hours, becoming the first
patient whose death was directly linked to experimental gene therapy.

   The testimony came in a hearing by the Senate Health, Education, Labor and
Pensions Committee's panel on Public Health, which is investigating patient
safety in gene therapy clinical trials and whether there is a need for more
vigorous supervision of the trials.

   The hearing follows reports that some researchers have failed to tell the
National Institutes of Health about some serious health conditions experienced
by patients taking part in gene therapy trials.

   Sen. Bill Frist, R-Tenn., a physician and chairman of the subcommittee, said
the death of Gelsinger "has sobered us all" about the promising field of gene
therapy.

   "Jesse's death is not merely a pothole that we can simply ride over on the
road to find genetic cures," said Frist. "We must take a new path that ensures
that no family will be forced to endure what the Gelsinger family has
experienced."

   Dr. Amy Patterson, head of an NIH office that oversees gene therapy, said
that over a seven-year period there have 691 adverse events, but only 39 had
been reported to the NIH within the time required by the regulations.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             929 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      FEBRUARY 3, 2000 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1039 words

HEADLINE: FACULTY PREVAILS: NO SPLIT AT PENN A PLAN DISCUSSED BY THE TRUSTEES
WOULD HAVE SEPARATED THE HEALTH SYSTEM FROM THE UNIVERSITY.

BYLINE: Karl Stark, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In the face of unified opposition from its medical faculty, the University of
Pennsylvania board of trustees is backing away - at least for now - from an
ambitious plan to sever its hospitals from the university and put them into a
separate, nonprofit corporation.

   The trustees had planned to vote this month on a plan to spin off Penn's
hospitals and doctor-practice network as early as July, officials involved in
the discussions said. One option would allow the new corporation to continue to
be owned by Penn, but would shield the university from future health-care
losses. Those losses have hit record levels in recent years.

   But the trustees' plan faced determined resistance from School of Medicine
faculty members, who feared that the separation would hurt more than it helped.

   Before its current fiscal troubles, Penn's health system had been the cash
engine that often sent money to the medical school and fueled its dramatic rise
in prestige and research grants. Creating the new company would split the health
system from the medical school and severely limit cash infusions into research
and education.

   Last month, 44 department chairs and center directors at Penn sent a letter
to senior university administrators and key trustees, asking that the health
system and medical school remain integrated. Both are run by William N. Kelley.

   Then, on Tuesday evening, about 500 medical-faculty members met in the
medical school's Dunlop Auditorium and unanimously passed a nonbinding
resolution urging Penn to postpone the restructuring.

   Robert L. Barchi, university provost and former chairman of two medical
school departments, assured the faculty Tuesday that the trustees would not vote
on the plan at the coming board meeting.

   Barchi said yesterday that there was never a formal plan for trustees to vote
this month. However, he said the trustees would continue to discuss
restructuring.

   "It was a planning exercise for the trustees and the university," he said.
"It contained some extremely important and compelling ideas. The concepts will
continue to be a topic of discussion, both in the board and among the faculty.
Prudent leadership of any health system would demand that you continually
reassess those kinds of factors."

   Several faculty leaders said yesterday that the process was fair.

   "Once the university heard the voice of the faculty, they listened, which is
a sign of a responsive and thoughtful university administration," said John H.
Glick, director of the University of Pennsylvania Cancer Center.

   Several faculty members said the health system had brought the trustees'
intense scrutiny on itself. The beleaguered system, whose revenues are larger
than those of the rest of the university, has lost nearly $300 million on
operations in the last two years. The system's finances caused the university's
bond rating to be downgraded in March.

   Some professors feared that even though the health system retained an ample
endowment, it might follow the bankruptcy of the Allegheny health system and
drag down the university along with it.

   But last summer, the health system hired the Hunter Group, a health-care
consulting firm, to help turn itself around. Using the Hunter Group's
recommendations as a guide, Penn cut 2,800 jobs, or 20 percent of its workforce,
and now cautiously predicts an upturn.

   Last week, Kelley said the health system was ahead of budget and had net
income of $16.7 million in the first five months of fiscal 2000. That compared
with a $34 million loss in the same period last year.

   "The really nasty stuff is behind us," Kelley said, although he cautioned
that some fiscal peril remains. "We're going to be in a continual cost-cutting
mode pretty much forever."

   The health system still has work to do to reach break-even. Interim financial
results in general can be optimistic, because they have not been audited, said
Robert Fuller, managing director of Fairmount Capital Advisors in Philadelphia,
which advises nonprofit health systems.

   Penn is achieving savings by cutting capital spending from a budgeted $70
million to an estimated $45 million this year. In addition, Hunter executives
issued 400 recommendations to continue the turnaround.

   Many observers say there was some merit in the trustees' plan. The
initiative, which started last spring, was rooted in the health system's dismal
fiscal performance and was unrelated to the university's current problems with
gene-therapy research.

   The trustees' main goal was to protect the university from a wildly uncertain
health-care market.

   In April, a subcommittee led by Russell Palmer, a former Wharton School dean
and chairman of the health system's trustees, began reviewing options and
looking at how other integrated systems worked.

   One goal was to give Penn financial protection should the health market
continue to deteriorate, according to one insider.

   The trustees also wanted to create a more nimble health system, one that
could merge or do deals with other companies without enduring the university's
often-ponderous review process.

   Faculty members feared that splitting up the health system could cause
dissension and loss of focus. It also might create huge logistical problems.
Penn faculty who wanted to admit patients to the Hospital of the University of
Pennsylvania or Pennsylvania Hospital would essentially have to deal with a
different company with its own priorities.

   Many faculty members agree that the health system's financial oversight
should be strengthened. Last month, Penn retained Arthur Andersen, the
accounting and professional-services firm, to assess the medical school's
performance. A health system spokeswoman confirmed that the school is losing
money, but would not say how much.

   In an e-mail last month, Kelley wrote that the health system has already had
to reduce its financial support of the medical school and that changes there are
necessary.

   "We must develop a longer-term strategy to identify alternative sources of
external support and to make the management of our school more cost-effective,"
Kelley wrote. "Part of that initiative is to increase the amount of faculty
salary support from grants."

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             930 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      FEBRUARY 3, 2000 Thursday SF EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1151 words

HEADLINE: GENE-THERAPY GUIDELINES UNHEEDED, PANEL IS TOLD "ALMOST TOTAL
BREAKDOWN" OF FEDERAL RULES JEOPARDIZES PATIENTS, WITNESSES SAID AT A SENATE
HEARING.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Patient safety in gene-therapy experiments is being jeopardized because
scientists are not following the federal guidelines governing this frontier
medicine and the federal government is not adequately enforcing the guidelines,
a Senate subcommittee was told yesterday.

   While gene therapy holds great promise for treating and even curing
intractable diseases ranging from rare inherited disorders to cancer, it must be
better regulated if it is to gain the public trust and move forward, witnesses
said.

   "The oversight system is failing us," LeRoy Walters, director of the Kennedy
Institute of Ethics at Georgetown University, told a standing-room-only hearing
of the Senate subcommittee on public health.

   He said there had been "almost total breakdown" of rules that require
scientists to promptly notify the National Institutes of Health when patients
get sick or die while enrolled in a gene-therapy trial. Of 691 so-called adverse
events in certain gene-therapy experiments since 1993, only 39 were immediately
reported to NIH officials, Walters said.

   And while scientists are not reporting the problems in a timely way, the two
federal agencies responsible for monitoring gene-therapy experiments - the NIH
and the FDA - are not coordinating their efforts and lack the staff to
adequately monitor the experiments, said Walters, former chairman of the NIH's
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee.

   His views echoed those of others who testified at the three-hour hearing
called by Sen. Bill Frist (R., Tenn.), subcommittee chairman, after the Sept. 17
death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, in a gene-therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   Gelsinger, who died four days after getting a gene drug aimed at curing a
rare liver disorder, is believed to be the first person to die as a direct
result of gene therapy, a decade-old field that had been widely regarded as
safe.

   Since 1990, about 4,000 Americans have taken part in some 400 gene-therapy
trials, most aimed at treating patients with terminal cancer. The experiments
have yet to yield any successful treatments or cures, but scientists believe
that the field, after years of frustrating research, is poised to take off. The
Penn death, however, has raised a new set of concerns about safety.

   Last month, federal regulators investigating the death identified 18
violations of federal guidelines or agreements by the Penn scientists and
suspended seven other gene-therapy trials at the university because it said
Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy lacked adequate safety controls.

   Penn is expected to respond to the federal criticism next week.

   At the hearing, Gelsinger's father, Paul, a handyman from Tucson, Ariz.,
alleged that the Penn scientists had "misled" him and his son by indicating that
the experimental therapy had proven effective in one patient and that the only
side effects from the treatment would be "flulike symptoms for a week."

   "Looking back, I can see that I was fairly na ve to have been as trusting as
I was," Paul Gelsinger said.

   His testimony, delivered as he fought back tears, marked a dramatic reversal
of his earlier support for the Penn team, whom he had described as heroes as
recently as two months ago. He said his change of mind was based on disclosures
during a scientific meeting in December, including the admission by Penn
scientists that the experimental gene therapy did not show statistically
significant results for any of the 18 patients.

   Although the trial was designed to test the safety of the gene-therapy drug
in treating a liver disease known as ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC)
deficiency, the scientific team had hoped to see some evidence that the gene
drug was getting into liver cells and prompting them to produce an enzyme that
the body needs to prevent the buildup of toxic levels of ammonia.

   Gelsinger also took aim at the FDA for conducting its business in secret and
being unduly influenced by "business interests," the NIH for failing to do a
better job of dogging adverse events in gene-therapy trials, and scientists in
the field as a whole for putting money and fame ahead of patient safety.

   "The concern should not be on getting to the finish line first, but on making
sure no unnecessary risks are taken, no lives filled with potential and promise
are lost forever, no more fathers lose their sons," he said.

   Federal officials yesterday acknowledged their own inability to adequately
monitor gene-therapy trials and laid out plans to improve their performance.

   By law, the FDA is required to keep information public. "We believe that
within the law there is more we can disclose," said Jay P. Siegel, director of
the FDA office that oversees gene therapy.

   Asked by Frist why the FDA did not spot protocol violations in Penn's OTC
experiment long before Jesse Gelsinger died, Siegel said staffing shortages
force the agency to rely on written reports from scientists - rather than
on-site inspections - to monitor clinical trials. In the wake of Gelsinger's
death, he said, the agency plans to shift more money into on-site inspections.

   The NIH also said it expects to begin conducting on-site reviews of
gene-therapy experiments.

   Many at the hearing underscored the importance of improved patient-consent
policies for gene-therapy trials.

   "What's on paper is important, but how it's presented is also important,"
said Frist, a heart-lung transplant surgeon serving his first term in the
Senate. "Some [gene-therapy scientists] see the Nobel Prize. Some have financial
interests."

   Walters said patients were rarely told how young the field of gene therapy is
and how unlikely it is that they will benefit from the trials in which they are
enrolled.

   Paul Gelsinger said he and his son Jesse gave consent for the OTC trial, "but
not informed consent." After the meeting, he acknowledged that the written
consent form in the OTC trial had mentioned the possibility of patients coming
down with hepatitis, liver disease serious enough to require a transplant, or an
inflammatory response that could be "life-threatening."

   He said that Steve Raper, the Penn surgeon who explained the risks to him and
his son, "downplayed" the possible setbacks. "I felt like it was safe," he said.

   Ken Wildes, Penn spokesman, declined to respond to the allegations. Penn's
legal team has refused to let its scientist speak for themselves in recent
weeks.

   Alan Milstein, a Pennsauken attorney now representing Gelsinger, declined to
say whether Gelsinger would file suit.

   In written testimony submitted to the subcommittee, Penn President Judith
Rodin expressed regret at Gelsinger's death.

   She also said that William H. Danforth, chancellor emeritus and vice chairman
of the trustees at Washington University in St. Louis, would chair an outside
committee that Penn is assembling to review the Institute for Human Gene Therapy
.

CORRECTION-DATE: FEBRUARY 4, 2000

CORRECTION:
CLEARING THE RECORD, PUBLISHED FEBRUARY 4, 2000, FOLLOWS:
 Because of an editing error, an article about gene therapy in yesterday's
Inquirer incorrectly described FDA rules. The Food and Drug Administration is
required by law to keep much of its information about clinical trials
confidential.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             931 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   February 3, 2000, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: WORLD, Pg. A-6

LENGTH: 395 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY'S ROLE IN DEATHS UNCERTAIN;
SENATE PANEL PROBES FDA, NIH OVERSIGHT OF PATIENT TRIALS

BYLINE: SHERYL GAY STOLBERG, THE NEW YORK TIMES

DATELINE: WASHINGTON -

BODY:


   Under pressure from Congress to explain lapses in oversight of gene therapy,
federal health officials acknowledged yesterday that they could not be certain
whether experiments had hastened, or possibly caused, the deaths of patients
other than the 18-year-old man who died at the University of Pennsylvania last
fall.

   "Most gene therapy trials are done in people with life-threatening or
terminal illnesses," Dr. Jay P. Siegel, a Food and Drug Administration official,
told a Senate subcommittee. "Patients in those trials die. It is usually not
possible to make a definitive determination" about what role gene therapy played
in the deaths.

   Siegel made his remarks at a packed 3 1/2-hour hearing before the
subcommittee on public health that covered a variety of topics, including
whether scientists had been truthful in informing patients about gene therapy
risks and why the FDA and the National Institutes of Health hadn't shared
information with each other. The two agencies monitor the research.

   At the conclusion, Sen. Bill Frist, R-Tenn., the subcommittee chairman,
declared that the system for protecting patients was broken. "It's a multisystem
failure," he said, adding, "We may have just touched the tip of the iceberg."

   Among those testifying yesterday was Paul Gelsinger, father of Jesse
Gelsinger, 18, whose death Sept. 17 has been the only one, as far as government
officials know, directly attributable to gene therapy. In an impassioned, at
times tearful, speech, Gelsinger, who not long ago defended the Pennsylvania
researchers as "ethical men," said he now feels he had been naive to have
trusted them and described the death of his son "an avoidable tragedy."

   He called for an independent patients' advocate to be present at discussions
when risks are explained to patients considering taking part in medical
experiments, known as informed-consent sessions. He also attacked the influence
of money from biotech companies in the race to making gene therapy work.

   On Jan. 21, the FDA shut down all University of Pennsylvania gene therapy
experiments, citing "numerous deficiencies" in the way the clinical trial was
run. Penn scientists did not testify yesterday, but the university's president,
Dr. Judith Rodin, sent a letter saying Penn takes the agency's charges
"extremely seriously" and will respond as soon as possible.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2000


                             932 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     February 3, 2000 Thursday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 449 words

HEADLINE: FDA UNCERTAIN IF GENE THERAPY AIDED IN DEATHS

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG; NEW YORK TIMES

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Under pressure from Congress to explain lapses in oversight of gene therapy,
federal health officials acknowledged yesterday that they could not be certain
whether experiments had hastened, or possibly caused, the deaths of patients
other than the 18-year-old man who died at the University of Pennsylvania last
fall.

   "Most gene therapy trials are done in people with life-threatening or
terminal illnesses," Dr. Jay P. Siegel, an official of the Food and Drug
Administration, told a Senate subcommittee. "Patients in those trials die. It is
usually not possible to make a definitive determination" about what role gene
therapy played in the deaths.

   Siegel made his remarks at a packed hearing before the subcommittee on public
health that covered a variety of topics, including whether scientists had been
truthful in informing patients about the risks of gene therapy and why the FDA
and the National Institutes of Health had not shared information. The two
agencies monitor the research.

   At the conclusion, Sen. Bill Frist, a Tennessee Republican, who is chairman
of the subcommittee, declared that the system for protecting patients was
broken. "It's a multisystem failure," Frist said, adding, "We may have just
touched the tip of the iceberg."

   Among those testifying yesterday was Paul Gelsinger, the father of Jesse
Gelsinger, 18, whose death on Sept. 17 has been the only one, as far as
government officials know, directly attributable to gene therapy. In an
impassioned, at times tearful, speech, Gelsinger, who not long ago defended the
Pennsylvania researchers as "ethical men," said he now feels he had been naive
to have trusted them.

   He called for an independent patients' advocate to be present at discussions
when risks are explained to patients considering taking part in medical
experiments, known as informed-consent sessions. He also attacked the influence
of money from biotech companies in the race to making gene therapy work.

   On Jan. 21, the FDA shut down all gene therapy experiments at the University
of Pennsylvania, citing "numerous deficiencies" in the way the clinical trial
was run, including serious lapses in informed consent. The Pennsylvania
scientists did not testify, but the university's president, Dr. Judith Rodin,
sent a letter saying the university takes the agency's charges "extremely
seriously" and will respond as soon as possible.

   In gene therapy experiments, scientists are trying to use DNA to correct a
wide variety of inherited disorders, as well as cancer and heart diseases.
Despite the technology's promise, the 10-year-old field has had relatively few
successes, and now Gelsinger's death may well slow the pace of research.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2000


                             933 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 3, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-7

LENGTH: 522 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy dangers weren't explained, victim's father says

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 WASHINGTON -- The father of a man who died after being injected with
experimental genes said he and his son were not informed of the true risks and
serious side effects that could be caused by the treatment.

   Paul Gelsinger of Tucson, Ariz., said that before he let his son participate
in a gene therapy experiment he was not told that a monkey had died in a similar
experiment and that another patient had experienced serious side effects.

   Gelsinger's son, Jesse, 18, died at the University of Pennsylvania in
September after being injected with genes designed to correct an inherited liver
disease.  He was recruited for the experiment because he was born with ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency syndrome, a liver disorder.

   "It looked safe.  It was presented as being safe," his father testified
yesterday at a Senate subcommittee hearing.  "Since it would benefit everybody,
I encouraged my son to do this.

   "I was misled.  That's what hurt the most."

   Jesse Gelsinger went into a coma and died within hours, becoming the first
patient whose death was directly linked to experimental gene therapy.

   The testimony came in a hearing by the Senate Health, Education, Labor and
Pensions Committee's panel on public health, which is investigating patient
safety in gene therapy clinical trials and whether there is a need for more
vigorous supervision of the trials by the government.  The hearing follows
reports that some researchers have failed to tell the National Institutes of
Health about some serious health conditions experienced by patients taking part
in gene therapy trials.

   Sen. Bill Frist, R-Tenn., a physician and chairman of the subcommittee, said
the death of Gelsinger "has sobered us all" about the promising field of gene
therapy.

   "Jesse's death is not merely a pothole that we can simply ride over on the
road to find genetic cures," Frist said.  "We must take a new path that ensures
that no family will be forced to endure what the Gelsinger family has
experienced."

   Judith Rodin, president of the University of Pennsylvania, in a letter Frist
read at the hearing, called the death of Gelsinger "a terrible tragedy."

   "We deeply regret Jesse Gelsinger's death and we want to learn everything we
can about how and why he died," Rodin wrote.

   She pledged a thorough investigation into the cause of the death and said she
was committed to finding ways of improving the university's research program.

   "We intend for our research programs, particularly those involving human
subjects, to meet the highest standards," Rodin said in the letter.  "Nothing
less is acceptable."

   Dr. Amy Patterson, head of an NIH office that oversees gene therapy, said
that researchers are required to report any serious adverse event among patients
in the gene therapy trials but that this requirement has been frequently
ignored.

   Gelsinger's death prompted a Food and Drug Administration investigation of
the University of Pennsylvania's gene therapy research program, which was halted
after inspectors found a number of violations.  The findings continue to be
evaluated by the FDA, and further action may be taken.


LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000


                             934 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                   February 3, 2000, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 905 words

HEADLINE: Victim's Dad Faults Gene Therapy Team; Researchers Misled Family of
Teen About Risks, Senate Oversight Panel Is Told

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Deborah Nelson, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   His voice trembling with emotion, the father of the teenager who died in a
gene therapy experiment in September told a rapt Senate subcommittee yesterday
that the University of Pennsylvania scientists who conducted the research
oversold its potential benefits and underplayed its risks.

   A disillusioned Paul Gelsinger, of Tucson, told senators he had come to the
painful conclusion that he was "fairly naive" to have trusted the study's
principal investigators, one of whom had a financial interest in the new
treatment.

   "It looked safe. It was presented as safe. I encouraged my son to do this,"
Gelsinger told the Health, Education, Labor and Pensions subcommittee on public
health at a packed hearing on federal oversight of gene therapy. "But I wasn't
given all the information. And some of the information I was given was not
true."

   Gelsinger's comments, made with two of his lawyers sitting nearby, marked a
significant shift in tone from previous statements of support for the doctors
who led the experiment--a change of heart he attributed to recent revelations
about serious safety lapses by the research team.

   The hearing, called by Sen. Bill Frist (R-Tenn.), was the first to address
the quickly growing field of gene therapy since 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger's
death, and came just two weeks after the Food and Drug Administration shut down
Penn's gene therapy program for lapses the agency uncovered there. The hearing
also addressed recent revelations that many gene therapy researchers have not
been properly reporting deaths and illnesses of study volunteers to the National
Institutes of Health.

   Regulation of gene therapy "is not working, it is failing," said Frist, a
heart surgeon, at the close of a four-hour hearing that included lengthy
questioning of government overseers. "Now we have to decide what we're going to
do."

   Representatives of the FDA and the NIH told the subcommittee they are
searching for ways to improve public accountability in the 10-year-old but still
unproven field, which shows great promise for treating diseases by changing
people's genetic makeup. They told the committee they have no explanation for
the agencies' recent discovery that just 39 of the 691 deaths and illnesses
suffered by volunteers in one type of gene therapy experiment over the past
seven years were reported to the NIH promptly as required by federal rules.

   Amy Patterson, who heads the NIH office overseeing gene therapy, said the
problem may be even bigger than that. Those 691 "adverse events" involved only
the 25 percent to 30 percent of gene therapy experiments that rely on the same
type of gene-altered virus used in the Gelsinger experiment, she said. A
November NIH plea to scientists in other areas of gene therapy has already
brought in 40 previously unknown adverse events, suggesting that throughout the
field researchers are flouting the reporting regulations.

   Both Patterson and Jay Siegel of the FDA said their agencies were analyzing
the situation and hoped to come up with policy changes to increase researchers'
compliance with federal gene therapy rules.

   Other witnesses had more concrete suggestions. LeRoy Walters, director of
Georgetown University's Kennedy Institute of Ethics, recommended the creation of
an independent "data monitoring and safety board," which would track gene
experiments and quickly identify emerging safety concerns. Similar boards are
now commonplace in large clinical trials of conventional therapies. "I think we
should do no less for the volunteers who participate in gene therapy studies,"
Walters said.

   H. Stewart Parker, representing the Biotechnology Industry Organization,
offered a draft of a new rule that would, for the first time, call upon biotech
companies to report some adverse events to the NIH. Under current regulations,
academic researchers must report problems publicly to the NIH but companies must
report only to the FDA, which keeps details of those records secret.

   But discrepancies in Parker's comments left unclear how much added public
oversight the industry plan would provide. The plan submitted to the
subcommittee calls for industry reporting to be "voluntary" and to include
"unexpected" adverse events, while current regulations are not voluntary and
demand reporting of "expected" as well as "unexpected" problems. Parker later
said in an interview that the industry was willing to make the rule mandatory
and it could include expected as well as unexpected problems.

   Frist said he was especially concerned about the process by which potential
volunteers are informed of the risks in gene therapy tests, and of the conflicts
of interest that can arise when researchers have a financial stake in a study's
outcome.

   Gelsinger's testimony echoed those concerns. He said Penn researchers told
him that a previous volunteer in the study had experienced a 50 percent
improvement in liver function, when in fact no such improvement had been
documented. And he said financial concerns had led researchers to compromise
patient safety.

   "Guys want to own this [technology] . . . they want to have the patents on
it," Gelsinger said. "I thought this was all about people. I'm very disappointed
to find that it is not all about people."

    Paul Gelsinger, whose son Jesse, 18, died in September during gene therapy
trial, testifies at Senate hearing. "I wasn't given all the information," he
said.

LOAD-DATE: February 03, 2000


                             935 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                       February 2, 2000, Wednesday ,FINAL

SECTION: TELEGRAPH ,1A

LENGTH: 1026 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy under a cloud; Trials: A teen-ager's death prompts a
Senate probe and casts a pall over a promising avenue of research.

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   When Paul Gelsinger agreed to withdraw life support for his teen-age son, the
victim of a gene therapy experiment gone awry, he vowed to stand by the
scientists who administered the tests "until my dying day."

    His resolve didn't last long.

    First came the news reports, then a federal report alleging that the
University of Pennsylvania failed to disclose crucial information to test
subjects -- such as the fact that the gene product had killed monkeys who were
given higher doses. Then in December, three months after his son died, federal
officials ordered the experiment and seven others at the center shut down until
further notice.

    Today, accompanied by a lawyer, the Tucson, Ariz., handyman is poised to
tell a Senate subcommittee that the doctors deceived him. He says his son,
Jesse, an 18-year-old supermarket clerk who suffered from a mild form of a rare
liver disease, might not have enrolled in the trial if told the truth.

    "Put yourself in my shoes," said Gelsinger, asked in an interview why he has
turned so publicly against the doctors. "Try to imagine walking your child into
something like this. My boy relied on my judgment and trusted me. And I trusted
the doctors."

    "I should have known everything," he said. "I had a right to know, and my
son had a right to know what he had gotten into fully. I had to find out from
other sources besides University of Pennsylvania . I had a lot of faith in these
guys, and I trusted them with my son's life."

    Gelsinger is one of seven witnesses scheduled to testify before the Senate
Subcommittee on Public Health and Safety, which will consider whether federal
agencies and medical institutions are doing enough to monitor the safety of gene
therapy experiments. The inquiry -- along with probes by the FDA, the National
Institutes of Health and the hospital itself -- isn't just about a Tucson
teen-ager but the future of gene therapy trials in general.

    "Those in the gene therapy community who think, 'This won't affect me,'
that's absolutely not true," said Dr. Arthur Caplan, who heads the medical
ethics program at the University of Pennsylvania. "It's absolutely devastating."

    Mounting concerns over the safety of gene therapy experiments -- and the
truthfulness of doctors conducting them -- could cause the government and
private foundations to shy away from funding the trials, he said. Scientists who
receive grants will likely have to slog through additional paperwork to satisfy
regulators.

    That might make critics feel better, he said, but slow progress.

    Though gene therapy hasn't yet cured anyone of any disease, many researchers
believe it will someday revolutionize the way patients are treated for
conditions ranging from cystic fibrosis to cancer. Gene therapies are based on a
common strategy: supplying patients with healthy genes that might go on to
produce substances they lack.

    Jesse Gelsinger suffered from ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, known
as OTC, a rare disease marked by the dangerous build-up of ammonia in the
bloodstream and brain. He had a mild form and controlled it with drugs and diet.
But he enrolled in the trial in the hope of helping babies who are afflicted
with the full-blown disease and usually die within a few years.

    His father, who was divorced but had custody over Jesse and three other
children, said he and Jesse read a lengthy consent form that warned of hepatitis
and other possible side effects. But he said the risks were posed as
theoretical. Never, he said, was he told that earlier volunteers had suffered
liver toxicity severe enough to warrant the trial's suspension.

    Nor, he said, was he told that monkeys given higher doses in earlier
experiments had died. Gelsinger said he learned of these lapses in newspaper
articles that appeared last fall in the Washington Post and the New York Times
and in a December hearing held by the National Institutes of Health.

    "I discovered things at the NIH meeting in early December that opened my
eyes up fully," Gelsinger said.

    Harris Pogust, an attorney with the firm Gelsinger has hired, said the
immediate goal is to help him through the hearing. And the firm is investigating
the case to determine whether to file suit.

    Jesse Gelsinger, a soft-spoken young man who loved motorcycles and
professional wrestling, suffered a lethal chain reaction after receiving
injections of the gene product. He developed jaundice, a clotting disorder and
kidney failure -- and lapsed into coma.

    Although doctors do not know what led to his death, they believe Jesse's
immune system mounted an exaggerated response to the altered cold virus that was
used as a "vector" to carry the gene to Jesse's tissues.

    Lately, his doctors have declined comment. Ken Wildes, a spokesman, said the
university is conducting reviews and decided not to participate in today's
hearing because it had not completed its response to the FDA critique.

    "Our thoughts and prayers are with him and his family," Wildes said.

    The controversy is being followed closely by families touched by genetic
illnesses that might someday yield to gene therapies. Many are desperate to see
the trials go forward and worry that Gelsinger's activism will hurt their
children.

    "I think it's really a shame that he's doing this in the name of his son,"
said Eva Oseland, whose 5-year-old son, Tyler, has OTC. She says technical
violations on consent forms pale in comparison to the horror of the disease. Her
son cannot walk or speak and is tube-fed a liquid diet.

    He has been hospitalized 200 times for seizures, comas and other
complications -- and could die any day.

    Oseland, who lives near Los Angeles, carries the OTC gene but is not
afflicted by the disease. She said she wanted to enroll in the trial but decided
against it after reading in the consent form that she could suffer serious side
effects. A single mother of three, she worried that nobody would be around to
care for her children if something bad happened to her.

    That, she said, is how clearly the scientists explained the risks to her.

    Now, she hopes that a therapy will be developed in time to help her son.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO(S) Testifying: Paul Gelsinger says he was not told of all the
risks of his son's gene therapy trials.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2000


                             936 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                    February 2, 2000 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 433 words

HEADLINE: Groups challenge abortion law: Statute against partial-birth procedure
limits women's treatment options, suit says

BODY:

   DETROIT -- Planned Parenthood and the American Civil Liberties Union have
filed a lawsuit to halt the enforcement of a new state law that bans
partial-birth abortions.

   The Infant Protection Act, which was signed by Gov. John Engler last summer
and due to go into effect March 10, is an attack on a woman's constitutional
right to an abortion, said the lawyers behind the lawsuit, which was filed
Tuesday in U.S. District Court in Detroit.

   The law defines a live infant as a human fetus at any point after any part of
the fetus exists outside the mother's body and either breathes, moves or has a
heartbeat. A doctor who aborts a fetus with any of those signs could be charged
with a felony punishable by up to life in prison or a $50,000 fine, or both.

   "The law is dangerous to a woman's health because it makes physicians subject
to criminal sanctions if they simply try to help a pregnant patient avoid severe
hemorrhaging and pain," said Kary Moss, executive director of the American Civil
Liberties Union's Michigan chapter.

   State Sen. Joel Gougeon, R-Bay City, the sponsor of the legislation,
dismissed the lawsuit's claims. "I guess my comment is here we go again. We're
just trying to protect children and at every turn we've been challenged to do
that," he said.

   The only exception allowed in the law is if, in the doctor's judgment,
abortion is necessary to save the mother's life and only if "every reasonable
precaution has been taken to save the infant."

   The lawsuit contends that this stricture applies throughout pregnancy, even
in cases when there is no possibility of a fetus surviving.

   Joining in the lawsuit are Dr. Mark Evans, vice-chairman of the department of
obstetrics and gynecology at Wayne State University and Hutzel Hospital, and Dr.
Timothy R.B. Johnson, a professor and chair of the department of obstetrics and
gynecology at the University of Michigan.

   The law would prevent doctors from acting according to their best medical
judgment without fear of legal penalty, Evans said. Evans -- who also directs
the Center for Fetal Diagnosis and Therapy at Hutzel and the university's human
genetics program -- said the law would end the center's research and work in
gene therapy. The program tries to fix birth defects while a fetus is in the
womb.

   The Infant Protection Act signed by Gov. Engler last year protects a live
fetus if any part of it exists outside the mother's body.

   Opponents are expected to ask a federal judge to issue an injunction or
temporary restraining order to prevent the state from putting the law into
effect on March 10.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2002


                             937 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               February 2, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 831 words

HEADLINE: Agency Failed to Monitor Patients in Gene Research

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

BODY:

   Officials at the National Institutes of Health said yesterday that they had
failed to keep track of how patients fared during gene therapy experiments and
had outlined steps to ensure that scientists followed rules requiring them to
report information about harmful side effects.

   "We were receiving only a small number of adverse event reports, and we
certainly should have recognized this as a sign of underreporting," Dr. Ruth L.
Kirschstein, acting director of the institute, wrote yesterday in a letter to a
congressman.

    In an interview, a senior official at the institute said, "There is no
excuse for it, and it should have been noticed."

   The admission by Dr. Kirschstein, in a letter to Representative Henry A.
Waxman, Democrat of California, came on the eve of a Congressional inquiry into
lapses of federal oversight into gene therapy in general and the death of a
patient in an experiment at the University of Pennsylvania in particular.

   In an exchange of letters with Mr. Waxman, officials at the health institute
had acknowledged that of 691 serious side effects experienced by patients in a
particular type of gene therapy experiment, only 39 were reported immediately,
as required by the agency. Other reports were received only after an inquiry
into the death of the Pennsylvania patient, Jesse Gelsinger, 18, who enrolled in
a trial to test a treatment for an inherited enzyme deficiency.

   In a letter on Jan. 10, Mr. Waxman complained, "This is a failure rate of
roughly 95 percent."

   In her reply, Dr. Kirschstein said scientists might have been confused about
the reporting requirements. "Nevertheless," she wrote, "while this is an
explanation for inadequate reporting, it is not an excuse."

   The admissions came amid increased scrutiny of the 10-year-old field of gene
therapy. Mr. Gelsinger died after an overwhelming immune reaction to an infusion
of corrective genes. Last month, the Food and Drug Administration shut down all
gene therapy experiments at the university.

   Today, Senator Bill Frist, Republican of Tennessee, will convene a hearing
into the death. Mr. Gelsinger's father, Paul, will testify, as will officials
from the Food and Drug Administration and the health institute.

   "I think the oversight system is failing to prevent serious violations of
patient protection," Senator Frist said. "Let's have full transparency in the
system."

   In recent months, it has become clear that the system is not as transparent
as federal rules require. Typically, researchers experimenting with drugs and
therapies are monitored by the drug agency, which is required to keep all
patient safety information confidential. Gene therapy has always been an
exception; because it is so novel, it is also monitored by the health institute
through a panel of medical and ethics experts called the Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee.

   Federal rules require that all serious side effects, whether or not directly
related to gene therapy, be disclosed immediately to the health institute. But
even before Mr. Gelsinger's death, members of the advisory committee had
expressed concerns that the requirements were not being met.

   To force scientists to comply, Dr. Kirschstein said the institute would begin
inspections of laboratories that conduct gene therapy research. The agency has
also repeated its rules to all scientists conducting gene therapy research and
is receiving weekly reports about side effects.

   The biotechnology industry is expected to oppose an efforts to force greater
disclosure. Michael Werner, a lawyer for the Biotechnology Industry
Organization, a trade group, said today that companies want to comply but are
concerned that their research may become public and available to their
competitors.

   Most patients in the experiments are already seriously ill, often with
cancer, and many die during the research from problems related to their
diseases.

   Mr. Gelsinger's case was unusual in that he was not particularly sick; he
suffered from a mild form of an enzyme deficiency. The Pennsylvania experiment
was designed to test the safety of a treatment for babies with a fatal form of
his disorder. It involved an infusion of corrective genes, encased in a weakened
cold virus, adenovirus.

   The 691 reports gathered so far include a range of side effects, from high
fever to serious infection to seizures, but most appeared to be related to the
patients' underlying diseases, the institute official said. But, the official
said, until the agency has completed a review of the reports it would be
impossible to determine if any patients have been harmed in gene therapy
research.

   The reports are from all studies that used adenovirus; such studies account
for one quarter of all the gene therapy clinical trials that have been conducted
over the past decade. So it is possible that there are many more reports
outstanding. Mr. Waxman said today that he was trying to press the health
institute to obtain the additional information.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2000


                             938 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               February 2, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1154 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   INTERNATIONAL   A3-13

House Votes to Expand Military Ties with Taiwan
The House voted overwhelmingly to expand military ties between Taiwan and the
United States, a move that China and the Clinton administration warned could
exacerbate regional tensions and jeopardize a landmark trade agreement.   A1


   Austrian Coalition Forms
The anti-immigrant Freedom Party of Jorg Haider and the People's Party, ignoring
threats of diplomatic isolation by the European Union and the United States,
said they would form a government.   A1

Chechen Rebels Leave Capital
Separatist rebels said they were abandoning Grozny and would carry out attacks
on Russian forces from the mountains and countryside.   A3

Russian Leader Drops By
Acting President Vladimir V. Putin made a surprise appearance at a Middle East
conference in Moscow attended by Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright. Mr.
Putin used the occasion to deliver his first foreign policy statement, making a
pointed reference to the Clinton administration's desire to modify the major
arms control treaty between the United States and Russia.   A5

Trying to Save Ulster Peace
Britain, Ireland and the United States struggled to preserve the power-sharing
government in Belfast after David Trimble, the first mnister of the Northern
Ireland Assembly, said shutting down the two-month-old government was
inevitable. The crisis developed when the I.R.A. signaled its unwillingness to
begin disarming.   A13

Fighting New French Workweek
French subway and bus workers joined truckers in protests that disrupted
transportation systems across France, in a dispute over a shorter workweek.
A10

Denial by Indonesian General
General Wiranto asserted that that he was not responsible for human rights
abuses in East Timor and sidestepped a suggestion by the president that he
resign.   A8

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A14-20

McCain Romps Over Bush; Gore Edges Out Bradley
Senator John McCain trounced Gov. George W. Bush in the New Hampshire Republican
primary, defeating him by a margin far wider than anyone in any either campaign
had anticipated.   A1

Vice President Al Gore held off a stiff challenge by Bill Bradley, but the
narrow result seemed to point to a long, contentious fight for the Democratic
presidential nomination.   A1

Sensitivity Training for Military
Every member of the armed forces will have to undergo training by the end of the
year to prevent anti-gay harassment, the Pentagon said, acknowledging that its
"don't ask, don't tell, don't harass" policy was poorly understood in the ranks.

   A15

Defending C.I.A. Inquiry
The director of central intelligence, George J. Tenet, left, responding to
reports about the handling of an internal inquiry involving a predecessor, John
M. Deutch, said he took "decisive action" after receiving a finding that Mr.
Deutch had mishandled classified documents.   A15

Early Findings on Jet Crash
The Alaska Airlines MD-83 jet that plunged into the Pacific while trying to make
an emergency landing at Los Angeles appears to have suffered a progressive
failure of a control system at the tail that controls how the plane pitches up
or down, according to a sketchy chronology by a senior investigator.   A14

At least 35 of the 88 people aboard the plane, all believed dead, were connected
to the airline or its commuter affiliate, Horizon Air.   A14

Challenge to Church Leadership
The top officials of two Anglican church provinces overseas, in Africa and Asia,
have consecrated two conservative American priests as bishops to minister to
Episcopalians in the United States who feel alienated from their denomination.
   A14

Survey on Net Privacy
Internet health sites collect some of the most personal information about their
users, but few follow their own declared policies about maintaining the privacy
of that data.   A19

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Biracial Jury Is Chosen In Diallo Murder Trial
Four blacks and eight whites were impaneled as the jury that will hear the case
against four white New York City police officers accused of murdering Amadou
Diallo, a black African immigrant who was unarmed, in a hail of bullets.   A1

Judge Keeps Forbes on Ballot
A federal judge forced the Republican Party on Long Island to drop its effort to
put Steve Forbes off the ballot and indicated that he would soon allow Senator
John McCain to qualify across New York State.   B1

Putting Sprinklers in Dorms
A New Jersey lawmaker said the Legislature would help pay to put sprinklers in
every college dormitory, which could cost $300 million.   B1

NEEDIEST CASES   B2

EDUCATION   B8

Chancellor Seeks Funds
Harold O. Levy, in his first appearance before the Legislature as New York
City's interim schools chancellor, asked for more money for the city's public
schools.   B3

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Computing the Age of AIDS
Scientists at the Los Alamos National Laboratory said that using a new
statistical method and one of the world's most powerful computers they had
traced the origin of the AIDS epidemic to around 1930.   A15

Missteps in Gene Therapy
Officials at the National Institutes of Health admitted that they had failed to
keep track of how patients fared during gene therapy experiments and they
outlined steps to ensure that scientists followed the rules.   A19

SPORTS   D1-8

Going Out on Top
Dick Vermeil, 63, who coached the St. Louis Rams to a Super Bowl victory on
Sunday, said he was retiring.   D1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-30

Battling for Legal Talent
Some of the nation's leading law firms, trying to attract and retain top talent
who may be tempted by the lure of Internet companies, have raised pay for their
associates by as much as 50 percent in the past week. The increases will let
first-year associates earn up to $160,000 a year, depending on year-end bonuses.

   A1

Clinton on the Economy
President Clinton said he was concerned about the growing trade deficit and
about debt loads being carried by individuals and businesses, but that his worry
was tempered by the strength that the economy derives from the budget surplus.
   C1

New Boss for G.M.
The General Motors Corporation is expected to announce on Wednesday that it will
promote its president, G. Richard Wagoner Jr., to chief executive as John F.
Smith Jr. relinquishes that job.   C1

Business Digest   C1

ARTS   E1-10

DINING   F1-14

OBITUARIES   C30-31

EDITORIAL   A20-21

Editorials: For now, a real campaign; the case of John Deutch; new pressure for
gun control; a wedge in the Cuban embargo.
Columns: Paul Krugman, Maureen Dowd.

Crossword   E6
TV Listings   E10
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D5


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2000


                             939 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               February 2, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 174 words

HEADLINE: INSIDE

BODY:


   Gene Therapy Lapses Cited
On the eve of a Congressional inquiry, officials at the National Institutes of
Health admitted that they have failed to keep track of how patients fared during
gene therapy experiments. PAGE A19


   Coalition Deal in Austria
Defying threats of diplomatic isolation by the European Union and the United
States, the Freedom Party of Jorg Haider and the People's Party announced that
they would join to form a government. PAGE A12

Clinton on the Economy
President Clinton is concerned about the trade deficit and the debt carried by
individuals and businesses, but his worry is tempered by the economy's strength.
PAGE C1

Rebels Retreat From Grozny
Separatist rebels said they were abandoning Chechnya's capital and would carry
out attacks on Russian forces from the mountains and countryside. PAGE A3

Rams' Coach, on Top, Quits
Wanting to leave while still a champion, Dick Vermeil retired as the St. Louis
Rams' coach two days after his team had won the Super Bowl. SPORTSWEDNESDAY,
PAGE D1

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2000


                             940 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     FEBRUARY 2, 2000 Wednesday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1595 words

HEADLINE: PENN GENE-THERAPY SUBJECT FEELING BETRAYED SHE SAYS SHE LEARNED ON HER
OWN OF A NEGATIVE LIVER REACTION AFTER A FELLOW PARTICIPANT DIED.

BYLINE: Susan FitzGerald, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In June 1998 Dolores Aderman became Patient No. 11 in a groundbreaking
gene-therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Researchers inserted a small tube and infused her liver with viral particles
loaded with a gene to correct a rare metabolic disease that ran in her family.

   Aderman left the hospital thinking that the experiment went off without a
hitch and happy that she had done her part in possibly finding a cure for the
disease that killed her son Michael two weeks before his fourth birthday and now
affected two other sons.

   But that was not the case, according to an investigation after the death last
September of Jesse Gelsinger, Patient No. 19 in the same gene-therapy
experiment.

   And in the months that have ensued, Aderman, 36, has been rethinking her role
as a volunteer on the frontiers of medicine. The Bucks County woman remains
committed to helping researchers find a cure for her sons' disease, but she also
feels betrayed.

   Records of the experiment showed that after her gene treatment, Aderman's
liver had a bad reaction. Key enzymes that serve as gauges of liver-cell injury
rose to levels high enough that the researchers reported the toxicity to the
federal Food and Drug Administration and were obligated to get permission to
proceed to the next patient.

   From a medical standpoint, Aderman was not in danger, and her enzyme levels
returned to normal by the time she left the hospital.

   But researchers write such toxicity standards into experiments to serve as
warning signs. The three patients who followed Aderman also experienced liver
toxicity, and the FDA has criticized Penn for not promptly reporting two of the
"adverse events."

   Penn did not return phone calls from The Inquirer requesting comment on
Aderman's story.

   Today, in the aftermath of Gelsinger's death in Penn's gene-therapy
experiment, Congress will hold a hearing on whether the safety of patient
volunteers is being adequately protected in this highly unproven but still
promising field of medicine.

   Are patients fully informed of the risks before they sign up for gene-therapy
trials? Do they understand that in this early testing phase the therapy will not
likely offer them any benefit? Are they kept up-to-date on unexpected
developments in the experiments? Is there rigorous oversight by the FDA and the
National Institutes of Health?

   The FDA found numerous violations in the way the Penn experiment was being
conducted. Last month the FDA shut down all gene-therapy trials at Penn's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy, headed by Dr. James M. Wilson, saying there
were not adequate systems to ensure the safety of patients.

   Penn is expected to officially respond to the FDA this week.

   Aderman said she knew nothing about her liver reaction until she pieced it
together from news accounts of FDA reports in December.

   Aderman said she was shocked because the doctors had never told her that her
enzymes had spiked.

   "The patient has the right to know everything going on," she said. "It's my
body. It's not your body. I lent them my body."

   * Aderman's friends and family thought she was crazy to volunteer for the
gene-therapy experiment.

   "What if something happens and for the rest of your life you have to pay for
it?" Aderman says her mother asked her.

   She learned about the experiment on the Internet while researching ornithine
transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency. Mark Batshaw, a doctor at Children's Seashore
House in Philadelphia who had treated one of Aderman's children, was one of the
researchers.

   Michael, her firstborn, had died in 1986, within hours of eating a
high-protein meal of three pieces of fried fish.

   It was only after the autopsy report came back that she learned of OTC, a
rare genetic disorder in which the liver is unable to rid the body of ammonia, a
natural byproduct of metabolism.

   Since then, Aderman has learned that the disease, which is inherited through
the mother's genetic code, probably killed two of her brothers, who died
inexplicably at a young age. Two of Aderman's other sons have the disease.
Aderman and her two daughters are carriers.

   People with OTC must eat a special low-protein diet and take medication. But
even a little cold can put their ammonia levels dangerously out of whack. At age
2, Aderman's son Jonathan fell into a coma for a week after drinking a glass of
milk intended for a sibling.

   Aderman was eager to volunteer for the experiment.

   "The only thing I thought about was if I could just help kids who were so
sick," Aderman said. "I went into it so I could save just one more mom or dad
from what I went through."

   Penn's gene-therapy trial was unusual because the patients were relatively
healthy.

   When scientists first ventured into this new approach to disease - which
involves giving patients corrective genes piggybacked onto viruses - they
focused on conditions in which patients were very ill or near death.

   Wilson's research team had wanted to test the technique on babies dying of
OTC, but a university review of the proposal determined that it would be
unethical since parents who were about to lose a child could not make a
clear-headed decision to allow their baby to take part.

   The plan shifted to using adults who were carriers or had mild symptoms of
the disease.

   But Aderman was far from a dispassionate participant.

   "It had to be done," she told her mother. Twelve years after his death,
Michael was still the first thing she thought about each morning.

   As Aderman went through the screening to see if she met the criteria for the
trial - answering questions, giving every detail of her medical history, having
her blood drawn for DNA testing, drinking a nasty concoction to see how her body
handled ammonia - she only knew that she wanted to be in the experiment.

   When it came time to sign the consent form on April 27, 1998, Aderman did not
dwell on the form's mentions of potential dangers - inflammation of the liver
from the virus used in the therapy or an immune response that could cause liver
damage.

   "OK, Michael, you didn't die in vain," she remembers thinking. "Mom is going
to do something to help all the kids with OTC."

   * When Aderman, a nursing aide in a nursing home, checked in for her gene
therapy, she was the first person in "Cohort 4," a group of patients who would
get the fourth-highest level of the drug.

   In keeping with the experiment's protocol, Aderman was placed in isolation
after the two-hour procedure. She developed aching symptoms similar to the flu,
but she was not worried because previous patients had felt the same way.

   For a week after the gene infusion, doctors and nurses methodically monitored
Aderman in the hospital, checking her blood and urine for a long list of
factors, including liver enzymes, that would indicate whether she was having a
reaction to the gene therapy. Doctors also did a liver biopsy, snipping a small
piece of her liver to get a firsthand look.

   "They said everything went good," she recalled.

   * Under federal rules, patients in clinical trials have the right to request
adverse-event reports emerging from the research, according to an FDA
spokesperson, and consent forms are supposed to spell out all possible risks and
complications.

   Beyond that, there is little clarity about what details patients should be
told.

   "If a patient experiences a serious toxicity in a study, whether it's a
clinical toxicity or a laboratory toxicity they might not know about, I think
researchers ought to tell the subject what is happening," said LeRoy Walters,
head of the Kennedy Institute of Ethics at Georgetown University.

   After news broke of Gelsinger's death, Aderman requested her medical records
from the University of Pennsylvania. She had gotten health insurance and wanted
her new doctor to have her complete medical history.

   She said Penn gave her lab reports from her hospital stay, a biopsy report
and copies of consent forms she had signed. She wanted more. What she got, she
said, was not enough to cover more than a week in the hospital. There was
nothing to say her case was reported to the FDA.

   Last week she called Dr. Philip Noguchi, who oversees gene research for the
FDA, to make another request for her records. She said he told her that he would
have to check on it.

   The FDA spokesperson said the agency would not discuss individual patients.

   Aderman figures she gave Penn her all and, in return, "all I ask for is a
little respect, a little common courtesy, and the truth."

   "You give your whole self," she said. "It's not something you take lightly.

   "You don't say, 'I think I'll go down to the University of Pennsylvania and
have them stick something up my artery.' "

   Aderman was also offended by the form letters that kept coming for months
after the researchers informed patients of Gelsinger's death.

   "I am very pleased to update you that the OTC gene therapy study is
progressing very well. We have now dosed 18 volunteers!" said letters sent to
Aderman in November and December requesting blood samples.

   A month after Gelsinger's death, she was at Penn for follow-up lab work and
she had to sign a consent form for the experiment because the previous one had
expired. The 11-page form, in detailing the experiment's risks, did not
specifically mention the liver toxicity experienced by patients in Cohort 4, or
Gelsinger's death.

   Still, Aderman remains a believer in Penn's gene-therapy experiment.

   She would do it again. In fact, "if Michael was alive," she says, "I would
let him go and do it."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Dolores Aderman says she is committed to aiding research despite her
communication complaints. (REBECCA BARGER-TUVIM, Inquirer Staff Photographer)

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             941 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          February 2, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-8

LENGTH: 224 words

HEADLINE: Closer watch vowed on gene therapy tests

BYLINE: New York Times News Service

BODY:
 Officials of the National Institutes of Health admitted yesterday that they had
failed to keep track of how patients fared during gene therapy experiments, and
they outlined steps to ensure that scientists follow rules requiring them to
report information about harmful side effects.

   "We were receiving only a small number of adverse event reports and we
certainly should have recognized this as a sign of underreporting," Dr. Ruth L.
Kirschstein, the acting director, wrote in a letter to a congressman. In an
interview, another institute official said, "There is no excuse for it and it
should have been noticed."

   The admission by Kirschstein, in a letter to Rep. Henry Waxman, D-Los
Angeles, comes on the eve of a congressional inquiry into lapses of federal
oversight into gene therapy in general, and the death of an 18-year-old patient
in one experiment at the University of Pennsylvania in particular.

   In an exchange of letters with Waxman, officials at the institutes had
acknowledged that of 691 serious side effects experienced by patients in a
particular type of gene therapy experiments, only 39 were reported immediately,
as required by the agency.  Only after an institute inquiry into the death were
other reports received.  In a Jan. 10 letter, Waxman complained, "This is a
failure rate of roughly 95 percent."


LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000


                             942 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   February 2, 2000, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17A

LENGTH: 798 words

HEADLINE: Hope can color a patient's consent

BYLINE: Robin Marantz Henig

BODY:

   When 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died this past fall after an
infusion of genetically altered cells, the burgeoning field of
gene therapy suffered a blow from which it still is reeling.

   Senate hearings scheduled for today are no doubt the first in
a long string of attempts to re-establish some regulatory control
over gene therapy, whose 10-year history has forged a jagged cutting
edge in human experimentation. With gene therapy, as with no other
branch of biomedical research, scientists and subjects alike take
visionary leaps of faith.

   Gelsinger, from Tucson, had a mild case of a rare genetic disorder
that usually occurs in a more severe form that kills infants soon
after birth. He wanted to help these children.


   "What's the worst that can happen to me?" he reportedly asked
a friend just before signing up as a research subject in a University
of Pennsylvania gene therapy experiment. "I die, and it's for
the babies." But he probably never fully understood how likely
"the worst that can happen" really was.

   Since Gelsinger's death, the focus has been on the procedures
of federal approval and subject recruitment in the Penn experiments
and other gene therapy experiments. Certain steps, for example,
probably were short-circuited in Gelsinger's case. And, although
those treating Gelsinger quickly informed the National Institutes
of Health of his death, as required, only 39 of 691 serious adverse
events among patients whose gene therapy was similar to Gelsinger's
were reported to NIH without prompting, the agency says. NIH's
acting director on Tuesday wrote Rep. Henry Waxman, D-Calif. ,
that NIH should have recognized something was wrong, given the
small number of adverse reports.

   Today's Senate public health subcommittee hearing focuses on the
procedural issues involved in the federal oversight of gene therapy
experimentation. But there is another part of this process that
is perhaps more important, yet far more difficult to regulate:
the inherent miscommunication in the complicated process of "informed
consent," in which patients must be informed of the risks and
benefits of any experiment.

   Hearing what they hope to hear

   In an emotionally charged context -- and the search for new treatments
for deadly diseases is certainly one -- people cannot really hear
what they are told. Do people in love listen to their friends'
warnings that they're just no good for each other? Does a would-be
homeowner who really wants a house heed the building inspector's
findings of damp rot in the basement and faulty wiring throughout?

   Similarly, the subjects involved in gene therapy experiments are,
on the whole, desperately sick -- and desperation is a poor backdrop
for rational decision-making. They may claim to understand that
gene therapy still has not cured a single patient; they may say
they realize that their involvement in early-stage research is
not expected to do them any personal good. But it would go against
human nature for them not to harbor some kernel of hope that maybe
they will be the unusual exceptions.

   For their part, investigators who truly believe in the value of
the experiment -- and have a financial stake in seeing it to its
resolution -- almost unconsciously will spin their information.
One biomedical ethicist, Paul Root Wolpe of the University of
Pennsylvania, reportedly has watched researchers tell potential
subjects that an experimental treatment was at a dose so small
it could not possibly hurt them. The dose also was too small to
do them any good, but that was not said.

   Besides word choices, all sorts of non-verbal cues get conveyed
in informed-consent conversations, just as they do in any human
interaction. Without really meaning to, scientists might lower
their voices when discussing risks, and add a lilt when discussing
benefits. How can such unconscious gestures be subjected to federal
legislation?

   The intentions are good, but . . .

   We need to remember that the informed-consent conversation is,
first and foremost, a conversation between two people. There is
no good way to engage in it without a certain amount of obfuscation,
unintentional deceit and miscommunication, even by the most sincere
and well-intentioned participants.

   There is no easy way around these problems. We cannot give up
on informed consent, or on human experimentation. Medicine will
progress in no other way.

   But we need to recognize the limitations of this flawed process.
The most obvious limitation is human nature. No one is really
hearing what investigators are saying, even though they might
sincerely be saying it. And sometimes, for a host of reasons,
the investigators are not quite telling it exactly like it is.

LOAD-DATE: February 02, 2000


                             943 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                   February 2, 2000, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 318 words

HEADLINE: Today In Congress

BODY:


   SENATE

   Meets at 9:30 a.m.

   Committees:

   Armed Services--9:30 a.m. Bosnia & Kosovo. Gen. Wesley Clark. 253 Russell
Office Bldg. Closed session to follow in 222 ROB.

   Budget--10 a.m. Internet taxation in the new millennium. Michigan Gov. John
Engler (R), Massachusetts Gov. Paul Cellucci (R). 608 Dirksen Office Bldg.

   Finance--10 a.m. Progress of efforts to overhaul the Internal Revenue Service
(IRS). 215 DOB.

   Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions--9:30 a.m. Public health subc. Patient
concerns associated with gene therapy, including the oversight role of federal
agencies. 430 Dirksen.

   Select Intelligence--10 a.m. Worldwide threat to national security. CIA
Director George J. Tenet. 216 Hart Office Bldg.

   HOUSE

   Meets at 10 a.m.

   Committees:

   Appropriations--9:30 a.m. Legislative branch subc. Fiscal 2001 appropriations
for Office of Compliance, Congressional Budget Office & Financial Managers
Council. H-144, Capitol.

   Education and the Workforce--10:30 a.m. Early childhood, youth & families
subc. & post-secondary education, training & lifelong learning subc. Federal
role in changing how math is taught in grades K-12. 2175 Rayburn House Office
Bldg.

   Government Reform--10 a.m. National economic growth, natural resources &
regulatory affairs subc. Kyoto & the Internet: The Energy Implications of
Digital Economy. 2247 RHOB.

   Government Reform--10 a.m. National security, veterans affairs &
international relations subc. Government research on causes & treatments of
illnesses developed by veterans of the Gulf War. 2154 RHOB.

   International Relations--10 a.m. Changing American diplomacy for new century.
2118 RHOB.

   Judiciary--10 a.m. Constitution subc. Mark up pending legislation. 2237 RHOB.

   Resources--11 a.m. Pending legislation. 1324 Longworth House Office Bldg.

   Ways and Means-- 2 p.m. Mark up Marriage Tax Penalty Relief Act of 2000. 1100
LHOB.


LOAD-DATE: February 02, 2000


                             944 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 1, 2000, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1807 words

HEADLINE: HUNT FOR CURE GETS PERSONAL PATIENTS' FAMILIES LAUNCH OWN MEDICAL
RESEARCH

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Right after a neurological exam in December of 1998, Stephen Heywood phoned
his brother Jamie and reported the devastating diagnosis in his typical
understated style. "The news does not look good."

   It was the verdict the close-knit Newton family feared for months. Stephen,
then 29, had learned that the progressive weakness that began in a single muscle
in his right hand was Lou Gehrig's disease, or ALS.   "This is terrifying
stuff," said Jamie Heywood, 33, an MIT-trained mechanical engineer. Jamie
Heywood immediately quit his job in San Diego at a brain research institute and
moved his family back to Newton. But first he pumped his colleagues for all they
knew about ALS, a brain- and spinal-nerve disease that paralyzes one part of the
body after another, leaving the mind intact but eventually silencing speech and
destroying even the ability to breathe.

   Immersing himself in the study of ALS with the help of several top
scientists, Jamie Heywood began taking pieces of ALS research into his own
hands, raising more than a half-million dollars in private donations. In less
than a year, his effort has fast-forwarded three potential therapies toward
human trials, some of which could begin later this year.

   "Jamie clearly is trying to save his brother's life," said Jamie's wife,
Melinda. "And by extension, he's trying to save everybody's life who has it."

   In his quest, Heywood joins a growing number of others who, with rapidly
lethal diseases threatening a family member, have launched ambitious efforts to
speed up research. One neurologist calls it "guerrilla science," though it is
neither illegal nor clandestine. These families raise money, take shortcuts
through scientific bureaucracies, and knock on the doors of scientists whom they
fund and motivate.

   "They call and say, 'We have a plane ticket for you, please be on the plane
with your slides,' " said Dr. Evan Snyder, a Children's Hospital researcher.

   Snyder has been much sought after by brain disease groups because he's
experimenting with a new potential treatment based on neural stem cells. These
are naturally occurring brain cells able to develop into different types of
nerve cells: They show exciting promise of being able to repair nervous-system
damage in ALS and other diseases.

   Snyder said the new consumer-entrepreneurs "often come from the business
realm and aren't used to the bureaucratic delays of academia" government, or
from large private organizations. "They're used to identifying a problem,
pulling together the resources they need, and getting started," said Snyder.

   That's what Jamie Heywood did. Likewise, other ALS activist groups such as
Project ALS - which funds Snyder - and the ALS Treatment Initiative based in
Texas.

   People whose lives are shadowed by rare diseases such as ALS often feel they
must take direct action because drug companies have shown little interest in
diseases that don't promise a large-scale payback. There are cutting-edge ideas
languishing in laboratories for lack of someone to push them into development.

   ALS, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, is rare, striking about 5,000 people
in the United States each year. Most are much older than Stephen Heywood: the
average age at diagnosis is 55. About 30,000 are alive with ALS at any one time.
Four out of five ALS patients die within five years of diagnosis. Only about 10
percent of cases are inherited, but in the vast majority it's a mystery as to
why motor neurons in the brain and spinal cord begin to die - or why some
muscles are spared.

   The most recent well-known ALS patient was Jim "Catfish" Hunter, the Hall of
Fame baseball player who died last year.

   Some long-term survivors of ALS add to the puzzle of why the nerve cells die
at dramatically varying rates. Famed physicist Stephen Hawking was diagnosed
with a form of ALS at age 21. He is now in his mid-50s, has a brilliant career,
as well as three children.

   The Heywoods have raised more than $500,000 through personal appeals and the
activities of the ALS Therapy Development Foundation that they run out of a
Victorian fixer-upper near Crystal Lake. Behind it is a ramshackle carriage
house that Stephen - a craftsman and carpenter before his illness - plans to
have renovated to accommodate his worsening disability.

   As Jamie Heywood searched for the most promising leads toward an ALS
treatment, he decided the most likely quick-payoff strategy would be gene
therapy to alter the levels of a chemical messenger in brain cells called
glutamate. In ALS, an excess of glutamate overstimulates and kills brain cells.

   Heywood and his scientist partners, Dr. Matthew During at Jefferson Medical
College in Philadelphia and Dr. Jeffrey Rothstein at Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, planned an attack using harmless viruses to carry a gene into the
body, enabling nerve cells to replace a key molecule called the glutamine
transporter that's missing or defective in ALS patients.

   In much less time than usual, the scientists and Heywood picked up on some
promising animal data, wrote up the complicated gene therapy application, or
protocol, and succeeded in January in getting it approved by the ethics board at
Jefferson. The gene-carrying viruses would be injected into patients' spinal
cords in an effort to protect motor neurons.

   A federal gene therapy board and the Food and Drug Administration still must
review the data. All gene therapy proposals are coming under intense scrutiny
now following the death of an Arizona youth in a gene therapy experiment at the
University of Pennsylvania.

   Ironically, after all his efforts on behalf of his brother, Jamie Heywood has
no power to pick who would be in a small group of volunteers to get the initial
treatments.

   The proliferation of family-based groups has created some tensions with
nationwide nonprofits such as the ALS Association. Taking a longer view, these
traditional nonprofits have a more conventional style of picking and funding
researchers through a grant application process.

   Robert Abendroth, research director at ALSA, said he empathizes with the
family groups, but worries that their short-term focus on treatments could
"fragment" ALS research. "I firmly believe we have to cover the waterfront," he
said. "We have to look short term and long term - we cannot put all the chips on
one or the other."

   Another critic is Abbey Meyers, who heads the National Organization for Rare
Diseases in Fairfield, Conn. She said she understands that affected people and
their families "don't want to just sit back and wait for a cure that may not
come for 100 years."

   "But in the case of ALS, they have no clue as to what causes it," she said,
suggesting that it is better to give money to an established organization with a
large scientific advisory board. "Laymen cannot make knowledgeable decisions
about who to give money to," Meyers added.

   Jamie Heywood, an intense and energetic man whose brain teems with ideas,
concedes it would be unfortunate if the groups siphoned off money from the
mainstream cause and wasted it on flaky projects.

   But he said he doesn't think that's happening - especially since many of the
top scientists the families are working with are the same ones that serve on
advisory boards of the large nonprofits.

   One of those scientists is Dr. Robert Brown, a neurologist and leading ALS
researcher at Massachusetts General Hospital. He is Stephen Heywood's doctor.
He's involved with ALSA as well as several of the family groups, and said he
believes the activists have credibility.

   Moreover, he said that the family movement has come at a propitious time,
when biological science and technology offer much to the effort to cure brain
diseases.

   Brown said that the ALS families aren't just desperate and grasping at
straws. He said they are bringing their energy and money to the ALS problem at a
time when the science has unprecedented potential to slow down or even cure
brain diseases. Among the new avenues are gene therapy and the use of "gene
chips" that can analyze thousands of genes at once to find out what goes wrong
in an ALS-affected nerve cell.

   The hottest ticket in brain medicine, centers on the neuronal stem cells that
Snyder maintains in a culture in his lab. Last year, he showed that infusions of
mouse neural stem cells into the brain would migrate to areas of nerve damage
and turn themselves into neurons, alleviating a nerve disease.

   Project ALS in New York, established by the family of Jenifer Estess, 37, a
theater producer who is severely disabled by the disease, is funding Snyder in a
collaboration with Rothstein at Johns Hopkins and Brown at MGH. Snyder said they
are testing neural stem cells in monkeys, and that human trials might be
launched in two or three years.

   Although the "guerrilla science" activists directly fund their chosen
scientists without the cumbersome review process that the National Institutes of
Health requires, that doesn't mean they ignore safety and ethical reviews.

   "We're not skipping any steps, but doing them all at the same time," said
Jamie Heywood, adding that this strategy saves time by carrying out required
tests in parallel instead of sequentially.

   Thirteen months after his diagnosis, Stephen Heywood has lost much of the use
of his right arm, his left arm is weakening, and he walks unsteadily, sometimes
falling. "What's hard is needing help with something you could do by yourself
the week before," said Heywood, who was amid his first major house renovation
when his right hand began to fail.

   In a recent interview, while his brother helped him eat by cutting his food,
Heywood said, "No matter what stage you're in, you find it is something you can
deal with as long as it doesn't get any worse." But what's so frustrating, he
added, "is that as soon as you think you can handle it - it gets worse."

   Stephen Heywood is the second of three sons of John and Peggy Heywood: their
father is an automotive engineering researcher at MIT. He and Peggy are pillars
of the congregation at Grace Episcopal Church in Newton, where Stephen is to be
married this month to Wendy Stacy, an administrator at the Harvard University
biological laboratories. By coincidence, another member of Grace's relatively
small congregation was recently diagnosed with ALS.

   Undaunted by his prognosis, Stephen and Wendy plan to have children and
continue to enjoy life and travel.

   Peggy Heywood says of her son Stephen, "He's just remarkable. I don't know
how he deals with the loss of his hand and arm. We all say he does better than
the rest of us would."

   Brown, the MGH neurologist, speaks calmly and clinically about ALS and the
fight to cure it. After all the patients he's seen, does he get used to it?

   "No. . .no, no, God, no," he said.

   "They all die of their disease. We've got to do better."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. Stephen Heywood (rear) has ALS. His brother Jamie has raised
more than $500,000 for research. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/PAM BERRY 2. Stephen
Heywood with his fiance, Wendy Stacey. Heywood found out that he had ALS, or Lou
Gehrig's Disease, in December 1998. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/PAM BERRY

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2000


                             945 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 1, 2000, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 450 words

HEADLINE: BETH ISRAEL SAYS FDA KNEW OF DEATHS

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

   While conceding they failed to report three gene therapy deaths to a
government research agency, officials at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
emphasize that they did report these "adverse events" to the US Food and Drug
Administration and received no response.

   The FDA "has more experience with evaluating experimental therapies than
anyone else," said Dr. Michael Rosenblatt, interim president of the medical
center, and who formerly did pharmaceutical industry research.   "It's not as if
these things didn't get reported to a very responsible expert organization in a
timely fashion," Rosenblatt said.

   Medical center officials said they felt unfairly singled out in a Washington
Post story yesterday that focused on the Boston hospital's failure to
immediately report the deaths to the National Institutes of Health's Recombinant
DNA Advisory Committee, or RAC. But those tardy reports were among a total of
652 nationwide that the RAC received after news reports and reminders about the
requirement to report adverse events in gene therapy.

   The new disclosures about more deaths from patients receiving experimental
gene therapy comes as a US Senate subcommittee is holding a hearing, scheduled
for tomorrow, on whether federal oversight of the research is adequate. The
question has been raised by the death last September of an Arizona youth in a
University of Pennsylvania gene therapy test. In the wake of that death, it has
been reported that a number of other deaths and illnesses in gene therapy trials
- whether or not they were due to the experimental treatment - have gone
unreported.

   The three patients at the medical center died in 1998 and 1999 as research
was led by Dr. Richard Junghans, an oncologist at the medical center. The test
of the gene therapy, in which gene-altered immune cells were given to terminally
ill cancer patients, was suspended last year as a result of the deaths.

   But Dr. Leon Goldman, head of the medical center's corporate compliance
organization, said that the physicians who looked into the deaths felt that two
of the three deaths were unrelated to the therapy and the third was
questionable.

   Regardless of what the researchers concluded about the deaths, they were
required to report them to the RAC so that the information could be conveyed to
other scientists carrying out gene therapy trials.

   "Somebody missed their reporting function," said Goldman, "but I don't think
the system failed in terms of looking after the patients' interests."

   He said that nurses caring for the patients, who were so ill they had only
weeks to live, were the first to question the three deaths in the first six
patients to get the treatment.

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2000


                             946 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                     February 1, 2000 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Photo 1: Daisy Ramos, from left, and her husband, Dr. Renato
Ramos, of Bloomfield Hills catch up with Kay Cherones and Cindy Grines of West
Bloomfield Township. Ricardo Thomas / The Detroit News Photo 2: Marian Lam,
widow of Dr. Conrad Lam of Franklin, and her son, Richard Lam of Houston, look
over the dozens of items up for auction, including a two-year lease on a 2000
Ford Mustang GT and a one-of-a kind Judith Leiber evening bag. Ricardo Thomas /
The Detroit News Photo 3: Dr. DouglasWeaver, left, chats with Mike Wilberding, a
member of the board of the Henry Ford Hospital Heart and Vascular Institute.
Wilberding, the general manager of Ogilvy and Mather, was honored as an
outstanding community leader. Ricardo Thomas / The Detroit News; Pg. 3C

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: Society: Sold-out event benefits 'first-class' heart program

BODY:

   In a mere three years, Red Heart Blues and All That Jazz has become one of
the hottest tickets on Metro Detroit's highly competitive charity circuit. And
this year's party only added to the momentum. The sold-out event -- 500 for
drinks, dinner, dancing, jazz and two auctions (silent and live) -- raised
$300,000.

   The glamorous and heady evening at the Somerset Inn in Troy was a
congratulatory one on several levels, benefiting the Heart and Vascular
Institute of Henry Ford Hospital.

   John B. Ponzio, director of public affairs and special events for Henry Ford
Hospital, said the event was special for the cause: healthier hearts and lives
for Detroiters.

   "We need to let the world know we have a first-class heart program in
Detroit," he said.

   While Ponzio supervised the set-up of the dining room still under way 20
minutes after the event began, revelers began their night of celebration
clustered in groups, kidding and nibbling on mounds of crudites and other more
inviting appetizers.

   As the evening continued, Steve Weikal, a sleight-of-hand artist, was doing
disappearing acts with the contents of salt shakers and wedding rings, and
making the right playing card come out of his wallet to the delight of other
partygoers.

   Spotted in the crowd was Bloomfield Hills' Mira Linder, owner of the
eponymous Spa in the City, wearing her trademark necklace that spells out her
name with a few bangles deftly balanced below a choker.

   "I'm on the planning committee," she said of the party. "I'm idealistic,
too."

   A Holocaust survivor, she said she feels her life was spared for a reason and
wants to give back to the community, and working on this party is one of the
ways she can do that.

   Also spied in the crowd was the incredibly slim and regal Mado Lie, who was
accompanied by her spouse, Dr. Kim Lie, a surgeon. They come from Grosse Pointe.

   "It's wonderful and gets better every year," she said of this event.

   Grosse Pointer and co-director of the institute Dr. Norman Silverman spoke
fervently of its commitment to education and research and introduced his
expectant daughter, Leah Gawel. Research into the technology of molecular gene
therapy is one of the fund-raising targets; the institute works with Genentech,
a firm dealing in microbiology and gene therapy, explained guest and event
committee member Sue Gilles.

   The live auction, after a heart smart dinner, was top-heavy in pricey goods:
a two-year lease on a 2000 Mustang convertible, all by its red self in the
reception area, cruises, and a star-studded hockey stick signed by Sergei
Federov and Steve Yzerman, among others.

   The real star of the auction, though, was nestled under its own glass cover
on a bed of red: a Judith Leiber handbag created for the event. Leiber is to
evening bags what Faberge was to eggs. Her little showstopper lived up to its
French title, minaudiere. Patterned with multicolored hearts and musical notes
set into Austrian crystals, it was a heart-stopper.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2002


                             947 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    February 1, 2000, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 1098 words

HEADLINE: Will the 21st century run on green or black gold?

BYLINE: Edward J. Sylvester and Lynn C. Klotz

BODY:

   The last century ran on oil. It fueled the cars that created the
suburbs, where most Americans live. It powered the world's commerce
and its wartime savagery. Abundant oil created the first billionaires;
the lack of it dragged down entire economies.

   And that's just oil in its simplest incarnations. Oil also created
the fertilizers that keep us fed and the plastics used to build
our computers, cars, aircraft, spacecraft and communications and
medical devices. Oil's offspring, as Daniel Yergin writes in The
Prize, are "the bricks and mortar of contemporary civilization,
a civilization that would collapse if the world's oil wells suddenly
went dry."


   But the emperor soon may be deposed. Field crops now have the
potential to replace oil gradually as our source of everything
from fuel to plastics. Black gold may be replaced by green --
unless, that is, this revolution is thwarted by the "green"
opposition to agricultural genetic engineering that is spreading
from food crops to all crops. That, ironically, would force the
world to stick with oil, the product environmentalists most hate.

   If the revolution succeeds, this switch from black to green gold
is the biotechnology most likely to have the biggest day-to-day
effect on our lives this century -- far more, in fact, than gene
therapy and human cloning, the advances most in the spotlight
today.

   This revolution already is under way, its progress hidden by our
fixation on the availability and price of oil. Agricultural wastes
and fast-growing, little-known native crops such as switch grass
are being developed to produce ethanol, a viable gasoline replacement
and for years a major raw material of the chemical industry.

   Remember ethanol? After brief fame during the Arab oil embargoes
of the 1970s, it vanished from public interest as the price of
oil fell, making it uncompetitive. Since then, oil's price has
fluctuated dramatically -- it has more than doubled in the past
year, and can only climb higher in the long run -- but the cost
of ethanol has dropped steadily as experimenters get far greater
yields from improved processes. In 1980, ethanol was $ 4 a gallon;
today, it's $ 1.25. The goal over the next few years is to reduce
that to 76 cents; many believe it can be cut to 50 cents a gallon
within a decade. Even at 76 cents, researchers say, ethanol would
be cost competitive with gasoline -- without ravaging coastlines
with oil spills.

   But here is the fork in the road: If crops economically could
be turned to alcohol by conventional growing methods, we'd all
be commuting on ethanol today. Once ethanol is marginally profitable
as a fuel, the race will be on to engineer the genes of switch
grass and other green feedstocks to get the best yields from the
least and least-valuable acreage.

   Every revolution means tough choices. Could genetically engineered
switch-grass seed damage other plants or wildlife? The odds of
damage never become zero. Using green feedstocks whose seeds cannot
reproduce would reduce the odds of damage, but requires the use
of "terminator" genes created through genetic engineering. What
if this revolution were halted? Demand for oil and coal would
continue to grow, meaning further environmental damage from their
recovery and use.

   Other crop plants are being used to produce the chemical bases
for lower-cost plastics and oils for fuel and lubricants. Last
month, Dow Chemical Co. and Cargill Inc. said they will begin
the first commercial production of plastics made entirely from
corn rather than petroleum. Ford already uses plastics strengthened
with fibers from the plant kenaf to make a stronger product with
less petroleum. Federally sponsored efforts have produced construction
materials -- replacements for wood, stone and plastic -- from
straw and fiber crops such as kenaf, which grows an incredible
12 feet in one year.

   "Industrial farmers" should be able to grow enough fuels and
chemicals to nearly eliminate our dependence on foreign oil within
25 years. Experts predict the United States ultimately could produce
75 billion gallons of ethyl alcohol a year from 50 million acres
of underused farmland -- more ethanol than the 70 billion gallons
of gasoline we now derive from imported oil.

   Cleaner fuel cleanly produced. Strong building materials from
rapidly renewable sources. Plastics from less oil. A cornucopia?

   Maybe. Right now, however, businesses and governments in the industrialized
world are facing tough choices and mounting protests. Ironically,
the protesters, like it or not, will face the same tough choices.

   Anti-biotechnology groups, swelling in size but still mostly in
Europe, are saying no to biotechnology developments: No genetically
engineered pest resistance, which could eliminate oil-based chemical
pesticides and their residues. No genetically engineered herbicide
resistance, which allows greater yields of food crops at lower
cost and the use of more environmentally friendly herbicides.

   Strangely, the protesters include groups that traditionally are
the most vocal opponents of "King Oil" and industrial methods
that lay waste to the environment. They don't want oil, but they
don't want biotech, either.

   The only way to achieve such a pre-industrial status quo is to
force the world to live on radically less energy and forgo the
economic growth that comes with energy development. That won't
happen.

   Hard bargains lie ahead. No group or government will give carte
blanche to any industry to press ahead for its own profit without
requirements to ensure safety and to avoid or reduce economic
dislocation. Nor should it.

   But one choice can be stated simply: Green gold or black. Assuming
that the world's population will expand and will try to thrive
economically, we either must support agricultural biotechnology's
quest to find alternative energy sources and reduce crops' energy
needs, or we must support increased oil exploration and production,
indefinitely.

   We cannot have it both ways.

   New agriculture's promises must be developed carefully. By all
means, regulate and field test when called for -- but regulate
the product, not the process. Genetically engineered crops inherently
present less risk than those traditionally bred.

   If our traditional industrial methods have taught us anything,
it is that care and caution must accompany every revolution. That
should have been the rule for the last industrial revolution.
We need to make it so this time.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Sam Ward, USA TODAY (Illustration)

LOAD-DATE: February 01, 2000


                             948 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                       January 31, 2000 Monday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 802 words

HEADLINE: TROUBLING OUTCOMES IN GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: DEBORAH NELSON And RICK WEISS; Washington Post

BODY:

   A Harvard-affiliated hospital in Boston quietly suspended a gene therapy
experiment last summer after three of the first six patients died and a seventh
fell seriously ill, previously unreleased research records show.

   Richard Junghans, the Harvard Medical School researcher who led the study,
blames the problems on a series of tragic coincidences that were mostly not
related to the treatment. But the federal committee that oversees gene therapy
had no chance to question that conclusion, nor could it share it with other
scientists working on similar experiments. That is because Junghans did not
report the deaths or illness to the National Institutes of Health when they
occurred, as required by federal regulations.

   Junghans isn't alone in his lapses. His were among hundreds of tardily
submitted "adverse event" reports that the NIH recently received in response to
news articles and stern agency directives last fall reminding gene researchers
of their legal obligation.

   Reports of 691 serious adverse events in gene therapy experiments swamped the
NIH as a result of the agency's reminders.  Officials hope the reports will shed
light on the mysterious September death of 18-year- old Jesse Gelsinger in a
University of Pennsylvania trial. The Washington Post obtained the reports
through a Freedom of Information Act request.

   Federal rules demand that such reports be filed "immediately" as problems
arise.  But 652 of the 691 had never before been seen by the NIH, according to
an agency summary requested by Rep. Henry A. Waxman, D-Calif. That means fewer
than 6 percent were filed on time.

   Moreover, those records indicated that at least some of the previously
unreported deaths remained unexplained. That raises the specter that Gelsinger
was not the first person to be killed by gene therapy, as researchers have
presumed, but the first to be reported as such to the NIH.

   Gene therapy is a field of experimental medicine that aims to cure diseases
by changing people's genetic makeup, but has yet to provide a cure after 10
years of studies on thousands of patients.

   The surprising discovery that so many medical problems in gene therapy
experiments had not been reported to the NIH, and the disturbing questions
raised by many of the reports, come at a crucial time for the controversial
field.

   Just 10 days ago, the Food and Drug Administration shut down the University
of Pennsylvania's prestigious gene therapy program. An agency investigation had
uncovered multiple lapses, some of which might have contributed to Gelsinger's
death.

   Because of public uneasiness about the long-term consequences of genetic
engineering, gene therapy has always been subject to extra regulatory oversight.
Most notably, all deaths and serious illnesses suffered by volunteers enrolled
in gene experiments must be reported not only to the FDA but also to the NIH,
even if the sponsor thinks they were not caused by the treatment.

   Unlike the FDA, which keeps the reports secret, the NIH presents them at open
meetings and makes them available to other scientists and the public.

   Evidence began to emerge last year that some researchers were not following
those rules. But the full extent of the problem remained unknown until last
month. That is when NIH officials tallied the results of their nationwide appeal
to researchers conducting gene therapy experiments similar to the one that
killed Gelsinger.

   Many patients, it turns out, suffered fevers, clotting abnormalities and
serious drops in blood pressure, symptoms reminiscent of those that presaged
Gelsinger's death. Other reports describe problems caused by medical procedures
used to deliver genes. Experiments in which genes are injected into brain
tumors, for example, have repeatedly led to neurological problems such as
partial paralysis and speech impairment, apparently caused by needle damage to
the brain.

   Throughout the reports to the NIH, scientists repeatedly acknowledge that
their gene treatments caused various nonlethal symptoms. But the scientists
invariably conclude that any deaths likely resulted from underlying illnesses or
other causes.  Those conclusions are difficult to challenge because families
frequently decline autopsies, and because most experiments recruit people who
are so ill that the ultimate cause of death might be hard to determine, or easy
to obscure, giving what one leading researcher termed "plausible deniability."

   Junghans' experiment with terminally ill cancer patients provides an example
of the difficulties inherent in interpreting medical complications and the
potential value of timely reporting to federal regulators.

   The first death in that study, conducted at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, was a 74-year-old woman whose colon cancer had spread to other organs.


LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2000


                             949 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                     January 31, 2000, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 9; National Desk

LENGTH: 110 words

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF / MASSACHUSETTS;
 HOSPITAL SUSPENDS GENE THERAPY TESTS

BYLINE: From Times Wire Reports

BODY:


   A Harvard-affiliated hospital in Boston quietly suspended a gene therapy
experiment last summer after three of the first six patients died and a seventh
fell seriously ill, previously unreleased research records show. Richard
Junghans, the Harvard Medical School researcher who led the study, blamed the
problems on a series of tragic coincidences that were mostly not related to the
treatment. Junghans' reports were among hundreds of tardily submitted "adverse
event" reports that the National Institutes of Health has received in response
to news articles and stern agency directives last fall reminding gene
researchers of their legal obligation.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2000


                             950 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     January 31, 2000 Monday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 500 words

HEADLINE: Report suggests more gene therapy deaths;
Previously unreleased documents show hundreds of unreported problems

BYLINE: DEBORAH NELSON AND RICK WEISS Washington Post

BODY:

   A Harvard-affiliated hospital in Boston quietly suspended a gene therapy
experiment last summer after three of the first six patients died and a seventh
fell seriously ill, previously unreleased research records show.

   Richard Junghans, the Harvard Medical School researcher who led the study,
blames the problems on a series of tragic coincidences that were mostly not
related to the treatment. But the federal committee that oversees gene therapy
had no chance to question that conclusion -- or share it with other scientists
working on similar experiments -- because Junghans did not report the deaths or
illness to the National Institutes of Health when they occurred, as required by
federal regulations.

   Junghans isn't alone in his lapses. His were among hundreds of tardily
submitted "adverse event" reports that the NIH recently received in response to
news articles and stern agency directives last fall reminding gene researchers
of their legal obligation.

   Reports of 691 serious adverse events in gene therapy experiments swamped the
NIH as a result of the agency's reminders, which officials hope will shed light
on the mysterious September death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger in a University
of Pennsylvania trial. The Washington Post obtained the reports through a
Freedom of Information Act request.

   Federal rules demand that such reports be filed "immediately" as problems
arise. But 652 of the 691 had never before been seen by the NIH, according to an
agency summary requested by Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D-Calif.). That means less
than 6% were filed on time.

   Moreover, those records indicated that at least some of the previously
unreported deaths remained unexplained. That raises the specter that Gelsinger
was not the first person to be killed by gene therapy, as researchers have
presumed, but the first to be reported as such to the NIH.

   Gene therapy is a field of experimental medicine that aims to cure diseases
by changing people's genetic makeup, but it has yet to provide a cure after 10
years of studies on thousands of patients.

   The surprising discovery that so many medical problems in gene therapy
experiments had not been reported to the NIH, and the disturbing questions
raised by many of the reports, come at a crucial time for the controversial
field.

   Just 10 days ago, the Food and Drug Administration shut down the University
of Pennsylvania's prestigious gene therapy program after an agency investigation
uncovered multiple lapses, some of which might have contributed to Gelsinger's
death.

   Sen. Bill Frist (R- Tenn.) has scheduled a hearing Wednesday to consider
whether federal oversight of gene therapy is adequate. Among those due to
testify are Gelsinger's father, who says federal regulators did not do enough to
protect his son, and a representative of the Biotechnology Industry
Organization, which is seeking regulatory changes that could decrease public
reporting of certain adverse events that the organization considers proprietary.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2000


                             951 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2000 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                            January 31, 2000, Monday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 007

LENGTH: 340 words

HEADLINE: GENE BREAKTHROUGH COULD BEAT CANCER

BYLINE: Bill Hoffmann

BODY:

   A miraculous gene-therapy treatment is credited with curing a woman dying
from ovarian cancer.

   It marks the first successful use of gene therapy against any cancer and
could lead to cures for other forms of the disease, scientists say.

   The treatment consisted of cancerous tissues being infected with a simple
cold virus that had been modified to carry human genetic material.

   That stopped the cancer cells from multiplying.

   The treatment was administered to a critically-ill British woman at Royal
Marsden Hospital in London four years ago.

   But it has taken until now to be certain she is cancer-free.

   "This is the first time gene therapy has cured ovarian cancer and it is a
major breakthrough," said Dr. Norman Nevin, professor of medical genetics at
Queen's University.

   "Any ovarian cancer patient who is alive after four years is regarded as
cured."

   Details of the treatment are to be published in a medical journal next month.

   The ovarian cancer success is the second breakthrough in two months.

   In December, doctors in Paris had achieved the world's first gene-therapy
cure for a genetic disease.

   The doctors, who operated on several patients -- including a 12-month-old boy
-- believe they have succeeded in curing an inherited immune deficiency disease
in babies -- by changing the gene.

   The ovarian cancer cure is significant because the disease is hard to treat.

   Each year about 5,000 women contract the cancer and about 4,000 die.

   In most cases, the ovarian tumors grow deep in the body and cannot be
detected until they are so large that they are inoperable.

   Now, it's possible other cancers may be cured using gene therapy.

   More than 3,000 patients worldwide are taking part in gene-therapy trials
involving such diseases as cancer, AIDS and heart disease.

   And scientists in Ottawa, Ontario, have found a gene linked to suicide.
People with a particular mutation are more than twice as likely to kill
themselves.

   The discovery means people with suicidal tendencies could be screened.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2000


                             952 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    January 31, 2000, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 679 words

HEADLINE: Our Flimsy Surveillance of Science

BYLINE: Daniel S. Greenberg

BODY:


   George Bernard Shaw counseled against allowing a doctor a financial interest
in cutting off your leg. The wisdom of that principle is unassailable. But it
rates few salutes on the gold-rush frontiers of medical science, where
scientists at elite universities have been accused of conducting rogue research
at the peril of trusting patients.

   Are these episodes relatively rare and overblown, as the spokesmen for
science contend? Or are they symptomatic of widespread disregard of safety and
ethics regulations in the race for cures, biomedical glory and financial profit?

   No one knows for sure. With a budget last year of $ 15.6 billion, the
National Institutes of Health allotted $ 2.6 million to its ethics and safety
enforcer, the Office for Protection from Research Risks--which employed one
full-time investigator to cover 4,000 research organizations that received NIH
money. The office since has been reorganized and upgraded a bit, and other
government agencies are in the picture, too. But they are all underfinanced and
overextended.

   Occasionally, however, they can't avoid pouncing. In a highly publicized
revelation of suspect human experimentation, seven research projects at the
University of Pennsylvania's Institute for Human Gene Therapy were halted Jan.
21 by the Food and Drug Administration following the death of an 18-year-old who
received a gene-based drug for treatment of a rare liver disorder.

   The FDA charged the Pennsylvania research program with "numerous serious
deficiencies," including long delays in reports of fatal animal experiments and
serious side effects in human patients, failure to report important changes in
the program, inadequate supervision by the legally required institutional review
board and neglect of informed-consent procedures. Last May, 2,000 federally
financed medical research projects at Duke University were suspended for four
days by federal authorities who accused Duke of a rubber-stamp review system and
neglect of informed-consent procedures.

   Just before that, the Department of Veterans Affairs temporarily shut down
research at its extensive facilities in the Los Angeles area because of safety
and ethics concerns. The episodes differ in detail, but their common background
is the extraordinary economic boom in the medical sciences, the intense
competition among universities for scientific superstars and the explosion of
opportunities for personal riches from the commercialization of academic
research. It's a rare heavy hitter in the academic bio-sciences these days who
doesn't have a deal going with a profit-seeking biotechnology firm.

   The Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the University of Pennsylvania,
directed by James M. Wilson, was financed partially by a biotech company Wilson
founded--an arrangement that has drawn interest of government investigators.

   As required by federal research regulations, locally appointed institutional
review boards are supposed to guard patients' rights and safety in medical
experimentation at universities and hospitals. However, when the General
Accounting Office looked at the review system several years ago, it found that
many of the boards were overwhelmed and understaffed, that quick, superficial
reviews were common and that in some instances, scientists sat as applicant and
judge.

   Two years ago, the inspector general of the Department of Health and Human
Services warned that review boards were caught between their ethical
responsibilities and local pressures to let the projects proceed.

   Among the leaders of research, the federal regulations, flimsy as they are,
tend to be regarded as a nuisance that must be tolerated. The head of the
Association of American Medical Colleges, Jordan Cohen, takes the entitlement
mentality to a new academic high. He says if Washington wants better
surveillance of the research it finances, it should provide money to staff and
run the local institutional review boards.


   The writer is a Washington journalist specializing in science, medicine and
politics.




LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2000


                             953 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post



                    January 31, 2000, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1793 words

HEADLINE: Earlier Gene Test Deaths Not Reported; NIH Was Unaware Of 'Adverse
Events'

BYLINE: Deborah Nelson; Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   A Harvard-affiliated hospital in Boston quietly suspended a gene therapy
experiment last summer after three of the first six patients died and a seventh
fell seriously ill, previously unreleased research records show.

   Richard Junghans, the Harvard Medical School researcher who led the study,
blames the problems on a series of tragic coincidences that were mostly not
related to the treatment. But the federal committee that oversees gene therapy
had no chance to question that conclusion--or share it with other scientists
working on similar experiments--because Junghans did not report the deaths or
illness to the National Institutes of Health when they occurred, as required by
federal regulations.

   Junghans isn't alone in his lapses. His were among hundreds of tardily
submitted "adverse event" reports that the NIH recently received in response to
news articles and stern agency directives last fall reminding gene researchers
of their legal obligation.

   Reports of 691 serious adverse events in gene therapy experiments swamped the
NIH as a result of the agency's reminders, which officials hope will shed light
on the mysterious September death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger in a University
of Pennsylvania trial. The Washington Post obtained the reports through a
Freedom of Information Act request.

   Federal rules demand that such reports be filed "immediately" as problems
arise. But 652 of the 691 had never before been seen by the NIH, according to an
agency summary requested by Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D-Calif.). That means less
than 6 percent were filed on time.

   Moreover, those records indicated that at least some of the previously
unreported deaths remained unexplained. That raises the specter that Gelsinger
was not the first person to be killed by gene therapy, as researchers have
presumed, but the first to be reported as such to the NIH.

   Gene therapy is a field of experimental medicine that aims to cure diseases
by changing people's genetic makeup, but has yet to provide a cure after 10
years of studies on thousands of patients.

   The surprising discovery that so many medical problems in gene therapy
experiments had not been reported to the NIH, and the disturbing questions
raised by many of the reports, come at a crucial time for the controversial
field.

   Just 10 days ago, the Food and Drug Administration shut down the University
of Pennsylvania's prestigious gene therapy program after an agency investigation
uncovered multiple lapses, some of which may have contributed to Gelsinger's
death.

   Sen. Bill Frist (R-Tenn.) has scheduled a hearing Wednesday to consider
whether federal oversight of gene therapy is adequate. Among those due to
testify are Gelsinger's father, who believes that federal regulators did not do
enough to protect his son, and a representative of the Biotechnology Industry
Organization, which is seeking regulatory changes that could decrease public
reporting of certain adverse events that the organization considers proprietary.

   Whatever Congress and federal regulators decide, the new findings of chronic
noncompliance with existing rules offer compelling evidence that the current
system is broken.

   Because of public uneasiness about the long-term consequences of genetic
engineering, gene therapy has always been subject to extra regulatory oversight.
Most notably, all deaths and serious illnesses suffered by volunteers enrolled
in gene experiments must be reported not only to the FDA but also to the NIH,
even if the sponsor thinks they were not caused by the treatment.

   Unlike the FDA, which keeps the reports secret, the NIH presents them at open
meetings and makes them available to other scientists and the public.

   Evidence began to emerge last year that some researchers were not following
those rules. But the full extent of the problem remained unknown until last
month, when NIH officials tallied the results of their nationwide appeal to
researchers conducting gene therapy experiments similar to the one that killed
Gelsinger.

   Many patients, it turns out, suffered fevers, clotting abnormalities and
serious drops in blood pressure, symptoms reminiscent of those that presaged
Gelsinger's death. Other reports describe problems caused by medical procedures
used to deliver genes. Experiments in which genes are injected into brain
tumors, for example, have repeatedly led to neurological problems such as
partial paralysis and speech impairment, apparently caused by needle damage to
the brain.

   Throughout the reports to the NIH, scientists repeatedly acknowledge that
their gene treatments caused various nonlethal symptoms, but they invariably
conclude that any deaths likely resulted from underlying illnesses or other
causes. Those conclusions are difficult to challenge because families frequently
decline autopsies, and because most experiments recruit people who are so ill
that the ultimate cause of death may be hard to determine, or easy to obscure,
giving what one leading researcher termed "plausible deniability."

   Junghans's experiment, which included serious side effects and a sudden,
unexplained death in his group of terminally ill cancer patients, provides an
example of the difficulties inherent in interpreting medical complications and
the potential value of timely reporting to federal regulators.

   The first death in that study, conducted at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, was a 74-year-old woman whose colon cancer had spread to other organs.
She fell ill in July 1998, eight hours after an infusion of gene-altered cells
that were meant to attack her cancer. She developed severe gastrointestinal
bleeding, refused further medical care and died four days later. Although the
altered cells are capable of attacking normal intestinal cells, Junghans
concluded that the woman's underlying illness rather than the treatment probably
caused the bleeding. The family declined an autopsy, he said.

   Next was a 46-year-old woman with recurrent breast cancer that had spread to
her liver, who died within a month of her last infusion. Her death too was
caused by her cancer, Junghans concluded.

   The third death remains unexplained. A 74-year-old man with colorectal cancer
experienced fever and heart flutters immediately after several infusions over
six months. Within two hours after his last infusion Feb. 1, he began getting
chest pains and heart rhythm abnormalities, prompting physicians to keep him in
the hospital overnight. When he didn't return for his appointment with the
researchers Feb. 3, Junghans called the police. They found the man dead at home.

   The cause could not be determined, even after an autopsy, but Junghans said
it was not related to the treatment, as the engineered cells are not known to
affect the heart.

   However, the next cancer patient to undergo the experimental treatment, a
64-year-old man with rectal cancer, immediately developed severe heartbeat
abnormalities, a high fever that lasted 36 hours, diarrhea and a drop in blood
pressure. He required drugs, intravenous fluids and oxygen to recover. After
that, Junghans concluded that the therapy probably caused the fever, which in
turn triggered the heart problems.

   At that point last June, Junghans said in an interview, the researchers
stopped enrolling new patients in order to conduct what he called a "mid-study
review." Beth Israel spokesman Bill Schaller later acknowledged, when pressed by
reporters, that hospital officials had actually suspended the study because of
patient safety concerns. Now the protocol is being reworded to preclude
volunteers with heart problems, Junghans and Schaller said.

   Junghans said he reported the deaths and illnesses to the FDA but didn't know
he was supposed to also notify the NIH immediately until he read news reports
last fall about the failure of other researchers to report volunteers' deaths to
the NIH.

   "We were in a panic when we found out the [NIH] wanted all these reports, so
we got on it," Junghans said. "It was not out of any wish to avoid . . . public
exposure. It was really innocent."

   One of the researchers named in the news that alarmed Junghans was Jeffrey
Isner from Tufts University, who had failed to notify NIH promptly when two
volunteers died in his widely publicized gene experiments aimed at growing new
blood vessels. Isner, who founded Vascular Genetics, which sponsored his study,
has said he believes both deaths were unrelated to the treatment.

   After The Washington Post revealed those lapses last fall, Isner's company
submitted a detailed report to the NIH on one of the patient deaths that
revealed that the cause of the man's "unfortunate death" had not been
determined. But, as with Junghans, that didn't stop Isner from concluding that
the gene treatment was not responsible.

   That kind of reasoning doesn't pass muster with some critics.

   "You have to find out what it is before you can rule out what it's not.
That's just logic," said Vera Hassner Sharav of Citizens for Responsible Care
and Research in New York. "Otherwise it's basically a denial of responsibility."

   Isner did not return phone calls.

   It's not clear why so few researchers have been keeping the NIH apprised of
complications. Some have said they thought the NIH reporting requirement got
dropped in 1996, when the NIH lost its power to approve or disapprove gene
therapy proposals as part of a streamlining that shifted that authority to the
FDA. But the requirement that all adverse events be reported fully and
immediately to the NIH was not affected, and it is stated plainly on every
letter of approval that goes out to researchers when they first gain permission
to start their experiments.

   Others have candidly said that public disclosure of adverse events in a gene
study--even those not caused by the new genes--can shake investor confidence in
a gene therapy company.

   Yet there are advantages to the dual system of reporting, some researchers
and regulators said. Federal law greatly restricts the FDA's freedom to
publicize side effects of experimental therapies or inform researchers about
possible problems at competing institutions. Indeed, an FDA official said the
agency cannot disclose whether it's investigating the Harvard experiment, even
though it's the type of case that might attract agency attention.

   By contrast, the NIH can share that kind of information.

   "I want to know of any problems other people are having with the same kinds
of cells we're using," said Eli Gilboa of Duke University, who does research
involving the same cancer molecule that Junghans is testing. The NIH's public
disclosure of adverse events "is critical," Gilboa said, "for all the clinical
investigators who want to do a good job."


LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2000


                             954 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    January 30, 2000, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Pg. B03

LENGTH: 2479 words

HEADLINE: A LOOK AT . . . Informed Consent; A Lot of Rules, Too Many Exceptions

BYLINE: Abbey S. Meyers

BODY:


   The highly publicized death in September of an 18-year-old patient in a
clinical trial at one of the largest academic gene therapy centers in the
world--the University of Pennsylvania's Institute for Human Gene Therapy--has
spurred a host of investigations and recriminations. It has also prompted some
people to ask a question we shall never be able to answer for sure: If Jesse
Gelsinger had known that monkeys had died from the therapy before it was given
to humans and that several previous participants had suffered serious toxic
reactions to the kind of treatment he was volunteering to undergo, would he have
agreed to take part in the trial?

   More generally, can we be certain that participants in the proliferating
number of experiments being conducted in other centers around the country have
been given the information they need before agreeing to participate?

   My experience as a former member of the National Institutes of Health
advisory committee that oversees gene therapy research suggests that the likely
answer to both those questions is no. Gelsinger's untimely death has exposed the
shortcomings in the system we have developed to protect patients. Some
researchers seem to view the process of informing patients about experiments as
a necessary hindrance in their race for scientific glory--and financial reward.
Gelsinger's story is viewed by many as an aberration. I believe, however, that
it may fit a pattern. Some researchers--not all--don't take seriously enough the
need for informed consent, despite the abuses of the past.

   Certainly, many of the greatest triumphs of the past 100 years were the
accomplishments of medical researchers who tamed rheumatic fever, eradicated
smallpox and polio and discovered the magical potency of antibiotics to win
countless victories over disease and death.

   But for every story of medical success there is a darker one of medical
abuse: the Nazi experiments on defenseless minorities; the Tuskegee experiment
in which African American men with syphilis were purposely denied medical
treatment for decades by American physicians; and numerous unethical experiments
on the mentally retarded and mentally ill who were confined to U.S.
institutions. History teaches that we should be cautious about allowing
researchers to pursue their investigations without government oversight and
regulation to ensure that their research will be meaningful and patients will be
adequately protected.

   The Nuremberg trials revealed the full horror of medical experiments
conducted by Nazi scientists during World War II--and created the political
resolve in industrialized countries to establish rules that would protect human
subjects in all future clinical experiments. In the United States, this code of
conduct for scientific research became known as the "Common Rule," and it was
last revised by the federal government in 1981.

   The Common Rule requires that all patients--or their legal guardians--who
volunteer to participate in clinical trials be fully informed about the details
of the experiment. They must have a complete understanding of the risks (even
the possibility of unknown dangers) as well as the potential benefits of the
experiment. For example, in an early (Phase I) clinical trial, which is
conducted solely for the purpose of determining the safety (not the
effectiveness) of a treatment, volunteers must be told that they should not
expect any personal benefit from the experiment, although the knowledge that
scientists will gain from the trial is likely to help other patients in the
future. In essence, the motivation for participation must be altruistic--a
desire to help humanity, not a desire to help oneself.

   The National Research Act of 1974 led to legal protections for all volunteers
who participate in medical and psychological research that involve federal
funds. The responsibility for ensuring that these rules are obeyed is assigned
to an institutional review board (IRB) located at every facility in the United
States that conducts research on humans, as long as the institution receives
federal money. Privately funded research is not affected. The IRB must ensure
that each experiment is scientifically and ethically sound, and must monitor its
progress to ensure that patients' rights are adequately protected.
Unfortunately, IRBs have been overburdened and underfunded. In recent months,
the federal government has stopped all human research at several
universities--including Duke University Medical Center, Rush-Presbyterian-St.
Luke's Medical Center in Chicago, and West Los Angeles Medical Center--because
their IRBs were failing to comply with patient protection rules.

   These sorts of shortcomings are particularly troubling in the swiftly moving
field of gene therapy. If the example of Gelsinger is anything to go by--and the
closings of these other medical centers suggests it is--patients are not being
fully and truthfully informed before being asked to give their consent to
participate.

   Unlike the infamous experiments that led to the adoption of the Common Rule,
modern gene therapy research is primarily funded by private companies, not the
government. That's an important distinction. While government-funded academics
must share information about their experiments, corporate funding often requires
scientists to keep information secret: Companies often insist that releasing
research information may provide an advantage to their competitors. If they
release news, it is often carefully tailored good news, while the bad news
remains hidden in the "trade secret" closet.

   The result is that many people have the mistaken impression that gene therapy
is already curing people (so far, however, there have been no documented cures),
and pin false hopes on the technology. Cancer patients, for example, will often
demand admission into a gene therapy trial because it represents their "last
chance" to be cured. It is worth noting that the great majority of gene therapy
experiments are not conducted on genetic diseases, which are too rare to
encourage investment capital, but on cancer, primarily because investors sense
that a potential treatment for cancer will be more profitable.

   Gene therapy has always been a controversial area of science, because it has
the potential to change the essence of the human race. In recognition of this,
the government assigned the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC) at the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) the task of overseeing development of the
technology. Composed of volunteer scientists, expert bioethicists, consumer
advocates and others who discuss each trial at quarterly public meetings, the
RAC created rules called "Points to Consider." Gene therapy researchers must
obey these rules if any patients in the trial are treated at a hospital that
receives federal funds. But trials sponsored by private companies do not have to
obey the rules if patients do not use facilities receiving federal funds.

   There have been a number of problems with putting those rules into effect.
When members of the RAC have complained that an informed consent document is
inaccurate or misleading, they are reminded that only the local IRB has
authority to dictate the words in the document. Not even the Food and Drug
Administration has any authority over the wording. (The agency focuses solely on
science, not ethics, so it cannot demand that a doctor disclose to patients in a
trial that he or she owns shares in the sponsoring company and thus stands to
benefit financially from the product being tested.) The sole authority for
approving informed consent documents--the local IRB--is not required to have any
members who are knowledgeable about the technology that they are reviewing.

   Members of an IRB (mostly staff of the institution) are usually keenly aware
of the need to attract government and industry research grants, and often are
unwilling to be too demanding when asked to revise informed consent documents.
It sometimes appears that IRBs are more concerned about protecting their
institutions' liability concerns than about protecting patients.

   In 1994, the RAC's Working Group on Informed Consent strengthened the Points
to Consider rules and spelled out exactly what each consent document should
address. Of course it is a challenge to make the highly technical work of modern
research scientists comprehensible to patients, but the Points to Consider set
up some straightforward rules: They require that informed consent documents must
be written in understandable language and they state that any adverse effects
seen in animal studies and patients who previously participated in the
experiment must be disclosed. Nevertheless, researchers and IRBs largely
continue to ignore these rules. The FDA, which does not have any bioethicists on
its staff, continues to approve new trials with inadequately worded informed
consent documents.


   In recent years, the RAC's authority over gene therapy research has also
lessened. In 1996, Harold Varmus, as director of the NIH, withdrew the RAC's
authority to approve gene therapy protocols, which greatly diminished its
oversight. Today, the RAC is left with only moral suasion, especially with
regard to informed consent documents.

   After Jesse Gelsinger died from multiple-organ failure, brought on by the
infusion of genetically altered cold viruses into his diseased liver, the FDA
found some glaring violations. The informed consent document Gelsinger signed
was very different from the documents the RAC had reviewed, and even different
from the so-called "final" document that the FDA had seen. Information about the
deaths of monkeys in the pre-clinical studies had been deleted, and there was no
mention of several serious adverse events experienced by patients who preceded
Gelsinger in this trial. As a result, all seven of the University of
Pennsylvania's gene therapy studies were recently suspended.

   Some of these problems were undoubtedly peculiar to this trial. But the
oversight system failed to prevent serious violations of patient protection
rules. Gelsinger's death shows that we must take a closer look at these
guidelines. After all, gene therapy is only one of many burgeoning biomedical
advances. Soon xenotransplantation, stem cells, cloning, in-utero transplants,
fetal gene transfers and many as-yet unimaginable giant steps in medicine will
be approaching the clinic.

   Next week, as a result of the investigations into Gelsinger's death, there
will be congressional hearings on gene therapy trials. Now is the time to build
the political resolve to fix this problem, before more tragedies occur. We
should not allow the Gelsinger case to stop the progress of gene therapy
research. The research must move forward with the appropriate patient
protections firmly in place to ensure that all clinical trial volunteers are
fully informed before they are asked to give their consent.



   Abbey Meyers, the founder and president of the National Organization for Rare
Disorders, was a member of the National Institute of Health's Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee's (RAC) Gene Therapy Subcommittee from 1989 to 1992, and a
member of the full RAC from 1993 to 1996.


   Even Before Nuremberg


   The Nuremberg Code of 1947 is usually referred to as the prototype for
regulations regarding informed consent, but debate over medical experimentation
goes back to 19th-century Prussia. In 1898, a University of Breslau professor of
venereology named Albert Neisser injected serum from syphilitic patients (most
of whom were prostitutes) into patients being treated for other conditions. The
patients were not informed about the injections nor asked for their consent.
When some of them contracted syphilis, Neisser denied his trials were the cause.
But news of his experiment prompted a public outcry.

   Berlin psychiatrist Albert Moll was one of the few academic physicians who
did not side with Neisser at the time. He collected evidence from 600 cases of
unethical, non-therapeutic research on humans and called for a new practice:
informed consent. Neisser was fined for his actions by the Prussian Royal
Disciplinary Court, according to a 1996 account by the British Medical
Association.

   After the court's action, the Prussian government formed a commission to
study the matter further. In 1900, Prussian hospitals and clinics were ordered
to perform medical interventions only for diagnosis, healing and immunization--
unless "the human subject was a minor or not competent for other reasons" or if
the subject "had not given his or her unambiguous consent" after "proper
explanation of the possible negative consequences" of the intervention.
Unfortunately, the directive was not legally binding, which could account for
its lack of historical impact.

   Thirty years later, the Nazi government issued legal guidelines, based on a
doctrine of informed consent, that were meant to minimize risk for human
subjects. The wording was remarkably similar to informed consent documents
today. The guidelines obviously did not keep Nazi doctors from performing
unethical experiments on concentration camp prisoners during World War II. The
ethical regulations in human medical research--and the doctrine of informed
consent that came about as a result of the Nuremberg trials--were the ones with
staying power.


   Cases


   Judgment calls about how and when to pursue informed consent are often
controversial. Examples in the news during the late 1990s:


   * At a hospital in Philadelphia, doctors treating a 31-year-old man with a
particular type of benign brain tumor recommended an untested variation on the
usual course of radiation. They did not get the man's consent; he suffered an
incapacitating stroke after the treatment. The neurosurgeons had not sought
experimental status for the procedure, nor had they submitted their proposal to
a hospital review board until they had treated several other patients, more than
a year later. A malpractice suit against the doctors and the hospital is set for
trial in mid-February.


   * One hundred severely injured trauma victims admitted to emergency rooms
across the country were unwitting participants in a drug company's clinical
trial for a new blood substitute intended to aid patients in hemorrhagic shock.
The product was used to treat 52 patients categorized as having a high expected
mortality rate due to their injuries; 24 died, leading the manufacturer to stop
the trial. Under government rules, the trial was legal; an FDA waiver allowed
the drug company to test its product on trauma victims who are unconscious or
otherwise unable to give consent. The hospitals conducting such trials are
supposed to notify their communities well in advance. A similar trial using the
same blood substitute is ongoing in European hospitals.


GRAPHIC: Illustration, jean-francois allaux for The Washington Post

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2000


                             955 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                January 29, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 176 words

HEADLINE: Ethics and Research

BODY:


   To the Editor:

   Re "Gene Therapy Ordered Halted at University" (front page, Jan. 22), about
the death of Jesse Gelsinger at the University of Pennsylvania that was caused
by an immune reaction to gene therapy:

    The ethics watchdogs in medical schools are expected to review clinical
experiments at arm's length, during meetings of institutional review boards.
Review boards in each institution that engages in federally financed clinical
research assess the ethical quality of research protocols. They rarely do
on-site monitoring of experimental arrangements. Rather, they use a kind of
honor system and simply read the forms submitted for approval. When I served as
an ethicist on one such board, my suggestion that we do on-site inspection of
cutting-edge research was dismissed.

   It may be that we need to monitor clinical research much more thoroughly, and
be much more honest about the dangers of such research.

JOHN DOUARD
Montclair, N.J., Jan. 22, 2000

The writer is an adjunct professor of philosophy at Rutgers University.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2000


                             956 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JANUARY 29, 2000 Saturday D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 699 words

HEADLINE: PENN'S PROGRAM FOR GENE THERAPY TAKES A NEW HIT PROMPTED BY FDA
CONCERN, THE MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY ASSOCIATION DECIDES TO HALT FUNDING FOR A HUMAN
TRIAL.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In another blow to the University of Pennsylvania's world-renowned
gene-therapy program, the Muscular Dystrophy Association said yesterday it was
suspending its financial support for a gene-therapy trial being overseen by
Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

   The action, announced in a brief statement, was prompted by the federal
government's recent decision to temporarily halt eight human gene-therapy trials
at Penn's institute because of concerns about patient safety, said R. Rodney
Howell, a pediatrician at the University of Miami.

   "MDA's commitment to patient safety is paramount," said Howell, who chairs
the association's scientific advisory board. He said the action was taken as a
precaution and that there have been no problems with the muscular dystrophy
trial.

   In investigating the Sept. 17 death of an Arizona teenager during a
gene-therapy experiment at Penn, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration found
that procedures at Penn's highly regarded gene-therapy institute were so lax
that patient safety could not be guaranteed.

   As a result, the FDA on Jan. 21 halted all human trials - including a
muscular dystrophy trial - being overseen by the institute and its director,
James M. Wilson, widely regarded as among the nation's most talented
gene-therapy researchers.

   Penn has not yet responded to the FDA's critique of the institute trial in
which Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died, but its scientists have
described any problems that occurred as largely procedural errors that did not
cause Gelsinger's death.

   It was not immediately clear how much money the Muscular Dystrophy
Association has put into Penn's gene-therapy trial, which is aimed at testing a
possible cure for one form of the devastating disease. Association officials
could not be reached for comment and Penn officials said they had no immediate
figures.

   According to the association's Web site, it is currently giving at least
$1.16 million to Wilson and other researchers at Penn's gene-therapy institute.
The institute's total annual budget is about $22 million.

   Ken Wildes, university spokesman, said: "While its [the association's]
decision to suspend funding is regrettable, we understand that decision." He
said the university was still dedicated to developing effective therapies for
muscular dystrophy and other deadly inherited diseases.

   The muscular dystrophy trial, which was being overseen by both Penn and Ohio
State University, was launched on Sept. 2 with much fanfare as a 36-year-old
traffic controller from Huron, S.D., became the first person to receive gene
therapy for the disease.

   The procedure, conducted at Ohio State's medical center, came just days
before the association's annual telethon headed by comedian Jerry Lewis. "I
haven't been this excited since we found the first muscular dystrophy gene in
1986," Lewis said at the time.

   While the trial was being led by Ohio State and Penn, it also involved
researchers at the University of Iowa in Iowa City; the University of Rochester
in Rochester, N.Y.; Washington University in St. Louis; Vanderbilt University in
Nashville; and Emory University in Atlanta. It was not clear whether the
collaborating institutions would also lose money.

   The trial had raised hope for people with the progressive muscle-wasting
disease and their families. Muscular dystrophy comes in various forms and mostly
affects boys. About 1 in 10,000 boys have Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the most
common type. There is no effective treatment or cure.

   The trial was aimed at a rare form known as limb-girdle-muscular dystrophy.
Doctors aimed to insert into patients' muscles a gene that would make a protein
needed to keep the muscles healthy.

   In his statement, Howell said the association, which pours millions of
dollars into muscular dystrophy research worldwide, had not abandoned its quest
for a gene-therapy cure.

   "We remain committed to advancing gene-therapy research and are considering
other options for clinical trials to determine the safety of gene-based
therapies for muscle," he said.

   On Wednesday, a U.S. Senate subcommittee will hold hearings on the safety of
gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             957 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                   January 29, 2000, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 435 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Run Amok?

BODY:



   THE DISCLOSURE of worse-than-shoddy research practices at the University of
Pennsylvania's Institute for Human Gene Therapy sends a cold shiver through the
field. Even ardent supporters of gene therapy--the promising but as yet
unrealized hope of curing people's inherited disorders by giving them new
genes--are hard-pressed to explain why a well-regarded research institute would
cut corners, ignore safety checks, fail to file required documents with the
government and otherwise appear to disregard established procedures for the
protection of human subjects in experiments.

   Critics have long expressed concern (which we share) that gene therapy
research is vulnerable to abuse because it is mostly backed by venture capital.
Researchers who are also investors, such as Penn principal investigator James
Wilson, may be tempted to oversell the promise of experiments and keep "adverse
events" quiet lest they depress stock prices. Dr. Wilson has said financial
interest plays no role in his research decisions. And no federal
conflict-of-interest rule prevents public research money from being used
together with private funding; such mingling is common.

   The Food and Drug Administration, investigating after 18-year-old Jesse
Gelsinger died in a Penn experiment, has now shut down all seven pending trials
in the institute, including attempts to cure cystic fibrosis and breast cancer.
The FDA cites 18 violations that include failure to inform patients of risks,
failure to follow the trial's own rules as to which patients (including Mr.
Gelsinger) were healthy enough to qualify as subjects, failure to notify the FDA
in timely fashion of serious side effects and failure to halt the experiment as
required when four patients suffered those side effects.

   This is all the more shocking when you consider that these researchers were
working in an area where even the most meticulous and conscientious experiments
carry risk: Experiments with gene therapy frequently involve people already
suffering life-threatening conditions, who may be more vulnerable to unexpected
side effects. All this calls, at the very least, for scrupulous reporting of
risks to the patients concerned, backed up by strong oversight.

   Further investigation--Penn has said it will form an outside committee, while
Sen. Bill Frist intends to hold hearings--will likely probe the degree to which
the FDA missed danger signs in confidential reports, waking up only when public
reports emerged through NIH. Biotech companies have been calling for less
disclosure to NIH, but this disaster argues for more.



LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2000


                             958 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 January 28, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 74 words

HEADLINE: Corrections

BODY:

   Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about problems with gene
therapy experiments, especially one at the University of Pennsylvania, referred
incorrectly to information given to one research subject, Jesse Gelsinger, and
his father, Paul Gelsinger. Far from having being unaware that the experiment
was risky, Paul Gelsinger said, they knew there were serious risks, including
risks of hepatitis, liver damage and even death.




   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2000


                             959 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                           January 27, 2000 Thursday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: Rules for research

BODY:

   President Clinton has proposed spending an additional $1 billion for
university-based research in several critical fields. The theme is expected to
be repeated tonight in his state of the union address.

   "We have not done a good enough job helping all Americans to understand why
we need very, very large investments in science and technology," he recently
told administrators and students at the California Institute of Technology.

   Nor apparently has the government done a good enough job monitoring the
progress of some of the most sensitive research being done at the university
level.

   The federal government recently halted all clinical trials in gene therapy at
the University of Pennsylvania, but not before an 18-year-old volunteer died and
at least four other volunteers suffered serious side effects.

   Gene therapy seeks to cure diseases by altering a person's DNA. The fatal
study was intended to test the safety of an experimental treatment of a rare
liver disease.

   Food and Drug Administration investigators said they found numerous
violations of federal research regulations and failures in protecting the human
subjects. In addition, the key figure in all seven gene therapy studies at Penn
is said to have a potentially large monetary stake in their outcome.

   Some of the hottest stocks around are in companies trying to unlock the
genetic code. Shares of the leading firms currently are up as much as tenfold
from their 1999 lows. So the government's action at Penn created waves on Wall
Street. It also underscored general criticism that gene studies are being
conducted in a crisis climate that jeopardizes patients.

   Among FDA charges against Penn are the lack of documentation that volunteers
were eligible to participate or that they had been adequately warned of the
risks involved. Also, researchers did not keep a record of the health of
volunteers after experiments began and researchers lost track of several lots of
experimental genes that had been infused into patients' livers.

   All told, the research sounds like a very sloppy operation -- a well-financed
sloppy operation. Penn's gene therapy program has an annual budget of about $25
million, much of it in taxpayer funding.

   The key transgression, however, is the lack of informed consent of patients,
which is the First Commandment of all legitimate research. And considering the
controversial nature of the trials, federal investigators were negligent in
ignoring the financial connections of the party in charge of the studies.

   Americans are more than willing to fund research that promises to save lives
and relieve suffering. But they want assurance that the research observes all
regulations and respects the rights of the subjects involved. Clearly, that was
not the case in Penn's gene therapy program.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2009


                             960 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                January 27, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1500 words

HEADLINE: Teenager's Death Is Shaking Up Field of Human Gene-Therapy Experiments

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 26

BODY:

   Perhaps no event in recent medical history has done more to shine light on
the inherent conflict of interest between researchers and their subjects than
the death of an 18-year-old from Tucson in a gene therapy experiment at the
University of Pennsylvania.

   It has been four months since Paul Gelsinger made the wrenching decision to
withdraw life support from his son, Jesse, after an infusion of gene-altered
viruses meant to correct an enzyme deficiency caused an immune response that
spiraled out of control. The grieving father then vowed to stand by the
Pennsylvania scientists "until my dying day."

    Now, amid accusations by the Food and Drug Administration that the
researchers repeatedly ignored rules intended to protect patients from harm, Mr.
Gelsinger has hired a lawyer. He says he was told too little when he encouraged
his son to volunteer for the study, which offered no benefit to the teenager,
but was designed to test the safety of a treatment for babies with a fatal form
of his disorder.

   The case may lead to increased regulation of clinical trials in gene therapy
research, a 10-year-old field that is already heavily scrutinized. And it shows
how expectations diverge in early-stage clinical trials, when researchers want
to learn if cutting-edge treatments are safe, but patients are hoping for a
cure.

   On Friday, the drug agency shut down all human gene therapy experiments at
Penn after finding "numerous serious deficiencies" in the way the clinical trial
involving the younger Mr. Gelsinger was run. The agency did not attribute the
youth's death to lapses by university doctors.

   But Dr. Kathryn Zoon, who runs the agency's Center for Biologics Evaluation
and Research, said in an interview on Tuesday that agency officials were
considering policy changes as a result of the Gelsinger case. She said the
agency was thinking of imposing a new rule that would allow it to make public
more information about gene therapy. And it is also considering beginning random
inspections of clinical trials of the sort it conducted at Penn.

   At the National Institutes of Health, officials are re-examining the role of
the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, which oversees gene therapy research but
lost much of its authority in a reorganization four years ago. Congress is also
considering stepping in. Next week, a Senate subcommittee will hold a hearing on
whether there is sufficient oversight for gene therapy.

   Dr. James Wilson, who directs Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy,
declined an invitation to testify, and declined to be interviewed for this
article.

   Mr. Gelsinger, who is on the witness list, says he and his son had no idea
there were risks -- of hepatitis, liver damage, and even a remote chance of
death. Neither did they know, he says, that despite 300 clinical trials, gene
therapy had never cured anyone. He said they were lulled into participating by
the idea that the study might prove that the therapy his son was receiving might
work on his disease.

   "I would have liked to have had somebody there who was not affiliated with
Penn that could have assisted in describing the whole process of gene therapy,"
Mr. Gelsinger, who works as a handyman, said in a telephone interview from his
Tucson home. "I didn't research it. But I shouldn't have to research it. I
believed these guys, everything they were telling me."

   As scientists map the human genome, they are uncovering mutations for genetic
disorders -- including ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, from which
Jesse Gelsinger suffered -- at a rapid pace. The idea of gene therapy is that
these illnesses can be cured, or prevented, through an infusion of corrective
genes. Typically, the genes are encased in a virus that acts as a taxicab, of
sorts, to deliver them to the proper cells in the body.

   One issue of particular concern to regulators about the Gelsinger case is the
process of informed consent. Federal rules require that the risks and benefits
of an experiment be explained to patients in understandable language, and that
patients be given sufficient time to make the decision. And if some patients
experience serious side effects, all volunteers are supposed to be informed and
then must consent again.

   These requirements were not met in the Penn study, the drug agency says. The
informed consent form the Gelsingers reviewed omitted information about monkeys
that had died after being given a similar, though stronger, treatment. And when
patients experienced elevations in liver enzymes that were significant enough to
bring a halt to the trial, the drug agency was not notified, and the consent
form was not revised.

   Some worry that biotechnology money is altering the informed consent
equation. At Penn, for instance, Dr. Wilson also founded a biotechnology firm,
Genovo, in which he holds stock. Although the company did not sponsor the study
in which Jesse Gelsinger participated, it does provide financial backing for Dr.
Wilson's institute. In previous interviews, Dr. Wilson has said Penn had rules
to prevent a conflict of interest between his academic position and his ties to
the company.

   But Dr. Ruth Macklin, a bioethicist on the National Institutes of Health
advisory committee, said, "There is one feature of this field that is quite
different from general run-of-the-mill research, and that is that large numbers
of the researchers themselves have a financial stake."

   Lapses in informed consent are common, said Dr. Gary B. Ellis, director of
the federal Office for Protection From Research Risks, which investigates
reports of abuses. Dr. Ellis says more than 90 percent of the cases he looks at
reveal problems with informed consent, a figure that does not surprise ethics
experts.

   "Consent forms are often very deficient and they overpromise," said Dr. LeRoy
Walters, a bioethics professor at Georgetown University and former chairman of
the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee at the N.I.H. "They make Phase One
studies" -- safety tests -- "sound like the cure for your cancer."

   Even when the forms are clear, and accurate, Dr. Walters and others say, the
discussions doctors have with their patients may cloud the issues. Patients
anxious for a cure may engage in a kind of selective hearing, taking in only to
information about potential benefits, while researchers eager to sign up study
volunteers may gloss over the risks.

   A conversation with Mr. Gelsinger reveals just how cloudy, and fraught with
emotion, the informed consent process can become. When he learned late last year
that the information about the monkeys had been omitted from the consent form,
he said, "I was willing to overlook it."

   But as he reflects on his decision making process, he said, he keeps coming
back to a talk he had with Dr. Mark Batshaw, a principal investigator in the
study. He said Dr. Batshaw told him the treatment was already working in some
patients and that because of the particular nature of his disorder, Jesse
Gelsinger would allow the scientists to "show exactly how well this works."

   Dr. Batshaw, through a spokeswoman, said the Gelsingers were never told the
therapy could be considered a treatment. Still, Mr. Gelsinger says he feels
misled. "They wanted to lock Jesse in," he said. "They didn't want him backing
out."

   The experiment involving Mr. Gelsinger was unusual, as gene therapy research
goes, because the participants were not particularly sick. Some were carriers of
the gene for OTC deficiency, a disorder in which the liver cannot process
ammonia, a toxic breakdown product of food. Others, like Mr. Gelsinger, suffered
from a mild form of the disease; in Mr. Gelsinger's case, it was controlled
through diet and drugs.

   The therapy involved an infusion of trillions of particles of the OTC gene,
encased in a weakened cold virus, adenovirus. When the drug agency investigated,
it said Mr. Gelsinger should never have been treated, because his liver was not
functioning well enough before doctors gave him the infusion.

   The findings have given a boost to those pressing for greater openness in the
field. The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, known as "the RAC," which
operates in public, is supposed to monitor patient safety, but in practice that
job has been left to the drug agency, which is required by law to do its work in
secret.

   Mr. Gelsinger, for instance, said he did not even know the RAC existed until
after his son's death, when he learned that the panel had reviewed the
experiment, and that some members thought it was too risky.

   Yet, critical though he is of Dr. Wilson's group, he still says he wants
their work to go forward. He is troubled that other gene therapy researchers
appear to be backing away from Dr. Wilson.

   "They'll sacrifice Penn, they'll sacrifice Jim Wilson," Mr. Gelsinger said.
"These guys screwed up, yes. But they should not be put out of business. They
should be able to lick their wounds and go back to work, because guess what?
They'll be clean from now on."

   http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 28, 2000, Friday

CORRECTION:

   Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about problems with gene
therapy experiments, especially one at the University of Pennsylvania, referred
incorrectly to information given to one research subject, Jesse Gelsinger, and
his father, Paul Gelsinger. Far from having being unaware that the experiment
was risky, Paul Gelsinger said, they knew there were serious risks, including
risks of hepatitis, liver damage and even death.




LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2000


                             961 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   January 27, 2000, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 711 words

HEADLINE: PITT AMONG TOP 10 CENTERS RECEIVING NIH RESEARCH FUNDS

BYLINE: CHRISTOPHER SNOWBECK, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Grant money and awards from the National Institutes of Health, the largest
source of funds for medical school research, are increasingly being concentrated
in 10 universities, a group that includes the University of Pittsburgh.

   The findings, reported yesterday in The New England Journal of Medicine,
provide fodder for debate over whether the concentration of resources is a good
thing for the research that universities produce and the medical students they
train.

   The trend has benefited both the University of Pittsburgh and Western
Pennsylvania, said Dr. Arthur Levine, dean of the Pitt medical school.

   In 1989, Pitt received more than $ 75 million in NIH money through 377
separate grants. By 1998, that had increased to $ 170 million through 580
awards.

   "Pittsburgh has been one of the research gems in terms of growth," said Dr.
Ernest Moy, director of research and assistant vice president of the Association
of American Medical Colleges. Moy was one of the authors of the New England
journal study.

   The study found that the top 10 schools received a greater share of all NIH
awards in 1997 than they did in 1986, increasing 2.5 percent from 24.6 percent
in 1986 to 27.1 percent in 1997. A total of 17,445 research grants and contracts
were handed out in 1997.

   The increased concentration of NIH money going to the top 10 was not as great
over that period, growing from 28.5 percent in 1986 to 29.4 percent in 1997. The
NIH gave out $ 5 billion in research money in 1997.

   The University of Pittsburgh and Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland
were the only two schools listed in the top 10 in 1997 that weren't on the list
in 1986, Moy said.

   Stanford University in Stanford, Calif., and the University of California Los
Angeles were in the top 10 in 1986 but didn't make the 1997 list. Part of the
reason they fell, Moy said, is that health maintenance organizations and managed
care plans have cut reimbursements to academic centers or sent patients
elsewhere, meaning Stanford and UCLA have had less money to invest in research.

   Conversely, Pittsburgh did not have a lot of managed care throughout the
study period relative to other markets. That means Pitt has had more money to
invest in laboratory space and hiring researchers.

   Levine said the capital investment in terms of building facilities and
attracting the best research talent at Pitt was enormous. Pitt continues to have
the top-funded program in psychiatric research, he said, and is a leader in
winning grants in cancer research.

   Levine said more capital investment is needed to keep the ball rolling.

   "Our space at Pittsburgh is now saturated with very productive researchers,"
he said. "We want to foster tissue engineering, the very latest in optical and
magnetic resonance imaging. ... We certainly want to take advantage of our
strength in neuroscience ... and expand our gene therapy program."

   Further investment in the research program will attract more federal money
and help the local economy by transferring the technology into spin-off
companies, Levine said.

   The good news for Pitt might also be good news for the country, but there's
debate about that, Moy said. Certainly large centers can argue with good reason
that they give the NIH more "bang for the buck," he said, because they have more
experience and facilities with which to conduct the research.

   But others would counter that more concentration could lead to a loss of
originality in research, Moy said, as some researchers who thrive in smaller
centers have trouble breaking in elsewhere. Also, some projects of particular
interest to certain localities might be overlooked if the local university
leaves the research to larger, national players.

   There's also a concern about medical education. Medical schools offer their
students both clinical training and access to cutting-edge research. A
concentration of research in a few big centers could lead to big research
centers training most of the specialist doctors while primary care doctors train
at centers that lack a research program.

   "Already generalists are not perceived as being highly valued in academic
medical schools," Moy said. To make a two-tiered system could potentially
exacerbate that problem."

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2000


                             962 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       January 27, 2000 Thursday, KENNER

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1086 words

HEADLINE: GENE PATIENTS NOT TOLD ALL FACTS;
RESEARCHERS IGNORE RULES, FDA SAYS

BYLINE: By Sheryl Gay Stolberg 1999, The New York Times

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Perhaps no event in recent medical history has done more to shine light on
the inherent conflict of interest between researchers and their subjects than
the death of an 18-year-old from Tucson in a gene therapy experiment at the
University of Pennsylvania.

   It has been four months since Paul Gelsinger made the wrenching decision to
withdraw life support from his son, Jesse, after an infusion of gene-altered
viruses meant to correct an enzyme deficiency caused an immune response that
spiraled out of control. The grieving father then vowed to stand by the
Pennsylvania scientists "until my dying day."

   Now, amid accusations by the Food and Drug Administration that the
researchers repeatedly ignored rules intended to protect patients from harm,
Gelsinger has hired a lawyer. He says he was told too little when he encouraged
his son to volunteer for the study, which offered no benefit to the teen-ager,
but was designed to test the safety of a treatment for babies with a fatal form
of his disorder.

   *** More regulation a possibility ***

   The case may lead to increased regulation of clinical trials in gene therapy
research, a 10-year-old field that is already heavily scrutinized. And it shows
how expectations diverge in early-stage clinical trials, when researchers want
to learn if cutting-edge treatments are safe, but patients are hoping for a
cure.

   On Friday, the Food and Drug Administration shut down all human gene therapy
experiments at the University of Pennsylvania after finding "numerous serious
deficiencies" in the way the clinical trial involving the younger Gelsinger was
run. The agency did not attribute the youth's death to lapses by university
doctors.

   But Dr. Kathryn Zoon, who runs the drug agency's Center for Biologic
Evaluation and Research, said Tuesday that agency officials were considering
policy changes as a result of the Gelsinger case. She said the agency was
thinking of imposing a new rule that would allow it to make public more
information about gene therapy. And it is also considering beginning random
inspections of clinical trials of the sort it conducted at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   At the National Institutes of Health, officials are re-examining the role of
the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, which oversees gene therapy research but
lost much of its authority in a reorganization four years ago. Congress is also
considering stepping in. Next week, a Senate subcommittee will hold a hearing on
whether there is sufficient oversight for gene therapy.

   Dr. James Wilson, who directs the Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the
University of Pennsylvania, declined an invitation to testify, and declined to
be interviewed for this article. Paul Gelsinger, however, is on the witness
list.

   *** Unaware of dangers ***

   Gelsinger says they had no idea there were risks -- of hepatitis, liver
damage, and even a remote chance of death. And Gelsinger now says that neither
he nor his son had any idea that despite 300 clinical trials, gene therapy had
never cured anyone. He said they were lulled into participating by the idea that
that therapy would work for his son's disease.

   "I would have liked to have had somebody there who was not affiliated with
Penn that could have assisted in describing the whole process of gene therapy,"
Gelsinger, who works as a handyman, said in a telephone interview from his
Tucson home. "I didn't research it. But I shouldn't have to research it. I
believed these guys, everything they were telling me."

   As scientists map the human genome, they are uncovering mutations for genetic
disorders -- including Ornithine Transcarbamylase (OTC) Deficiency, from which
Jesse Gelsinger suffered -- at a rapid pace. The idea of gene therapy is that
these illnesses can be cured, or prevented, through an infusion of corrective
genes.

   In examining the Gelsinger case, one issue of particular concern to
regulators is the process known as informed consent. Federal rules require that
the risks and benefits of an experiment be explained to patients in language
that is understandable to them, and that patients be given sufficient time to
make the decision. And if some patients experience serious side effects, all
volunteers are supposed to be informed and then must consent again.

   These requirements were not met in the Pennsylvania study, the FDA says. The
informed consent form the Gelsingers reviewed omitted information about monkeys
that had died after being given a similar, though stronger, treatment. And when
patients experienced elevations in liver enzymes that were significant enough to
bring a halt to the trial, the FDA was not notified, and the consent form was
not revised.

   *** Economic influence ***

   Some worry that biotechnology money is altering the informed consent
equation. Many university-based gene therapy researchers have company ties. At
the University of Pennsylvania, for instance, Wilson also founded a biotech
firm, Genovo, in which he holds stock. Although the company did not sponsor the
study in which Jesse Gelsinger participated, it does provide financial backing
for Wilson's institute. In previous interviews, Wilson has said the university
had rules to prevent a conflict of interest between his academic position and
his ties to the company.

   But Dr. Ruth Macklin, a bioethicist on the NIH advisory committee, said,
"There is one feature of this field that is quite different from general
run-of-the-mill research, and that is that large numbers of the researchers
themselves have a financial stake."

   Lapses in informed consent are common, said Dr. Gary Ellis, director of the
federal Office for Protection From Research Risks, which investigates reports of
abuses. He said more than 90 percent of the cases he looks at reveal problems
with informed consent, a figure that does not surprise ethics experts.

   "Consent forms are often very deficient and they overpromise," said Dr. LeRoy
Walters, a bioethics professor at Georgetown University and former chairman of
the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee at the NIH. "They make Phase One studies"
-- safety tests -- "sound like the cure for your cancer."

   Even when the forms are clear, and accurate, Walters and others say, the
discussions doctors have with their patients may cloud the issues. Patients
anxious for a cure may engage in a kind of selective hearing, taking in only to
information about potential benefits, while researchers eager to sign up study
volunteers may gloss over the risks.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2000


                             963 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                 JANUARY 26, 2000 Wednesday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL OPINION; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 661 words

HEADLINE: BLINDED BY SCIENCE GENES: RISKY TRIAL, DEADLY ERROR

BODY:

   Hope is what drew Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson to the University of
Pennsylvania's Institute for Human Gene Therapy last fall to participate in a
clinical trial of gene therapy on his 18th birthday, the very first day he was
eligible.

   Gelsinger suffered from ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, a
genetic liver ailment that causes ammonia to build up in the blood, resulting in
coma and sometimes death.

   Traditional drug therapies haven't been successful for many genetic diseases
like cystic fibrosis, hemophilia and various forms of cancer. But the developing
field of gene therapy offers a new approach - and Gelsinger volunteered, in
part, to help find a cure.

   Instead, he became the first person to die from gene therapy treatment.

   Gelsinger's death has prompted a nationwide reconsideration of the controls
on gene therapy research. It has raised questions about the impact on the
process of private biotechnology companies, which now sponsor much of the
research. Is the profit motive pushing the therapy faster than is safe? Are drug
companies, as one critic suggests, more interested in patents than patients?

   Last week, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration halted gene therapy trials
at Penn, charging numerous violations of its rules - including withholding
important information of past side effects of the therapy, as well as the
financial connection of the institute's director, James Wilson, with a private
company that sponsored the research.

   Wilson has yet to respond. Penn says it will appoint an independent committee
of scientists from outside the university to evaluate its policies.

   But the questions about gene therapy research go beyond Penn and its apparent
problems.

   The nation was once quite skittish about the whole notion of genetic
engineering. The government established controls that were stricter than those
on pharmaceutical research. Lately, though, the safeguards appear to have been
reduced, or ignored.

   Basic drug research is supervised by the FDA, which operates in private, and
thus protects proprietary information - "company secrets" - from other
pharmaceutical companies, as well as the stock market. But gene therapy research
was different. It also was overseen by a committee of the National Institutes of
Health, which operates in public.

   Three years ago, in a controversial move, NIH cut back its oversight - in
part because of the pleas of desperate victims who wanted research to proceed
faster, in part because of complaints by the biotechnology industry.

   Until Gelsinger's death, the industry was agitating for even less scrutiny.

   In practice, this has meant that researchers in one trial did not have access
to information from other trials - and that deaths and side effects from similar
experiments weren't quickly reported.

   A U.S. Senate subcommittee on Public Health, chaired by Sen. Bill Frist,
R-Tenn., will hold hearings today on the safety of gene therapy. First to speak
will be Jesse Gelsinger's father.

   But it's obvious even now that, although gene therapy has tremendous
potential to cure genetic diseases, the field is in need of more oversight, not
less.

   Mayor comes to the rescue Street's stand-up act For months, Philadelphia
firefighters have had to fight two wars at the same time.

   The first war has been against Hepatitis C, which has been slowly decimating
the ranks. The infectious disease already has stricken 130 firefighters.

   The second war has been against the city and Fire Commissioner Harold
Hairston, who has heartlessly refused to acknowledge the problem. Instead, he
made firefighters go to court to prove they contracted deadly disease at work.

   Kudos to Mayor Street for ending at least one of the wars. After staff writer
Julie Knipe Brown's special report on the firefighters plight, Street has
pledged $3 million to cover the costs for treatments.

   As for Hairston, he's still in the running to be fire commissioner. Why?

NOTES: In Our Opinion

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Gelsinger

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             964 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    JANUARY 25, 2000 Tuesday SFCITY EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 607 words

HEADLINE: NIH PROBING GENE THERAPY AT PENN

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The National Institutes of Health is investigating whether a controversial
gene-therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania violated federal
regulations governing patient safety.

   If the NIH finds significant violations, it could strip James M. Wilson,
director of Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, of his federal grants, and
impose other sanctions.

   Last year, Wilson had seven NIH grants totaling $5 million, according to a
government spokesman. NIH funding accounts for nearly half of the institute's
$22 million budget.

   The probe, which was launched last Tuesday, is in addition to a decision by
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration last week to suspend human gene therapy
trials at the institute.

   The actions followed the death Sept. 17 of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson,
Ariz., during a gene-therapy experiment at Penn's Institute for Human Gene
Therapy, one of the nation's premier programs.

   A preliminary report by Penn scientists found that Gelsinger died after
having a severe immune response to the modified cold virus used to deliver new
genes to his liver.

   He was the 18th patient to get the experimental therapy, which was aimed at
correcting an inherited liver disorder known as ornithine transcarbamylase
deficiency. Four other patients had serious side effects, but recovered.

   Gary Ellis, director of the NIH Office for Protection From Research Risks,
said yesterday that the NIH probe was launched in response to "a citizen
complaint" about possible problems in the university's oversight of the liver
trial.

   Ellis declined to elaborate on the complaint, saying that information was
confidential. He said the investigation could take 18 to 22 months.

   Robert Barchi, Penn provost and a professor of neurology, said yesterday that
the NIH was looking only at the liver trial and not at other campus research. He
said the probe did not amount to the kind of sweeping action recently taken by
the Office for Protection From Research Risks on other campuses.

   Over the past year, the office has suspended biomedical research on a number
of campuses, including Duke University, the University of Illinois at Chicago,
and the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, after finding that the
schools did not have adequate systems for monitoring patient safety.

   Barchi said he could not comment on the university's oversight of the liver
trial. But he said Penn was committed to protecting patient safety through a
system of review committees.

   Under federal regulations, schools that receive federal funds must establish
institutional review boards to oversee any research involving human subjects.
The committees are made up of faculty members and others not directly connected
to the research.

   In its report issued on Friday, the FDA found that Wilson's gene-therapy
institute had failed to provide timely information to the Penn board that was
overseeing the liver trial.

   For instance, the faculty committee was not informed about the patient side
effects as they occurred, and it was not told about a crucial change in the
protocol that allowed sicker patients to be enrolled, the FDA said.

   Barchi said he had been pushing for stepped-up oversight of campus research
since becoming provost a year ago. Last spring, he appointed a committee to
review animal experiments, and, this month, he named a campus committee to
review research involving human subjects.

   In addition, Penn president Judith Rodin announced Friday that a committee of
scientists not from Penn would review how well the university was monitoring
human trials at its Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             965 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    JANUARY 25, 2000 Tuesday SFCITY EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 763 words

HEADLINE: INVESTOR MAY LEAVE PENN GENE THERAPY GROUP GENOVO CORP. HAS BEEN
SEARCHING FOR OTHER SITES. THE ACTION, IT SAID, WAS UNRELATED TO A PATIENT'S
DEATH LAST FALL.

BYLINE: Joseph N. DiStefano, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The major corporate backer of the University of Pennsylvania's troubled
Institute for Human Gene Therapy is prepared, if necessary, to move its money
elsewhere following Friday's federal ban on human experiments at the West
Philadelphia lab.

   Genovo Corp., of Sharon Hill, has been considering "alternative sites" for
the research it funds, a Genovo spokesman, Fred Spar, said. He said the search
predated, and was unrelated to, problems following the death last fall of Jesse
Gelsinger, 18, while undergoing an experimental Penn gene therapy for liver
disease.

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration ordered a halt on Friday to human tests
developed by James M. Wilson, the institute's founder and director, pending an
investigation.

   Under a 1995 deal with Penn, Genovo and its partners, which include four
larger biotech companies, have exclusive rights to commercialize gene therapy
advances developed at the institute under Wilson. The for-profit company was
founded by Wilson in 1992, and is partly owned by Wilson and by Penn.

   While the FDA has stopped the Penn trials, "the right to [Penn] patents . . .
[has not] been stopped," Spar said yesterday. "Those patents can be used
anywhere."

   Based on its control of Penn's patents and its connection with Wilson's labs,
Genovo has attracted millions of investment dollars from two Cambridge, Mass.,
biotech companies, Biogen Inc. and Genzyme Corp.

   Genovo has a five-year-old agreement with Biogen to develop gene therapies
for liver and lung disorders. Both deny any connection - financial or otherwise
- to Gelsinger's death. "We had no role," Genovo's Spar said.

   While Spar did not identify alternatives to Penn, Wilson and an earlier group
of his fellow gene therapists have already demonstrated their mobility.

   Wilson, along with William N. Kelley, now head of the University of
Pennsylvania Health System, and Tadataka Yamada, head of SmithKline Beecham's
research division, all obtained gene therapy patents for work they did while
colleagues at the University of Michigan in the 1980s. Yamada was on Genovo's
board until last summer, and Kelley helped attract Wilson to Penn in 1992.

   Some Michigan gene therapy patents have since been licensed to Genovo, Spar
said. Genovo also has deals with Massachusetts General Hospital and with the
University Medical Center in Nantes, France, to study insect viruses.

   Biogen was Genovo's first big investor. Two of the four seats on Genovo's
board of directors are filled by Biogen employees: its head of research, Joseph
N. Davie, and its head of investor relations, John G. Conley.

   In 1995, Biogen agreed to spend $35 million over five years to help Genovo
develop gene therapies to treat lung and liver diseases. Biogen also bought $4.5
million of Genovo stock.

   A Biogen spokeswoman, Kathryn Bloom, declined to say whether the contract
would be extended when it expires in July.

   Despite the companies' close relationship, the Genovo board "had no direct
oversight of Wilson's clinical trials," Bloom said. As Genovo directors, Davie
and Conley "review the concepts, but they have no direct day-to-day monitoring
responsibilities."

   Only one Penn trial stopped by the FDA, a brain cancer therapy with one
patient, was directly monitored by Biogen, Bloom said. Biogen money - mingled
with funds from federal and nonprofit agencies - helped fund other Penn trials
for lung and liver ailments and cancers, but Wilson, not Biogen, oversaw those
trials, Bloom said.

   "We have rights to certain information, but Genovo was one of a number of
sponsors," Bloom said. "We had no control over those trials."

   Last fall, Genzyme invested $3.4 million in Genovo and promised future
funding, and gained the right to use Wilson's lab to develop a clinical trial
for lysomal storage disorders, which interfere with fat processing. Genzyme did
not return calls seeking comment on the FDA's action.

   Dompe S.A., a privately held Italian pharmaceutical company, is also an
investor in Genovo.

   In 1997, Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc., of Cambridge, and Genovo agreed to
develop a gene therapy delivery system. Ariad did not buy stock in Genovo, and
the relationship does not involve tests on humans, said Ariad's chairman, Harry
J. Berger, a former Penn adjunct professor and head of research at Malvern-based
Centocor Inc.

   Still, Ariad conducted "very close oversight" of the lab's work, with
biweekly data reviews and quarterly meetings between his team and Wilson's,
Berger said.

   Joseph N. DiStefano can be reached at distefj@phillynews.com

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             966 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   January 25, 2000, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1500 words

HEADLINE: KEEPING OLD FRIENDS FRISKY!;
DOGS AND CATS ARE LIVING WELL LONGER THANKS TO IMPROVED VETERINARY CARE

BYLINE: DEBORAH WEISBERG

BODY:


   According to the Guinness Book of World Records, the world's oldest dog lived
to 29 and the oldest cat to 34.  While these "records" were reached in the first
half of the 20th century and were considered a fluke at the time, pets overall
these days live longer and remain in better health as diet and veterinary care
improve.

   Local veterinarians, like those across the country, are seeing more geriatric
dogs and cats than ever, with some reporting that nearly a third of their
patients are in their older years. Their challenge, they say, is to make life
better for animals who are living longer.

   On average, small and medium dogs are living to 14 to 16 years, large dogs to
9 to 10 years and cats to 16 years, according to Veterinary Pet Insurance of
Kansas City, Mo.

   Cancer, heart failure, and kidney disease lead the pack in ailments affecting
older cats and dogs, with degeneration of the spine and joints, diabetes and a
host of glandular malfunctions, such as Cushing's disease (overactive adrenal
gland) and hyperthyroidism, following close behind. Organs wear out. Vision and
hearing diminish with age. Animals' bodies lose flexibility. As their muzzles
whiten, their foot pads become brittle. And they are less able to handle stress.

   Owners may assume that weakness in the hind quarters, which bear most of an
animal's weight, is an indication of arthritis or hip dysplasia, but it could be
symptomatic of anything from a brain tumor to anemia to a torn nail, said Dr.
James Krewatch, of Bradford Hills Veterinary Hospital in Marshall.

   Veterinary care has become more sophisticated. With improved diagnostic
testing, one of the biggest health risks in older pets - cancer - can be
detected early. If treated early, is it one of the most curable of all chronic
diseases, veterinarians say. And the same array of medical services available to
people - surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, immune enhancement therapy and gene
therapy - is also available to pets.

   Aging begins when the body's cells start to deteriorate faster than the body
can repair them. For animals, old age arrives at different times depending on
their size. According to the American Veterinary Medical Association, dogs
larger than 90 pounds are considered elderly by age 6, an age when breeds
weighing under 20 pounds are still in their prime. Those smaller dogs reach the
geriatric stage at 11.5 years. Dogs 20 to 50 pounds are geriatric by 10, and
those 50 to 90 pounds are old by age 8. Cats over 10 pounds are elderly at age
7. As a rule, indoor cats and dogs live longer than those left to roam outside.

   Likewise, spayed and neutered animals tend to live longer. The procedures can
reduce the risk of some cancers, particularly in females.

   "I've had as many as eight cats of my own, and they all lived past 20," says
Dr. George Meerhoff of Norwin Veterinary Hospital in Mount Pleasant. "Good feed
is the secret. Another big factor is environment. Older pets need calm, familiar
surroundings."

   Bob Johnson of Franklin Park says low stress and a loving family are the
reasons his 14-year-old, 70pound yellow Lab, Timber, is still active.

   Despite a bout with Lyme disease, plus chronic arthritis, diminished hearing
and a recent stroke from which she has almost recovered, Timber "looks great,"
Johnson says, and is able to enjoy her favorite activities, like catching ball.
"She has good genes, and a very supportive environment," Johnson says.

   Peaceful surroundings and loving care also have enabled Lars, an 11-year-old,
85-pound German shepherd, to survive the degenerative neuromuscular disease with
which he was diagnosed two years ago. "He was expected to be dead a year ago,"
says his owner, Kim Beck of Pine. "But he still romps and plays like a puppy. I
was told he could live another year, but who knows? He may continue to surprise
us."

   Besides a regimen of steroids and vitamins, Lars receives weekly shots to
control severe skin allergies, which is not related to his neuromuscular
disease.

   Allergies are just one of the problems for which Beverly Rowe's 14-year-old
English spaniel is being treated. Others include cancer of the mouth, thyroid
disease and digestive difficulties. "Dr. Krewatch says Shannon is the longest
surviving cancer patient he's ever seen," says Rowe, of Hampton.

   "We take it one day at a time and concentrate on keeping him feeling his best
as long as we can," Rowe says. "Once he suffers a lot of discomfort, and I
couldn't make it any better, I wouldn't let it go on. But right now, he enjoys
his life."

   Vets say "gut feelings" are an owner's best diagnostic tool in recognizing if
their pet has a health problem. "An animal's behavior is constant and
predictable," Krewatch says. "Be alert to changes and stay on top of them."

   Some other telltale signs: a dull, dry coat and flaky skin, joint stiffness,
energy loss, weight gain, increased water intake, digestive system problems and
frequent constipation.

   If an animal is in pain, he will usually withdraw and stop eating, he says.
Because cats are independent, owners may not notice they are ill until the
ailment is very advanced. "It's apparent sooner in dogs," Krewatch points out,
"because they interact more with owners."

   Weight loss prompted Suzanne Martin of Mount Pleasant to take one of her
cats, Noel, to the vet five years ago. Her doctor, Meerhoff, discovered a
diseased thyroid and removed it. "We thought he wouldn't survive, but it's like
he willed himself to live."

   Noel is now 17, "and still going strong," Martin said.

   Owners of older pets say their animals have become more attached to them with
advancing years. "Timber wants to be wherever the family is. He follows us all
the time," Johnson says. "He can't get up on the bed anymore, so he struggles up
the steps and sleeps on the floor beside our bed."

   Most owners believe they'll instinctively know when it's time to put their
pets down and will look to their vet for confirmation.

   "We're grateful that Lars is not in any pain," says Beck. "But we've decided
that, when he becomes incontinent, we'll probably put him to sleep. It would be
an intolerable situation. And it would rob him of his dignity."

   She and her husband, Don, say they will have Lars euthanized at home by
Krewatch, who provides this service.

   "When the quality of an animal's life is reduced enough that he cannot walk,
or cannot get out of his own waste and may not even realize that he is
incontinent, or when the pain cannot be controlled, it may be time to think
about putting an animal down," Krewatch says. "A vet will talk with the animal's
loved ones, but it is always the owner's decision."The vet can provide medical
judgments, but we don't know 100 percent of the time in all cases," Meerhoff
says. "As owners, we can be selfish, but we generally know when it's obviously
time."

   AT THE VET'S

   A yearly checkup is recommended for all house pets, and some veterinarians
may want to see older pets every six months.

   Besides evaluating heart and lung function, vets examine eyes and ears,
analyze blood, check stool for parasites and urine for kidney disease, palpate
the abdomen and lymph glands for evidence of small tumors, offer preventive
treatment for conditions such as heartworm and administer booster shots against
viruses. Dogs are routinely immunized against parvo, distemper, hepatitis,
kennel cough, and rabies, while cats are inoculated against rabies, feline
distemper, several respiratory diseases - including rhino-tracheitis, feline
calci-virus, and feline pneumonitis - and the nearly always fatal feline
leukemia, which is spread through blood exchange with an infected animal. Yearly
exams also include dental check-ups. Eightyfive percent of pets over age 3 have
periodontal disease. This can lead to more serious ailments such as kidney
disease because this organ filters the bacteria generated by infected gums.
Owners are urged to clean their pets' teeth using a brush or a finger cot and
specially flavored pastes. Professional cleanings, performed under anesthetic,
may be required. Dry feed can help minimize tartar build-up. As pets age, owners
may want to switch to "reduced calorie feeds," which also are lower in sodium
for the heart, and in protein and phosphorous for the kidneys. Specialty feeds
are available for animals with health problems, such as allergies and diabetes.

   Table scraps can cause gas, and pig ears can create bacterial diarrhea, said
Mount Pleasant veterinarian George Meerhoff.  "I'm not a big advocate of
rawhide. Dog-bone biscuits are the safest treat." One of the most common
problems affecting older pets - osteoarthritis - can be kept at bay if pets
maintain their normal weight.

   Though older pets sleep more, moderate exercise and socialization will help
to keep them fit and involved. "Use gentle encouragement. Let an animal go at
his own pace," Meerhoff suggests.

   Deborah Weisberg is a freelance writer who lives in Swisshelm Park.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 2, PHOTO: Peter Diana/Post-Gazette: Kim Beck, with Lars, her
11-year-old; German shepherd.; PHOTO: Andy Starnes/Post-Gazette: Even in cold
weather, Lars gets his daily; exercise. The 11-year-old German shepherd, owned
by Kim and Don Beck of Pine,; has a degenerative neuromuscular disease that
causes weakness in his; hindquarters.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2000


                             967 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

             January 25, 2000, Tuesday, 4 State / Suncoast Edition

SECTION: METRO & STATE; AROUND THE STATE; Pg. 5B

DISTRIBUTION: METRO & STATE; CITY & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

LENGTH: 114 words

HEADLINE: 2 Florida students among finalists for 'Junior Nobel'

SOURCE: Compiled from Wire Reports

BODY:


   Two Florida high school students are among 40 finalists for a $ 100,000
four-year scholarship.

   Helen Irene Wiersma, an 18-year-old Okeechobee High School student, and
Benjamin David Zusman, a 17-year-old Fort Lauderdale student at Pine Crest High
School, were chosen Monday as finalists in the Intel Science Talent Search. The
competition has been referred to as the "Junior Nobel Prize."

   The winner will be announced March 13.

   Wiersma developed a new method for controlling tropical soda apples, weeds
that have infested Florida's pasturelands. Zusman investigated gene therapy for
people suffering from cystic fibrosis in his biochemistry project.

   - Wire reports


LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2000


                             968 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    January 25, 2000, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 9D

LENGTH: 650 words

HEADLINE: Cancer drug stops cysts in genetic kidney disease

BYLINE: Anita Manning

BODY:

   Scientists may be close to finding the first drug to treat --
and possibly cure -- a genetic kidney ailment that affects 600,000
Americans.

   Polycystic kidney disease, or PKD, causes fluid-filled cysts to
grow on the kidneys, destroying normal tissue. The only treatment
choices are dialysis and a kidney transplant. PKD most commonly
strikes adults in midlife, but one form of the disease attacks
infants, often killing them before the age of 1 month.


   Now a drug being developed as a possible cancer treatment by Wyeth-Ayerst
has been found to reverse the course of one form of PKD in lab
mice, researchers say in the current issue of Kidney International,
a peer-reviewed journal of the International Society of Nephrology.

   Researchers treated the PKD mice with an experimental drug, known
as EKI-785, and compared the outcome with control groups of untreated
cystic mice and normal mice.

   "We have shown dramatic improvement in survival of the mice,
dramatic improvement in kidney function, such that the function
of treated animals was the same as healthy control animals, and,
most striking, a dramatic reduction of cystic formation in the
treated animals," says pediatric nephrologist Ellis Avner, senior
author and chairman of pediatrics at Case Western Reserve University
and chief pediatrician at the Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital
in Cleveland.

   The drug blocks the ability of a protein called epidermal growth
factor to bind with receptors that in PKD patients are abnormally
located on the inside of the cystic kidney ducts, where urine
is collected. By interfering with the receptor's activation, the
drug halted the reproduction of cyst-forming cells associated
with PKD.

   "We have, for the first time, a therapy specifically focused
on what we know is a specific abnormality of the disease," Avner
says. "Since we're probably years away from successful gene therapy,
this, to me, is the natural approach."

   He hopes a small clinical trial in humans can begin in 12 to 18
months, when further testing on mice is completed.

   Another positive outcome, he says, is that "because of the specific
effects of the drug, it has had little toxicity to normal tissue."

   Jared Grantham, a professor at the University of Kansas Medical
Center in Kansas City and co-founder of the Polycystic Kidney
Research Foundation, says the drug is "extremely potent, and
the reversi-bility of the disease was astounding."

   The tests were done on mice bred to have a form of PKD that occurs
when both parents carry the recessive gene. The parents are free
of PKD, but their offspring have a 25% chance of being born with
autosomal recessive PKD. It affects one in 10,000 to 40,000 births.
The other form, autosomal dominant PKD, needs only one copy of
the gene, so if either parent carries it, the children have a
50-50 chance of developing the disease, usually in their 40s.
That form affects one in 500 to 1,000 people.

   While the research was conducted on mice with the recessive form
of the disease, there's "reason to think this drug would also
work" in the dominant form, Grantham says.

   "The potential for this to be a non-toxic, effective therapy
is quite high," he says. "More studies need to be done to prove
safety and efficacy, but the extent to which the disease was impeded
was striking. This will open interest in the pharmaceutical business
in looking more carefully at agents to treat this disease. . . . This is the
opening of a very wide door."

   For more information, contact the Polycystic Kidney Research Foundation
at 800-753-2873 or www.pkdcure.org.

   TEXT WITHIN GRAPHIC BEGINS HERE

   Polycystic vs. normal kidney

   A normal kidney is about the size of a fist, but a polycystic
kidney, covered with cysts, can grow to the size of a football.
The largest one on record weighed 38 pounds.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Marcy E. Mullins, USA TODAY

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2000


                             969 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                    JANUARY 24, 2000, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B1; BIOSCOPE

LENGTH: 1139 words

HEADLINE: Double Trouble -- State Panel Grapples With Ethics of Human Cloning;

California's ban on procedure may expire, extend in 2003

BYLINE: TOM ABATE

BODY:
Here's another reason to be glad you live in California: This is one of just
three states that have, temporarily at least, outlawed human cloning.

    OK, so maybe protection from human clones isn't of top concern, but surely
you'll be proud to know California is the only political body in the land
actively studying whether -- or how -- to regulate this science fiction form of
procreation.

    "This is something society has to think about and, as usual, California is
ahead of the pack," said Theodore Friedmann, director of gene therapy research
at the University of California at San Diego and a member of the state-sponsored
Advisory Committee on Human Cloning.

    The 12-person panel, which has met quietly three times since May, will hold
an all-day public meeting Thursday at Children's Hospital in Oakland.

    Committee member Margaret McLean, director of the biotechnology ethics
program at Santa Clara University, said she feels awed by the task: giving the
state a recommendation next year about whether to extend a human cloning ban
enacted in 1997 or let it expire in 2003.

    "When I first got the appointment letter with the blue and gold seal, it was
like, whoa, what a responsibility," McLean said.

    Blame it all on Dolly, the Scottish sheep that became a media darling. After
Dolly's debut in 1997, Chicago physicist Richard Seed fanned fears about cloning
by proposing to replicate himself -- something he had neither the money nor the
expertise to do.

    Stanford University law Professor Hank Greely, a California cloning
committee member who has studied the politics of the issue, said President
Clinton responded to the human cloning furor by issuing an executive order
banning federal funds for such research.

    Private biotech firms, unaffected by the proclamation, promised not to do
human clones but advocated against a federal ban, which gave Congress a mandate
to do what Congress does so well -- fulminate while doing nothing.

    Into this legal void stepped California. In 1997, the state enacted a law
making it a violation of the Medical Practices Act for any corporation, research
lab or clinic to clone a human being. Backed by a $1 million fine and loss of
business license, the ban was designed to expire in 2003 -- time enough for the
cloning advisory committee to report back to state officials on whether to make
it permanent.

    Greely said Rhode Island later enacted a temporary ban modeled on the
California statute, while Michigan passed a permanent anti-cloning law. But only
California seems to have formed a committee to study human cloning.

    At first blush, it may seem odd for a state -- even a self-important state
like California -- to attempt to draw boundaries around itself and exclude some
new biomedical technology.

    As cloning committee member and University of California at San Francisco
geneticist Larry Shapiro said, "It's hard to think about how you would stop a
train moving swiftly down the tracks even if you wanted to."

    Ban human cloning in California and it could just move to Nevada.

    But, as it turns out, states have traditionally regulated medical safety,
and when the gee whiz gets stripped away, cloning has some serious issues.

    It seems Scottish scientists used nearly 300 eggs in the process of cloning
Dolly. Fewer than 30 were successfully cloned and implanted in surrogate sheep
mothers -- some of those were miscarried, others born deformed -- before cute
little Dolly was born.

    "Unfortunately in the world we live in, animals are cheap and you can just
throw them away," said Ruth Hubbard, professor emerita of biology at Harvard
University, an observer of the California committee's work.

    The qualms would undoubtedly increase if the eggs and embryos were human.

    Still, it seems wacky that some states might erect cloning speed bumps while
others ignore the technology's moral potholes. But Hastings law Professor
Radhika Rao, an expert on reproductive law and a cloning committee member, said
the states, not the federal government, are the traffic cops for
technology-assisted procreation.

    "There is no federal law on assisted reproduction -- the U.S. Supreme Court
has never taken a case on it," Rao said. As a result, states differ wildly on
issues like who is legally the parent of a baby born to a surrogate mother who
bears a child created by artificial insemination of another woman's egg.

    "In some states, commercial surrogacy is illegal and a criminal offense,"
Rao said. "In other states, the contract is legal but unenforceable, and in
still other states, the contract is both legal and enforceable."

    It is only after a problem arises because of conflicting state laws that the
U.S. Supreme Court steps in and sets a national standard, as happened with
abortion in 1973, said Rao, who once clerked for Justice Harry A. Blackmun,
author of the Roe vs. Wade decision.

    So state-by-state experimentation on human cloning has historical roots, odd
as that may sound in our techno-driven global village.

    I've barely given you a sense of what the committee must grapple with. "What
the public thinks you mean by cloning is creating a carbon copy of ourselves,"
said McLean, the Santa Clara ethicist. "It's actually far more complex than
that."

    Put aside, for a moment, the notion of cloning a whole human and think about
using the technology to make spare parts. Go back to the egg, scoop out its
nucleus, insert the nucleus of one of your cells. That's a clone.

    But instead of implanting the embryo into a surrogate mom and letting it be
born, put it into a petri dish and control its development so that it only
produces a heart. This heart would be genetically identical to yours, let's say.
Science might be able to do this in 15 or 25 years. Your heart might be failing
by then. What would you pay for a heart that transplant surgeons could drop into
your chest the way mechanics pop in a new engine?

    Human cloning is far more than the "Boys from Brazil." It's biotechnology
meets Kragen Auto parts.

    The Human Cloning Advisory Committee will tackle all these issues and more
from 9 a.m. until 4 p.m. on Thursday in Oakland. For more information about the
meeting, or to state your opinion if you can't attend, contact George Cunningham
with the Department of Health Services in Berkeley at gcunning@dhs.ca.gov or
(510) 849-5102.

    I would have aimed you at a Web site, but it doesn't exist. It seems that
between the invention of the fax machine and the creation of Dolly, our
forward-thinking state government failed to note the advent of the World Wide
Web and its usefulness in creating virtual forums on issues of public interest.


   Look for BioScope every Monday in the Business section. Send your
bio-feedback to Tom Abate by e-mail, abate@sfgate.com; fax, (415) 543-2482; or
phone, (415) 777-6213.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2000


                             970 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    January 23, 2000, Sunday 4 STAR EDITION

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 469 words

HEADLINE: A dose of common sense for high-tech medicine

BYLINE: DAN RATHER; Rather is anchor of CBS Evening News and a native Texan.

BODY:

   GENE therapy. Transplants. Artificial hearts. Orthoscopic surgery. CAT scans.

   We're in a high-tech revolution in medicine, with a dazzling array of new
procedures, protocols and equipment available.

   But high-tech care does not eliminate the need for low-tech common sense.

   Modern medicine's arsenal of prescription drugs, to use an example that's
been in the news lately, is only as good as the weakest link in the
doctor-pharmacist-patient chain. All of those links can be pretty weak, even
when diagnoses and overall care are excellent.

   There's concern among health-care professionals over patients' improper use
of prescription drugs. Too many patients tend to forget or let their dosage
schedules slide.

   This can spell trouble for all of us. When you're on antibiotics, it's human
enough to stop taking them once your symptoms go away or your infection clears
up. But if you don't finish the prescription, you may have killed only the
weakest bacteria, leaving the strongest - and most medicine-resistant - alive to
propagate.

   Doctors share in the blame for the growing problem of antibiotic-resistant
bacterial strains. Antibiotics are seriously overprescribed, so there are plenty
of opportunities for bacteria to develop resistance.

   Even more basic is growing confusion over drug names. Modern medicine has
given us a bounty of new drugs - so many that drug companies are having trouble
giving them distinctive names that neither sound alike nor look alike when
scrawled by a doctor on a prescription pad.

   Doctors' notoriously bad handwriting used to be the stuff of jokes. But it is
no laughing matter these days, not when there are drugs with names as similar as
Celexa (an antidepressant), Cerebyx (an anti-seizure medication) and Celebrex (a
painkiller). Federal regulators say, in fact, that they have received scores of
medical mix-up reports since Celebrex came on the market at the beginning of
last year.

   A few months ago, a jury found a Texas cardiologist liable for a fatal mix-up
that came from the pharmacist misinterpreting the doctor's chicken scratch.
Instead of Isordil, a drug for heart pain associated with valve problems, the
patient got Plendil, a high-blood-pressure drug. The patient was dead within two
weeks.

   What to do? Well, there are signs that patients are becoming more educated
and involved with their care, in part because of developments like medical
Internet sites.

   The computer age also ought to free doctors from writing out prescriptions by
hand and enable them to provide the kind of information that can help
pharmacists avoid mix-ups. This is information that patients ought to ask for in
any case - especially if the doctor is writing by hand.

   Of course, doctors' handwriting is no worse than that of a lot of us. It's
just a lot more important.


LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2000


                             971 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JANUARY 23, 2000 Sunday D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1209 words

HEADLINE: PENN CHARGES WON'T HINDER GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: Huntly Collins and Shankar Vedantam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   Eight years ago, a rising star named James M. Wilson arrived at the
University of Pennsylvania with a grand vision: that Penn would become the
nation's leading center for the pioneering field of gene therapy to cure a wide
range of diseases.

   Today, Wilson's highly touted Institute for Human Gene Therapy, with a $22
million budget and a staff of 180, is in disarray.

   On Friday, four months after an Arizona teenager died during a clinical trial
at the institute, the Food and Drug Administration charged the center with
numerous violations and ordered it to halt all seven of its clinical trials,
five of which had already enrolled patients.

   Wilson, who declined to comment on Friday, is expected to respond to the
charges within a week or so, according to Penn officials. In the past, he has
characterized the lapses as errors of judgment or oversights that had no bearing
on patients' safety.

   Penn president Judith Rodin said Friday that the university would set up a
committee of non-Penn scientists to critique the institute's handling of its
research.

   In a letter to Penn officials, the FDA said a three-month probe of the
institute, prompted by the Sept. 17 death there, found "serious deficiencies in
the procedures . . . for oversight and monitoring" of its clinical trials.

   Wilson was brought to Penn from the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor by
William N. Kelley - dean of Penn's medical school and chief executive officer of
the university's health system - with the promise of building a world-class
research center and bringing revenue to the university.

   As part of the arrangement, Genovo Inc., a private Sharon Hill company that
Wilson founded, helped fund the institute. Last month, federal officials
questioned the conflicts of interest that could arise from such
university-industry ties.

   That issue is among topics to be raised at a hearing in Washington scheduled
for Wednesday by U.S. Sen. Bill Frist (R., Tenn.) The dead teen's father, Paul
Gelsinger, is expected to testify.

   Despite the problems at Penn, Savio Woo, a gene researcher at Cornell
University who heads the American Society for Gene Therapy, said Friday that he
doubted the progress of gene therapy would be hindered.

   "We do not condone our members' conducting trials that violate protocols
under the FDA," Woo said.

   Other scientists also said that the unproved but potentially revolutionary
field of gene therapy is poised to take off.

   "From a scientific point of view, the momentum is building," said Richard
Jude Samulski, director of the Gene Therapy Center at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill.

   Fresh from an international gene-therapy meeting, he said the excitement in
the field was enormous. "We know this is going to work. It's just a matter of
doing our homework and getting it done."

   Among the most promising experiments, according to many scientists, is one
aimed at correcting a rare type of hemophilia by giving patients a gene they
need for their blood to clot.

   Scientists at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and Stanford University,
which are conducting a small human-safety trial, are expected to announce
preliminary results in a medical journal next month.

   At Thomas Jefferson University, Matthew During, who is developing gene
therapy to correct disorders of the central nervous system, said the FDA
crackdown on Penn was unlikely to affect his own work.

   He criticized the Penn scientists for using a method of gene delivery that
could cause a serious - even life-threatening - immune response. "You knew you
were looking at something that could be a dangerous weapon," he said.

   During is using a different delivery system, one widely regarded as safer.

   Sidney Wolfe, a consumer advocate, said the FDA crackdown may have properly
knocked gene therapy off its pedestal.

   "There's this halo, sacrosanct idea of gene therapy, that no one could be
involved unless they are completely trustworthy, that maybe left more blinders
on than in other areas," said Wolfe, who heads the Washington group Public
Citizen.

   Estuardo Aguilar-Cordova, a gene-therapy expert at Texas Children's Hospital
in Houston and an adviser to the National Institutes of Health, called the FDA
report "a wake-up call."

   Federal regulators began scrutinizing Penn's gene-therapy institute after
Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz, died last fall. He volunteered to get an
experimental gene drug aimed at correcting a rare liver disorder that can lead
to a potentially fatal buildup of ammonia in the bloodstream. The disease is
called ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency.

   He died at Penn four days after getting the treatment. Wilson's team has
attributed his death to "an immune-system revolt" triggered by the modified cold
virus used to deliver the genes he needed.

   The FDA said that it was difficult to estimate how long it would take the
institute to correct its operating methods.

   "It takes as long as it takes to comply," said Philip Noguchi, director of
cellular and gene therapies at the FDA. "Things that may seem trivial may take a
year or more."

   Noguchi said that the agency's move to suspend the clinical trials was
"unusual."

   "While this is not the norm, what we are doing is simply carrying out our
regulations," he said.

   The agency's report painted a picture of a clinical trial rife with problems.

   For example, the Penn researchers informed neither the FDA nor the
university's Institutional Review Board - a group designed to protect patients'
safety - of important changes they were making in the trial's blueprint.

   Those changes allowed the researchers to lower the bar and recruit patients
who were sicker to start with. It also allowed the doctors more leeway to
recruit men. Men with the deficiency that Gelsinger suffered from have a more
severe form of the disease.

   Gelsinger's spot on the trial was originally supposed to have been occupied
by a woman. The researchers treated Gelsinger without getting permission from
the FDA to treat a man.

   The agency also charged that Wilson's team did not promptly inform the agency
of side-effects in two patients - side-effects so severe that the FDA said they
were supposed to bring the trial to a halt.

   And in 1998, when the Penn scientists found that two monkeys died in animal
experiments using high doses of gene therapy, they kept the FDA in the dark
about it for almost a year.

   Noguchi said that the trial was plagued with poor documentation and that
agency officials could find no records that the researchers had noted patients'
eligibility for the trial.

   He said half the consent forms were not properly filled out. The agency asks
the patient, investigator and a witness to sign a form on the same day to
indicate that the patient has been fully informed of the risks and benefits of
the trial and is giving consent to participate.

   "In this case, we had concerns that the [institute] was not able to meet our
regulations or assure the FDA that they could do that," Noguchi said. "They were
not able to comply with the regulations."

   * Inquirer staff writers Faye Flam, Susan FitzGerald and Joseph N. DiStefano
contributed to this article, which also contains information from the Associated
Press.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             972 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   January 23, 2000, Sunday, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. A-2, CORRECTION/CLARIFICATION

LENGTH: 631 words

BODY:


   National. The federal government's suspension of human gene therapy
experiments at the University of Pennsylvania involved all seven studies there.
A story yesterday had the wrong number of studies.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2000


                             973 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        January 23, 2000 Sunday, SLIDELL

SECTION: PICAYUNE; Pg. 21H2

LENGTH: 434 words

HEADLINE: THERAPY HOLDS HOPE FOR ONE OF 2 SICK BOYS

BYLINE: By Jane Triola Contributing writer

BODY:

   Living in a sterile environment with no outside contact and isolated from
family and friends is the only life known to two children in Bush.

   Because of a rare immune deficiency, 15-month-old Austin Rodriguez and his
1-month-old brother, Damien, live in an isolation bubble, but an experimental
procedure in Paris this month may allow Damien to live a normal life.

   Austin and Damien, the sons of Paul Rodriguez and Jamie Pigrenet of Bush,
were both born with the same life-threatening x-linked severe combined
immunodeficiency disease. A bone marrow transplant did not cure Austin, who
received the marrow from his father and will undergo another transplant in the
future.

   "Both of the boys were born with the same genetic disease," their great-uncle
Bill Pigrenet of Pearl River said. "Both boys have to live in a bubble with no
contact from outsiders and can only be held by their father and mother. Their
whole trailer is a bubble that has to be continually cleaned all day long.
Neither parent can work because of the possibility of bringing germs into their
environment. We can only visit with them through a glass wall."

   Because of his young age, Damien has been chosen to participate in an
experimental gene therapy alternative treatment at the Hospital Necker in
Paris.. The French doctors received permission to treat five patients before
obtaining approval to continue with the program. To date, the French doctors
have successfully treated four patients, and it is hoped that Damien will be the
fifth success story, Pigrenet said.

   The estimated medical cost to Damien and his family, who left for France
early last week, is more than $75,000. To date, the family has raised nearly
$52,000, but they still need to raise $23,000, as well as nearly $125 a day for
living expenses for 55 days, Bill Pigrenet said.

   In an effort to raise the money, Bill Pigrenet, a former musician, contacted
several old friends who are also musicians and asked for their help.

   A benefit dinner dance will be held at Ron Charles Restaurant and Lounge on
U.S. 90 in Lake Catherine Feb. 20 from 2 to 7 p.m. Musicians scheduled to appear
include Billy Bell and the Dominos, as well as Rock 'n' Roll Hall of Famers Art
Sir Van, Harvey Jesus and Earl Stanley and many others.

   "I am one of the others," Bill Pigrenet said.

   Tickets to the benefit, which include dinner and entertainment, are $10 each
and may be purchased at the door or in advance by calling 863-2092, 898-0290 or
886-5600.

   Donations also may be made at any Hibernia National Bank to the Damien
Rodriguez Fund, account No. 8005231710.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2000


                             974 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        January 23, 2000 Sunday, ORLEANS

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 1647 words

HEADLINE: THE GENE TEAM;
WITH GREAT PROMISE FOR MEDICINE AND BUSINESS, LSU AND TULANE PUT ASIDE THEIR
RIVALRY TO CREATE A JOINT GENE THERAPY PROGRAM

BYLINE: By Stewart Yerton Business writer

BODY:

   Last week, two dozen professionals gathered over coffee and king cake in the
Chancellor's Conference Room at the LSU Health Sciences Center in New Orleans to
take what many hope will be the first steps into a new economic frontier.

   It was a diverse group, including doctors, researchers, lawyers, politicians
and hospital administrators, and at the head of the table, leading the meeting,
was an odd sight: top executives of the Tulane and Louisiana State University
medical schools, traditional rivals on the New Orleans science scene, sitting
shoulder to shoulder.

   "I know it's pretty unusual to see Tulane and LSU at the same table," said
Dr. Mervin Trail, chancellor of the LSU Health Sciences Center. Tulane Medical
Center Senior Vice President Paul Whelton chuckled genially, "But you'll get
used to it."

   What had brought the two together was nothing less than the building block of
life -- deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA -- and the attempts by researchers at both
universities to use parts of the DNA molecule to treat hereditary diseases and
illnesses like lung cancer. Despite a recent setback in gene research in
Pennsylvania, many believe gene therapy will revolutionize the medical field in
the 21st century.

   Known as the Gene Therapy Research Initiative, the venture would create a
private nonprofit corporation that would be an umbrella for both universities,
as well as LSU-Shreveport. Each institution already conducts gene research. The
initiative would bring together the schools' assets -- labs and equipment,
faculty researchers, grant money and lab workers -- in hopes of creating a
critical mass of scientists, laboratories and equipment.

   Eventually, backers of the program say, the initiative could bring more money
and jobs into the state from private and federal grants, patents and contracts
with private pharmaceutical companies.

   The Legislature has appropriated $6.5 million to get the project started. The
initiative could eventually have a budget many times that amount.

   Organizers must iron out several major administrative and bureaucratic
details before they can begin spending money to buy equipment and hire workers.
But once it is launched, promoters say, the consortium will provide well-paying
jobs much needed in a community battered by oil industry layoffs.

   In the first two years, Trail said, the project hopes to bring 10 new faculty
scientists. Those jobs would carry salaries between $75,000 and $125,000. In
addition, the project will bring in about three dozen technicians, fellows and
assistants, with annual salaries or stipends of $25,000 to $50,000.

   Trail, who helped create the Ernest N. Morial Convention Center, served as
president of the Greater New Orleans Tourist and Convention Commission and
founded the New Orleans Sports Foundation before joining LSU, said the
biomedical industry can become an economic engine for New Orleans at least as
big as tourism.

   "The next new economic frontier for this community is the medical industry
and what takes place between these two universities," Trail said.

   *** Program's roots in 1998 ***

   Such comments create promise, but the gene therapy program is in its infancy.
Trail and former Tulane Medical Center Chancellor John LaRosa laid the
groundwork for the project in May 1998, when they spoke before the Legislature
on gene therapy.

   It was remarkable that the two administrators were standing together in a
Capitol built by former Gov. Huey Long. Before Long established the LSU School
of Medicine in 1930, Tulane operated the state's only medical school. Long
portrayed LSU's medical school as a place that would offer opportunities to
capable young students turned down by what Long cast as the elitist Tulane.

   But some say Long was motivated by more than altruism. According to Dr. John
Salvaggio's "New Orleans' Charity Hospital: A Story of Physicians, Politics, and
Poverty," Long also created LSU School of Medicine to carry out a personal
grudge against administrators at Tulane, which used Charity Hospital in New
Orleans as a teaching hospital. With the creation of LSU's medical school,
Tulane would have a natural rival.

   Although Tulane and LSU worked together at Charity, which they shared as a
teaching facility, relations between the two universities were often chilly
until LSU gained control over Charity in 1997. Tulane continues to use Charity
as a teaching hospital, although it is owned by LSU.

   Since the takeover, relations between the two institutions have thawed, and
the Gene Therapy Research Initiative is perhaps the most dramatic sign of this
warmth.

   A buzz has developed about biomedical technology in the New Orleans business
community. Last year, the New Orleans Regional Chamber of Commerce sponsored a
trip by local business leaders to Minneapolis and St. Paul, Minn., to study
several economic development issues, including the Twin Cities' medical
industry.

   LaRosa left Tulane in June, but Whelton has since picked up the baton and is
moving forward with the initiative.

   Despite the momentum, the project still has far to go. Lawyers are refining
the articles of incorporation for the Louisiana Genetics Research Consortium
Inc., the formal name of the nonprofit company. Among the thornier topics is how
to deal with intellectual property rights to a technology developed by, say, a
Tulane researcher in an LSU lab under the auspices of the consortium.

   The consortium also must appoint a board of directors. In addition, before it
spends any money appropriated by the Legislature, the consortium must hash out a
cooperative endeavor agreement with the state, which is required for
partnerships between the state and private companies. The organization also is
seeking the stamp of approval of the Louisiana Board of Regents, the state
organization that oversees public grants to universities.

   *** Explaining the process ***

   One recent morning, Dr. Jay Kolls, director of LSU Health Sciences Center's
Gene Therapy Program in New Orleans, sat before a bank of computers and
microscopes and explained gene therapy. On one computer monitor was a group of
dark blue circles ringed by bursts of glowing red material. The spots were cell
nuclei, Kolls explained, while the red material was viruses marching toward the
cells' centers.

   Each cell in a living thing contains a nucleus that in turn contains long
strands of DNA. The DNA is like the software in a computer; it controls what the
cells do. A gene is a part of the DNA, like a piece of a software program.

   Just as a faulty program can wreak havoc on a computer, a damaged gene can
cause problems for people. Gene therapy involves injecting a new gene into a
patient either to replace or augment the faulty gene, like a software upgrade.

   Scientists use viruses to deliver the genes to the cell nuclei. Among his
projects, Kolls is researching the potential of using viruses to carry
disease-battling genes into the lungs of cancer victims.

   Kolls and his colleagues have received grants totaling about $1 million a
year for the next five years to perform such research. More equipment and staff
would allow them to conduct more work. More faculty would mean more grant
proposals and eventually more grand money form public sources like the National
Institutes of Health and private foundations.

   In addition to the grant money and other assets, LSU brings a virus-growing
lab, a lab for examining tissue of lab rats, a laboratory with a facility for
keeping lab animals, and a laboratory for work with dangerous viruses. LSU also
brings about 25,000 square feet of lab space at its Clinical Sciences Building
in New Orleans.

   Tulane and LSU-Shreveport also bring assets. Tulane has $8 million to $10
million for faculty and lab workers, said Prescott Deininger, professor of
environmental health sciences at Tulane School of Public Health and the
Zimmerman Chair and director of basic research at Tulane Cancer Center. One of
the next steps, Deininger said, is for Tulane to hire a director for Tulane's
gene therapy center.

   In addition to the money and staff, Tulane brings one of the nation's largest
primate labs, located in Covington, an array of labs in New Orleans and much
needed new space, Deininger said.

   LSU-Shreveport also has a virus lab, a morphology lab and two researchers
paid to find gene therapy for cancer, Kolls said.

   The consortium will create opportunities beyond the three institutions, Trail
said, opportunities for private biotech firms, venture capitalists and
professionals like bankers and intellectual property lawyers.

   "That's what Research Triangle Park's all about in North Carolina," he said.

   *** Hope despite setback ***

   In September, Jesse Gelsinger, an otherwise healthy 18-year-old Arizona man
with a rare liver disease, died while receiving an experimental gene therapy
treatment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   The death has been a public relations blow to gene therapy research, and
federal regulators have tightened oversight of clinical trials on humans. Some
companies have said they will cut back on their investment in gene therapy
research.

   Deininger, the Tulane researcher and administrator, admits gene therapy is in
its early stage.

   "There have been very limited successful treatments," Deininger said.

   But he added it is an important new field. "I don't think there's any chance
it will be a dead end," he said.

   If the consortium cannot be pulled together and financed quickly, Deininger
said, New Orleans and the state will be just one of many places trying to
recruit leading scientists and attract grant money.

   "This is when you get the name of being a place that's a real player," he
said.

   Trail agreed.

   "The hookups and the availability for cross-fertilization are probably better
now than they have ever been," he said. "The scientists and the science will
attract the business."

GRAPHIC: A STATEWIDE ENTERPRISE The Louisiana Genetics Research Consortium Inc.
would unite assets of the universities -- labs, grant money, faculty and staff
-- and infuse the new company with millions of dollars in state money to pay for
more equipment and scientists. The goal is to create a network that will sustain
itself with money from patents, private pharmaceutical company contracts and
grants from federal agencies and private groups.  THE PARTNERS Tulane University
Medical Center WHAT THEY BRING $8 million to $10 million for faculty and lab
workers, lab space on the sixth floor of the J. Bennett Johnston Environmental
Research Building THE PARTNERS Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
WHAT THEY BRING $1 million a year for five years from public and private grants,
which support approximately four faculty researchers 20,000 to 25,000 square
feet of lab space at Clinical Sciences Building THE PARTNERS LSU Medical Center,
Shreveport WHAT THEY BRING Lab space, plus two researchers on gene therapy for
cancer CONSORTIUM FACILITIES AND POTENTIAL PARTNERS * Pre-Clinical Lab Space *
LSU-S Virus Lab * LSU-S Morphology Lab * Institute for Micromanufacturing *
Tulane Primate Center * University of Louisiana at Lafayette's New Iberia
Primate Research Center LSU * Lab for 12 investigators with space for small
animals and veterinarians and a lab for working with dangerous viruses * Virus
Lab * Rodent Morphology Lab * Genomics Lab Tulane * Human Morphology Lab * Stem
Cell Lab GRAPHIC GENE THERAPY: INSERTING MODIFIED DNA Since 1990, gene therapy
has been used, without great success so far, in an attempt to treat inherited
diseases in children or adults. LSU Health Sciences Center and Tulane University
Medical Center are teaming up to make New Orleans a center for gene therapy
research. How it works: 1 A corrective gene (DNA segment) is inserted into a
virus 2 The virus is injected into patient or given by nasal spray 3 The virus
attaches to a target cell 4 The virus is taken into a cell, where it unloads the
corrective gene 5 The corrective gene joins cell's DNA 6 Cell starts making new
protein, which eases symptoms of disease VIEW FULL-TEXT ON MICROFILM.  KRT Dr.
Jay Kolls, director of LSU Health Sciences Center's Gene Therapy Program in New
Orleans, says gene therapy involves injecting a new gene into a patient either
to replace or augment the faulty gene. [COLOR] STAFF PHOTO BY BRYAN S. BERTEAUX
This image, which appears on Dr. Jay Kolls' monitor in the photo below left,
shows viruses in red surrounding a cell, blue, in a gene therapy experiment.
[COLOR] Mervin Trail. Paul Whelton 3 PHOTOS

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2000


                             975 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                January 22, 2000, Saturday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 511 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH NEWS YOU CAN USE

BODY:
Prez urges hike

   in medical spending

   PASADENA, Calif. - President Clinton yesterday proposed a $2.8 billion
increase in research into elusive medical cures and high-tech breakthroughs,
such as reducing information in the Library of Congress into a unit the size of
a sugar cube.

   Clinton said he would bring U.S. spending in this area to $41 billion,
including a $1 billion increase for the National Institutes of Health to
research diabetes, brain disorders, cancer, genetic medicine, disease prevention
and development of an AIDS vaccine.

   The emerging field of nanotechnology - the ability to manipulate individual
atoms and molecules - would get a $497 million boost. Scientists believe the
technology could revolutionize the 21st century the way the transistor and the
Internet led to the Information Age.

   Gene therapy halted

   over teen's death

   WASHINGTON - The government, citing numerous violations of research
regulations, suspended all clinical trials by a University of Pennsylvania
physician and laboratory whose gene therapy experiment resulted in the death of
an Arizona teenager.

   Among the accusations: Researchers didn't report two other very serious
reactions from the experimental gene therapy before 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger
died.

   With yesterday's decision, the Food and Drug Administration stopped seven
separate experiments until Dr. James Wilson and the university's Institute for
Human Gene Therapy correct the violations. Neither Wilson nor the university
immediately responded to requests for comment.

   Behavior No. 1 factor

   in breast cancer

   WASHINGTON - Women who are rushing to get tested for so-called breast cancer
genes seem to be forgetting that behavior is a bigger factor in their risk than
genes, experts said yesterday.

   A study of women who signed up for genetic testing showed many were engaged
in high-risk behaviors, such as smoking and failing to use sunscreen.

   "According to most estimates, 5% to 10% of all cancers are caused by
inherited genetic mutations," said Karen Emmons of the Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute in Boston, who led the study.

   "By contrast, 70% to 80% of cancers have been linked to behavioral factors,"
she said. "Doctors should not lose sight of the many practical steps that people
can take to lower their odds of getting cancer."

   Cancer docs eye

   'marijuana patch'

   ALBANY - Scientists are planning research on whether a "marijuana patch"
similar to the patches that help smokers kick the habit could help ease the
suffering of cancer patients.

   The American Cancer Society is funding a three-year, $361,000 grant for
research at the Albany College of Pharmacy. The marijuana patch could ease the
pain, nausea and vomiting that chemotherapy patients can suffer, said Gail
Tyner-Taylor of the American Cancer Society.

   The concept is similar to patches used as a way to deliver doses of nicotine
to help people quit tobacco. The patch could provide an alternative to smoking
pot for medical purposes, which is approved but a controversial issue
nationwide.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2000


                             976 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                      January 22, 2000 Saturday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 191 words

HEADLINE: U.S. HALTS GENE THERAPY STUDY

BYLINE: MARLENE CIMONS; Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: WASHINGTON --

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration called a halt Friday to human gene therapy
research at the University of Pennsylvania after an investigation into the death
last September of an 18-year-old patient found numerous violations by university
scientists.

    The inquiry found serious lapses by the study's principal researchers in
reporting potentially serious side effects -- seen before the patient died --
and in other procedures involving entry criteria and informed consent.

   Dr. Philip Noguchi, an FDA official involved in the oversight of gene therapy
research, said that the studies would not be allowed to resume until the
institute and the principal investigator, Dr. James M. Wilson, correct the
violations and demonstrate that their procedures comply with FDA rules.

    In response to the FDA action, University of Pennsylvania President Judith
Rodin said that she had asked the school's provost to appoint a committee of
"distinguished scientists with extensive experience in clinical research" -- but
without affiliation to the university -- to review the institute's oversight and
monitoring procedures and recommend corrections.


LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2000


                             977 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   January 22, 2000, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 518 words

HEADLINE: FDA halts research on gene therapy;
Finds violations at University of Pennsylvania after patient's death

SOURCE: Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - The Food and Drug Administration called a halt to human gene
therapy research at the University of Pennsylvania on Friday after an
investigation into the death last September of an 18-year-old patient found
numerous violations by university scientists.

   The inquiry found serious lapses by the study's principal researchers in
reporting potentially serious side effects - seen before the patient died - and
in other procedures involving entry criteria and informed consent.

   The action effectively stops seven studies under way at the University of
Pennsylvania's Institute of Gene Therapy, in addition to the trial in question,
which was suspended after the death.

   Dr. Philip Noguchi, an FDA official involved in the oversight of gene therapy
research, said the studies would not be allowed to resume until the institute
and the principal investigator, Dr. James M. Wilson, correct the violations and
demonstrate that their procedures comply with FDA rules.

   In response to the FDA action, University of Pennsylvania President Judith
Rodin said she had asked the school's provost to appoint a committee of
"distinguished scientists with extensive experience in clinical research" - but
without affiliation to the university - to review the institute's oversight and
monitoring procedures and recommend corrections.

   The university, she said, "has cooperated fully with all aspects of the FDA's
investigation, and would continue to do so."

   Jesse Gelsinger, of Tucson, Ariz., had volunteered for the experimental
treatment with the hope of curing his rare genetic disorder, ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency, which prevents the liver from breaking down
ammonia, a normal byproduct of protein digestion.

   He died after researchers infused a genetically modified virus into his liver
in an attempt to introduce new genes that could correct those responsible for
his ailment.

   Gene therapy researchers, working at what is widely regarded as the future
cutting edge of treatment for many disorders, attempt to replace or repair
damaged or missing genes with healthy ones.

   More than 300 gene therapy studies are under way and at least 2,500 patients
have been treated without apparent harm.

   Although Gelsinger was not the first patient undergoing gene therapy to die,
his death is believed to be the first directly related to the experimental
procedure.

   In its findings, the FDA said that two earlier volunteers in the University
of Pennsylvania study suffered reactions serious enough to have put the study on
hold. But researchers, the FDA found, attributed the side effects to the
patients' medical histories rather than the experiment.

   Also, the scientists did not report the deaths of two monkeys under treatment
during animal studies, which typically precede human trials.

   The agency also said that Gelsinger's blood levels of ammonia, a measure of
liver damage, were too high for him to have been eligible for the study and that
scientists had altered eligibility criteria without FDA approval.

   Finally, the agency faulted the lab for not properly monitoring the study.


LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2000


                             978 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                    January 22, 2000, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 10; National Desk

LENGTH: 597 words

HEADLINE: FDA HALTS HUMAN GENE RESEARCH AT UNIVERSITY;
 MEDICINE: FDA INQUIRY FINDS VIOLATIONS BY SCIENTISTS. PROBE WAS LAUNCHED AFTER
DEATH OF PATIENT UNDERGOING EXPERIMENTAL THERAPY AT PENNSYLVANIA SCHOOL.

BYLINE: MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   The Food and Drug Administration called a halt to human gene therapy research
at the University of Pennsylvania on Friday after an investigation into the
death in September of an 18-year-old patient found numerous violations by
university scientists.

   The inquiry found serious lapses by the study's principal researchers in
reporting potentially serious side effects--seen before the patient died--and in
other procedures involving entry criteria and informed consent.

   The action effectively stops seven studies underway at the University of
Pennsylvania's Institute of Gene Therapy, in addition to the trial in question,
which was suspended after the death.

   Dr. Philip Noguchi, an FDA official involved in the oversight of gene therapy
research, said that the studies would not be allowed to resume until the
institute and the principal investigator, Dr. James M. Wilson, correct the
violations and demonstrate that their procedures comply with FDA rules.

   In response to the FDA action, University of Pennsylvania President Judith
Rodin said that she had asked the school's provost to appoint a committee of
"distinguished scientists with extensive experience in clinical research," but
without affiliation to the university, to review the institute's oversight and
monitoring procedures and recommend corrections.

   The university, she said, "has cooperated fully with all aspects of the FDA's
investigation and would continue to do so."

   Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson had volunteered for the experimental treatment with
the hope of curing his rare genetic disorder, ornithine transcarbamylase
deficiency, which prevents the liver from breaking down ammonia, a normal
byproduct of protein digestion.

   He died after researchers infused a genetically modified virus into his liver
in an attempt to introduce new genes that could correct those responsible for
his ailment.

   Gene therapy researchers, working at what is widely regarded as the cutting
edge of treatment for many disorders, attempt to replace or repair damaged or
missing genes with healthy ones. More than 300 gene therapy studies are
underway, and at least 2,500 patients have been treated without apparent harm.

   While Gelsinger was not the first patient undergoing gene therapy to die, his
death is believed to be the first directly related to the experimental
procedure.

   In its findings, the FDA said that two earlier volunteers in the University
of Pennsylvania study suffered reactions serious enough to have put the study on
hold. But researchers, the FDA found, attributed the side effects to the
patients' medical histories rather than the experiment.

   Also, the scientists did not report the deaths of two monkeys under treatment
during animal studies, which typically precede human trials.

   The agency also said that Gelsinger's blood levels of ammonia, a measure of
liver damage, were too high for him to have been eligible for the study and that
scientists had altered eligibility criteria without FDA approval.

   Finally, the agency faulted the lab for not properly monitoring the
study--saying that it did not have an overall standard operating procedure for
its clinical trials. It also said that it found irregularities in the forms on
which researchers are supposed to explain the possible risks and benefits of
participation and on which patients consent to take part.

   Noguchi said that, while most gene therapy studies are being done in "a
responsible manner," the agency is considering stepping up its inspections and
"reminding investigators of their responsibilities."

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2000


                             979 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                    January 22, 2000 Saturday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 359 words

HEADLINE: University ordered to halt human testing

BYLINE:  Associated Press

BODY:

   Birmingham, Ala. -- The government has ordered Alabama's largest medical
center to stop enrolling human test subjects in hundreds of federally funded
studies.

   The order contained no mention of any harm to people who participated in the
experiments, and it was unclear how long admissions to the programs would be
halted. Last year, a similar moratorium at Duke University's medical center
lasted four days.

   The University of Alabama at Birmingham said Friday that about 25% of its
2,220 research projects -- including AIDS research and cancer research -- could
be temporarily affected by the order.

   The order was issued this week by the National Institutes of Health's Office
for Protection from Research Risks, which oversees patient safety procedures at
federally funded institutions. It was made public by the university.

   The government found flaws in UAB's internal oversight of its research
projects involving human subjects, including a failure to adequately review
patient risks and insufficient tracking of research participants for follow-up
information.

   The NIH order means new patients cannot enroll in about 40 AIDS research
programs that already involve as many as 150 people, said Michael Saag, head of
UAB's outpatient AIDS clinic. People already involved in studies will continue
with the trials, he said.

   Also Friday, the government suspended all clinical trials by a University of
Pennsylvania physician and laboratory whose gene therapy experiment resulted in
the death of an Arizona teenager. Numerous violations of research regulations
were alleged.

   Among the accusations: Researchers didn't report two other very serious
reactions from the experimental gene therapy before 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger
died.

   With the decision, the Food and Drug Administration stopped seven experiments
until James M. Wilson and the university's Institute for Human Gene Therapy
correct the violations.

   Experts, stunned by Gelsinger's death last September, are questioning whether
gene therapy experiments have been subject to enough oversight or if researchers
let precautions slip because gene therapy has been considered safe.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2000


                             980 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                January 22, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1104 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Ordered Halted At University

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 21

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration temporarily shut down human gene therapy
experiments at the University of Pennsylvania today after an inspection
uncovered "numerous serious deficiencies" in ensuring patient safety during a
clinical trial that cost an 18-year-old Arizona man his life.

   The decision to place the entire program -- eight experiments, including five
active clinical trials in diseases ranging from cystic fibrosis to breast cancer
-- on "clinical hold" is highly unusual. The hold is indefinite, agency
officials said, and will not be lifted until the agency is convinced that the
university's Institute for Human Gene Therapy can follow federal rules designed
to protect study volunteers from harm.

    The agency notified the Penn scientists of the decision in a two-page letter
today. In response, the university's president, Judith Rodin, pledged to appoint
a committee of outside scientists to review the institute's work. In a
statement, she said Penn "has cooperated fully with all aspects of the F.D.A.'s
investigation and would continue to do so."

   The agency's action comes two days after its investigators completed a
detailed inspection of patient records and laboratory data from the experiment
that killed the Tucson man, Jesse Gelsinger, on Sept. 17. Mr. Gelsinger died of
multiple organ failure caused by a severe immune reaction to an infusion of
corrective genes and is the first person to have died as a direct result of gene
therapy.

   Some of the findings, including evidence that Mr. Gelsinger was ineligible
for the experiment and that the scientists had failed to report serious side
effects in other patients that could have put a halt to the study, were made
public last month during a meeting of the Recombinant D.N.A. Advisory Committee,
the panel that oversees gene therapy research for the National Institutes of
Health.

   But the final inspection report, which cited 18 specific violations, also
turned up new problems. It found, for instance, that the Pennsylvania scientists
had enrolled all 18 patients without filling out eligibility forms. Instead, the
Food and Drug Administration said, the scientists created the forms after Mr.
Gelsinger died, leaving them unsigned and undated. By that time, the agency's
inquiry had already begun.

   "This is one of the many concerns that we have had about the conduct of the
study," said Dr. Philip Noguchi, the agency official in charge of gene therapy
research. 'It indicates to us that the sponsor was not following rules, was not
following our regulations and in general was not reporting to F.D.A. in a timely
fashion."

   Dr. James Wilson, the director of the gene therapy institute, did not take
telephone calls today. But in the past, he has strongly defended his work,
including the decision to treat Mr. Gelsinger.

   The death rocked the nine-year-old field of gene therapy, a field that has
had few treatment successes, and today's announcement was another blow. Dr.
Arthur Caplan, a bioethicist at the University of Pennsylvania, said the move
could hurt gene therapy programs across the country.

   "If there are violations and problems it can have a devastating impact across
the board, for all gene therapy research, at every institution," Dr. Caplan
said. He predicted a "loss of funding and a loss of enthusiasm."

   Congress has already indicated its concern. Senator Bill Frist, Republican of
Tennessee, has called a hearing for next week to examine whether there is
sufficient oversight for patient safety in gene therapy experiments.

   One of the speakers at next week's hearing will be Paul Gelsinger, Jesse
Gelsinger's father. Until now, the elder Mr. Gelsinger has supported the
scientists at Penn, even as the Food and Drug Administration released its highly
critical preliminary results last month. But today Mr. Gelsinger indicated he
had changed his mind and said he had hired a lawyer, although no suit has been
filed.

   "Everybody was wrong," Mr. Gelsinger said sadly in a telephone conversation
from Tucson. "Even me."

   He declined to elaborate, referring questions to the lawyer, Alan Milstein,
who said he was not surprised by the agency's move. "It seems appropriate in
light of what happened to Jesse," Mr. Milstein said.

   In interviews today, leaders in the gene therapy field also appeared to be
backing away from their support of Dr. Wilson.

   "All I can say is we are surprised at this," Dr. Savio Woo, president of the
American Society for Gene Therapy, said in a telephone interview. "But that
being said, we support the F.D.A.'s action as being appropriate. If there are
all these numerous violations then any situation would need to be put on hold
until they can clean up their act."

   Among the agency's findings were serious flaws in the way Penn scientists
explained the benefits and the risks of the experiment to patients, a process
known as informed consent. For 9 of the 18 patients, the agency said, "the
consent process was not well documented." Investigators could not always
determine who had conducted the informed consent discussions and who had
answered the questions; in one case, for example, a patient and a witness signed
the informed consent document on March 17, 1997, but the investigator signed it
on June 5, a week before the gene therapy was administered.

   While those failures may sound like minor details of recordkeeping, Dr. W.
French Anderson, a gene therapy scientist at the University of Southern
California, said the agency took them seriously, especially when a pattern
emerged.

   Dr. Noguchi said today that the investigation was continuing. The next step,
he said, is for Dr. Wilson to respond to the inspection.

   One reason Mr. Gelsinger's death has generated so much controversy is that he
was not particularly sick before he died. He suffered from a relatively mild
form of ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, an inherited disorder in which
the liver is unable to process ammonia, a toxic breakdown product of protein.
The disorder was kept in check through diet and drugs.

   The experiment in which Mr. Gelsinger participated was designed to test a
treatment for babies with a fatal form of the disease. It involved an infusion
of trillions of particles of the ornithine transcarbamylase gene, tucked inside
a weakened cold virus.

   Dr. Wilson has consistently maintained that the Penn scientists had no
evidence that would have led them to predict Mr. Gelsinger's death, and Dr.
Noguchi, of the F.D.A., would not say whether the agency thought the death could
have been prevented. "I'm not going to speculate on what these things really
mean," he said.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jesse Gelsinger's death was the first attributed to gene
therapy. (Associated Press)(pg. A12)

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2000


                             981 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                January 22, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1256 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   INTERNATIONAL   A3-8

Smuggling Case Reveals Corruption in China
A conspiracy that apparently involved Communist Party, police and banking
officials smuggled billions of dollars in cars, oil and industrial materials
through the southeastern port of Xiamen in the 1990's, evading huge sums in
taxes, according to officials familiar with the case.   A1

Coup in Ecuador
President Jamil Mahuad was replaced by a three-member junta after a rebellion by
Indians that was backed by the armed forces.   A1


   Ireland Let Terror Suspect Go
Officials said a man taken in for questioning in Dublin last month might have
ties to an Algerian terror suspect arrested in Seattle. But the Irish police
released him before learning of that possibility.   A3

Russian Warns of Attacks
Acting President Vladimir V. Putin, speaking to police and security officials,
warned Russians that there was increasing danger of Chechen-organized terrorist
attacks.   A4

Car Bomb Explodes in Spain
Two car bombs exploded in Madrid, killing an army officer and wounding others.
The government blamed a Basque separatist group.   A7

Advice on U.N. Dues Dispute
Richard C. Holbrooke, United States representative to the United Nations, told
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that it would be difficult to win United
Nations consent to reduce Washington's share of the budget, a condition set by
Congress for paying $1 billion in back dues.   A8

A Minimum Age for Combat
Negotiators in Geneva agreed on a new international protocol prohibiting the use
of child soldiers in war, after the United States dropped opposition to
establishing 18 as the minimum age for combat.   A8

University Votes to End Strike
Students, faculty members and workers of the national university in Mexico City,
worn out by a nine-month strike, voted overwhelmingly in favor of a plan to
return to class. But strikers who have paralyzed the enormous campus since April
refused to recognize the outcome.   A6

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A9-12, 16

Bush Affirms Views On Court and Roe v. Wade
Gov. George W. Bush responded to some conservatives' criticism that he is
equivocal on abortion by declaring that the Supreme Court had "stepped across
its bounds and usurped the right of legislatures" with its landmark Roe v. Wade
decision. With the Iowa Republican caucuses only three days away, both Mr. Bush
and his main challenger in that arena, Steve Forbes, were making strong appeals
to conservatives.   A1

Senator John McCain, campaigning in South Carolina, criticized Roe v. Wade as
"overreaching." But he added that after "a lot of study, a lot of consultation
and a lot of prayer," he had decided that his opposition to abortion did not
extend to cases of rape and incest.   A10

Heart Condition Downplayed
Bill Bradley sought to assure voters in Iowa that recurrent episodes of atrial
fibrillation were just "a nuisance" and would not affect his ability to campaign
for president. His doctor said in an interview that Mr. Bradley's recent
irregular heartbeats were not significant.   A11

Aid to Get the Poor Online
President Clinton wants federal subsidies to help poor people buy computers and
connect to the Internet, one of the initiatives planned for his State of the
Union message to narrow the so-called digital divide.   A9

Cuban Grandmothers in U.S.
The grandmothers of Elian Gonzalez arrived in New York saying he had expressed a
desire in phone calls to return to his family in Cuba. The boy's relatives in
Miami scoffed at that assertion, maintaining that he has repeatedly said he
wants to stay in this country. The women hope to meet with government officials
and others who may help them.   A9

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Action in Gene Therapy Death
The F.D.A. said it was temporarily shutting down all human gene therapy
experiments at the University of Pennsylvania after an inspection uncovered
"serious deficiencies" in ensuring patient safety in a clinical trial that took
the life of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, above.   A1

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Auto Thefts Tumble in Face Of Gadgets and Strategies
New Yorkers are still more likely to have their cars stolen than residents of
most other cities, but law enforcement and insurance experts say technological
advances and crime-fighting strategies have converged with such success that
thieves stole fewer cars in New York last year than at any time since 1965. Last
year, 39,000 auto thefts were reported, a decline of almost 74 percent from the
147,000 stolen in 1990.   A1

Pension Fund Plan Is Dropped
The Fisher real estate family and Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, trying to defuse a
standoff with the Giuliani administration, abandoned plans for a private fund to
invest $1 billion of public-employee pension money in New York real estate
projects.   B1

Recalling a Murder Suspect
Interviews with friends, relatives and acquaintances of Michael C. Skakel
produced contrasting portraits of the 39-year-old man accused of murdering a
15-year-old neighbor in Greenwich, Conn., 25 years ago.   B1

Inquiry Into Doctor's Actions
The Manhattan district attorney is investigating what officials said were a
number of incidents involving Dr. Allan Zarkin, who was accused by a patient of
carving his initials into her abdomen after delivering her daughter by Caesarean
section at Beth Israel Hospital.   B3

Beliefs   B7

NEEDIEST CASES   B7

OBITUARIES   A13

SPORTS   D1-8

Action on Jets Coaching Front
Al Groh, the linebackers coach, is expected to be named head coach on Monday.
And Commissioner Paul Tagliabue reaffirmed the Jets' contract with Bill
Belichick, meaning he may not go to another club this season without their
consent.   D1

Canada Backs Off Subsidies
The Canadian government abandoned plans to help subsidize the N.H.L. teams in
Canada, after the proposal drew public criticism.   D1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

P.& G. Weighs Merger
Procter & Gamble's board met to consider a merger with two pharmaceutical
giants, American Home Products and Warner-Lambert, that would create one of the
world's largest consumer products and drug companies.   A1

German Bid for I.M.F. Post
German officials have stepped up a campaign to install one of their own, Caio
Koch-Weser, a deputy finance minister, as head of the I.M.F., using a lukewarm
endorsement by President Clinton to rally support and break a three-month
deadlock.   C1

Earnings Slip at Caterpillar
Caterpillar, the world's largest maker of construction and earth-moving
equipment, said fourth-quarter profits fell 21 percent from a year ago as demand
slowed in North America and Latin America.   C1

Markets Diverge Again
The Dow dropped 99.59 points, to 11,251.71, and the S.& P. 500 fell 4.21, to
1,441.36. But the Nasdaq, heavy with telecommunications and computer-related
issues, rose 45.89 points, to 4,235.40, in its busiest day ever, topping
Thursday's record, as 1.91 billion shares changed hands.   C3

Business Digest   C1

ARTS & IDEAS   B9-24

EDITORIAL   A14-15

Editorials: A misdirected college tax credit; Mr. Bush's sneaky friends;
conciliatory election in Chile; the long labor slide ends.

Columns: Anthony Lewis.

Bridge   B21

TV Listings   B24

Crossword   B23

Weather   B23

Public Lives   A9


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2000


                             982 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                 JANUARY 22, 2000 Saturday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 07

LENGTH: 375 words

HEADLINE: FDA HALTS TESTS BY PENN LAB GENE THERAPY BLAMED FOR TEEN-AGER'S DEATH

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The government, citing numerous violations of research regulations, suspended
all clinical trials by a University of Pennsylvania physician and laboratory
whose gene therapy experiment resulted in the death of an Arizona teen-ager.

   Among the accusations: Researchers didn't report two other very serious
reactions from the experimental gene therapy before 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger
died.

   With yesterday's decision, the Food and Drug Administration stopped seven
separate experiments until Dr. James M. Wilson and the university's Institute
for Human Gene Therapy correct the violations.

   Neither Wilson nor the university immediately responded to requests for
comment.

   The FDA's stern action comes as experts, stunned by Gelsinger's death last
September, are questioning whether gene therapy experiments have been subject to
enough oversight.

   Gelsinger is the first patient known to have died from gene therapy,
considered one of medicine's most promising frontiers, although more than 5,000
patients have participated in 350 clinical trials.

   "This is really a wake-up call, where perhaps we get a little comfortable
with things as they're going on and then get a little cavalier," said Estuardo
Aguilar-Cordova of the Baylor College of Medicine, a gene therapy adviser to the
National Institutes of Health.

   The FDA inspection shows "some of the precautions fell through the cracks,"
Aguilar-Cordova said, but the violations are "not characteristic" of Wilson and
gene therapists expect Wilson's lab will meet federal standards quickly.

   Gelsinger was enrolled in an experiment designed to correct a genetic liver
disorder by injecting his liver with a cold virus bearing normal genes. He
suffered a toxic reaction within hours of treatment and died four days later.

   That experiment was immediately halted.

   FDA investigators charged last month that the Tucson teen-ager should never
have been part of the study but did not complete a formal inspection of Wilson's
lab until this week. That inspection cites 18 possible violations of federal
research rules.

   While Wilson will be able to challenge the findings, the FDA called the
violations serious enough that all other human experiments in the lab are on
hold for now.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             983 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JANUARY 22, 2000 Saturday D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 740 words

HEADLINE: FDA SHUTS DOWN GENE THERAPY AT PENN INSTITUTE THE SWEEPING ACTION
FOLLOWED A THREE-MONTH PROBE INTO THE DEATH OF AN 18-YEAR-OLD PATIENT.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins and Shankar Vedantam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   Federal regulators yesterday shut down all gene-therapy trials at the
University of Pennsylvania's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, charging that the
institute does not have proper systems in place to guarantee patient safety.

   Any trial conducted by James M. Wilson, director of the institute, is to be
suspended until Penn scientists can convince federal regulators that they can
protect patients.

   Under the action, no new patients can be recruited into clinical trials at
the institute. Patients already enrolled are to be taken off any experimental
gene therapy unless doing so would jeopardize their safety.

   The sweeping action, announced yesterday by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, follows a three-month government probe into a Penn gene-therapy
experiment that led to the death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz.

   Ken Wildes, a Penn spokesman, said a response to the FDA would be issued
soon, possibly within a week, and probably would be made public by the
university.

   In a one-page statement issued last night, Penn president Judith Rodin said
the university's provost, Robert Barchi, would appoint an outside committee,
made up of scientists not affiliated with Penn, to examine the institute's
oversight of clinical trials.

   Last week, in anticipation of the FDA report, Rodin appointed an in-house
committee of scientists to review the safeguards for research involving human
subjects.

   In its scathing report issued yesterday, the FDA identified 18 specific
violations of government rules and agreements by the Penn scientists who oversaw
the gene-therapy experiment that led to Gelsinger's death on Sept. 17.

   A Penn spokesman said that Wilson, regarded as one of the nation's top
gene-therapy scientists, was not available for comment.

   Alan Milstein, a Pennsauken attorney representing Gelsinger's father, Paul,
said: "The FDA report comes too late for Jesse Gelsinger. In light of the
findings, suspending the [gene-therapy] program certainly seems appropriate."

   Philip Noguchi, director of cellular and gene therapies at the FDA, said in
an interview that he could not speculate whether the violations would have
stopped the trial and prevented Gelsinger's death had the FDA known about them.
At the very least, he said, they would have prompted "extensive discussions."

   The violations cited in the FDA report included recruiting patients who might
have been too sick to participate; underreporting side effects in patients
treated before Gelsinger; and keeping both government and university monitors in
the dark about crucial decisions.

   Penn officials said the FDA-imposed suspension would affect eight
gene-therapy trials, involving cystic fibrosis, the lung cancer mesothelioma,
melanoma, breast cancer, muscular dystrophy, and brain cancer.

   Officials said they did not know how many people had been enrolled in those
studies, but Wildes estimated it was probably a small number.

   In addition, the suspension affects two other trials of experimental gene
therapy that have not begun enrolling patients. The trial in which Gelsinger was
enrolled was suspended shortly after his death.

   Gelsinger was the 18th patient to be treated in his trial, which aimed to
correct an inherited disorder - ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTC) - in
which the liver is unable to rid the body of ammonia, a byproduct of metabolism.

   He died four days after Penn scientists infused trillions of genetically
altered viruses directly into his liver, with hopes of giving him the gene he
lacked.

   The unusual reaction, which was not seen in other patients, led to
Gelsinger's death, Penn scientists have concluded. It was the first death
directly attributed to gene therapy since human gene-therapy experiments began a
decade ago.

   Among the violations cited by the FDA:

   Wilson's team changed the rules for the trial without prior permission from
the FDA or the university's own watchdog group, the Institutional Review Board
(IRB). One change had the effect of allowing sicker patients - those with higher
ammonia levels - to get the experimental therapy.

   The Penn scientists did not tell the FDA about the deaths of two out of three
monkeys in a related animal experiment until nearly a year after the fact. Such
reports must be filed within 15 days. Noguchi said the monkeys, who died while
receiving high doses of a gene therapy similar to that given to Gelsinger, would
have

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             984 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   January 22, 2000, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A-6

LENGTH: 597 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY CRACKDOWN;
FEDERAL OFFICIALS HALT HUMAN EXPERIMENTS AT THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA;
WHERE AN 18-YEAR-OLD BEING TREATED FOR A RARE LIVER DISORDER DIED.;
GENE THERAPY CRACKDOWN

BYLINE: RICK WEISS AND DEBORAH NELSON, THE WASHINGTON POST

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   The federal government yesterday halted all human gene therapy experiments
involving a prominent researcher at the University of Pennsylvania, saying an
investigation into the September death of a teen-ager there found the school's
prestigious program in serious disarray.

   Investigators at the Food and Drug Administration said they found numerous
violations of federal research regulations and shortcomings in the protection of
human subjects at Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, which is led by
researcher James M. Wilson.

   Penn couldn't provide investigators with proof that any of the volunteers in
the fatal study had been eligible to participate or had been adequately warned
of the risks of the research, FDA officials said. They also said Penn had not
properly monitored the health of volunteers after the experiment began, and lost
track of several lots of the experimental genes that had been infused into
patients' livers.

   The findings go beyond FDA revelations in December that the Penn researchers
had not stopped the experiment as required after four successive volunteers
suffered serious side effects, then allowed Jesse Gelsinger, 18, into the study
even though he was not healthy enough to qualify. Gelsinger died from the
treatment Sept. 17, in what is believed to be the first death caused directly by
gene therapy.

   The FDA's decision to suspend all eight gene therapy studies at Penn's
institute sent shock waves through the genetic research community. Gene therapy,
which seeks to cure diseases by giving people new DNA, was already at the center
of a national controversy because of recent revelations that some researchers
had not been reporting side effects as required, even as some companies were
seeking to reduce the level of federal oversight of the field.

   Gene therapy has grown enormously from its beginnings in 1990, when a
4-yearold girl became the first patient to be treated with genes. Yet despite
the initiation of hundreds of studies involving thousands of patients suffering
from a variety of diseases, and a growing financial investment by private
companies hoping to profit from the novel approach, the field has yet to
document its first cure. In recent years, the field has come under criticism
from some scientists, ethicists and others for moving ahead too quickly,
jeopardizing patients.

   Responding to the FDA report, Penn President Judith Rodin yesterday announced
that university Provost Robert L. Barchi would appoint an independent committee
of scientists with no affiliation to the university to review the gene
institute's oversight and monitoring of clinical trials.

   The FDA's action comes three days after the National Institutes of Health
quietly opened a separate investigation into gene therapy experiments at Penn.

   Penn's institute is one of the largest academic gene therapy centers in the
world, with an annual budget of about $ 25 million and links with private
biotechnology companies. Wilson, who is a key investigator in all seven gene
therapy studies suspended by the FDA, has come under increased scrutiny in the
months since Gelsinger's death, in part because of revelations that he had a
potentially large financial stake in the outcome of the Gelsinger study.

   The study suspensions also have repercussions for outside corporations that
directly or indirectly sponsor the institute's clinical trials, including Genovo
Inc., of suburban Philadelphia, a company founded by Wilson, and Biogen, a
Massachusetts company that has poured $ 37 million into the institute and
Genovo.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2000


                             985 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     January 22, 2000 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 587 words

HEADLINE: FDA CITES VIOLATIONS, HALTS HUMAN GENE THERAPY WORK AT PENN

BYLINE: By MARLENE CIMONS; LOS ANGELES TIMES

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration called a halt to human gene therapy research
at the University of Pennsylvania yesterday after an investigation into the
death last September of an 18-year-old patient found numerous violations by
university scientists.

   The inquiry found serious lapses by the study's principal researchers in
reporting potentially serious side effects - seen before the patient died - and
in other procedures involving entry criteria and informed consent.

   The action effectively stops seven studies under way at the University of
Pennsylvania's Institute of Gene Therapy, in addition to the trial in question,
which was suspended after the death.

   Dr. Philip Noguchi, an FDA official involved in the oversight of gene therapy
research, said the studies would not be allowed to resume until the institute
and the principal investigator, Dr. James M. Wilson, correct the violations and
demonstrate that their procedures comply with FDA rules.

   In response to the FDA action, University of Pennsylvania President Judith
Rodin said she had asked the school's provost to appoint a committee of
"distinguished scientists with extensive experience in clinical research" - but
without affiliation to the university - to review the institute's oversight and
monitoring procedures and recommend corrections.

   The university, she said, "has cooperated fully" with the investigation.

   Jesse Gelsinger, of Tucson, Ariz., had volunteered for the experimental
treatment with the hope of curing his rare genetic disorder, ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency, which prevents the liver from breaking down
ammonia, a normal byproduct of protein digestion.

   He died after researchers infused a genetically modified virus into his liver
in an attempt to introduce new genes that could correct those responsible for
his ailment.

   Gene therapy researchers, working at what is widely regarded as the future
cutting edge of treatment for many disorders, attempt to replace or repair
damaged or missing genes with healthy ones. More than 300 gene therapy studies
are under way and at least 2,500 patients have been treated without apparent
harm.

   While Gelsinger was not the first patient undergoing gene therapy to die, his
death is believed to be the first directly related to the experimental
procedure.

   In its findings, the FDA said two earlier volunteers in the University of
Pennsylvania study suffered reactions serious enough to have put the study on
hold. But researchers, the FDA found, attributed the side effects to the
patients' medical histories rather than the experiment.

   Also, the scientists did not report the deaths of two monkeys under treatment
during animal studies, which typically precede human trials.

   The agency also said that Gelsinger's blood levels of ammonia, a measure of
liver damage, were too high for him to have been eligible for the study and that
scientists had altered eligibility criteria without FDA approval.

   Finally, the agency faulted the lab for not properly monitoring the study -
saying it did not have an overall standard operating procedure for its clinical
trials. It also found irregularities in the forms on which researchers are
supposed to explain the possible risks and benefits of participation and on
which patients consent to take part.

   Noguchi said that, while "most (gene therapy studies) are being done in a
responsible manner," the agency is considering stepping up its inspections in
the future and "reminding investigators of their responsibilities."

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2000


                             986 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 22, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 513 words

HEADLINE: Gene project on hold after man's death; University of Pennsylvania's
program shut down by FDA

BYLINE: Sheryl Gay Stolberg; NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 WASHINGTON -- The Food and Drug Administration announced yesterday that it was
temporarily shutting down every human gene therapy experiment at the University
of Pennsylvania after an inspection uncovered "numerous serious deficiencies" in
ensuring patient safety during a clinical trial that cost an 18-year-old Arizona
man his life.

   The decision to place the entire program -- eight experiments, including five
active clinical trials in diseases such as cystic fibrosis and breast cancer --
on "clinical hold" is highly unusual.

   The hold won't be lifted until the agency is convinced that the university's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy can follow federal rules designed to protect
study volunteers, officials said.

   In response, university President Judith Rodin pledged to appoint a committee
of outside scientists to review the institute's work.

   The FDA's action comes two days after its investigators completed an
inspection of patient records and laboratory data from the experiment that
resulted in the death of Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson in September.  Gelsinger was
the first person to die as a direct result of gene therapy.

   Some of the findings were made public last month during a meeting of the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, the panel that oversees gene therapy
research for the National Institutes of Health.  Those findings included
evidence that Gelsinger was ineligible for the experiment and that the
scientists failed to report side effects in other patients that could have
halted the study.

   The final report, which cited 18 violations, also turned up new problems.  It
found, for instance, that the Pennsylvania scientists had enrolled all 18
patients without filling out eligibility forms.  Instead, the FDA said, the
scientists created the forms and filled them out after Gelsinger died, leaving
them unsigned and undated.

   Dr. James Wilson, director of the university's gene therapy institute, didn't
take telephone calls yesterday.  But in the past, he has defended his work,
including the decision to treat Gelsinger, who died Sept. 17.

   Sen. Bill Frist, R-Tenn., has called a hearing for next week to examine
whether there is sufficient oversight for patient safety in gene therapy
experiments.

   In another research-related shutdown, the University of Alabama was told
Thursday to shut down about one-quarter of its research involving human
subjects, about 550 experiments, mostly medical trials.

   The order came from the Office of Protection from Research Risks, an agency
of the Department of Health and Human Services.  It didn't restrict the
university's ability to conduct other research.

   The agency found that the university had frequently violated federal rules.
Under these rules, researchers who want to use federal funds for research on
humans must obtain prior approval for their plans to ensure that patients will
be safe and will be informed about the risks they will face.

   Agency officials told the university that its review board routinely failed
to check whether the research was being conducted properly.


LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000


                             987 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       January 22, 2000, Saturday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: Pennsylvania gene therapy tests halted; FDA cites violation of
regulations at university clinic in wake of patient's death

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard


BODY:  WASHINGTON - The government, citing numerous
violations of research regulations, suspended all clinical trials
by a University of Pennsylvania physician and laboratory whose gene
therapy experiment resulted in the death of an Arizona teen-ager.


    Among the accusations: Researchers didn't report two other very
serious reactions from the experimental gene therapy before
18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died.


    With Friday's decision, the Food and Drug Administration stopped
seven separate experiments until Dr. James Wilson and the
university's Institute for Human Gene Therapy correct the
violations.


    Neither Wilson nor the university responded to requests for
comment.


    The FDA's stern action comes as experts, stunned by Gelsinger's
death in September, are questioning whether gene therapy
experiments have been subject to enough oversight or if researchers
let precautions slip because gene therapy has been considered so
safe.


    Gelsinger is the first patient known to have died from gene
therapy, considered one of medicine's most promising frontiers,
although more than 5,000 patients have participated in 350 clinical
trials.


    "This is really a wake-up call, where perhaps we get a little
comfortable with things as they're going on and then get a little
cavalier," said Estuardo Aguilar-Cordova of the Baylor College of
Medicine, a gene therapy adviser to the National Institutes of
Health.


    The FDA inspection shows "some of the precautions fell through the
cracks," Aguilar-Cordova said, but the violations are "not
characteristic" of Wilson and gene therapists expect Wilson's lab
will meet federal standards quickly.


    But a consumer advocate said the government has been too lax in
ensuring gene therapists follow research rules important for
patient safety.


    "There's this halo, sacrosanct idea of gene therapy, that no one
could be involved unless they're completely trustworthy, that maybe
left more blinders on than in other areas," said Dr. Sidney Wolfe
of Public Citizen.


    Gelsinger was enrolled in an experiment designed to correct a
genetic liver disorder by injecting his liver with a cold virus
bearing normal genes. He suffered a toxic reaction within hours of
treatment and died four days later.


    That experiment was immediately halted.


    FDA investigators charged last month that the Tucson teen-ager
should never have been part of the study but did not complete a
formal inspection of Wilson's lab until this week. That inspection
cites 18 possible violations of research rules.


    While Wilson will be able to challenge the findings, the FDA called
the violations serious enough that all other human experiments in
the lab are on hold for now.


    "We are taking an action ... that we think is in the public health
interest," said Dr. Kathryn Zoon, chief of FDA's Center for
Biologics.



LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2000


                             988 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 22, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 515 words

HEADLINE: Gene project on hold after man's death; University of Pennsylvania's
program shut down by FDA

SOURCE: NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BYLINE: Sheryl Gay Stolberg

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   WASHINGTON -- The Food and Drug Administration announced yesterday that it
was temporarily shutting down every human gene therapy experiment at the
University of Pennsylvania after an inspection uncovered "numerous serious
deficiencies" in ensuring patient safety during a clinical trial that cost an
18-year-old Arizona man his life.

   The decision to place the entire program -- eight experiments, including five
active clinical trials in diseases such as cystic fibrosis and breast cancer --
on "clinical hold" is highly unusual.

   The hold won't be lifted until the agency is convinced that the university's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy can follow federal rules designed to protect
study volunteers, officials said.

   In response, university President Judith Rodin pledged to appoint a committee
of outside scientists to review the institute's work.

   The FDA's action comes two days after its investigators completed an
inspection of patient records and laboratory data from the experiment that
resulted in the death of Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson in September.  Gelsinger was
the first person to die as a direct result of gene therapy.

   Some of the findings were made public last month during a meeting of the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, the panel that oversees gene therapy
research for the National Institutes of Health.  Those findings included
evidence that Gelsinger was ineligible for the experiment and that the
scientists failed to report side effects in other patients that could have
halted the study.

   The final report, which cited 18 violations, also turned up new problems. It
found, for instance, that the Pennsylvania scientists had enrolled all 18
patients without filling out eligibility forms.  Instead, the FDA said, the
scientists created the forms and filled them out after Gelsinger died, leaving
them unsigned and undated.

   Dr. James Wilson, director of the university's gene therapy institute, didn't
take telephone calls yesterday.  But in the past, he has defended his work,
including the decision to treat Gelsinger, who died Sept. 17.

   Sen. Bill Frist, R-Tenn., has called a hearing for next week to examine
whether there is sufficient oversight for patient safety in gene therapy
experiments.

   In another research-related shutdown, the University of Alabama was told
Thursday to shut down about one-quarter of its research involving human
subjects, about 550 experiments, mostly medical trials.

   The order came from the Office of Protection from Research Risks, an agency
of the Department of Health and Human Services.  It didn't restrict the
university's ability to conduct other research.

   The agency found that the university had frequently violated federal rules.
Under these rules, researchers who want to use federal funds for research on
humans must obtain prior approval for their plans to ensure that patients will
be safe and will be informed about the risks they will face.

   Agency officials told the university that its review board routinely failed
to check whether the research was being conducted properly.


LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2000


                             989 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               January 22, 2000, Saturday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1536 words

HEADLINE: NATION & WORLD BRIEFS

BYLINE: From News Services

BODY:


NATION

LITTLETON, Colo.

Columbine High School will get a new library

   The library at Columbine High School where most victims of a bloody massacre
in April were killed will be torn down and replaced with a glass atrium, parents
of victims said Friday as they began a fund-raising drive to pay for
construction.

   "We were ambivalent at first," said Don Fleming, whose daughter Kelly Fleming
was one of 13 people killed by Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold before both student
gunmen took their own lives. "But when we went in there after the shooting, we
knew it should never be used again as a library. It's ... just not right to ask
kids to go there and use it with all those memories."

   The library, damaged in the shooting, has been walled off and lockers placed
in front of it. On Thursday, the Jefferson County School Board approved building
the library in a different location and replacing the current one with a glass
atrium paid for with donated funds. That decision set the stage for parents to
start raising the $ 3.1 million needed for construction.

WASHINGTON

U.S. halts clinical trials in lab that led to death

   The government, citing numerous violations of research regulations, suspended
all clinical trials by a University of Pennsylvania physician and laboratory
whose gene therapy experiment resulted in the death of an Arizona teen-ager.

   Among the accusations: Researchers didn't report two other very serious
reactions from the experimental gene therapy before Jesse Gelsinger, 18, died.

   With Friday's decision, the Food and Drug Administration stopped seven
separate experiments until Dr. James M. Wilson and the university's Institute
for Human Gene Therapy correct the violations.

   The FDA's stern action comes as experts, stunned by Gelsinger's death in
September, are questioning whether gene therapy experiments have been subject to
enough oversight or if researchers let precautions slip because gene therapy has
been considered so safe.

FLINT, Mich.

Train burning propane forces evacuations

   A train car caught fire in a rail yard and spewed burning propane Friday,
closing schools and forcing hundreds of people to evacuate their homes for fear
of an explosion. There were no reports of injuries.

   It wasn't known what sparked the fire. The train was passing through the CSX
yard when a railroad employee spotted flames shooting from a valve used to
relieve pressure in the tankers.

   At least 500 people were evacuated within a mile of the yard, Fire Chief
Theron Wiggins said. A stretch of Interstate 475 was closed.

   Fire officials said initially that they feared the fire threatened a
half-million gallons of propane in nearby freight cars. But crews managed to
uncouple the others from the burning tank, which contained about 33,000 gallons
of liquid propane.

HUNTSVILLE, Texas

Man who killed 5 people in 1982 is executed

   A man who killed his lover and four neighbors was executed Friday, ending a
case that death penalty opponents used as a test of Gov. George W. Bush's
"compassionate conservatism."

   Larry Keith Robison shot, stabbed and decapitated his homosexual lover, then
shot and stabbed four other people in 1982. The 42-year-old Air Force veteran
had said for the past several months that he was ready to die so he could leave
death row.

   "I've never denied my part in it, or tried to excuse myself or avoid the
responsibility," Robison said in an interview last summer.

   Robison had been scheduled to die in July. Death penalty opponents lobbied
Bush to grant him a one-time reprieve because of his mental illness and called
it a test of Bush's presidential campaign theme of "compassionate conservatism."


==========

WORLD

GENEVA

Accord on ending use of child soldiers is reached

   An accord aimed at ending the use of child soldiers worldwide was reached
Friday after six years of efforts and a compromise that allows governments to
maintain voluntary recruitment of children 16 and older.

   Officials and campaigners welcomed the agreement, which sets a combat limit
of 18, as an important step toward easing the plight of the world's child
soldiers. More than 300,000 youths below the age of 18 are involved in fighting,
according to U.N. figures.

   U.N. agencies and human rights campaigners wanted to raise the age limit on
all military recruits to 18 from the 15 specified in the U.N. Convention on the
Rights of the Child. The United States was among countries opposing the higher
limit. The United States allows voluntary enlistment at 17. Britain starts at
16.

   The accord will be subject to approval from U.N. bodies and then be put up
for signature by governments.

MADRID, Spain

2 car bombs explode, killing army officer

   Hopes for an end to Basque separatist violence in Spain vanished Friday when
two car bombs exploded in a Madrid neighborhood, killing an army officer and
ending a 19-month lull in such attacks.

   Police immediately blamed the bombings on the Basque separatist group ETA,
which ended a cease-fire last month after failing to win government concessions.
Investigators said the attacks had all the hallmarks of the ETA.

   Although there was no immediate claim of responsibility, police reported last
month that they had intercepted two ETA-linked cars carrying 3,300 pounds of
explosives to Madrid. The group often waits weeks before claiming responsibility
for an attack. The last attack attributed to the ETA was the killing of a
governing party official on June 25, 1998.

   Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar condemned Friday's attack and promised that
the government would not yield in its fight against ETA.

TOKYO

Suspected cult followers abduct son of ex-guru

   Intruders believed to be cult followers on Friday abducted the 7-year-old son
of the former guru of the doomsday group behind the 1995 gas attack on Tokyo's
subway.

   The kidnapping, which reportedly involved the former guru Shoko Asahara's
daughter, was likely a sign of infighting in the Aum Shinri Kyo as it faces
increasing pressure to disband, Japanese media reports said.

   Several people broke into a cult facility in Asahimura, 60 miles northeast of
Tokyo, and assaulted those who tried to stop them, TBS-TV said.

   One of the intruders, Satoshi Nagayama, 37, a former cult member, was later
arrested nearby and charged with breaking into the facility, police said. The
kidnappers fled by car, Kyodo News Service said. Police were looking for the
boy, whose name was not released, and Nagayama's suspected accomplices, they
said.

BAGHDAD, Iraq

First nuclear inspectors since 1998 arrive

   Inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency arrived in Iraq on
Friday to verify that the nation's nuclear stocks are not being used for
weapons.

   The monitors are the first to visit Iraq since U.N. weapons inspectors left
the country in late 1998 on the eve of U.S.-British airstrikes.

   The team leader, Ahmad Abuzahra, said the inspection had nothing to do with
the supervision imposed by the United Nations after the 1991 Persian Gulf War
over Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.

   He said the inspection was part of the monitoring program imposed on all
signatories to the nuclear nonproliferation treaty. Iraq signed the treaty in
1968.

GENEVA

Russia refuses to modify missile treaty with U.S.

   U.S. and Russian officials ended nuclear disarmament talks Friday with Russia
refusing to modify a key anti-ballistic missile treaty.

   No new agreements were announced, but the Russian news agency ITAR-Tass
quoted diplomatic sources as saying the talks were constructive.

   "The Russian side underlined the tight interrelatedness between the process
of reducing strategic arms and the (Anti-Ballistic Missile) Treaty of 1972,"
said the Russian Foreign Ministry.

   The talks were conducted between the countries' top disarmament specialists:
John Holum of the State Department and Yuri Kapralov, the acting head of the
Russian Foreign Ministry's arms control department. Their meeting was intended
to revive deep cuts in each side's nuclear arsenals and to work out differences
over the ABM treaty. Washington wants to change the ABM treaty so it can develop
a limited nuclear missile defense to ward off attacks from rogue nations.

TEHRAN, Iran

Ex-president assails bid by reformists

   A former president said Friday that reformists are humiliating Iran in their
attempts to win votes in next month's parliamentary elections.

   In his prayer sermon at Tehran University, which was broadcast live on
state-run radio, Hashemi Rafsanjani said it was unjust to question such things
as Iran's performance during the Iran-Iraq war in 1980-88 and the principles of
the revolution.

   "If you want to win votes, you should choose other ways and not humiliate
your nation," said Rafsanjani, who leads a council that advises Iran's supreme
leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, on major issues.

   The elections on Feb. 18 are shaping up as a showdown between candidates
backing reformist President Mohammad Khatami and calling for more openness, and
those who fear the Islamic roots of Iran's 1979 revolution are being forgotten.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO Photo from THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Firefighters put out flames
Friday from a car burning after a bomb went off in Madrid, Spain. Basque
separatists are suspected of exploding two car bombs in the city. The blasts
killed an army official.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2000


                             990 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 January 22, 2000, Saturday, THREE STAR EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1523 words

HEADLINE: NATION & WORLD BRIEFS

BYLINE: From News Services

BODY:


NATION

LITTLETON, Colo.

Columbine High School will get a new library

   The library at Columbine High School where most victims of a bloody massacre
in April were killed will be torn down and replaced with a glass atrium, parents
of victims said Friday as they began a fund-raising drive to pay for
construction.

   "We were ambivalent at first," said Don Fleming, whose daughter Kelly Fleming
was one of 13 people killed by Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold before both student
gunmen took their own lives. "But when we went in there after the shooting, we
knew it should never be used again as a library. It's ... just not right to ask
kids to go there and use it with all those memories."

   The library, damaged in the shooting, has been walled off and lockers placed
in front of it. On Thursday, the Jefferson County School Board approved building
the library in a different location and replacing the current one with a glass
atrium paid for with donated funds. That decision set the stage for parents to
start raising the $ 3.1 million needed for construction.

WASHINGTON

U.S. halts clinical trials in lab that led to death

   The government, citing numerous violations of research regulations, suspended
all clinical trials by a University of Pennsylvania physician and laboratory
whose gene therapy experiment resulted in the death of an Arizona teen-ager.

   Among the accusations: Researchers didn't report two other very serious
reactions from the experimental gene therapy before Jesse Gelsinger, 18, died.

   With Friday's decision, the Food and Drug Administration stopped seven
separate experiments until Dr. James M. Wilson and the university's Institute
for Human Gene Therapy correct the violations.

   The FDA's stern action comes as experts, stunned by Gelsinger's death in
September, are questioning whether gene therapy experiments have been subject to
enough oversight or if researchers let precautions slip because gene therapy has
been considered so safe.

FLINT, Mich.

Train burning propane forces evacuations

   A train car caught fire in a rail yard and spewed burning propane Friday,
closing schools and forcing hundreds of people to evacuate their homes for fear
of an explosion. There were no reports of injuries.

   It wasn't known what sparked the fire. The train was passing through the CSX
yard when a railroad employee spotted flames shooting from a valve used to
relieve pressure in the tankers.

   At least 500 people were evacuated within a mile of the yard, Fire Chief
Theron Wiggins said. A stretch of Interstate 475 was closed.

   Fire officials said initially that they feared the fire threatened a
half-million gallons of propane in nearby freight cars. But crews managed to
uncouple the others from the burning tank, which contained about 33,000 gallons
of liquid propane.

CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C.

Captain in fatal hike will have court-martial

   The Marine commander of Camp Lejeune on Friday ordered a court-martial for
the captain who oversaw a hike last summer in which a reservist died from heat
stroke.

   Maj. Gen. Ronald Richard reversed a judge's recommendation from earlier this
month that had called the case against Capt. Victor Arana a leadership issue
rather than a criminal one.

   Arana, 28, has been charged with negligent homicide, violating a lawful order
and dereliction of duty in connection with the death on July 7 of Lance Cpl.
Giuseppe Leto. The charges carry a possible penalty of 3 1/2 years in prison.
Arana also could be dismissed from the service.

   Arana was accused of marching his unit too fast with not enough time for
breaks during an eight-mile hike. Investigators said his handling of the unit
violated training guidelines.

Leto, 21, died of heat stroke.

==========

WORLD

MADRID, Spain

2 car bombs explode, killing army officer

   Hopes for an end to Basque separatist violence in Spain vanished Friday when
two car bombs exploded in a Madrid neighborhood, killing an army officer and
ending a 19-month lull in such attacks.

   Police immediately blamed the bombings on the Basque separatist group ETA,
which ended a cease-fire last month after failing to win government concessions.
Investigators said the attacks had all the hallmarks of the ETA.

   Although there was no immediate claim of responsibility, police reported last
month that they had intercepted two ETA-linked cars carrying 3,300 pounds of
explosives to Madrid. The group often waits weeks before claiming responsibility
for an attack. The last attack attributed to the ETA was the killing of a
governing party official on June 25, 1998.

   Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar condemned Friday's attack and promised that
the government would not yield in its fight against ETA.

TOKYO

Suspected cult followers abduct son of ex-guru

   Intruders believed to be cult followers on Friday abducted the 7-year-old son
of the former guru of the doomsday group behind the 1995 gas attack on Tokyo's
subway.

   The kidnapping, which reportedly involved the former guru Shoko Asahara's
daughter, was likely a sign of infighting in the Aum Shinri Kyo as it faces
increasing pressure to disband, Japanese media reports said.

   Several people broke into a cult facility in Asahimura, 60 miles nor theast
of Tokyo, and assaulted those who tried to stop them, TBS-TV said.

   One of the intruders, Satoshi Nagayama, 37, a former cult member, was later
arrested nearby and charged with breaking into the facility, police said. The
kidnappers fled by car, Kyodo News Service said. Police were looking for the
boy, whose name was not released, and Nagayama's suspected accomplices, they
said.

BAGHDAD, Iraq

First nuclear inspectors since 1998 arrive

   Inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency arrived in Iraq on
Friday to verify that the nation's nuclear stocks are not being used for
weapons.

   The monitors are the first to visit Iraq since U.N. weapons inspectors left
the country in late 1998 on the eve of U.S.-British airstrikes.

   The team leader, Ahmad Abuzahra, said the inspection had nothing to do with
the supervision imposed by the United Nations after the 1991 Persian Gulf War
over Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.

   He said the inspection was part of the monitoring program imposed on all
signatories to the nuclear nonproliferation treaty. Iraq signed the treaty in
1968. The international agency also is responsible for stripping Iraq of its
potential to acquire or produce nuclear weapons.

GENEVA

Russia refuses to modify missile treaty with U.S.

   U.S. and Russian officials ended nuclear disarmament talks Friday with Russia
refusing to modify a key anti-ballistic missile treaty.

   No new agreements were announced, but the Russian news agency ITAR-Tass
quoted diplomatic sources as saying the talks were constructive.

   "The Russian side underlined the tight interrelatedness between the process
of reducing strategic arms and the (Anti-Ballistic Missile) Treaty of 1972,"
said the Russian Foreign Ministry.

   The talks were conducted between the countries' top disarmament specialists:
John Holum of the State Department and Yuri Kapralov, the acting head of the
Russian Foreign Ministry's arms control department. Their meeting was intended
to revive deep cuts in each side's nuclear arsenals and to work out differences
over the ABM treaty. Washington wants to change the ABM treaty so it can develop
a limited nuclear missile defense to ward off attacks from rogue nations.

TEHRAN, Iran

Ex-president assails bid by reformists

   A former president said Friday that reformists are humiliating Iran in their
attempts to win votes in next month's parliamentary elections.

   In his prayer sermon at Tehran University, which was broadcast live on
state-run radio, Hashemi Rafsanjani said it was unjust to question such things
as Iran's performance during the Iran-Iraq war in 1980-88 and the principles of
the revolution.

   "If you want to win votes, you should choose other ways and not humiliate
your nation," said Rafsanjani, who leads a council that advises Iran's supreme
leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, on major issues.

   The elections on Feb. 18 are shaping up as a showdown between candidates
backing reformist President Mohammad Khatami and calling for more openness, and
those who fear the Islamic roots of Iran's 1979 revolution are being forgotten.

LONDON

British officials return statue of Egyptian queen

   Britain handed part of a statue of an ancient Egyptian queen back to Egypt on
Friday, 10 years after it was smuggled to Britain.

   "We are sending a message and setting a precedent that both Egypt and the UK
are determined to pursue this illegal trade and to bring to justice those who
are involved," the Egyptian ambassador to London, Adel El-Gazzar, said at a news
conference.

   The approximately life-size head of Queen Nefertari, also called the Head of
Meryet, was displayed on a table at the handover ceremony. She was the favorite
wife of King Ramses II, who ruled Egypt from 1304 BC to 1236 BC, and the mother
of six of his children.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO Photo from THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Firefighters put out flames
Friday from a car burning after a bomb went off in Madrid, Spain. Basque
separatists are suspected of exploding two car bombs in the city. The blasts
killed a Spanish army official.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2000


                             991 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           January 22, 2000 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 358 words

HEADLINE: FDA stops research on gene therapy at Penn

BYLINE: Marlene Cimons, LOS ANGELES TIMES

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration called a halt to human gene therapy research
at the University of Pennsylvania yesterday after an investigation into the
death last September of an 18-year-old patient found numerous violations by
university scientists.

    The inquiry found serious lapses by the study's principal researchers in
reporting potentially serious side effects - seen before the patient died - and
in other procedures involving entry criteria and informed consent.

    The action effectively stops seven studies under way at the University of
Pennsylvania's Institute of Gene Therapy, in addition to the trial in question,
which was suspended after the death.

    Dr. Philip Noguchi, an FDA official involved in the oversight of gene
therapy research, said that the studies would not be allowed to resume until the
institute and the principal investigator, Dr. James M. Wilson, correct the
violations and demonstrate that their procedures comply with FDA rules.

    In response to the FDA action, University of Pennsylvania President Judith
Rodin said that she had asked the school's provost to appoint a committee of
"distinguished scientists with extensive experience in clinical research" - but
without affiliation to the university - to review the institute's oversight and
monitoring procedures and recommend corrections.

    The university, she said, "has cooperated fully with all aspects of the
FDA's investigation, and would continue to do so."

    Jesse Gelsinger, of Tuscon, Ariz., had volunteered for the experimental
treatment with the hope of curing his rare genetic disorder which prevents the
liver from breaking down ammonia, a normal byproduct of protein digestion.

    He died after researchers infused a genetically modified virus into his
liver in an attempt to introduce new genes that could correct those responsible
for his ailment.

    Gene therapy researchers, working at what is widely regarded as the future
cutting edge of treatment for many disorders, attempt to replace or repair
damaged or missing genes with healthy ones. More than 300 gene therapy studies
are under way and at least 2,500 patients have been treated without apparent
harm.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             992 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       January 22, 2000 Saturday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 222 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY TRIALS HALTED IN WAKE OF DEATH

BYLINE: By Sheryl Gay Stolberg 2000, The New York Times

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration announced Friday that it is temporarily
shutting down every human gene therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania after an inspection uncovered "numerous serious deficiencies" in
ensuring patient safety during a clinical trial that cost an 18-year-old Arizona
man his life.

   The decision to place the entire program -- eight experiments, including five
active clinical trials in diseases including cystic fibrosis and breast cancer
-- on "clinical hold" is highly unusual.

   The hold will not be lifted until the agency is convinced that the
university's Institute for Human Gene Therapy can follow federal rules designed
to protect study volunteers, officials said.

   In response, university President Judith Rodin pledged to appoint a committee
of outside scientists to review the institute's work.

   The FDA's action comes two days after its investigators completed an
inspection of patient records and laboratory data from the experiment that
resulted in the death of Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson in September. Gelsinger was
the first person to die as a direct result of gene therapy.

   Some of the findings were made public last month during a meeting of the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, the panel that oversees gene therapy
research for the National Institutes of Health.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2000


                             993 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                     January 22, 2000 Saturday, ST. BERNARD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 308 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY TRIALS HALTED IN WAKE OF DEATH

BYLINE: By Sheryl Gay Stolberg 2000, The New York Times

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration announced Friday that it is temporarily
shutting down every human gene therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania after an inspection uncovered "numerous serious deficiencies" in
ensuring patient safety during a clinical trial that cost an 18-year-old Arizona
man his life.

   The decision to place the entire program -- eight experiments, including five
active clinical trials in diseases including cystic fibrosis and breast cancer
-- on "clinical hold" is highly unusual.

   The hold will not be lifted until the agency is convinced that the
university's Institute for Human Gene Therapy can follow federal rules designed
to protect study volunteers, officials said.

   In response, university President Judith Rodin pledged to appoint a committee
of outside scientists to review the institute's work.

   The FDA's action comes two days after its investigators completed an
inspection of patient records and laboratory data from the experiment that
resulted in the death of Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson in September. Gelsinger was
the first person to die as a direct result of gene therapy.

   Some of the findings were made public last month during a meeting of the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, the panel that oversees gene therapy
research for the National Institutes of Health. Those findings included evidence
that Gelsinger was ineligible for the experiment and that the scientists failed
to report side effects in other patients that could have halted the study.

   The final report, which cited 18 violations, also turned up new problems. It
found, for instance, that the Pennsylvania scientists enrolled all 18 patients
without filling out eligibility forms. Instead, the FDA said, the scientists
created the forms and filled them out after Gelsinger died, leaving them
unsigned and undated.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2000


                             994 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                   January 22, 2000, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1212 words

HEADLINE: FDA Halts Experiments On Genes at University; Probe of Teen's Death
Uncovers Deficiencies

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Deborah Nelson, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   The federal government yesterday halted all human gene therapy experiments
involving a prominent researcher at the University of Pennsylvania, saying an
investigation into the September death of a teenager there found the school's
prestigious program in serious disarray.

   Investigators at the Food and Drug Administration said they found numerous
violations of federal research regulations and shortcomings in the protection of
human subjects at Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, which is led by
researcher James M. Wilson.

   Penn could not provide investigators with proof that any of the volunteers in
the fatal study had been eligible to participate or had been adequately warned
of the risks of the research, FDA officials said. They also said Penn had not
properly monitored the health of volunteers after the experiment began, and lost
track of several lots of the experimental genes that had been infused into
patients' livers.

   The findings go beyond FDA revelations in December that the Penn researchers
had not stopped the experiment as required after four successive volunteers
suffered serious side effects, then allowed 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger into the
study even though he was not healthy enough to qualify. Gelsinger died from the
treatment Sept. 17, in what is believed to be the first death caused directly by
gene therapy.

   "Putting everything together, there appears to be a real problem with how
they conduct their day-to-day operations," said Philip D. Noguchi, director of
FDA's division of cellular and gene therapies.

   The FDA's decision to suspend all seven active or pending gene therapy
studies at Penn's institute sent shock waves through the genetic research
community. Gene therapy, which seeks to cure diseases by giving people new DNA,
was already at the center of a national controversy because of recent
revelations that some researchers had not been reporting side effects as
required, even as some companies were seeking to reduce the level of federal
oversight of the field.

   Preliminary evidence of lapses at Penn, which emerged soon after Gelsinger's
death last fall, had deepened the field's woes. Yet many researchers had
suspected that regulators would settle for a mild punishment, given Penn's
status as one of the preeminent gene therapy research centers in the country and
the high ranking of Wilson, past president of the American Society for Gene
Therapy (ASGT).

   Yesterday's action proved otherwise.

   "I certainly hope this will be a message to all investigators that we really
need to conform to regulations," said Savio L.C. Woo, president of the ASGT and
director of the Institute for Gene Therapy and Molecular Medicine at Mount Sinai
School of Medicine in New York.

   Gene therapy has grown enormously from its beginnings in 1990, when a
4-year-old girl became the first patient to be treated with genes. Yet despite
the initiation of hundreds of studies involving thousands of patients suffering
from a variety of diseases, and a growing financial investment by private
companies hoping to profit from the novel approach, the field has yet to
document its first cure. In recent years, the field has come under criticism
from some scientists, ethicists and others for moving ahead too quickly,
jeopardizing patients.

   That such a high-profile institution would have so many serious lapses "does
give us pause," Noguchi said. The FDA plans to step up its educational programs
and inspections of other research centers, he said, to make sure any similar
conditions elsewhere do not go undetected.

   Responding to the FDA report, University of Pennsylvania president Judith
Rodin yesterday announced that university provost Robert L. Barchi would appoint
an independent committee of scientists with no affiliation to the university to
review the gene institute's oversight and monitoring of clinical trials and to
recommend any needed remedial action.

   The university is also expected to respond in detail to the FDA's findings.
Noguchi said the agency will take that response into account before it decides
what, if any, sanctions to impose beyond the suspension of clinical trials.

   The FDA's action comes three days after the National Institutes of Health
quietly opened a separate investigation into gene therapy experiments at Penn.
Gary Ellis, director of the NIH's Office for Protection of Research Risks, said
his office sent a letter to the university on Tuesday initiating that
investigation, which he predicted might go on for as long as a year.

   Penn's institute is one of the largest academic gene therapy centers in the
world, with an annual budget of about $ 25 million and links with private
biotechnology companies. Wilson, who is a key investigator in all seven gene
therapy studies suspended by the FDA, has come under increased scrutiny in the
months since Gelsinger's death, in part because of revelations that he had a
potentially large financial stake in the outcome of the Gelsinger study.

   The study suspensions, called clinical holds, also have repercussions for
outside corporations that directly or indirectly sponsor the institute's
clinical trials, including Genovo Inc., of suburban Philadelphia, a company
founded by Wilson, and Biogen, a Massachusetts company that has poured $ 37
million into the institute and Genovo.

   A spokesman for Genovo declined to comment, referring all questions to
Wilson, who could not be reached late yesterday. Genovo has an interest in the
successful outcome of some gene therapy experiments at the institute, including
the Gelsinger study, which has been on hold since his death.

   The FDA's findings, which are called "observations" at this stage pending
Penn's formal response, are the result of a two-month investigation involving
multiple visits to Philadelphia to examine laboratory and hospital records.
Investigators found that the researchers had admitted all 18 patients into the
Gelsinger study without ever documenting that any fit the eligibility
requirements of the study, which was to test the safety of an experimental
treatment for a rare inherited liver disorder called ornithine transcarbamylase
deficiency.

   Only after Gelsinger died and the study was suspended did the researchers
create eligibility forms for participants, none of which had been signed when
investigators came on the scene in late November.

   Moreover, for half of the 18 patients enrolled, investigators could find no
documentation that the volunteers had been properly told of the experiment's
risks or of the kinds of procedures that would be conducted on them, including
invasive liver biopsy studies.

   The consent form had also been altered without FDA notification to eliminate
the mention that monkeys had died of a similar procedure, and it did not
disclose that earlier volunteers had suffered serious side effects.

   "If Gelsinger was never told that four people before him had Grade 3
[serious] toxicities and that monkeys had been killed by this kind of treatment,
then you have to ask, did he really give informed consent or did he just give
consent?" asked Leon Rosenberg, a geneticist at Princeton University who
pioneered research on Gelsinger's disease.Staff researcher Alice Crites
contributed to this report

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2000


                             995 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2000 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                    January 17, 2000, Monday, Metro Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 8C

LENGTH: 934 words

HEADLINE: MONDAY MORNING QUARTERBACK;
Ol' Jimmy just sails away

BYLINE: Jerry Zgoda; Staff Writer

BODY:

   Maybe now, finally, Jimmy Johnson will let that hair down.

        So smug and so good for so long, Johnson, after winning a college
national championship and two Super Bowls, goes out like this: apologizing on
Saturday for the NFL's most lopsided playoff loss in 60 years, retiring on
Sunday by looking for the nearest skiff to float out of town.

        "High tide is at 2 o'clock," he said. "I've got to get out there."

        Almost makes you feel sorry, in some ways, for the fellow who, along
with Jerry Jones, remade the Dallas Cowboys into America's Team by mugging Mike
Lynn into that unforgettable Herschel Walker trade 11 years ago.

        On Saturday, after the stadium sprinkler system prematurely tried to
wash the Dolphins right out of Jacksonville, Fla., Johnson made a reference
about coming "full circle," from those brash, Howboutthemcowboys? days, when his
team won its Super Bowls by a combined score of 82-30, to these final years,
when his Dolphins lost their last two playoff games 100-10.

        "I've never been on this side before," he said.

        Saturday's 62-7 loss to Jacksonville is surpassed in NFL playoff history
only by Chicago's 73-0 victory over Washington in 1940, three years before
Johnson was born. Almost always, Johnson greeted losses with anger. This time,
he directed it all at himself, explaining away a loss in which the Jaguars
obtained 38 points before the Dolphins gained a first down by saying he had
worked his players too hard during a short week.

        A Fort Lauderdale, Fla., columnist began his account of Saturday's game
with this dateline: Chernobyl.

        Johnson probably could have explained it by saying he had stayed in the
game one year too long. Johnson, 56, quit last year, then reconsidered a day
later after meeting with owner Wayne Huizenga. This time he called his decision
"final and forever."

        Gone now are his differences with star quarterback Dan Marino, who wants
to return for another season under new coach Dave Wannstedt but probably won't,
and his fights with the media, which questioned him for, among other things,
acquiring troubled players Dimitrius Underwood and Cecil Collins.

        Gone, also, are that undefeatable attitude and just maybe that
indestructible hair. You'll probably next see Johnson on a TV pregame show's
set.

        "He does not want a job," Huizenga said of Johnson, who will remain with
the team as a consultant. "He wants to fish."

        Well, as we always say in these parts, "Howboutthembonefish?"

   .

   A HITCH IN GETTING ALONG

        A couple of more days of this and we suspect you'll hear grown men cry
out, "Mom, he looked at me!"

        Pro sports in recent days has been just full of childish behavior and
petty squabbles.

   - Pittsburgh Penguins coach Herb Brooks is getting called into the
principal's office this week, suspended indefinitely pending league punishment
for shoving Colorado Avalanche announcer John Kelly after a game Thursday.

        Kelly had suggested Penguins player Matthew Barnaby is a modern-day Dino
Ciccarelli when Barnaby collapsed to the ice after he was cross-checked from
behind by a Colorado player. Brooks stepped out of a postgame interview to go
after Kelly, supposedly outraged at Kelly's "He has a tendency to embellish"
comment.

        Anybody who has ever covered Brooks knows his every move with the media
is manipulated with a purpose. Yes, Herbie, we know, we know: Even after all
these years, you stick up for your fellas. Big yawn.

   - Forget Boston-New York, Dallas-Washington, Minnesota-Green Bay. You want a
big rivalry these days, we give you . . . Toronto-Milwaukee. That's right, those
feisty Raptors and Bucks combined for 106 fouls, three bloody injuries, one
fight and three ejections after both teams packed their angry eyes for a
home-and-home weekend series.

        At issue: an argument over who's more deserving for that final U.S.
Olympic team spot, Toronto's Vince Carter or Milwaukee's Ray Allen. (Allen got
the invitation.) Carter answered with 47 points in a Raptors victory Friday at
home, Allen countered with 33 in a Bucks victory Saturday in Milwaukee. "We
can't wait to see these guys again," Raptors heavyweight Muggsy Bogues said. The
teams next meet Feb. 5 in Milwaukee.

   - Dallas Mavericks one-man show Michael Finley played his game of Take That
with Portland's Scottie Pippen by scoring 32 points in the Mavs' upset of the
Blazers on Saturday. Last week, Pippen said Finley shouldn't make the All-Star
team because "some of the worst players in the league" could turn into big
scorers on such a lousy team.

        "That comment from Scottie was basically an All-Star not having an
All-Star season, and if a guy like me makes the team, that's one less spot for
him," Finley said.

   .

   MADE TO ORDER

        Channel surfers who watched Shaquille O'Neal destroy the Timberwolves on
Saturday night or saw Sunday's usual display of 330-pound behemoths doing battle
haven't seen anything yet. The medical director of the Salt Lake City Olympics
organizing committee foresees a time in which geneticists may be able to deliver
athletes from a catalog.

        Gene therapy someday could make sporting purists forget all about drug
doping.

        "What if we get to the point where we're able to produce people who are
so genetically superior that they are able to excel?" Charles Rich asked the
Salt Lake Tribune. "You just hope there are going to be some thoughtful,
responsible people who are going to be involved."

        Could happen. Big-time sports is due for a couple of those types any
century now.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2000


                             996 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JANUARY 15, 2000 Saturday D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 876 words

HEADLINE: PENN PLANS REVIEW OF RESEARCH ON HUMANS A FACULTY PANEL WILL ASSESS
HOW WELL THE UNIVERSITY OVERSEES THE STUDIES. A TEEN DIED THERE IN A GENETIC
TRIAL.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins and Shankar Vedantam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   The University of Pennsylvania yesterday appointed a faculty committee to
examine the adequacy of the school's system for overseeing all campus research
involving human subjects.

   The 10-member committee, announced by Penn president Judith Rodin, comes four
months after the death of an 18-year-old Arizona man in a controversial
gene-therapy experiment at Penn's medical center.

   The death is being investigated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration,
whose officials have publicly criticized Penn scientists for violations of
research protocol.

   But Penn provost Robert L. Barchi, who will be chairman of the faculty
committee, said Jesse Gelsinger's death and the criticism were not the driving
force behind the formation of the panel.

   "The death of Jesse Gelsinger is something that's of great concern to us and
to the FDA," Barchi said. "But we would have done the review independent of
Jesse's death."

   Barchi said outside grants for biomedical research on the Penn campus had
shot up 75 percent in the last five years. Last year, Penn had $476 million in
research grants, more than 60 percent of it involving medical research.

   "We are very heavily committed to biomedical research here, and the
translation of that research to the bedside," Barchi said. "We just need to be
sure we're doing everything here in the best possible ethical way."

   Barchi, a professor of neurology who spearheaded Penn's Institute for
Neurological Sciences, said that at least 20 percent of the medical-grant
dollars supported research involving human subjects.

   Penn, like other universities that receive federal funds, is required to set
up an internal system for monitoring the safety of any research involving human
subjects.

   The system must include an Institutional Review Board of faculty, ethicists
and others. Such boards must approve any human experiments before they take
place.

   Barchi said the scope of the committee's work would be defined by its
members. At the very least, however, he said it would examine the adequacy of
Penn's system for approving, monitoring and documenting the research.

   A similar review was recently conducted for animal research at Penn, he said.

   Barchi said he hoped the human-subjects committee could complete its work by
June. Its findings - and possible recommendations for change - will be presented
in a written report to Rodin.

   Gelsinger, who had a genetic disorder of the liver that produces a deadly
buildup of ammonia, died at Penn in September, several days after experimental
gene therapy to correct the problem.

   The Penn scientists, headed by geneticist James M. Wilson, concluded that the
teenager died from an immune-system revolt set off by the genetically engineered
cold virus they used to deliver the corrective gene to the boy's liver.

   His death is believed to be the first caused by gene therapy, an unproven but
potentially revolutionary approach that aims to cure disease rather than simply
treat its symptoms with medicines.

   The research trial, which was stopped immediately after Gelsinger's death,
was aimed at assessing the safety of the gene drug at various doses. Gelsinger,
the 18th patient, was one of two who got the highest dose. The other patient, a
woman, lived.

   A Senate subcommittee is scheduled to hold hearings on the safety of gene
therapy in general on Jan. 26, and a committee of the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) is due to make recommendations in March about the safety of the
gene delivery vehicle used by Wilson and many other researchers around the
country.

   Wilson declined to comment.

   Several members of the newly appointed committee emphasized yesterday that
they would not be investigating Wilson or his Institute for Human Gene Therapy,
but rather making sure that Penn was in compliance with federal regulations
governing research involving human subjects.

   "This is not an investigation of any particular study or investigator," said
Linda Aiken, professor of nursing and sociology. "This is a generic look at
research at Penn. It's a proactive look at the beginning of a new century. With
Penn poised to grow even further in its research on human subjects, this [asks]
how well are we doing in protecting the welfare of human subjects?"

   She said Gelsinger's death had "served as a reminder that we need to be
diligent in terms of protecting human subjects."

   Committee member Ralph D. Amado, a physics professor and Penn's vice provost
for research, said the committee was charged with overseeing "how we are doing,
what the [federal] regs are, and how we are doing with respect to the regs."

   Arthur Caplan, a medical ethicist who works in Wilson's institute, also will
serve on the committee. He said its formation had more to do with the federal
government's recent crackdowns on big research universities such as Duke as
opposed to Gelsinger's death.

   At Duke, new grants for medical research were put on hold by the NIH until
the university corrected what the government viewed as conflicts of interest and
other problems in its system for overseeing human trials.

   "It looks like the NIH is really getting tough," Caplan said last night.
"It's better to be proactive here rather than wait for the rules to come down."

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             997 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   January 15, 2000, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 557 words

HEADLINE: GROWING INSULIN CELLS BRINGS DIABETES HOPE

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   A new animal study has revealed clues to what could become a novel way to
treat diabetes, using growth factors to increase the number of insulin-producing
cells.

   Although still a long way from application in human patients, the findings in
today's Journal of Biological Chemistry indicate that it is possible to lower
blood sugar levels by growing more pancreatic islet cells, which include the
beta cells that make insulin.

   "Up until now, there was no evidence you could make islets grow in [the
body], that you could make them [multiply] using bioengineering techniques,"
said Dr. Andrew Stewart, chief of endocrinology and metabolism at the University
of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.

   A lack of the hormone insulin causes Type I diabetes, leading to poor
regulation of blood sugar. Injections must be taken to replace insulin. In Type
II diabetes, the body becomes insensitive to insulin's signals to cells for the
adjustment of blood sugar. Drugs are taken by mouth to either make the pancreas
secrete more insulin or to make the cells more sensitive to the hormone.

   Other researchers found that a naturally occurring chemical called hepatocyte
growth factor had the ability to make beta cells multiply in test tube
experiments, Stewart said. His team conducted mouse experiments to see if the
growth factor would make more of the cells within the body and find out what
effect that had on insulin and blood sugar.

   They put the mouse gene for the growth factor inside the eggs of normal
female mice. Babies born to them carried the extra growth factor genes in their
cells. Throughout their two-year life spans, these nondiabetic mice made more
beta cells and higher amounts of insulin. Because of that, they were constantly
hypoglycemic, meaning they had lower than normal sugar levels.

   With a new supply of insulin-making beta cells, blood sugar levels could be
normalized in someone with diabetes without the need for constant monitoring of
sugar levels and injections or pills. The cells could still respond to changing
blood sugar by varying insulin secretion, Stewart said.

   The gene would have to be delivered to human patients in a different fashion
from the mouse model.

   In people, beta cells might be isolated from the pancreas of a cadaver donor
and treated with the growth factor in the lab to make the cell numbers increase.
Then the cells could be given to a patient or even several patients.

   Now, transplants of islet cells are being studied, but one pancreas does not
provide enough of those cells for even one patient, said diabetes expert Dr.
Massimo Trucco of Children's Hospital.

   Pancreas transplants are also successfully performed, but "there are few
donors compared to the need of all the people who must be transplanted," Trucco
said. "If you are able, for instance with gene therapy, to transfer the growth
factor gene into the islets of a human being and expand them at that point, that
will be a fantastic solution for the problem."

   Other issues have to be ironed out. The cells should not multiply so much
that the patient is at risk of tumor growth, for example. None of the hundreds
of mice studied have had this complication, Stewart said.

   "Whether that will truly work [in humans] needs to be explored, but there's
no obvious reason why it couldn't work," he said.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2000


                             998 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              January 14, 2000, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 528 words

HEADLINE: Twin monkey embryos cloned

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BYLINE: BY PAUL RECER

DATELINE: ATLANTA

BODY:

   Researchers using a technique called embryo-splitting hope to grow
genetically identical rhesus monkeys in the laboratory, which would enable
experiments such as growing new organs from stem cells to be tested on monkeys
rather than mice.

   Monkeys are more like people than mice.

   The technique has so far produced only one living rhesus monkey, a female
named Tetra, but Professor Gerald Schatten said that four twinned infants are on
the way.

   Schatten, a researcher at the Oregon Health Sciences University in Portland,
said the goal is to produce identical monkeys that could be used to perfect new
therapies for human disease.

   The study appears in the journal Science.

   Most medical therapies are now first tested in mice, but monkeys would be
more reliable in developing daring new techniques such as gene therapy or
growing new organs from stem cells, Schatten said.

   "It is a huge leap from a mouse to a patient," Schatten said. "The monkeys
could fill that scientific gap.

   "Medical research needs to have healthy, genetically identical animals so
cures can be perfected before they are tested on humans," he said.

   In their research, Schatten and his colleagues created monkey embryos in the
laboratory by combining sperm and egg. When the embryos developed to an
eight-cell stage, they were each split into four parts, with each part
containing two cells. These were then nurtured into new embryos.

   In effect, he said, the single embryo became four embryos, all genetically
identical. The new embryos were then implanted into the uteruses of different
mothers.

   In the first test of the technique, the researchers produced a single animal.
A twin was implanted, but miscarried.

   Now, said Schatten, four monkeys are pregnant with cells taken from two
separate embryos. Three of the mothers were implanted with two unrelated embryo
splits and the fourth mother was impregnated with a single embryo split.

   Schatten said it will not be known until May, when the animals are born,
which of the split embryos are developing into infants. "It is likely that we
will have genetically identical monkeys born to different mothers," he said.

   The technique is not cloning in the sense of producing a genetic duplicate of
an adult, such as was accomplished by a Scottish researcher who cloned a sheep.

   Instead, said Schatten, the technique clones genetically identical infants
that arose from the same embryo. It is virtually unknown, he said, for identical
twin rhesus monkeys to be produced naturally.

   Schatten said that genetically identical monkeys could be used to develop
treatments using embryonic stem cells. Research using human embryonic stem cells
is controversial because to produce the cells requires the death of an embryo.

   Stem cell research, however, offers the promise of growing new organs.

   His research, said Schatten, may make it possible to split a monkey embryo
and use one part to produce a live monkey, while using the other embryo's parts
to produce stem cells. Those stem cells would be genetic matches to the live
monkey. The stem cells could then be used to grow new organs, which could then
be tested on the live monkey.

GRAPHIC: Tetra is the only monkey produced by the technique. ; ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2000


                             999 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                       January 14, 2000 Friday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 290 words

HEADLINE: MONKEY CLONED FROM SPLIT EMBRYOS

BYLINE: PAUL RECER; Associated Press

DATELINE: ATLANTA --

BODY:

   Researchers using a technique called embryo splitting hope to grow
genetically identical rhesus moneys in the laboratory -- a breakthrough that
would enable experiments such as growing new organs from stem cells to be tested
on monkeys rather than mice. Monkeys are closer to human biology.

   The technique has so far produced only one living rhesus monkey, a female
named Tetra, but Professor Gerald Schatten said that four more twinned infants
are on the way.

   Schatten, a researcher at the Oregon Health Sciences University in Portland,
said the goal is to produce identical monkeys that could be used to perfect new
therapies for human disease.

   The study appears today in the journal Science.

   Most medical therapies are now first tested in mice, but monkeys would be
more reliable in developing daring new techniques such as gene therapy or
growing new organs from stem cells, said Schatten.

   "It is a huge leap from a mouse to a patient," said Schatten. "The monkeys
could fill that scientific gap.

   "Medical research needs to have healthy, genetically- identical animals so
cures can be perfected before they are tested on humans," he said.

   In their research, Schatten and his colleagues created monkey embryos in the
laboratory by combining sperm and egg. When the embryos grew to an eight-cell
stage, they were each split into four parts, with each part containing two
cells.  These were then nurtured into new embryos.

   In effect, he said, the single embryo became four embryos, all genetically
identical. The new embryos were then implanted into the uteri of different
mothers.

   In the first test of the technique, the researchers produced a single animal,
named Tetra. A twin to Tetra was implanted, but miscarried.


LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2000


                             1000 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    January 14, 2000, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 399 words

HEADLINE: Researchers split embryos to create genetically identical monkeys

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: ATLANTA

BODY:

   ATLANTA - Researchers using a technique called embryo splitting hope to grow
genetically identical rhesus monkeys in the laboratory - a breakthrough that
would enable experiments such as growing new organs from stem cells to be tested
on monkeys rather than mice.

   The technique has so far produced only one living rhesus monkey, a female
named Tetra, but Professor Gerald Schatten said four more twinned infants are on
the way.

   Schatten, a researcher at the Oregon Health Sciences University in Portland,
said the goal is to produce identical monkeys that could be used to perfect new
therapies for human disease.

   The study appears today in the journal Science.

   Most medical therapies are now first tested in mice, but monkeys would be
more reliable in developing daring new techniques such as gene therapy or
growing new organs from stem cells, Schatten said.

   In their research, Schatten and his colleagues created monkey embryos by
combining sperm and egg. When the embryos grew to an eight-cell stage, they were
each split into four parts, with each part containing two cells. These were then
nurtured into new embryos.

   In effect, he said, the single embryo became four embryos, all genetically
identical. The new embryos were then implanted into the uteri of different
mothers.

   In their first test, the researchers produced a single animal, named Tetra. A
twin to Tetra was implanted, but miscarried.

   Now, said Schatten, four mother monkeys are pregnant with cells taken from
two separate embryos. Three of the mothers were implanted with two unrelated
embryo splits and the fourth mother was impregnated with a single embryo split.

   He said it will not be known until May, when the animals are born, which of
the split embryos are developing into infants.

   "It is likely that we will have genetically identical monkeys born to
different mothers," he said.

   The technique is not cloning in the sense of producing a genetic duplicate of
an adult, such as was accomplished with the famed Scottish ewe named Dolly.

   Instead, the technique clones genetically identical infants that arose from
the same embryo. It is unknown for identical twin rhesus monkeys to be produced
naturally.

   Schatten said that genetically-identical monkeys could be used to develop
treatments using embryonic stem cells, the ancestral cells from which all organs
and tissue grow during gestation.


GRAPHIC: Mug: The technique has produced one living rhesus monkey, a female
named Tetra.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2000
