
                             2001 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     April 21, 1998, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C, Maryland Watch

LENGTH: 186 words

HEADLINE: GenVec enters deal to develop gene therapy

BODY:


   GenVec Inc. of Rockville said yesterday that it will work with a Japanese
pharmaceutical company to develop cancer-fighting gene therapies.

   Under an agreement between GenVec and Fuso Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd. of
Osaka, the two companies will work on research, development and
commercialization of gene therapies for the treatment of cancer.

   The agreement gives GenVec unspecified "product development-related milestone
payments" and research funding for up to five years. Fuso also has purchased an
unspecified equity stake in GenVec.

   The deal gives Fuso commercialization rights in Japan and options for
commercialization in South Korea and Taiwan. GenVec retains commercialization
rights in the rest of the world. The Rockville-based company will also receive
royalties on products commercialized by Fuso.

   "Fuso is committed to leveraging their current leadership position in the
manufacture and marketing of injection, infusion and dialysis solutions to
pursue innovative gene-based therapies using advanced biotechnology," said Paul
Fischer, GenVec's chief executive.

   Pub Date: 4/21/98

TYPE: COLUMN

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 1998


                             2002 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     APRIL 21, 1998 Tuesday CNORTH EDITION

SECTION: NEIGHBORS; Pg. B03

LENGTH: 751 words

HEADLINE: NEWS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   MORRISVILLE SOLICITOR QUITS

   AFTER COUNCIL VOTE MONDAY MORRISVILLE BOROUGH - With the council deadlocked,
Mayor Anthony Dominic cast the deciding vote last night to terminate Borough
Solicitor Ralf Gilbert's services at the end of the month.

   But instead of serving out his term, a noticeably shaken Gilbert announced
his resignation, gathered his overcoat and briefcase and walked out of council
chambers.

   Councilmen Terry Phillips and Jack Buckman forced the vote on whether to
terminate Gilbert after the council could not reach a majority during three
votes on which of three nominations for the position to support.

   Councilman Joseph DiGiorgio joined Phillips and Buckman in favor of hiring
lawyer John Warenda. Council members Charles Grabowski, William Mullen, Nancy
Sherlock and Jane Burger voted to retain Gilbert, and Councilwoman Patricia
Schell supported former solicitor Darwin Roseberry. Schell joined the three
Warenda supporters to terminate Gilbert after Phillips brought up the motion
with Buckman's support. With the vote 4-4, Mayor Dominic broke the tie.

   AUDUBON MAN STABBED

   AT NORRISTOWN GARAGE NORRISTOWN - Roosevelt Clark, 38, of Audubon, was found
stabbed at a garage Saturday afternoon, police said.

   Officers discovered Clark at Doc's 2 Black Window Tint & Detail Shop, 626
Markley St., with several chest wounds. He was listed in serious condition
yesterday at the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center.

   Police said a man who was found kneeling over Clark told investigators that
he stabbed Clark in self-defense. He was not held, and the Montgomery County
District Attorney's Office will decide whether any charges will be brought.

   SOUTHAMPTON HOME INCURS

   $150,000 DAMAGE IN FIRE SOUTHAMPTON - Fire yesterday caused an estimated
$150,000 in damage to a single-story home and its contents in the 300 block of
Maple Avenue, fire officials said.

   Upper Southampton Fire Marshal Mark Showmaker said the 8:35 a.m. blaze
appeared to have begun in the kitchen. The cause remains under investigation,
Showmaker said. Only one person was home at the time. That person escaped injury
after being awakened by a neighbor, the fire marshal added.

   Fire Capt. Kevin McKinney suffered a steam burn on one cheek while battling
the blaze, Showmaker said. Firefighters from Northampton, Warminster, Bryn Athyn
and Hartsville helped Upper Southampton firefighters extinguish the blaze.

   REPORTED ABDUCTION FROM

   ATM UNDER INVESTIGATION WARMINSTER - Police are investigating a reported
carjacking that began in Northeast Philadelphia and ended about 2 a.m. Sunday at
the Rosemore Shopping Center, County Line Road, with the victim being shot in
the leg by her purported abductor.

   Bucks County District Attorney Alan Rubenstein said the victim, Kathryn
Hellwig, 22, a convenience store clerk who lives in Philadelphia's Far
Northeast, reported she was abducted shortly before midnight from an ATM machine
near Grant and Academy Roads. She was unclear as to what occurred during the two
hours she was held by the abductor, Rubenstein said. Rubenstein said the man
pulled a gun on her and a struggle ensued. Hellwig said he then grabbed her gun,
which was in the vehicle, and shot her in the leg, Rubenstein said.

   The man then fled into a waiting vehicle, Hellwig said, and she drove to a
doughnut shop and called police. She was taken to Abington Memorial Hospital,
where she was admitted in stable condition. The case remains under
investigation.

   CONFERENCE TO SPOTLIGHT

   BREAST CANCER WEAPONS Living Beyond Breast Cancer, a nonprofit educational
and support organization based in Narberth, will sponsor a conference on new
methods of breast cancer detection, diagnosis and treatment.

   The conference will be held from 8 a.m. to 1 p.m. on April 25 at the Twelve
Ceasars Banquet & Conference Center, 4200 City Line Ave.

   The new detection methods include digital mammography, sentinel lymph node
biopsy, core biopsy, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and Sestamibi scanning.
The new therapies will focus on antibodies, vaccines, gene therapy, chemotherapy
and hormonal treatments, including the latest on using the drug tamoxifen to
prevent cancer. The scheduled speakers are experts from leading cancer centers
in Philadelphia, Boston, New York and elsewhere.

   The conference fee, which includes breakfast, is $25, but it can be waived
for financial hardship. To register or receive more information, call Living
Beyond Breast Cancer at 610-668-1320.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             2003 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      April 19, 1998, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. F4

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: Biotechnology;
Old guard still riding profitable stock wave;
FAST TRACK

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg

BODY:

    Despite a recent dearth of major drugs from the New England biotech
community and few initial public offerings, the founders of older firms are
still prospering.

    In Genetic Engineering News's annual list of molecular millionaires,
released earlier this month, some New England biopharmaceutical leaders are
doing better than ever. Based on proxy information and using a late-February
stock price, the trade publication's list of 100 millionaires includes more than
a dozen from the state's biopharmaceutical community.

    Most of those listed are either current or retired founders, early
investors, and current directors. Their companies are active in drug
development, medical diagnostics, genomics, and medical devices.

    Overall, 69 of the 100 on the list either had doctoral or medical degrees,
or both. The value of their stock ranged from $ 196.54 million - the value of
shares owned by Barrie Stevens Haigh, the recently retired chairman of Quintiles
Transnational Corp. of Durham, N.C., who headed the list - to $ 1 million. No.
100 is Sterling K. Ainsworth, president of Napro Biotherapeutics of Boulder,
Colo.

    From Massachusetts, shares owned by Dr. Richard F. Selden, a founder and
president of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge, were worth nearly $
20.86 million.

    Others from Mass.-based firms on the Genetic Engineering News list, ranked
by the value of their stock, are: Orrie M. Friedman, retired chairman of Genome
Therapeutics Corp. ($ 17.38 million); Phillip A. Sharp, chairman of Biogen's
scientific advisory board ($ 15.4 million); Joshua S. Boger, founder and
chairman of Vertex Pharmaceuticals Inc. ($ 14.26 million); Michael A. Wall,
chairman of Alkermes Inc. ($ 11.67 million); Marlene Kaplan Goldstein of
Advanced Magnetics Inc. ($ 8.45 million); Benno C. Schmidt, early investor in
Vertex Pharmaceuticals ($ 8.3 million); Robert F. Johnson, director of Sepracor
Inc. ($ 7.42 million); Frank Lee, chief scientific officer of Millennium
Pharmaceuticals Inc. ($ 7.4 million); Thomas H. Fraser, president and chief
executive of Diacrin Inc. ($ 4.78 million); Lindsay A. Rosenwald, a founder and
chairman of Interneuron Pharmaceuticals ($ 4.37 million); Anton E. Schraft, a
director of Organogenesis Inc. ($ 4.19 million); Alexander M. Haig Jr., director
of Interneuron Pharmaceuticals Inc. ($ 1.59 million); and Scott M. Rocklage,
founder and president of Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc. ($ 1.28 million).

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 1998


                             2004 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     April 19, 1998, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Pg. C04

LENGTH: 1467 words

HEADLINE: Who Will Decide Between Defect and Perfect?

BYLINE: Jeremy Rifkin

BODY:


   Tonight, NBC will air an adaptation of Aldous Huxley's classic dystopian
novel about a genetically engineered future society. When Huxley wrote "Brave
New World" in 1932, no one could have imagined that the scientific insights and
technological know-how would exist by the end of this century that could make
his vision real.

   On March 20, many leading molecular biologists and geneticists met at the
University of California at Los Angeles to discuss the prospect of making
genetic changes in the human "germ line" -- sperm and eggs -- that would be
passed on to future generations. The ability to alter genes before conception
raises the possibility that we might be able to re-engineer our genetic
blueprints and redirect the course of our biological evolution.

   Curiously absent from the discussion, and the subsequent reporting of the
event, was any mention of the word "eugenics." That term -- conceived in the
19th century by Sir Francis Galton, Charles Darwin's cousin -- is generally
divided along two lines. Negative eugenics involves the systematic elimination
of so-called undesirable biological traits. Positive eugenics is concerned with
the use of selective breeding to "improve" the characteristics of an organism or
species.

   Because genetic-engineering technologies are by their nature eugenics tools,
no thoughtful discussion of this revolution can occur without raising eugenics
issues. Some might take offense at the idea that eugenics is built into the new
technology. They prefer to equate eugenics with the Nazi experience. But the new
eugenics bears little resemblance to the shrill cries of racial purity that
culminated in the Holocaust. The old eugenics was motivated by fear and hate;
the new eugenics is spurred by market forces and consumer desire. Genetic
engineering is coming to us not as a sinister plot, but rather as a social and
economic boon.

   The consequences of programming genetic changes into the human germ line are
largely unpredictable and unknowable. Nonetheless, a growing number of molecular
biologists, medical practitioners and pharmaceutical companies are anxious to
take the gamble, convinced that controlling our evolutionary destiny is
humankind's next great social frontier. Their arguments are couched in terms of
personal health, individual choice and collective responsibility for future
generations.

   Proponents of human genetic engineering argue that it would be cruel and
irresponsible not to use this powerful new technology to eliminate serious
"genetic disorders." Is it wrong, ask the molecular biologists, to want
healthier babies? The problem with this argument is that once we begin repairing
"defects" in the human germ line, there is no logical place to stop.

   If diabetes, sickle-cell anemia and cancer are to be prevented by altering
the genetic codes of individuals, why not proceed to other less serious
"disorders" such as color blindness, dyslexia, obesity and short stature? In the
end, why would we ever say no to any alteration that might enhance the
well-being of our offspring? It would be difficult to imagine parents rejecting
genetic modifications that promised to improve their children's opportunities.

   According to a 1992 Harris poll, 43 percent of Americans "would approve using
gene therapy to improve babies' physical characteristics." With Americans
already spending billions of dollars on cosmetic surgery to improve their looks
and on psychotropic drugs to alter their moods, the use of genetic therapies to
enhance unborn children hardly seems far-fetched.

   Indeed, many advocates of germ-line intervention already see the potential
benefits. They contend that the current debate over corrective measures to
address serious illnesses is too limited and urge a more expansive discussion to
include the advantage of enhancement therapy as well. The Economist magazine has
suggested, in an editorial, that society needs to move beyond moralistic
hand-wringing and embrace the new commercial eugenics opportunities that will
soon become available.

   The Economist editors asked, "What of genes that might make a good body
better, rather than make a bad one good? Should people be able to retrofit
themselves with extra neuro-transmitters, to enhance various mental powers? Or
to change the color of their skin? Or to help them run faster, or lift heavier
weights?"

   The Economist editorial board made clear that its own biases lay firmly with
the marketplace. The new commercial eugenics, it argued, is about ensuring
greater consumer freedom so that individuals can make of themselves and their
heirs whatever they choose. The editorial concluded with a ringing endorsement
of the idea.

   While the notion of consumer choice would appear benign, the very idea of
eliminating so-called genetic defects raises the troubling question of what is
meant by the term "defective." Ethicist Daniel Callahan of the Hastings Center
penetrates to the core of the issue when he observes that "behind the human
horror at genetic defectiveness lurks. . . an image of the perfect human being.
The very language of 'defect,' 'abnormality,' 'disease' and 'risk' presupposes
such an image, a kind of prototype of perfection."

   Do we then come to see ourselves as miswired from the get-go, riddled with
errors in our genetic code? If that is the case, against what ideal norm are we
to be measured? If every human being is made up of varying degrees of error,
then we search in vain for the norm. What makes the new language of molecular
biology so subtly chilling is that it risks creating a new archetype, a
flawless, errorless, perfect being to which to aspire -- a new man and woman
without the warts and wrinkles, vulnerabilities and frailties that have defined
us from the beginning of our existence. How tolerant is society likely to be of
those whose "errors" go uncorrected? Will we empathize with those who are less
than "perfect," or will we see them as "mistakes" that could have been avoided
with proper engineering?

   Some genetic engineers believe that a future genetocracy is all but
inevitable. Molecular biologist Lee Silver of Princeton University writes about
a not-too-distant future of two biological classes, which he refers to as the
"Gen Rich" and "Naturals." The Gen Rich -- perhaps 10 percent of the population
-- include businessmen, musicians, artists, athletes and intellectuals who are
society's elite. They have all been enhanced with specific synthetic genes that
allow them to succeed in their fields in ways not conceivable among those born
of nature's lottery.

   While Silver acknowledges that the increasing polarization of society into
Gen Rich and Natural classes might be unfair, he points out that wealthy parents
have always been able to provide advantages for their children. "Anyone who
accepts the right of affluent parents to provide their children with an
expensive private school education cannot use unfairness as a reason for
rejecting the use of reprogenetic technologies," argued Silver.

   Like many of his colleagues, Silver is quick to defend the new technologies:
"In a society that values human freedom above all else, it is hard to find any
legitimate basis for restricting the use of reprogenetics."

   The new genetic-engineering technologies raise one of the most troubling
political questions in human history: To whom would we entrust the authority to
decide what is a good gene and what is a bad gene? The federal government?
Corporations? The scientific community? Few of us, I suspect, could point
confidently to any institution or group of individuals. If, however, we were
asked whether we would sanction new bio-engineered products that could enhance
the physical, emotional and mental well-being of our progeny, many of us would
not hesitate to add our support.

   We appear caught between our instinctive distrust of these institutional
forces and our desire to increase our personal choices in the biological
marketplace. Many of us will be eager to take advantage of the new gene
therapies -- both for ourselves and our offspring -- if they deliver on their
promise to enhance our physical, emotional and mental health. After all, part of
the essence of being truly human is the desire to alleviate suffering and
enhance human potential.

   The problem is that biotechnology has a distinct beginning but no clear end.
In the decades to come, we might well barter ourselves away, a gene at a time,
in exchange for some measure of temporary well-being. In the long run, the
personal and collective security we have fought so hard to preserve may well be
irreversibly compromised in our pursuit of engineered perfection.

   Jeremy Rifkin is author of "The Biotech Century: Harnessing the Gene and
Remaking the World" (Tarcher/Putnam, 1998).


GRAPHIC: Illustration, jean-francois allaux for The Washington Post

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1998


                             2005 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                      April 17, 1998, Friday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 04E; Pg. 04E

LENGTH: 289 words

SERIES: Metro Final

HEADLINE: Financial stocks stall after strong run-up

BODY:


   Financial stocks, which had jumped following the merger announcement by
Citicorp and Travelers Group, generally fell Thursday.

   J.P. Morgan (ticker symbol JPM) fell $ 5.81 1/4 to $ 142.87 1/2 and accounted
for more than a quarter of the decline of the Dow Jones industrial average.
Traders said comments by BankBoston and Merrill Lynch that they're not pursuing
mergers hurt the financial sector. ''The whole world is not a takeover
candidate,'' said Donna Van Vlack, head trader at Brandywine Asset Management,
which oversees $ 7.5 billion in assets. ''There may be an OmniBank one day, but
not tomorrow. A little rationality is being priced back into these stocks.''

   One of the exceptions to the decline was First Union (FTU), which hit a
52-week high of $ 62.31 1/4 before closing at $ 60.56 1/4, up 31 1/4 cents.
There was no immediate explanation for the gain.

   First Union's climb came as merger partners NationsBank (NB) and BankAmerica
(BAC) were retreating. NationsBank lost $ 2.50 to $ 77.87 1/2, BankAmerica $
3.06 1/4 to $ 87.68 3/4.

In other trading:

   Apple Computer (AAPL) rallied $ 1.18 3/4 to $ 28.62 1/2 after its
second-quarter profit beat even the most optimistic forecasts on strong sales of
its G3 computers and cost cutting orchestrated by interim Chief Executive
Officer Steve Jobs. Amgen (AMGN) lost $ 2.12 1/2 to $ 55.81 1/4. Transkaryotic
Therapies and Hoechst Marion Roussel won a summary judgment of non-infringement
from the U.S. District Court in Boston related to a lawsuit brought by Amgen.

   Visx (VISX) jumped $ 8.31 1/4 to $ 40.25. The laser technology company posted
a first-quarter profit of $ 8.9 million, up from $ 2.7 million a year earlier
and above most analyst estimates.

GRAPHIC:  Graphic :
 TRACKING THE DOW
 Closing Dow Jones industrial average for last 21 trading days
 Thursday's close: 9076.57
 Day's change: Down 85.70

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1998


                             2006 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       April 17, 1998 Friday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 040

LENGTH: 489 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFCASE

BODY:

   BOUGHT: Equity Office Properties, the mega-REIT from Chicago with a
fast-growing Boston portfolio, has acquired the BankBoston's 7 New England
Executive Park in Burlington for $ 27.8 million. The 11-story tower, one of the
most recognizable buildings along Route 128, hosts BankBoston offices and
tenants Merrill Lynch and Riemer & Braunstein.  - HS

   COURT WIN: Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. and Hoechst Marion Roussel claimed a
court victory yesterday in a federal judge's decision to let the two companies
continue testing a version of Amgen Inc.'s top selling Epogen anemia treatment.
The two firms said a Boston federal judge dismissed Amgen's patent infringement
claim against them. That ruling will let them finish testing the new drug,
aiming to win federal Food and Drug Administration approval for it later this
year. Cambridge-based Transkaryotic shares rose $ 7.75 to $ 36 following the
ruling. Epogen sales bring in about $ 2.4 billion to Amgen.  - BN

   VARIAN DEAL: Varian Associates Inc., which employs 1,000 people in
Gloucester, has bought Genus Inc.'s computer chip equipment operations in
Newburyport for $ 25 million, plus more if the operation meets certain revenue
targets. Genus said the plant has 160 people. But Varian said it is too early to
say how many will keep their jobs. The deal is expected to close in the next
couple of months.  - HS

   RAYTHEON: Raytheon Co.'s Raytheon Wireless Solutions formed a distribution
partnership with Ingram Micro Inc. The companies said Ingram Micro would
distribute Raytheon's Raylink wireless networking service. Ingram Micro, of
Santa Ana, Calif., is a wholesale distributor of technology products. Raytheon
Wireless Solutions develops wireless LAN services.   - DJ

   SPUN OFF: NewsEdge Corp. in Burlington said it completed the spinoff of its
ClariNet Communications unit on undiclosed terms yesterday. It said ClariNet
president Roy Folk will also serve as CEO of the new company, called NaviLinks
Inc.   - DJ

   BOUGHT: A Rockville, Md., company said yesterday it agreed to buy
Hudson-based Net2Net Corp. for stock worth $ 75 million. Visual Networks Inc.
said it will combine Net2Net's asynchronous transfer mode communications
management systems with its own products, which manage Internet and frame-relay
communications. Visual did not say what would become of Net2Net's 48 employees.
   - BN

   SOLD: New York City agreed to sell a lower Manhattan armory to a group of
investors that includes Care Matrix, a Needham based nursing home operator
headed by Abe Gosman, for $ 15 million. The investors plan to build a
275,000-square foot mixed-use project that would include theaters, cinemas and a
170-bed nursing home. The armory is on 14th Street between 6th and 7th Avenues,
on the border between the city's Chelsea and Greenwich Village districts.   - BN

   Sources: Herald staff, Associated Press, Reuter, Dow Jones, and Bloomberg
News services

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1998


                             2007 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                             April 17, 1998, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS , Pg. 1F

LENGTH: 424 words

HEADLINE: CHILDREN'S ACTING CEO NAMED TO TOP SPOT

BYLINE: Debbie Gebolys , Dispatch Business Reporter

BODY:


   Under its first new chief executive in 23 years, Children's Hospital is
launching a campaign to move pediatric health care closer to central Ohio
neighborhoods.

   Dr. Thomas N. Hansen, acting chief executive at Children's for 15 months, was
named yesterday to the top post. Hansen will relinquish his role as Children's
medical director, a position he has held since 1995, in order to oversee the
hospital's health-care businesses and medical-research programs.

   Hansen succeeds Stuart W. Williams, who stepped down Jan. 1, 1997, after 22
years at Children's.

   Hansen's appointment follows two extensive searches. Initially, he was not a
candidate for the post.

   While acting chief executive of the 2,300-employee hospital, Hansen launched
plans for Children's first off-campus urgent-care center. He said yesterday at
least three others are planned within five years.

   The first is slated for Venture Drive in Dublin. The $ 3.5 million,
15,000-square-foot outpatient facility will house laboratory services, health
clinics, educational programs, speech therapy and a night-only urgent-care
center.

   ''It's our first real big step into the community and we're very excited
about it,'' Hansen said. ''We want them in the four corners of the community.''

   Children's already operates four outpatient laboratories, including one
opened under Hansen in Newark, Ohio, the most remote from Children's East Side
campus. It also operates seven physician clinics.

   Plans call for Children's to expand its clinics to surrounding counties.
''Our goal is to improve access to outpatient care,'' he said.

   Another goal is to build Children's research component, capitalizing on a
five-year, $ 1.8 million grant from the National Institutes of Health. Gene
therapy, cancer biology and molecular genetics will be the focus, he said.

   Hansen is one of only five Ohio hospital executives who is a doctor. Two of
the other four are local - the chiefs of the Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital and
Research Institute and Harding Hospital.

   Hansen also has served as chairman of the pediatrics department at Ohio State
University since May 1995, a position he will retain.

   He came to Children's from Texas Children's Hospital in Houston, where he was
vice chairman for research, director of neonatology, and co-director of the
Center for Training in Molecular Medicine. He was president of the International
Pediatric Research Foundation's board of trustees from 1992 to 1997.

   Dispatch Medical Reporter Mark Somerson contributed to this report.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO , Dr. Thomas N. Hansen, . . . outreach plan in offing

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1998


                             2008 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1998 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                         April 16, 1998, Metro Edition

SECTION: Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 615 words

HEADLINE: 'U' researchers treat rare genetic disease with marrow transplants

BYLINE: Gordon Slovut; Staff Writer

BODY:

    Though they don't know why it works, scientists have used bone marrow
transplants successfully to treat five children who otherwise would have been
doomed by a genetic disease to mental disintegration and early death.

    The children, who were missing a gene needed to produce a brain-protecting
enzyme, are functioning normally or near-normally up to nine years after they
were infused with bone marrow or, in one case, with blood from the umbilical
cord of a newborn, according to a report in today's New England Journal of
Medicine.

    The research team, headed by Dr. William Krivit, a professor of pediatrics
at the University of Minnesota, said it's the first successful treatment for the
rare disorder, known as globoid-cell leukodystrophy (GCL).

    The disease causes the fatty myelin that insulates the brain cells, much
like the insulation around an electrical wire, to degenerate, exposing the brain
cells to rapid deterioration.

    Dr. Elso Shapiro, a neurobiologist with the research team, said she has
worked closely with the parents of children with GCL and similar diseases.

    "The most encouraging thing about this is that some of the children actually
improve," Shapiro said.  "Some of these children read and speak clearly, and the
parents see them lose the ability to read and speak clearly.  It is devastating
for them."

    Although bone marrow transplants pose a substantial mortality rate of about
10 to 20 percent, there are few other options. Until they were tried on these
patients, "we had no treatment," Shapiro said.

    Dr. Lawrence Lockman, a university neurologist who worked on the team, said
he considers the treatment as a sort of gene therapy.  "What we are doing is
putting normal cells of someone into the recipient - not a normal gene into a
defective cell," he said.

    Replacing the bone marrow gives patients an entirely new and genetically
healthy system to produce blood cells.  After the transplants, blood levels of
the vital enzyme are much higher.

    Dr. Chester Whitley, a University of Minnesota associate professor of
pediatrics-human genetics and researcher on genetic defects, said Krivit's
research could help scientists develop better treatments for more common
diseases such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's.

    There's no evidence that bone marrow transplants will work against either,
but Krivit's research raises the possibility that replacement cells or
transplants of genetic material may be able to halt or reverse those devastating
diseases, Whitley said.

    It shows that some enzymes, genetic material or other cells can cross the
blood-brain barrier and possibly even reverse some brain damage, he said.  The
blood-brain barrier is a little understood filtering system in which the body's
circulation of blood to the brain carries only cells that are smaller than a
certain size, screening out most toxins and drugs.

    Some of the researchers suspect that in the GLC treatment, the healthy
transplanted marrow, which becomes seeded and grows rapidly in the hollows of
the patients' bones, touches off the production of so much of the missing
enzyme, galactocerobrosidase, that some passes through the blood-brain barrier
and protects the myelin.

    Others speculate that the transplants send tiny fragments of healthy DNA,
which carries genetic messages, into the brain. The DNA then penetrates the
brain cells, making them normal, so they produce the enzyme.

    Still others suspect that the new marrow sends out scavengers, known as
microglia cells, that prevent damage that otherwise would occur as a result of
the enzyme deficiency.


LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1998


                             2009 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                   April 15, 1998, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 683 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY USING A VIRUS COULD HELP TREAT ARTHRITIS

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   As medical researchers explore the use of genes to treat disease, one of
their hurdles is to find a way to deliver the desired gene to the appropriate
place in the body.

   In the case of gene therapy for rheumatoid arthritis, they might get some
unexpected help from the body itself.

   University of Pittsburgh researchers discovered in animal experiments early
last year that when they delivered therapeutic genes to one arthritic knee of a
rabbit, cells containing the beneficial gene subsequently were found in both the
treated and the untreated knees.

   ''We thought the effects would be localized to just one joint,'' said Steve
Ghivizzani, a post-doctoral fellow in Pitt's department of molecular genetics
and biochemistry.

   But some sort of communications system within the body seems to be at work,
causing cells containing the beneficial gene to migrate to other affected
joints.

   There's no guarantee the mechanism works in anything other than a rabbit. But
if the same mechanism is present in humans, it might someday make it easier to
treat rheumatoid arthritis.

   ''It's a very exciting result,'' said Sergei Makarov, a molecular biologist
and arthritis researcher at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. ''The
ramifications are quite important.''

   Rheumatoid arthritis is seldom limited to a single side of the body, or even
a single type of joint, Makarov said.

   ''These results suggest it would be possible to treat systemic disease by
treating only the most involved joints,'' he added.

   Ghivizzani and his co-authors, including Paul Robbins and Christopher Evans,
reported their findings yesterday in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.

   Gene therapy is an experimental approach to treating disease. A gene that
produces a protein that is lacking or in short supply in the patient is inserted
into desired cells. For arthritis gene therapy, genes are placed into the lining
of an inflamed joint.

   In July 1996, Pitt launched the first clinical study of gene therapy for
rheumatoid arthritis, a disease affecting more than 2 million Americans. That
trial, just now being completed, involves adding a gene that prevents the cells
from responding to inflammatory agents.

   In animal experiments early last year, Ghivizzani evaluated two genes that
looked as if they might help arthritis sufferers. One of the genes produces
receptor proteins for interleukin-1 and the other produces receptor proteins for
tumor necrosis factor alpha. The hope is that extra receptor proteins would
float off into the joint's synovial fluid, capturing interleukin-1 and tumor
necrosis factor alpha molecules and preventing them from damaging the joint
lining.

   Ghivizzani attached the experimental genes to adenoviruses, common cold
viruses specially prepared not to cause disease. Once injected into the joint,
the viruses would help insert the genes into joint cells.

   The idea was to compare the inflammation in the treated joint with that of
the untreated joint. But the researchers found that inflammation in both joints
improved.

   Ghivizzani said it appeared that the viruses did not carry the genes beyond
the originally treated joints; none of the genes were found in the liver, for
instance. Instead, it appears that cells into which the beneficial genes were
inserted somehow migrated to the other arthritic knee.

   In Chapel Hill, Makarov made a similar observation in mice using a different
type of gene therapy, blocking a transcription factor that normally activates
interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor alpha.

   ''We're trying to sort out the mechanism now,'' Ghivizzani said, admitting he
and his colleagues don't know which cells migrate or how the body knows to move
those cells.

   ''At this point, it's strictly in this rabbit model,'' he said. Tests are
continuing in rabbits and mice, but there's no guarantee that the same mechanism
is present in humans.

   Both of the genes tested in the experiments seemed to have value as
therapeutic agents and thus might be combined with the gene already being tested
in the clinical trial.

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1998


                             2010 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 14, 1998, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 1244 words

HEADLINE: Treatment of cystic fibrosis on the fast track

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   Phase 1: 13 pills three times a day for one week.

   Eric Kast, 30, of Norman, Okla., swallows them with pride. He
believes he is contributing to an eventual cure for cystic fibrosis.

   CF is the most common fatal, inherited disease among whites, affecting
30,000 children and young adults in the USA. Most will die from
lung damage caused by the buildup of thick mucus and chronic infections.


   But progress in treating this fatal disease is accelerating at
a remarkable pace. When Kast was born in 1968, median life expectancy
was just over 10 years. By 1980, with improved medical care, boys
and girls could expect to go to high school and were living to
age 18.

   Then scientists began unlocking the secrets of the physiology,
and fundamental discoveries in the basic science began streaming
out of laboratories like smoke from a genie's bottle.

   By 1989, Kast and others with CF could not only expect to go to
college, they also had time to marry and start a family. Life
expectancy jumped to 29. The same year, a gene mutation responsible
for 90% of cases was found, and the genie was out of the bottle
for good.

   Since then, the gene has been giving up its secrets as quickly
as scientists can tease them out. And the findings have been rapidly
transferred to studies involving CF patients. Kast has been among
the first to join experimental trials and to benefit from advances
when they are made.

   The mound of pills Kast has been taking is for a study of an experimental
drug called phenylbutyrate.

   It is one of several new drugs that, next to gene therapy, represent
the most remarkable potential advance yet in cystic fibrosis.

   Phenylbutyrate, a second drug called CPX and a third, Duramycin,
are designed specifically to repair the molecular havoc created
by a gene mutation that is locked in the cells that line Kast's
lungs and airways.

   Before discovery of the gene and the ensuing study of the mutation,
scientists could not have conceived of developing such highly
targeted drugs. Today this approach, which integrates basic science
with gene discovery, represents the way most drugs will be created
in the new millennium.

   "We are now able to create designer drugs based on the detailed
molecular biology of a disease," says Francis Collins, director
of the National Human Genome Research Institute at the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md. "And we are in fact coming
up with drugs that we would never have been able to think of before."

   Collins and his research team discovered the cystic fibrosis gene
while at the University of Michigan. Lap-Chee Tsui and John Riordan
discovered the gene at the same time at their lab at the University
of Toronto. The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, in Bethesda, credits
all three with the discovery.

   "Since discovery of the gene, I've been given hope for the future,"
Kast says. "In addition to the gene therapy, they have many drugs
that they are developing. That gives us hope that if one doesn't
work, another one will."

   Kast doesn't know yet whether he got a placebo or phenylbutyrate
in the latest study. But he says it doesn't matter.

   "What they are testing on me in these studies today will be available
for all of us with the disease in a few years. This is not just
a dream anymore," says Kast, whose4-year-old niece also has cystic
fibrosis.

   Phenylbutyrate is supposed to work as a chaperon for a protein
called the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
(CFTR).

   The gene is called by the same name. The job of the gene is to
write the instructions needed by a cell to manufacture the CFTR
protein. The job of the protein is to create an opening or channel
in the cell membrane to let chloride out. Channels are vital to
cell function, allowing for the movement of sodium, chloride,
calcium and other substances through the cell membrane. Understanding
of channels has exploded in the last decade and has been key to
learning how Kast and others are affected by the disease.

   Chloride and sodium, which together make salt, rely on channels
to flow in and out of cells all over the body and to maintain
a balance with each other inside the cell like siblings on a seesaw.
In the lungs, this balance between chloride and sodium is necessary
to maintain a thin mucus to carry away congestion.

   The cells of the body make CFTR proteins all the time. The proteins
are assembled and are supposed to travel to the cell membrane
and behave as a channel. The mutation on the CFTR gene causes
three little letters among the millions in the genetic code to
go missing in the giant volume of CFTR protein instructions. That
makes the protein skip a step in its assembly, and that disables
it.

   When the CFTR protein doesn't travel where it is supposed to,
components of the cell that behave like inspectors on an assembly
line reject the disabled CFTR and junk it. That results in a deficit
of CFTR protein acting in the cell membrane as chloride channels.
Sodium flows in through its own channel, builds up and upsets
the balance.

   Now that scientists know there is a "trafficking problem" with
the CFTR protein, they can develop specific strategies to overcome
it, says Pamela Zeitlin of Johns Hopkins School of Medicine in
Baltimore.

   Molecules like phenylbutyrate and CPX appear to escort the defective
CFTR protein to the cell surface. If it's at least delivered,
it has a shot at completing its role as a chloride channel. The
Phase 1 study Kast was in finished five weeks ago. Zeitlin says
Phase 2 studies should be completed by the end of this year.

   CPX is studied by Harvey Pollard, director of the Institute for
Molecular Medicine at the Uniformed Service University School
of Medicine, Bethesda. It is from the same family of drugs as
caffeine, except caffeine has no effect on cystic fibrosis, Pollard
says.

   CPX seems to go one step further than phenylbutyrate. Not only
does it deliver the CFTR protein to the cell membrane, it also
attaches itself near the site where the step in the protein's
assembly was skipped. Binding to that site appears to improve
its ability to function as a channel.

   Pollard credits the discoverers of the gene with the advance.
"We are standing on the shoulders of giants with this one,"
Pollard says. "We couldn't have done any of this without knowing
the gene. Now, if you can develop a small molecule like CPX and
drug-based therapies that make a mutant protein work better, that
means you don't have to change the gene of the organism. It could
be like insulin for diabetes."

   Phase 2 studies of CPX also should be completed by the end of
the year, says Robert J. Beall, president and CEO of the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation.

   The third drug under study is a weak antibiotic from the 1950s
called Duramycin. It is being tested as an inhalant that may stimulate
other genes to create surrogate channels for chloride, says Zeitlin,
who also is heading that research.

   The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation is funding nine studies involving
new gene-targeted drugs or gene therapy.

   "Progress has accelerated very rapidly in my lifetime," Kast
says. "The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation is raising the money, and
I think more scientists have gotten involved with the research
because they can see that a cure is within reach. I think they
see this is something that is going to happen."

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Suzy Parker, USA TODAY, Source: Scientific American
(Diagram); GRAPHIC, B/W, Grant Jerding, USA TODAY, Source: Scientific American
(Diagram)

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1998


                             2011 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 14, 1998, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 546 words

HEADLINE: Understanding behavior of the CF gene

BODY:

   Scientists have rapidly expanded their study of cystic fibrosis
since the 1989 discovery of the gene that causes the disease.

   According to figures compiled for USA TODAY by the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation, the number of scientific papers published on the disease
rose from 345 in 1980 to 620 in 1988. The focus of most of the
papers: understanding the basic defect that caused the symptoms
in CF patients.


   By 1990, a year after the gene discovery, the number of papers
published rose to 801. Since 1995, more than 1,000 papers have
been published each year. Most of these focus on understanding
the behavior of the gene and its protein, understanding chloride
channels and testing new drug therapies, says Robert J. Beall,
president and CEO of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.

   In all, scientists have published 12,139 scientific papers on
cystic fibrosis. The milestones that mark the progress of those
papers:

   1990: Scientists make a normal copy of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (CFTR) gene and correct human CF cells in
the lab. Gene therapy becomes a possibility.

   1992: Researchers create a mouse model for CF, providing a reliable
way to test gene and drug therapies. They also learn to make large
amounts of CFTR protein and begin learning to create protein-targeted
therapies.

   1993: The first human gene therapy studies begin at three sites.
University of Iowa researchers report that CF cells in their human
patients were corrected. The Food and Drug Administration approves
the first drug for CF in 30 years. It is Pulmozyme and is designed
to break up thick mucus in the lungs.

   1994: Two gene therapy trials begin, and Phase 2 studies begin
in the first patients treated.

   1995: A four-year clinical trial of ibuprofin shows that high
doses under controlled conditions can reduce lung inflammation
in CF patients.

   The first aerosol gene therapy trials begin. Until now, gene therapy
trials have used modified cold viruses to deliver genes. The University
of Alabama becomes the first to test microscopic beads called
liposomes that contain genes. Johns Hopkins University tests a
new delivery system called adeno-associated virus.

   1996: University of Iowa researchers discover the underlying reason
people with CF are so receptive to bacterial infections: Apparently
because of high salt concentrations outside cells, a naturally
occurring substance that wards off infection is unable to perform
its job.

   1997: CPX is approved for Phase 1 studies. University of Pennsylvania
researchers discover a molecule called HHBD-1 that may be a key
link between CF cells and fatal lung infections.

   The University of Washington-Seattle and PathoGenesis Corp. begin
mapping and sequencing the entire genome of Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
which is the main bug that infects CF patients' lungs. This will
provide new treatment approaches.

   The FDA approves TOBI, an inhaled antibiotic that has been shown
to improve lung function and reduce the number of days that patients
spend in hospitals.

   1998: Phase 1 phenylbutyrate trial finishes. The Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation begins a partnership with biotechnology companies to
provide money for further development of drugs.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1998


                             2012 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       April 13, 1998 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 3F

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: ESTROGEN PILL MAY AID MEN

BODY:

   Estrogen pills are good for older women's hearts. So researchers asked the
obvious question: Why not men's?

   A team from Hartford Hospital in Connecticut found this key female sex
hormone may indeed help lower older men's risk of heart attacks.

   The results of Dr. Satyendra Giri's nine week study will be published in the
April issue of the journal Artherosclerosis.

   Giri and colleagues gave very low doses of estrogen to 22 healthy volunteers
whose average age was 74. They found that the men's levels of HDL, the good form
of cholesterol that protects against heart attacks, rose 14 percent, while their
levels of artery-clogging LDL fell 6 percent.

   There was a price: Four men complained of tender breasts and five had
heartburn.

   Much more study is necessary to determine whether the better cholesterol
levels translate into lower risk of heart attacks and whether the treatment is
safe for men.

   Migraine relief

   Large daily doses of vitamin B2 may help prevent migraine headaches, a
European study reported in the journal Neurology.

   After three months, patients taking vitamin B2 reported 37 percent fewer
migraines than other comparable patients not taking the vitamin. That reduction
in the frequency of migraine attacks is comparable to the effect of other drugs
used to prevent migraines.

   Researchers called for a follow-up study to test vitamin B2 against other
migraine treatments already in use.

   The study was conducted at six medical centers in Belgium and Luxembourg.

   The effect of vitamin B2 on migraine frequency showed up after a month of
daily doses and increased over the next two months, researchers said.

   Repairing muscle

   Researchers have used cells from bone marrow to replace damaged muscle tissue
in mice, signaling a new line of attack on degenerative muscle diseases like
muscular dystrophy, according to a report published in the journal Science.
Researchers said their work on genetically altered mice indicates immature cells
taken from bone marrow can move into damaged muscle tissue and grow new muscle
fibers.

   "This illustrates that this subset of [bone marrow] cells has this potential
to be made into all kinds of cells," said Dr. Darwin Prockop, director of gene
therapy at the Allegheny University of the Health Sciences in Philadelphia.

   Teams led by Prockop and Dr. Arnold Caplan of Case Western Reserve University
had discovered more than a year ago that a type of marrow cells could be
cultured into precursor muscle cells in a lab dish.

   But Fulvio Mavilio and Guiliana Ferrari of the San Raffaele-Telethon
Institute for Gene Therapy in Milan and colleagues "closed the loop" by
demonstrating that the cells could do the same thing in a living animal.

COLUMN: HEALTH BEAT

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1998


                             2013 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                             April 12, 1998, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS , Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 620 words

HEADLINE: RIVERSIDE DOCTORS TRY GENE THERAPY;
LUNG CANCER STUDY

BYLINE: Mark D. Somerson , Dispatch Medical Reporter

BODY:


   Cancer doctors at Riverside Methodist Hospitals have joined an elite group of
researchers worldwide testing whether gene therapy is effective in fighting lung
cancer.

   An 80-year-old Columbus woman recently diagnosed with widespread lung cancer
was injected two weeks ago with a modified cold virus carrying a tumor
suppressor gene called p53.

   The woman is the first cancer patient in the United States and the 13th in
the world to be injected with this particular virus, said Dr. Leslie Laufman, an
oncologist at Riverside.

   Riverside is the first U.S. site to begin the study, which is sponsored by
Schering-Plough of Madison, N.J.

   This gene therapy is being used in conjunction with standard chemotherapy and
also will be tested at sites in Louisville, Ky.; Knoxville, Tenn.; and New
Orleans.

   While new drugs and surgical techniques are extending the lives of many
cancer patients, scientists worldwide are betting that correcting genetic
mistakes will be the long-term answer.

   This is the second clinical trial in Columbus testing gene therapy as a
cancer treatment.

   Last fall, researchers at the Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital joined 15 sites
in the United States, Europe and Japan to inject the p53 gene into recurrent
head and neck tumor sites in 78 patients. That study is sponsored by
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Pharmaceuticals.

   In 1990, genetic researchers discovered p53, a tumor-suppressor gene that is
responsible for controlling cell growth. When mutation occurs in this gene -
known as the ''guardian of the genetic code'' - cells grow uncontrollably. That
can lead to tumors and cancers.

   The mutated gene is present in about half of all cancers.

   The theory is that an injected virus will successfully replicate in the
cancer cells and, with the help of p53, destroy those cells before moving on to
others.

   Dr. Judith Westman, director of the clinical cancer genetics program at James
Cancer Hospital, said the incidence of p53 mutation is about 60 percent in lung
tumors and about 69 percent in head and neck cancers.

   Laufman said this study and others like it are important because lung cancer
is the No. 1 cancer killer in the United States.

   The American Cancer Society estimates that 171,500 cases of lung cancer will
be diagnosed this year and that 160,100 people will die of the disease.

   In Ohio, an estimated 8,200 cases will be diagnosed, and 7,700 people will
die of lung cancer.

   Still, the Riverside study is designed strictly to see whether the normal p53
gene is successfully implanted in the cancer cells.

   ''There is very little advantage to the patient for going through this
study,'' Laufman said. ''This study is pure research.''

   After diagnosing the Riverside patient with cancer, they scheduled her first
chemotherapy session. That day, the virus and genes were injected into one
tumor.

   The next day, she underwent a CT scan to examine the tumor site. A needle
biopsy was conducted to see if normal p53 found its way inside.

   She will undergo the procedure twice more.

   Doctors at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston have been injecting
viruses laden with p53 into lung cancer patients for about two years. Dr. Jack
Roth, director of that study, has been comparing p53 gene therapy alone with
gene therapy plus chemotherapy. Roth has reported that the therapy has shrunk
some tumors.

   Researchers at Onyx Pharmaceuticals of Richmond, Calif., are also injecting
p53 into tumors in advanced-stage lung cancer patients.

   Laufman said the Schering virus differs from the others. She said how it is
injected in the tumor site is also unique.

   The hope is that patients with early, localized cancer can one day be treated
with gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1998


                             2014 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    April 11, 1998, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 13C

LENGTH: 232 words

HEADLINE: Oncormed Inc. to aid in trial of gene therapy; Biomedical

SOURCE: BY A SUN STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Oncormed Inc. of Gaithersburg said yesterday that it will collaborate with
Introgen Inc., of Austin, Texas, on an early-stage clinical trial of an
experimental gene therapy for cancer.

   Under the deal, Oncormed will provide analytical services for tissue samples
collected from healthy human volunteers administered doses of a gene therapy
that Introgen developed to correct mutations in what's known as the p53 gene.

   Mutations of that gene have been found in more than 50 percent of all cancer
cases. Financial terms of the Oncormed-Introgen agreement were not disclosed.

   Introgen said it hopes that Oncormed's genetic testing services help expand
the understanding of the p53 gene's role in cancer.

   The agreement is the second Oncormed has struck with Introgen.

   In September, RPR Gencell, a division of French pharmaceutical giant
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, and Introgen hired Oncormed to provide genetic testing
services for a human trial they were sponsoring on a gene therapy to treat head
and neck cancer. That trial also involves the p53 gene.

   Oncormed said the new agreement is further validation of its efforts to shift
its focus from providing genetic screening services to health care providers to
providing services to drug and biotechnology companies that want to gather
information about the molecular effects of their experimental therapies.

   Pub Date: 4/11/98

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1998


                             2015 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     April 10, 1998, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C, MARYLAND WATCH

LENGTH: 192 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy starts on research facility

BODY:


   Genetic Therapy Inc. began construction yesterday of a new $ 20 million
state-of-the art research facility in Gaithersburg.

   The company, which is developing gene therapies for cancer, vascular and
other diseases, hopes to occupy the new building in late 1999, said Rachel King,
chief executive officer of GTI, which is owned by drug-giant Novartis of Basel,
Switzerland.

   King said the 70,000 square-foot, two-story project is a sign of the
company's commitment to remaining headquartered in Maryland and of Novartis'
commitment to advancing gene therapy.

   The building will be across the street from GTI's headquarters off Clopper
Road. Inside will be animal testing, toxicology and other facilities for
conducting advanced research on gene treatments in development.

   GTI does not forecast significant additional hiring when the facility is
complete.

   King said the new facility is needed because the company's research needs
have grown as result of strides made with the help of Novartis scientists after
the drug giant was created last year when GTI's former parent, Sandoz
Pharmaceuticals, and Cyba-Geigy merged.

   Pub Date: 4/10/98

TYPE: COLUMN

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 1998


                             2016 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       April 10, 1998 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 519 words

HEADLINE: COPERNICUS GENE SYSTEMS NAMES VP

BODY:

   Copernicus Gene Systems Inc., a privately held biotechnology company, has
named K. Megan O'Neill Miller as vice president of administration. She moves up
from director of finance and administration, a post she has held since the
company was incorporated early last year. She will manage all administrative
functions, including human resources and information systems.

   Separately, the company elected Robert C. Moen, a leader in gene therapy, to
its board of trustees. He is vice president of clinical and regulatory affairs
at the gene therapy unit of Baxter Healthcare Corp. in Round Lake, Ill.


   GENEVA CHERVENIC REALTY INC.

   David Chervenic was elected president and appointed the principal broker as
the company celebrated its 25th anniversary. Chervenic began his real estate
career in 1975 as a sales associate and was promoted to vice president of sales
in 1984.

   INTERNATIONAL TOTAL SERVICES INC.

   Jamie C. Koechley was named marketing coordinator of the provider of aviation
and commercial security and other aviation staffing support services. She is
responsible for domestic and international trade shows and will coordinate
special events and promotional programs as well as other marketing projects. She
is a graduate of Notre Dame College of Ohio.

   Holly Harvanec was named marketing assistant with responsibility for sales
proposal development, newsletter and direct-mail copywriting as well as general
assistance with all marketing and communications projects. She is a graduate of
Ohio University.

   ZIEGLER METZLER & MILLER

   Howard E. Hendershott Jr. and Christopher E. Soukup have joined the firm.
Brian J. Green has joined as a commercial litigation, business and real estate
associate. Stephen M. Bales and John E. Redeker have been named full equity
partners. Bales is in commercial litigation and Redeker is in management of the
real estate practice group and a member of the business practice group.

   CLEVELAND REAL ESTATE PARTNERS

   Joseph G. Greulich joined as an associate in the consulting and investment
groups. He began his career as a consultant with Quadres Commercial Real Estate.
Megan Hess is an associate in the consulting group. She will specialize in the
government relations division. She previously was with Cleveland's Department of
Economic Development. Howard Moss joined as a senior associate in the consulting
group. He specializes in the leasing and sale of industrial properties and has
experience in commercial real estate and development. Ted L. Barr is president
of the capital markets/investment group. He is a senior commercial real estate
executive with extensive experience in leasing, purchase and sales, banking and
finance and buyer representation.

   1ST COMMUNICATIONS

   Carrie Cassidy was named marketing manager for its Event Management Services
subsidiary. She will develop the marketing strategies for 30 technology trade
shows for the company, which produces more than 125 trade shows and 40
conferences annually. She has been with Advanstar as marketing manager of the
technology groups directing marketing strategies for 10 annual trade shows.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS by: NO CREDIT; PHOTO 1:; Miller; PHOTO 2:; Koechley; PHOTO 3:;
Chervenic

COLUMN: COMPANIES & PEOPLE

   APPOINTMENTS

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 1998


                             2017 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    April 8, 1998, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2D, BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 1255 words

HEADLINE: Micro-Integration acquires CompSource in all-stock deal

SOURCE: From staff and wire reports

BODY:


   Micro-Integration Corp., a Frostburg information technology firm, said
yesterday that it has acquired computer services company CompSource Inc.

   The value of the all-stock purchase was not disclosed. CompSource, based in
West Reading, Pa., sells networking and software services in eastern and central
Pennsylvania. For the 1997 fiscal year, the firm had revenue of $ 3.3 million.

   The acquisition, which went into effect April 1, will not result in any
reduction in Micro-Integration's 80-member work force, according to
Micro-Integration Chairman and Chief Executive Officer John Parsons.

Oceanix Biosciences gets $ 750,000 grant

   Oceanix Biosciences Inc. has received a $ 750,000 federal grant to help
further its efforts to develop new drug compounds from marine microbes, the
company said yesterday.

   The small business innovation grant was awarded by the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases and will fund Oceanix research for a two-year
period, the Hanover-based company said.

   With the help of an earlier federal research grant, Oceanix said, it has been
able to determine that new antibiotics and other drug compounds might be
developed from marine microbes. The company has developed an extensive library
of marine organisms to use in its research.

Genvec will work with California firm

   Genvec Inc. said yesterday that it will work with a California biotechnology
company to jointly develop new treatments for disease by combining radiation
therapy and gene therapy.

   Privately held Genvec, a gene therapy developer based in Rockville, said the
deal with Varian Biosynergy Inc. of Palo Alto entails Varian developing
equipment and software programs that would allow doctors to precisely target
radiation to treat cancer and other diseases.

   Genvec will be responsible for developing drugs that address genetic defects
after being activated by radiation. Financial terms of the agreement were not
disclosed.

Jazz video taping not open to public

   Today's taping by jazz saxophonist Stanley Turrentine of a video to promote
Baltimore is not open to the public. Turrentine and his ensemble will record an
original score to help sell the city to conventioneers and others looking for
meeting space, as part of an advertising campaign by the Baltimore Area
Convention and Visitors Association.

   Turrentine toured with Ray Charles' blues and R & B band in the early 1950s.
He also earned Billboard's "Album of the Year," "Jazz Artist of the Year," and
"Number One Album of the Year" awards in 1987.

Microsoft, Sony to work together on linking products

   In an effort to hasten the "digital revolution" in the living room, Microsoft
Corp. and Sony Corp. said yesterday they would work together on technology to
link personal computer and consumer electronics products.

   Under the arrangement, the two powerful companies will cross-license
technologies with the aim of forging a single standard to link such devices as
personal computers, digital television, video cameras and videocassette
recorders in a home network.

   Executives declined to give any details about specific products that might be
released but painted a picture of a future in which common standards eliminate
the "spaghetti wires" and multiple remote controls of today's home entertainment
center.

Consumer borrowing jumped in February

   American consumers increased their borrowing in February at the fastest pace
in four months, reflecting unseasonably mild weather that encouraged a spending
boomlet.

   Consumer debt outstanding grew at a 6.9 percent annual rate to a seasonally
adjusted $ 1.24 trillion, the Federal Reserve said yesterday. That followed a
moderate 4.5 percent rate increase in January and was the strongest since
October.

   Economists said the borrowing reflected consumers' optimism about their
financial prospects, as well as mild weather linked to the El Nino ocean
current, which encouraged early sales of spring merchandise. Also, strong home
sales, spurred by mortgage rates near four-year lows, stimulated sales of
furniture and other big-ticket items for the home.

FCC chief seeks to increase minority station owners

   The nation's top broadcast regulator challenged the TV and radio industry
yesterday to find ways to bolster minority ownership.

   Minorities own only 2.8 percent of the nation's TV and radio stations. The
numbers are on the decline.

   Bill Kennard, chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, asked the
industry to give him ideas within 60 days for reversing the trend. It was
Kennard's first address as FCC chairman to the broadcasting industry, which is
meeting in Las Vegas.

Toyota Tacoma leads in crash repair bills

   An insurance industry study released yesterday found that some popular small
pickups racked up sizable repair bills in crash tests at just 5 mph. Leading the
way was the Toyota Tacoma, which sustained $ 4,361 in damage over four low-speed
tests.

   The best of the lot, the Chevrolet S-10 LS, had $ 2,246 in damage. The other
trucks tested by the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety were the Ford Ranger
XLT ($ 2,952 in total damages), the Dodge Dakota Sport ($ 3,863) and the Nissan
Frontier XE ($ 3,867).

   The institute, which is sponsored by the insurance industry, said the trucks
sustained the damage because most are equipped with rigid bumpers. By contrast,
cars have bumpers that contain energy-absorbing materials such as foam.

Internet sales firm being bought by Staples

   Quill Corp., a quiet Lincolnshire, Ill., company specializing in Internet
sales of office supplies direct to businesses, is being purchased by giant
Staples Inc. for about $ 685 million in stock.

   Under the deal announced yesterday, Quill will keep its own brand name,
headquarters and distribution centers. None of the company's 1,200 employees
will lose their jobs as a result of the merger, officials said.

   The purchase of privately held Quill will increase Massachusetts-based
Staples's share of the $ 60 billion market for direct-delivery office supplies
to about 3 percent. Quill racked up $ 550 million in sales last year over the
Internet, through a mail-order catalog and telemarketing. Staples logged about $
1 billion in direct sales last year, 20 percent of its revenue.

DuPont's new 'centerpiece': agriculture, biotech, drugs

   DuPont Co. will realign its chemicals and specialties businesses into three
groups, President and Chief Executive Officer Charles O. Holliday Jr. said
yesterday.

   A life sciences group will include the company's agriculture products,
pharmaceuticals and biotechnology. Holliday called this group "the centerpiece
of DuPont in the future." Differentiated businesses will include segments such
as Lycra, and foundation businesses will include nylon, polyesters and
engineering polymers.

   DuPont also said it will spend $ 40 million to boost production of resins at
a plant in Victoria, Texas. The company has also boosted by 35 percent its
polymers capacity at a plant in Sarnia, Ontario.

$ 2.9 billion package approved for Mozambique

   The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank approved a $ 2.9 billion
debt relief package yesterday for war-torn Mozambique as part of a program to
help poor nations committed to reform, bank officials said.

   The package is part of the international Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
initiative. The World Bank said Mozambique now faces a year-long review period
before the plan is made final.

   Pub Date: 4/08/98

TYPE: COLUMN

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1998


                             2018 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1998 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 7, 1998 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-5

LENGTH: 663 words

HEADLINE: Bill may encourage clinical trials at sites like UCSD

BYLINE: FINLAY LEWIS, FINLAY LEWIS covers economics and trade for Copley News
Service.

BODY:

   Harsh market forces have been battering research programs at academic medical
complexes like the University of California San Diego, but help from Congress
may be on the way. Bipartisan support on Capitol Hill is beginning to coalesce
behind a proposed 20 percent Medical Innovation Tax Credit.

   The bill has been designed to strengthen commercial links between campuses on
the one hand and entrepreneurial biotech firms and drug companies on the other.
The tax break would be available to offset the cost of staging clinical trials
-- a powerful medical research tool -- but only if conducted at a medical
school, teaching hospital or charitable research hospital carrying a National
Cancer Institute designation as a cancer center. The bill, which has the
powerful patronage of Rep. Bill Archer, R-Texas, chairman of the House's
tax-writing committee, springs from the realization that exclusive devotion to
the bottom line may not be always compatible with cutting-edge research. Public
health experts acknowledge that academic medical centers, like the one at UCSD,
cannot possibly conduct clinical trials as cheaply as the commercial operations
that have sprung up recently in response to the competitive incentives that have
transformed American medicine. As a result, one study demonstrates that the
share of clinical research trials performed at teaching hospitals has dropped
from 85 percent nine years ago to below 30 percent now. Daniel Masys, who heads
the clinical research program at UCSD's medical school, observed that this
development is occurring at a time when researchers are attempting the
unprecedented.

   One of their goals is to unravel the very mysteries of life itself by
learning how to interpret the hereditary instructions genetically encoded in the
cells of all living organisms. "The kind of complexity that we are encountering
with gene therapy and with trying to understand how genes contribute to health
and disease is mind-boggling," Masys said. Clinical research is absolutely
vital, Masys and other experts contend. They also make a strong case for the
proposition that this and other ground-breaking research can best be performed
in settings that are devoted above all else to intellectual inquiry and
scientific investigation. Scott Sudduth, an assistant vice chancellor for the
University of Texas system, observed that there is a reason most important
breakthroughs in curing disease and advancing medical knowledge occur within a
campus environment. Facilities there, he said, "have the resources, the
personnel, the faculty, the students, the scientific commitment, the access to
patients" essential to trail-blazing research. But, others argue, the strengths
provided by medical schools and their allied teaching hospital complexes also
constitute their weaknesses. Managed-care economics has taken over American
medicine, triggering a drive to contain costs that is at odds with the
traditional role of such institutions as UCSD's School of Medicine and its
affiliated UCSD Medical Center. These complexes have multiple missions that
bolster their research capabilities, but such missions also make them costly to
operate because those roles include teaching students, training residents, and
caring for the indigent and for those suffering from obscure or incurable
diseases. As a result, they have higher fixed costs than the clinics, research
organizations or other companies that have been formed in recent years almost
exclusively to perform clinical research trials for a profit on drugs or medical
devices. Richard Knapp, executive vice president of the Association of American
Medical Colleges, estimates that the cost differential between medical schools
and private clinical trial centers ranges from 15 percent to 30 percent. Biotech
firms and drug companies already receive a research and experimentation tax
credit, but it is designed in a way that makes it of limited use in offsetting
the costs of clinical research trials.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2019 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                     April 06, 1998, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 13 Metfront

LENGTH: 634 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy labs offer promise;
Baylor woos leading researcher from St. Jude's to find new treatments

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   Dr. Malcolm K. Brenner takes bounds up two steps at a time as he climbs the
stairs between his 11th floor office and his 12th floor research laboratory at
the Feigin Center at Texas Children's Hospital.

   It is symbolic of the sense of urgency that this new director of the Shell
Center for Gene Therapy at Baylor College of Medicine feels.

   Patients in the Texas Medical Center and around the world anxiously await the
results from tests of promising new gene therapies. But Brenner knows that
important questions remain to be answered before gene therapy - manipulating the
genetic code to treat diseases - becomes reality.

   It was the chance to apply gene therapy to all kinds of diseases that drew
Brenner to Houston from St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, Tenn.

   After nearly two years of negotiation with Dr. Ralph Feigin, president of
Baylor, Brenner is now setting up his new laboratories.

   The rooms may be new, but the people in them are familiar. He has brought
with him much of the staff he had in Memphis. The settling in period is nearly
over, he said. And experiments are progressing along with the unpacking of
boxes.

   At age 46, Brenner is considered a leader in the new field. His name is
frequently spoken in the same breath with other leaders, including Dr. W. French
Anderson, who led the team that performed the first gene therapy at the National
Institutes of Health, and Dr. Ron Crystal, whose work with diseases such as
cystic fibrosis at the University of Pennsylvania has pushed him to the
forefront of clinical efforts.

   Gene therapy has been less in the public eye lately. But if it seems to the
public that the first blush of enthusiasm for gene therapy is over, Brenner does
not see it that way.

   "There are more trials (tests of gene therapy in humans) than ever before,"
he said.

   But the era of overexuberance is over, he said. A new realism has set in, and
most scientists recognize that viable gene therapies will require more work.

   "There are major obstacles to overcome," said Brenner. "You never get an
immediate fulfillment of a new technique."

   But he will be surprised if gene therapy is not a major form of treatment
within the next 20 years.

   But to make that true for disorders of the blood and organs, the true
progenitor cells must be found. The cells - called the pluripotent stem cells -
are the primitive parents from which specialized cells of blood, lymph and
marrow are derived.

   Changing the genetic code of those long-lived progenitor cells would effect a
long-time treatment that would be passed on to the short-lived specialized cells
of the blood and bone marrow.

   Brenner hopes that work by Dr. Margaret Goodell, whom he recruited to Baylor,
will provide crucial information leading to the identification of these
important cells.

   But although much of Brenner's work has centered on the blood-forming system
and bone marrow transplant, he hopes to work in the field of nerves and brain,
autoimmune disorders, eye problems and cancer.

   Eventually, he expects to have 30 to 35 faculty members and 300 staff members
in his center. Already, a specialized facility for producing the genetic
materials given to patients is operating at Texas Children's Hospital.

   Those who came with him to Baylor include Dr. Robert A. Krance, Dr. Helen E.
Heslop and Brenner's wife, Dr. Cliona Mary Rooney.

   He anticipates dividing his time between the laboratory and patient care,
setting up a major bone marrow transplant program at Baylor-affiliated
hospitals.

   Good research involves taking what is learned in the laboratory quickly to
the bedside, he said. Then what is learned at the bedside can be refined further
in the lab.

   "It's a two-way street," Brenner said. "It's from the lab to the clinic and
from the clinic to the lab."


GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Malcolm K. Brenner, the new director of the Shell Center for
Gene Therapy at Baylor College of Medicine; Craig H. Hartley / Special to the
Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1998


                             2020 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       April 5, 1998 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1H

LENGTH: 1902 words

HEADLINE: SCRAMBLING FOR WORKERS;
LABOR SHORTAGE IS CONSTRAINING THE GROWTH -4 OF SMALL COMPANES IN THIS ROBUST
ECONOMY

BYLINE: By TROY FLINT; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   While much of America celebrates the nation's robust economy, Michael Estlick
feels left out.

   Like many small-business owners, Estlick has struggled to find skilled
employees. "We've been trying to hire, but, unfortunately, we've been unable to
find people with the experience we need."

   Estlick is vice president of Electro Mechanical Technology Inc., a Cleveland
maker of electronic parts for such products as vacuum cleaners, cars and circuit
boards.

   The 10-employee company has hired four people in the last year and had hoped
to hire up to six more. EMT, like other advanced-technology small businesses,
has had to delay its growth because of the shortage of skilled workers.

   "We have a plan to expand our business over the next 12 months, and this does
push that back a bit because what we are planning to do now is take people with
less experience and train them ourselves," he said.

   In today's vibrant economy, small businesses like EMT - those employing fewer
than 100 people - can fall on what amounts to a double-edged sword.

   Unable to find enough skilled workers, these companies have seen their growth
constrained in a period of nearly unparalleled economic expansion. That problem
is particularly acute among high-tech companies. A recent Greater Cleveland
Growth Association survey of 159 small businesses found that 45 percent said a
shortage of skilled labor was their greatest concern.

   To reverse the trend, area small businesses are launching outreach programs
with public high schools, stepping up job-training efforts, offering flexible
work schedules and, in one case, sponsoring a radio program to help recruit
applicants.

   "What we're finding is that colleges and institutions who've trained people
for our type of work - industrial engineering assembly-type work - are not
really teaching them the skills needed in today's industries," Estlick said.
"There seems to be a big void between what the colleges and training schools are
teaching and what business needs actually are."

   As the country's economic engine continues to purr - an engine fueled in
large part by the growth of small businesses - many employers complain that the
workforce is not keeping pace with the advance of technology.

   "We have a cyclical [labor shortage] problem - it's clear by the unemployment
rate - but small firms are also dealing with long-term problems that need to be
addressed," said Cliff Waldman, an economist with the National Federation of
Independent Businesses in Washington. "They, like the economy, are demanding
more cognitive-skilled employees, and the workforce is slow in responding to
changes in those type of demands."

   The effects of the shortage are changing the way companies recruit employees
and prompting many small businesses to adopt innovative hiring practices.

   "It's very difficult. It used to be that you could advertise for positions
and have a pretty large pool to choose from," recalled Mike Summers, president
of Summers Rubber Co. in Cleveland. "Now, if you can find a qualified candidate,
they're not available very long. So, as a consequence, what used to be a fairly
deliberative process for our company is a much quicker one than we'd like, one
we're not particularly comfortable with."

   Summers generally hires for two major job classifications, warehouse
fabricator and customer service. Summers has long advertised in newspapers but
increasingly has relied on word of mouth to attract new job candidates.
Referrals, Summers said, increase the chance of a skills match because his
employees, customers and vendors know the attributes he seeks.

   In the past, his company found relatively few of its workers among the older,
teenage or female segments of the population. Now, as Summers begins to
cultivate relationships with these communities, he is discovering valuable
resources.

   Summers Rubber has 60 employees, about 10 of whom have been hired in the past
year. The company participates in a job training program with Max Hayes High
School in Cleveland designed to build a pipeline of employees for local
companies. Currently, six Max Hayes students work part time at Summers' facility
on Berea Road, but the company also makes extensive use of people old enough to
be the grandparents of those kids.

   "The other pool we look to is the older generation of worker who might be
displaced or find themselves in transition. Many of them desire to work part
time, and we are able to accommodate them on a flexible basis," Summers said.
"Normally, we might not look at them for entry-level positions because we might
perceive them to be overqualified, but they're not."

   In order to tap into new parts of the workforce, Summers has also tweaked
some job requirements. "As far as our physical plant operations, there was a
thought that they might have been physically too demanding for women, but we've
been able to re-engineer some of our processes to accommodate them and had a
great deal of success in what has normally been an all-male environment."

   Employers like Summers no longer have the luxury of relying on a single part
of the work force or on traditional methods of recruitment to lure skilled
workers. The Growth Association survey helped quantify their bind. The report,
issued last month, found that 45 percent of the respondents expect to add
employees this year and cited labor availability as small businesses' greatest
stumbling block.

   Twenty-three percent of the business owners cited labor availability as "the
biggest problem facing small business," and 22 percent identified labor quality
as their gravest concern, the report said. Worries about the labor pool outpaced
the closest fears - competition and taxes - by nearly 2 to 1.

   "I constantly hear people say if we could only hire more people, we'd do 25
percent more business. It's hard enough getting labor; it's really hard to get
tech people, and we're always looking for another avenue to remind people that
we're there looking," said Liz Kohout, owner of American Insourcing, a Cleveland
contract manufacturer for packaging and subassembly firms.

   To that end, the company created and sponsors a weekly radio program called
American Job Link. The show airs each Wednesday during morning drive time on
WERE/1300-AM. It discusses workplace issues and carries advertisements for job
openings at American Insourcing and its clients.

   The program also features frequent interview sessions where executives from
local companies pitch their firms. After eight broadcasts, the company has hired
two employees.

   "We had to go to that extent to constantly remind people we're out there,"
said Kohout, who hosts the program.

   For Kohout, that means going Hollywood. In addition to providing day care and
flexible hours for her employees, she has also initiated less standard perks
such as a discount video library. For a $1 fee - which goes toward the purchase
of additional films - workers at American Insourcing can rent videos for an
extended period of the time.

   And for employees who struggle with the English language, American Insourcing
employs interpreters for Spanish, Polish, Russian, Ukrainian and Vietnamese.

   In an area with minimal population growth, immigrants and workers formerly on
the dole offer the greatest pool of untapped labor. Many of American
Insourcing's employees are fresh from the welfare rolls and can't afford to pay
for the day care necessary to balance family commitments with their new jobs.
For these people, flexible work schedules can determine whether they accept a
position or remain on the job.

   "Some people start an hour or two later after they've put their kids in
school, and some people opt to go in early and get back in the afternoon to
watch their kids," Kohout said. "I've seen people put in a whole day's worth of
work in less hours because of the extra motivation."

   Creativity and accommodation are the buzzwords for employers nationwide when
discussing recruiting. But locally, there is a sentiment among many employers
that no matter what incentives are offered, it remains difficult to find skilled
labor.

   The Growth Association study revealed a sense among some employers that the
quality of the local workforce is inferior to that found in other parts of the
country. When asked why outside competitors are able to produce more
effectively, 46 percent of the respondents said skilled labor was more readily
available in other regions.

   "I believe in Northeast Ohio we need to make a stronger effort to have a more
highly educated work force that meets the needs of a knowledge-based company,"
said Jack Kleinhenz, chief economist and senior director of research at the
Growth Association. "That means linking universities, colleges and higher
education institutions into industries in Northeast Ohio and developing programs
to help drive those linkages."

   Similar efforts in other regions have created a link between education and
businesses and an economic boom for surrounding areas. Kleinhenz points to
Boston and North Carolina's Research Triangle as models for spurring high-tech
growth and attracting marketable talent.

   Local experts in the biotechnology field stress that achieving a critical
mass of companies in these industries is critical to attracting talented
applicants.

   If biotech companies "recruit someone from the West Coast to work here, the
person not only sees the move as somewhat of a risk, they ask, 'If something
happens to this company a year or two down the road, where do I go from there?'"
said Ellen Blahut, director of the Edison Technology Incubator, which is
affiliated with Case Western Reserve University.

   "If you're in Silicon Valley, you just go next door or down the road and
apply for a job."

   Yet, as Blahut noted, the growing number of high-tech firms in Northeast Ohio
lessens the risk of picking up and relocating to Cleveland. Still, in the dicey
world of high technology where scientifically valuable discoveries do not always
translate into lucrative products, the risk, challenge - and potential gain - of
a start-up can be a firm's biggest selling point.

   Gemini Technologies, a biotech firm in University Circle, develops gene
therapies designed to eliminate the production of harmful cell proteins. The
company hired two employees since it opened last October, and opportunity - not
money - was the carrot.

   "In both cases, we managed to induce people who were from the area or who
were out of town and wanted to come back, and they took paycuts to do so,"
Leaman said.

   "We're doing drug discovery research essentially, so the payday is years down
the road. We have benefits, but they're fairly standard, and we try to be
competitive with salary, but I'd say we're only marginally so."

   The financial incentives that Leaman can offer, such as equity compensation
if the firm goes public, are speculative, but they could eventually outstrip
those at larger firms. For employees daring enough to tie their futures to the
success of a fledgling company, the promise of huge rewards lies on the horizon.

   "The bad part is that, as a start-up company, it's difficult to offer
competitive salary and benefits compared to the big boys in town, which are Case
Western Reserve and Cleveland Clinic," Leaman said. "What we can offer people,
of course, is the chance to get in on the ground floor of a start-up company
with the potential of growing as the company grows."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (COLOR) BY: SCOTT SHAW / PLAIN DEALER PHOTOGRAPHER; Liz Kohout
and Brenda Gutierrez assemble products at Cleveland's American Insourcing, a
contract manufacturer for packaging and assembly companies. As president of
American Insourcing, Kohout has opened a day-care center, launched subsidized
lunch programs and even hosted a talk show sponsored by the company in an effort
to attract workers.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1998


                             2021 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       April 5, 1998 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: SUNDAY; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 347 words

HEADLINE: Q & A: SEARCH FOR A CURE

BYLINE: By ULYSSES TORASSA

BODY:

   Lavanya Kondapalli is only 17, but her resume already spans six pages -
editor of the yearbook at Magnificat High School in Rocky River, "It's Academic"
team captain, president of the Chemistry Club, volunteer tutor and hospital
aide, and winner of a slew of awards for her science projects. That impressive
document, and her burning desire to find a cure for cystic fibrosis, helped land
her a job as a lab assistant at Athersys, a Cleveland biotech company that is
capitalizing on the creation here of the world's first artificial human
chromosome.

   Q. Why are you so interested in cystic fibrosis?

   A. I had a project to do in my honors biology class on genetic disease and I
picked cystic fibrosis. I was interested in it because of the potential gene
therapy has for curing it. For those who have it, there's a lot of mucus that
gets built up in the lungs, and it just seems to be a very hard way to enter
life.

   Q. What makes you think the artificial chromosome will help?

   A. The potential is there because you can code for the parts of a gene that a
person who has a genetic disease is missing. So we can take this coded section
and put it back into the cells, and hopefully once it's there, it will code for
the missing body chemicals.

   Q. What are your long-term goals?

   A. I like the way medicine combines the social aspects with the biology. I
think it's probably a good match for me. Ideally, I would like to be involved in
research throughout my undergraduate years. As a doctor, I'd like to concentrate
on cystic fibrosis patients. I hope we find a cure before I'm 40, hopefully
sooner, and I'd like to be involved in the research and testing of it.

   Q. What do you do for fun?

   A.I watch a lot of movies. I'm kind of on this kick where I'm trying to
become fluent in Spanish, so I drag all my friends to Spanish restaurants so we
can talk to the Spanish waiters. And we're trying to start a band. Most of the
time we just sit around and talk about what our band's going to do. We do have a
name, though. It's called "Oucheiffel" (pronounced Ouch, I fell).

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY GUS CHAN / PLAIN DEALER PHOTOGRAPHER; Lavanya Kondapalli

COLUMN: LANDMARKS

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1998


                             2022 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    April 1, 1998, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2C, Business Digest

LENGTH: 1253 words

HEADLINE: GenVec gets patent for the altering of herpes virus

SOURCE: From staff and wire reports

BODY:


   GenVec Inc. said it has been issued a patent that covers a method for
altering and manufacturing the herpes simplex virus so it could be used to treat
diseases by getting therapeutic genes to targets in the body.

   Specifically, GenVec said Monday, the patent pertains to altering the herpes
virus so that it can't replicate, and therefore might prove a safe way to
transfer genes into the body. GenVec said it plans to load the altered virus
with therapeutic genes to treat diseases.

   The Rockville company, which is attempting to develop gene therapies, says it
believes that the virus could have a role in treating neurological disorders,
cancer and cardiovascular disease.

EntreMed lost 17 a share in 4th quarter

   EntreMed Inc. said yesterday that it lost $ 2.1 million, or 17 cents a share,
on revenue of $ 1.3 million in its fourth quarter, which ended Dec. 31.

   For the 1997 fiscal year, the Rockville-based biotechnology company posted a
net loss of $ 6.5 million, or 54 cents a share, on revenue of $ 4.8 million.

   By comparison, the company closed its 1996 fourth quarter with a $ 1.3
million loss on $ 1.3 million in revenue. It reported a loss of $ 4.3 million on
$ 4.6 million in revenue for the 12-month period of 1996.

2 organ-rejection drugs get patent protection

   Gaithersburg-based MedImmune Inc. said yesterday that it has received patent
protection for two drugs it is co-developing to prevent and treat organ
rejection and autoimmune diseases.

   The Gaithersburg-based vaccine developer said the patent covers the
experimental drugs MEDI-507 and BTI-322.

   It is co-developing the drugs with BioTransplant Inc. of Charlestown, Mass.
BioTrans-plant licensed the drugs to MedImmune for potential commercialization.

Toyota to expand Indiana truck plant and add 1,000 jobs

   Toyota Motor Corp., stepping up its assault on the booming U.S. truck market,
said yesterday that it will spend $ 500 million to expand an unfinished truck
plant in Indiana, adding 1,000 jobs to the facility.

   The Princeton, Ind., plant has yet to build a single T150 pickup truck. But
Toyota said it will expand the factory's annual production capacity to 150,000
units from the 100,000 initially envisioned.

   Analysts said the expansion will make room for the plant to produce a new
full-size sport utility vehicle that will compete with vehicles such as Ford
Motor Co.'s Expedition and General Motors Corp.'s Chevrolet Tahoe.

2 stock analysts fired over porn in computers

   As Wall Street is being scrutinized for its treatment of women, Salomon Smith
Barney has fired two high-ranking stock analysts for using company computers to
share pornography.

   The brokerage, a subsidiary of Travelers Group Inc., said yesterday that it
fired the executives Friday. They were identified by people inside the firm as
Dean Eberling, a prominent analyst of securities firms, and Anthony Maltese,
also a stock analyst.

   The terminations occurred less than two weeks before a U.S. judge weighs the
fairness of a settlement to resolve sexual discrimination and harassment claims
against Smith Barney Inc., which later merged with Salomon Brothers.

Pepsi aims at teen thirst with a less-sweet Slice

   Aiming squarely at teen-age America, Pepsi-Cola is introducing a reformulated
version of its orange-flavored Slice soft drink today. The reformulation, a
Pepsi spokesman said, is less sweet and contains caffeine.

   The logo and package have also been redesigned to appeal to a different
audience. The can is bright blue with a contorted orange "S," meant to evoke
Pepsi's freshly minted slogan for the drink: "New Slice. It's orange, only
twisted."

Sell to it, not VW, BMW warns Rolls' parent

   Angered by a report that Volkswagen still wants to buy Rolls-Royce and is
willing to pay as much as $ 940 million, BMW warned yesterday that it would stop
delivering supplies to the British automaker if its parent company sells it to
anyone other than BMW.

   Rolls-Royce parent Vickers said Monday that it had accepted a $ 570 million
bid from BMW, based in Minich, Germany -- which supplies Vickers with engines
for the latest Rolls-Royce models.

   But in order for ownership to go to the German company, Vickers shareholders
must approve the deal. That vote is expected in May.

Odor remover coming by June

   Procter & Gamble Co., the world's largest maker of household products, said
yesterday that its product designed to remove odors from fabrics should be in
stores by June.

   R. Kerry Clark, president of P&G's North American laundry and cleaning
products business, said the patented spray product, Febreze, would eliminate
odors rather than cover them up with another fragrance.

   Among the odors the product is intended to work on are those from pets,
tobacco smoke and cooking fumes.

Japan, European Union accused over trade barriers

   Japan and the European Union were singled out by the Clinton administration
yesterday as trading partners accused of erecting the most unfair barriers to
U.S. exports. South Korea and China also came in for criticism.

   The 1998 "National Trade Estimate Report on Foreign Trade Barriers" covered
the alleged improper activities of 49 countries and three trading groups.

   The nations ranged from Argentina to Zimbabwe in the report, which puts
countries on notice that they could be subject to potential U.S. economic
sanctions if they do not mend their ways.

Kodak increasing pay while cutting jobs

   Eastman Kodak Co., in the midst of trimming almost 20,000 jobs, is raising
pay scales to bring them into line with industry averages.

   Based on job performance, most workers will get increases ranging from 3
percent to 6 percent on May 11. The across-the-board raises are the first in
three years at Kodak, based in Rochester, N.Y.

   Late last year, squeezed by falling profits, intensified competition from
Japanese rival Fuji and mounting losses in digital photography, Kodak targeted
16,600 job cuts through 1999. On top of 3,300 job cuts still unfolding from the
previous year, layoffs will total 19,900, or nearly one-fifth of Kodak's
worldwide payroll.

Gibson Greetings expects 480 jobs to go

   Plans to cut costs and get new products to market faster will wipe out 480
jobs by early next year, Gibson Greetings Inc. said yesterday.

   Gibson said it will hire outside contractors by the end of this year to
handle all the manufacturing operations done at its suburban Cincinnati
headquarters, eliminating about 415 hourly and production positions. It will
eliminate about 65 office and administrative positions by early next year.

   The restructuring is expected to improve earnings starting in 1999, the
company said. Gibson makes and sells greeting cards, gift wrap, party goods and
licensed products.

Salary, bonus up 34% for Times Mirror chief

   Times Mirror Co. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Mark H. Willes'
combined salary and bonus rose 34 percent last year to $ 2.87 million, the Los
Angeles-based company said yesterday in documents filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission.

   Willes' pay was partly based on the company's 50 percent increase in profit
per share.

   Willes was paid a salary of $ 905,770, up 13.5 percent from 1996, and a bonus
of $ 1,968,750, up 46 percent. The company said the salary for its top
executives was generally in line with pay at similar companies, while the
bonuses were slightly higher than the midpoint in the media industry.

   Pub Date: 4/01/98

TYPE: COLUMN

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1998


                             2023 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1998 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            April 1, 1998 Wednesday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B14

LENGTH: 925 words

HEADLINE: PROPORTION OF BOYS TO GIRLS BORN IN U.S. DIPS DURING 1970S, '80SHealth
Notebook

DATELINE: CHICAGO

BODY:

   Wednesday, April 1, 1998 PROPORTION OF BOYS TO GIRLS BORN IN U.S. DIPS DURING
1970S, '80S

   Health Notebook

   The search for Mr. Right may be getting even harder.

   The ratio of boys to girls born in the United States and Canada dipped ever
so slightly between 1970 and 1990, and a study suggests environmental factors
-- such as prenatal exposure to pesticides -- may be why.

   The declines began even earlier in several other industrialized countries
and corresponded with increases in some male birth defects and prenatal
exposure to pesticides and industrial chemicals, said Devra Lee Davis, an
environmental epidemiologist at the World Resources Institute, a
Washington-based policy-research institute.

   Davis and her colleagues examined data on birth ratios and increases in  male
birth defects, such as misplaced urinary openings and testicular cancer.

   They concluded the reduction in the proportion of males born may indicate
``some as yet unrecognized environmental health hazards are affecting the sex
ratio of births as well as other unexplained defects in male reproduction.''
Their analysis appears in today's issue of The Journal of the American Medical
Association.

   Some studies have indicated male fetuses are more vulnerable than females  to
prenatal exposure to toxic substances and either die before birth or are  born
with defects or a susceptibility to cancer. Other studies have suggested
environmental factors can cause harm even before gender has been determined  and
may block embryos from developing into males.

   Although the death rate for males tops that of females at nearly every age,
the worldwide human sex ratio hovers around 106 male births for every 100
female births. That is, about 51.5 percent of births are males.

   In the United States, the percentage dropped from about 51.34 to 51.21
between 1970 and 1990, the researchers reported. That's a decrease of one male
birth per 1,000 live births, or 38,000 males during the 20-year period, the
researchers reported.

   In Canada, the loss was 2.2 male births per 1,000 live births, or 8,600
males, during the 20-year period.

   New technology promising as method to repair genes

   SEATTLE

   University of Washington researchers say they have come up with a promising
new technology to fix the faulty genes that cause such diseases as hemophilia
and cystic fibrosis.

   The technique is years away from being applied to humans, but it's been far
more successful than previous attempts at gene therapy, said Dr. David  Russell,
a UW genetic researcher and assistant professor of medicine.

   ``I think it has the potential to solve a lot of the main problems with  gene
therapy,'' Russell said.

   A three-year research project by Russell and Roli Hirata, a research
technician, is reported in the April issue of the journal Nature Genetics,
published Tuesday.

   Nearly all previous attempts at gene therapy, including attempts to treat
cystic fibrosis and several forms of cancer, have failed or been only  partially
successful.

   Scientists think part of the problem is that enough ``corrected'' DNA, the
basic component of genes, can't be delivered to the correct place on a
chromosome, the area of the cell nucleus where the gene is located. Some
attempts, called gene addition, also have left defective DNA that competes  with
the corrected form.

   Like other researchers, Russell uses a special virus, called
adeno-associated virus (AAV), to carry the corrected DNA into the target cell.
Viruses naturally infect by invading host cells, but the AAV is stripped of  any
harmful DNA and loaded with genetic material to fix the defect.

   Not only does it carry the new DNA into the cell, it knocks out the
defective gene that is causing the problem.

   Russell's technique has accomplished the exchange of DNA only about 1
percent of the time, but that's still about 10,000 to 100,000 times more
successful than previous attempts in normal human cells.

   He said that some diseases, including hemophilia, might be cured with only  3
percent to 5 percent correction rates and that many others could be cured  with
rates of 10 percent or greater.

   New findings on Redux cast doubt on ill effects to heart

   More than 1,000 patients who took Redux, a popular diet drug pulled from the
market last year, did not experience a greater rate of heart valve damage, a
study suggests.

   Contrary to earlier studies, the Georgetown University study, presented
Tuesday at the annual meeting of the American College of Cardiology, found
patients taking Redux, also known as dexfenfluamine, experienced no  significant
increase in valve leakage when compared to the general  population.

   About 6.5 percent of the patients taking Redux, for example, experienced at
least some type of mild heart valve regurgitation, compared with 4.5 percent  of
the participants taking a lookalike, inactive pill.

   ``The results should be reassuring for the majority of patients taking
Redux,'' said Dr. Neil Weissman, the study's principal investigator and
director of clinical echocardiography at Georgetown University Medical  Center.

   But critics pointed out the study only looked at patients taking Redux for
less than three months, which might not be enough time for abnormalities to
develop.

   Dr. Richard Bowen, a Naples, Fla., physician specializing in obesity, said
most of his patients were on Redux for about seven months. ``My strongest
criticism is that (the study) looked at such a short duration'' of treatment,
he said.

   Market research, however, indicated that more than 85 percent of patients
took Redux for less than 90 days.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2024 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      March 31, 1998 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 012

LENGTH: 387 words

HEADLINE: Hormone shot helps heart patients grow bypass

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   For the first time, doctors have shown that injections of a genetically
engineered hormone can help people with bad hearts grow their own bypasses, an
approach that could someday offer an alternative to surgery and angioplasty.

   The hormone, which occurs naturally in the body, triggers the heart to sprout
tiny vessels to carry blood around blockages that cause angina pain. The results
of the first experimental use, released yesterday, showed that the treatment
eased angina in 13 of the 15 people treated.

   The results are considered preliminary and the doctors say more tests are
needed.

   Nevertheless, Dr. Timothy Henry of the University of Minnesota, who headed
the study, said, "We are excited by this. It is a unique approach to treating
coronary artery disease."

   About 1 million Americans a year undergo either bypass or angioplasty.

   If all goes as the researchers hope, natural proteins called growth factors
could offer a new alternative, especially for those who have already failed the
standard approaches or cannot be helped by them.

   In this experiment, doctors injected genetically engineered vascular
endothelial growth factor, or VEGF.

   All of the men and women had serious chest pain and could not be treated by
angioplasty or bypass surgery.

   Among those helped was a man in his early 50s who had already had two
bypasses and two angioplasties, yet was still crippled by angina. The growth
hormone appeared to relieve his condition almost completely.

   Henry said the man told him that "the only side effect was that he had to go
back to work."

   The results were reported at a cardiology conference in Atlanta.

   Dr. Michael Mann of Brigham and Women's Hospital called the research "a
critical and bold step."

   In another study, Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in
Brighton reported his gene therapy approach to circumventing blocked leg vessels
has been extended to a larger group of patients.

   At a cardiology conference in November, he had reported success with the
treatment on about 20 patients.

   At this week's conference, he said he has now treated 29 patients.

   In addition, Isner said the approach seems to help patients suffering from an
inflammatory disease of the blood vessels of the legs and patients with sensory
neuropathy, acute loss of feeling in the feet.

LOAD-DATE: April 01, 1998


                             2025 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                     March 31, 1998, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 419 words

HEADLINE: Tumor-suppressor gene shows promise against a cancer gene

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center physicians are using a new
tumor-suppressor gene to turn off the deadly cancer effects of another gene.

   In a report Monday at the American Association for Cancer Research in New
Orleans, Dr. Naoto T. Ueno, an instructor in M.D. Anderson's Department of Blood
and Marrow Transplantation, described as promising early results from tests of
gene therapy using the E1A tumor suppressor gene.

   The target of the gene therapy was a gene called HER2/neu. When this is
detected in cancers of the breast and ovary, the disease is more deadly.

   Dr. Mien-Chie Hung, interim deputy chairman of the Department of Tumor
Biology and director of Anderson's Breast Cancer Basic Research Program, was one
of the people who first identified the HER-2/neu gene. He noticed that when the
gene was mixed in culture with the tumor-suppressor gene called E1A, the cancer
gene was turned off.

   When mice with induced ovarian tumors were treated with E1A, the tumors
disappeared in at least some of the animals.

   That prompted Ueno and Hung to take their idea to Dr. Gabriel N. Hortobagyi,
chairman of the Department of Breast Medical Oncology, whom they asked if he
thought they should proceed to trials in women.

   Hortobagyi became part of the project, and helped obtain approval from the
required local and federal groups. They began to enroll women in the study
nearly two years ago, Ueno said. All the women had been treated for their
disease before and had no other treatment options.

   The scientists used a form of fat capsule called a liposome to take the gene
into the women's tumor cells because the liposome made it easier to give repeat
injections of the gene.

   When the more common viruses are used to take genes into cells, the body can
build up an immune reaction to the viruses after the first injection. On
subsequent injections, the body destroys the viruses before they can accomplish
their purpose.

   So far, Ueno said, they have analyzed the cancer cells of three patients
before and after treatment. They have found evidence that E1A is working in
cancer cells, and that the levels of deadly HER2/neu gene product are lower
after the gene therapy treatments.

   However, Ueno said, it is too early to determine if the treatment has a
direct effect on the tumors, although levels of chemicals tested to determine
cancer activity have decreased in some patients.

   One patients has received eight injections of the gene so far without adverse
side effects, he said.


LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1998


                             2026 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 March 31, 1998, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Page 1; Column 4; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1938 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Find New Ways To Break Into the Brain

BYLINE: By DENISE GRADY

BODY:

   DRUG companies working on promising new treatments for brain disorders like
Alzheimer's disease, tumors and depression are learning a hard lesson: it is
easier to make a medicine that will act on the brain than it is to make one that
will get into the brain.

   Dr. William Pardridge, a brain researcher at the University of California at
Los Angeles, estimates that 95 percent of drugs discovered using the latest
technologies will not get into the brain. "Companies are not developing
strategies to get them there," he said. "It's like a captain that takes a ship
to sea without a compass."

    Delivering drugs into the brain is a tricky business, because long ago
mammals' brains evolved an elaborate security system to keep things out. The
system, known as the blood-brain barrier, provides a stable environment for the
brain, protecting it from the ebb and flow of hormones, nutrients, toxins,
microorganisms and other substances that find their way into the bloodstream.
The barrier is essential for survival.

   But now that there are medicines to fight cancer, infections, mental illness
and neurological disorders, the blood-brain barrier has turned into a mixed
blessing. So scientists are working to outsmart it.

   Results have been mixed. A protective mechanism that has been eons in the
making is not easily undone, and no single strategy has emerged as the key to
the barrier. Still, tests are underway on a number of interesting approaches.

   Dr. Thomas Jacobs, director of the stroke and brain tumor programs at the
National Institutes of Health, said that in the past five years major advances
have been made in the understanding of how brain cells communicate with each
other and how they are affected by various diseases. That knowledge has made it
possible to develop highly specific drugs for brain disorders.

   But he asked, "How do we get these very sophisticated drugs into the area of
the brain where they'll be most effective?"

   Dr. Jacobs agreed with Dr. Pardridge and other researchers in the field who
say that major drug companies do not pay enough attention to the blood-brain
barrier. "I can see why they don't," he said. "Their charge, the way they're
looking at the survival and mission of their companies, is to develop new
therapeutics, and they're hoping someone else will solve the problem or they can
get around it or it won't be an issue."

   Although the phrase blood-brain barrier might conjure an image of a wall in
the neck, the barrier is not one checkpoint. It is billions of them, formed by
cells lining hundreds of miles of capillaries that pipe blood to the brain.
Unlike capillaries anywhere else in the body, those in the brain are lined by
cells so tightly sealed together that they are essentially seamless. In addition
to these so-called tight junctions, the lining cells, called endothelial cells,
have far fewer of the porelike openings in other capillaries. And the
capillaries in the skull are separated from brain cells by a dense matrix of
protein that forms part of the barrier.

   The net effect is to filter out a wide array of substances, including large
molecules that cannot slip through the tight junctions, and water soluble ones
that are repelled by the fatty cell membranes. Penicillin, many cancer drugs and
hormones can't get in. But alcohol, caffeine and nicotine, which dissolve in
fat, zip through. Antidepressants and other drugs used to treat mental and
emotional disorders are also fat soluble.

   But the brain needs some things that are water soluble, including glucose,
required for energy, and the amino acids the body uses to build proteins. The
brain has evolved transport systems that escort those molecules through the
barrier.

   Several ways of getting through or around the blood-brain barrier are being
tested in people. As is often the case in medical research, these experimental
treatments are being tried in patients who have almost nothing to lose: people
with cancerous brain tumors that resist standard therapy. The immediate goal is
to find better treatments for those patients, but scientists say they hope the
research will also lead to new ways to send drugs into the brain for other
disorders.

   The oldest technique takes the blood-brain barrier by storm, flooding it with
a solution that shocks it open for a brief period, during which doctors shoot in
a mixture of cancer drugs that cannot normally get through.

   Only five medical centers in the United States offer the treatment, as part
of a research program set up by Dr. Edward Neuwelt, a neurosurgeon at Oregon
Health Sciences University and the Veterans Administration Hospital in Portland.
"It's an involved technology," he said.

   The treatment requires cutting a slit in the patient's groin, inserting a
catheter into an artery and threading it into vessels in the neck, so that drugs
can be pumped into the brain. This can be done only by a specially trained team
in an operating room, with the patient under general anesthesia. The procedure
can cause seizures, and damage eyesight and hearing. Patients must be strong
enough, and determined enough, to endure the risks and rigors 24 times during
the 12 to 18 months it takes to complete acourse of therapy. They also need an
insurer willing to foot the bill, about $250,000.

   "I'm doing this because I had no other choice," said Sandy Scherer, 47, who
has had 14 treatments at the University of Minnesota Cancer Center in
Minneapolis. Ms. Scherer, a middle school teacher from Albert Lea, Minn.,
learned two years ago that breast cancer had spread to her brain. Radiation
temporarily stalled the tumors, but her doctors had nothing else to offer. One
doctor suggested the experimental treatment. "We agreed there was no choice,"
Ms. Scherer said. "If it worked it would be wonderful. If not, at least I'd be
giving information to somebody else instead of sitting home and wasting away
until I was gone."

   At the halfway mark, her results were mixed. Some tumors shrank and a few
disappeared, but others showed no change.

   The procedure, which Dr. Neuwelt developed in the 1970's and 1980's, uses a
sugar called mannitol to disrupt the blood-brain barrier. Mannitol works by
osmosis, drawing water out of the cells that line the capillaries. As the cells
shrink, they pull away from each other, opening the tight junctions and letting
molecules of the chemotherapy drugs slip through. The barrier may stay open as
long as 30 minutes, until the cells plump up again.

   Since 1980, more than 600 patients have undergone the procedure. The best
results have been with a rare brain tumor known as primary central nervous
system lymphoma (which is different from the lymphoma associated with AIDS).
Patients live longer than those given standard chemotherapy.

   Dr. Neuwelt described some lymphoma patients in language that few cancer
specialists dare to use. "I'm talking about curing people," he said, adding, "We
have patients who are 15 years out" who show no symptoms.

   Dr. Eli Glatstein, a radiation oncologist at the University of Pennsylvania
in Philadelphia who has written a commentary on Dr. Neuwelt's work for The
Cancer Journal, said, "His results in primary lymphoma are far better than
anything I've been able to do."

   But Dr. Glatstein also cautioned that more research is needed.

   Dr. Keith Black, a neurosurgeon at Cedars Sinai Medical Center in Los
Angeles, discovered that a naturally occurring substance in the body,
bradykinin, can open capillary walls in the brain, but only around tumors.

   About 80 patients have been treated with a synthetic version of bradykinin,
called RMP-7, which is made by Alkermes, a drug company in Cambridge, Mass.
Injected into arteries feeding the brain, RMP-7 increased the penetration of
chemotherapy and slowed tumor growth a bit in 60 percent of patients with
recurrences of a particularly severe type of tumor known as a glioma.

   "It's somewhat encouraging," Dr. Black said.

   But he has found a way to improve the treatment. Tests showed that RMP-7
worked well for some tumors but not others, and Dr. Black has identified a
second compound that can be combined with RMP-7 to open the barrier in all
tumors.

   Dr. Black said he hoped his discoveries would apply to brain disorders other
than tumors, including mental illness. "One of the major goals we have is to
really identify how the normal blood-brain barrier is regulated on a biochemical
level," he said. "Once we identify all those components, I think we'll be able
to develop a biochemical strategy to open the normal barrier."

   A very different approach to delivering drugs to brain tumors was developed
by Dr. Henry Brem, a neurosurgeon from the Johns Hopkins University, and Dr.
Robert Langer, a professor of chemical and biomedical engineering at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. It is a dime-sized disk made of a
material that slowly releases a chemotherapy drug for three weeks.

   Rather than trying to manipulate the blood-brain barrier, this treatment
vaults right over it. The disks, known as Gliadel wafers, are implanted in the
skull, up to eight at a time, in patients having surgery for a rapidly fatal
tumor called glioblastoma multiforme. Drug concentrations in the brain reach
1,000 times the levels that can be achieved with standard chemotherapy.

   The wafers are not a cure, but they add a few months, sometimes more, to
patients' lives. More than 1,000 people in the United States and Europe have had
them implanted. The important thing, said Dr. Brem, is that patients do not
suffer the nausea, vomiting and hair loss caused by traditional chemotherapy.

   At the National Cancer Institute, a team led by Dr. Edward Oldfield has also
chosen to bypass the blood-brain barrier, by installing pumps in patients'
skulls to squirt a steady stream of cancer killing agents into tumors for days
or weeks. In a small study published last fall, tumors shrank in 9 of 15
patients, including 2 in whom they disappeared, though it could not be predicted
how long the effects would last.

   Dr. Oldfield predicted the pump could be used to deliver gene therapy and
growth factors that might induce nerve-cell regeneration in Parkinson's disease,
Alzheimer's disease and injuries to the spinal cord and other nerves.

   At U.C.L.A., Dr. Pardridge is trying to develop ways of manipulating the
blood-brain barrier that do not require cutting patients, putting them under
general anesthesia or opening their skulls. His favorite approach involves what
he calls "a molecular Trojan horse." That means linking two different molecules
and using one that normally crosses the barrier to smuggle in a drug that cannot
pass on its own.

   "Insulin could act as the Trojan horse," he said. "It has its own transport
system, and you could piggyback on that and trick the transport system into
taking you across. But if you used insulin, you'd lower blood sugar."

   To avoid that, he and his colleagues took a molecule that behaves like
insulin and tested it in monkeys by attaching it to a drug that does not
normally cross the blood-brain barrier. When the two molecules were coupled,
they readily entered the brain.

   The molecule has not been tested in people, but Dr. Pardridge said he thought
it would lend itself to new diagnostic tests for Alzheimer's disease. And if a
drug is developed to treat such neurological disorders, the antibodies could
provide a way to deliver it to the brain.

   "It would be something that could be injected as a daily shot," he said.
"We're trying to solve this problem for everyday people, not just poor souls who
have been given a death sentence and would try anything."

GRAPHIC: Diagram: "Outsmarting Brain's Defenses
Nature has endowed the brain with an elaborate security system to shield it from
toxins, hormonal surges or other substances that normally flow in the blood. But
this blood-brain barrier also keeps useful drugs, like possible treatments for
Alzheimer's disease or brain tumors, from reaching their targets in the brain.
So scientists are trying to pierce the barrier. The barrier is formed in part by
cells that line the tiny capillary blood vessels in the brain. These endothelial
cells are sealed together in what scientists call tight junctions.

How the barrier works

HOW SUBSTANCES IN BLOOD STREAM CROSS . . . THE BLOOD-BRAIN BARRIER . . . TO
REACH BRAIN CELLS

A. Water-soluble substances, like penicillin, have great difficulty penetrating
the fatty cell membranes of the brain.

B. Fat-soluble substances, like fatty acids in the diet needed for energy,
dissolve into the cell membranes and cross the barrier, unless the molecules are
very large. In this way, chemicals the brain needs are allowed through.
Caffeine, nicotine and alcohol also enter the brain this way.

C. Certain substances the brain needs, like glucose and amino acids, are ferried
across the barrier by special transport proteins.

D. Other molecules, like insulin, link up to receptors on the surface of brain
cells and are escorted through.

Two ways to outsmart the barrier

ONE APPROACH: FORCING AN OPENING
The sugar mannitol, injected into an artery that feeds the brain, draws water
out of the cells lining the capillaries. The cells shrink, pulling away from
each other. Seals between them open temporarily, allowing drugs to reach
tissues.

ANOTHER APPROACH: A DIME-SIZED IMPLANT
Dime-sized disks surgically implanted into the brain slowly release chemotherapy
drugs directly to tumors. Cancer patients who receive chemotherapy this way may
avoid the nausea, hair loss and other symptoms people experience who must take
the therapy intravenously or in pill form.

Surgeons sometimes place drug-filled disks where a tumor is removed.

Diagram illustrates workings of the barrier.

(Source: Dr. Joan Abbott and Dr. Edward Neuwelt)

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1998


                             2027 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      March 31, 1998 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 971 words

HEADLINE: KEEPING THE FAITH;
CLEVELAND BOY TO GET BONE MARROW FROM SISTER TO FIGHT RARE DISEASE

BYLINE: By KARL TURNER; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   Jay Clark describes his family's emotional state for the last two years as a
calm in the face of a storm.

   Faced with adversity and doubt, they never gave up hope. They never lost
their faith. "At no point did we say, 'Our boy is going to die at an early age.'
We just took it as it came,' Clark said.

   Jay and Sara Clark's son, Addison, 2, was born with Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome,
an extremely rare, potentially fatal disease of the immune system that affects
about 500 boys nationally. It took the help of the National Institutes of Health
to diagnose the disease, which weakens the immune system and destroys the
blood's ability to clot. Addison wears a protective helmet to prevent a bump
that could cause disastrous bleeding, and he is vulnerable to infections.

   The good news is that a bone marrow transplant - from Addison's 8-year-old
sister, Claire - holds the potential for a cure. The Cleveland family is in
Cincinnati, getting ready for Addison to undergo that procedure.

   Some researchers believe learning more about Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome through
cases such as Addison's may help in further understanding cancer and developing
treatments for it.

   The Clarks' ordeal began in August 1995, when Addison showed signs of
bleeding in his digestive tract. He bruised easily, often just from lightly
bumping into things, and he had petechiae - bleeding into the skin that looks
like pin pricks.

   Doctors at Kaiser Permanente medical centers and the Cleveland Clinic
initially believed Addison had idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, a common
disorder among 2- to 6-year-olds that is curable and not life-threatening. ITP
damages the blood's platelets - the clumping cells that form clots - thus making
patients vulnerable to prolonged bleeding.

   Addison had many of the symptoms of ITP - bleeding gums, bloody nose, bloody
stools and petechiae - so doctors began treating him for it. But the treatments
did not work, said Dr. Dick Suh, a pediatric cancer specialist at the Clinic.

   Addison responded well, however, to platelet transfusions from his mother.
Suh said the transfusions shouldn't help ITP patients because the body should
destroy the new platelets.

   The doctors knew of Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome, whose symptoms are similar to
ITP, but they did not think Addison had it because it is so rare.

   Both diseases drastically reduce the number of platelets. But Wiskott-Aldrich
severely damages the immune system as well, making it difficult for patients to
fight off common infections.

   "Wiskott-Aldrich is something we all know exists, but the last time I saw it
was in a textbook, not in a kid," said Dr. Peter Paladin, associate chief of
pediatrics for the Ohio Permanente Medical Group.

   Kaiser-Permanente doctors suggested Addison's spleen be removed. The spleen
is believed to be the main destroyer of platelets in ITP patients. The Clarks
had heard about Wiskott-Aldrich from a family friend who is a doctor and asked
for a second opinion, Jay Clark said.

   Suh had seen several cases of Wiskott-Aldrich at Texas Children's Hospital
and agreed that Addison should undergo genetic testing for the disease.

   The Clarks made two trips to Maryland - to Johns Hopkins Hospital in
Baltimore and the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, where the
Wiskott-Aldrich diagnosis was confirmed.

   Dr. R. Michael Blaese, chief of NIH's clinical gene therapy branch, has
treated Wiskott-Aldrich patients for more than 30 years. He said he first saw
the syndrome as a medical student in 1963.

   "It was incredibly rare then because children rarely lived beyond the age of
4 or 5," he said.

   Blaese recommended the Clarks have Dr. Alexandra Filipovich of Children's
Hospital Medical Center in Cincinnati perform a bone marrow transplant. She has
treated more than a hundred patients with the syndrome. Claire was identified as
a bone-marrow match. Addison's twin, Alice, is not.

   "Successfully replacing the bone marrow is equivalent to curing the disease,"
Filipovich said. "Addison should be able to play sports and lead a normal life."

   Bone-marrow transplants involving Wiskott-Aldrich patients and matching
sibling donors have a 90 percent success rate. Platelets and the cells of the
immune system grow in bone marrow. Replacing the marrow essentially allows
patients to "grow" a new immune system.

   Recent advances allowed researchers to map the faulty gene that causes the
syndrome. Women cannot get the disease but can pass the faulty gene to their
sons.

   Blaese said understanding how the Wiskott-Aldrich gene works will help
researchers design gene therapies that help cells resist cancers. Cells in the
blood and immune systems of women who have the Wiskott-Aldrich gene mutation
suppress the bad gene in favor of the healthy gene with which it is paired.

   Addison will receive bone marrow from Claire in the next few weeks. The
Clarks are renting an apartment in Cincinnati and home-schooling Claire so they
can be together.

   Jay Clark, a truck driver and writer, and Sara Clark, a waitress, took leaves
from their jobs to be with Addison.

   "We decided to all come down together," Jay Clark said. "It's good for him to
have his sisters around and to have his mother here all the time."

   The Clarks look forward to Addison having a normal life - no more spontaneous
bleeding, helmets, transfusions and infections.

   Blaese said one patient he treated went on to become a high school baseball
player and was getting married. Sports may be in Addison's future, but Jay Clark
has another dream for his son.

   "Flying," Jay Clark said. "He's dying to fly."

   The Clarks have set up a fund for tax-deductible donations to help pay for
Addison's treatment. Contributions may be sent to the Addison Clark Bone Marrow
Transplant Fund, attention Pam Simmons, KeyBank, 9411 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH
44106.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (color) by DAVID KOHL / ASSOCIATED PRESS:; Addison Clark, 2, with
parents Sara and Jay and sisters Alice, 2, and Claire, 8, is awaiting a bone
marrow transplant to treat Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome. Claire will donate marrow
to her brother.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1998


                             2028 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                             March 29, 1998, Sunday

SECTION: INSIGHT - DISCOVERY , Pg. 7B

LENGTH: 716 words

HEADLINE: CANCER FIGHTER LEAVES OU TO JOIN FRONT LINES

BYLINE: David Lore

BODY:


   Tom Wagner manipulates genes for a living, but it's hard to make a Dr.
Strangelove out of this 56-year-old molecular biologist.

   True, the Ohio University researcher has created a few new creatures in his
time. In 1981, he made headlines around the world by endowing lab mice with
functioning rabbit genes. This work led to genetically altered pigs, sheep and
cows.

   And true, after decades of animal studies, Wagner is impatient to try out
some of these techniques on human beings. After 28 years on the Athens campus,
he is leaving Ohio this summer for South Carolina just to get closer to the
human side of the equation.

   Ohio, however, isn't losing a Dr. Frankenstein.

   Since arriving at OU in 1980, Wagner has helped put Ohio University on the
science map. In addition, as founder of the Edison Biotechnology Institute at
OU, he has been responsible for one of the more successful programs in Ohio's
statewide technology renaissance.

   I've written about Wagner's work ever since taking up the science beat at The
Dispatch in 1984. What I've admired most about him over the years has been his
unwavering focus on the use of biotechnology to improve the lives of average
people.

   Wagner's roots are in rural Ohio - in one of our first interviews, he
described himself as a fifth-generation Ohio farmer.

   He began working on so-called transgenic animals not to turn the barnyard
into a freak show but to make small family farms self-sufficient once again.

   If milk and meat yields could be increased, and livestock genetically altered
to produce products such as medicines and enzymes, small farms might compete
with corporate agriculture, he thought.

   When the economics of biotechnology killed that dream, Wagner redirected the
institute's expertise in genetic engineering to the development of new therapies
for cancer and other diseases.

   Wagner was always a lone voice championing the need for basic research within
the Edison program, a statewide R&D effort more oriented toward short-term
business fixes and improvements.

   He argued that real breakthroughs in science or technology require investment
of time, money and vision.

   Ironically, he's leaving Ohio out of frustration with delays in applying his
basic research outside of the laboratory.

   ''God knows we've cured mice of all sorts of tumors,'' he said earlier this
month.

   But in recent years, curing mice wasn't enough for Wagner, particularly after
his father and brother were afflicted by cancer.

   At the Biotechnology Institute, Wagner and OU researcher Xiao Chen have
developed a promising gene-therapy procedure that has been 60 percent effective
in reducing or eliminating tumors in mice. It works by introducing a herpes
simplex gene into tumor cells, making them highly vulnerable to the herpes drug
ganciclovir.

   Wagner and Chen see this therapy as an early-stage alternative to surgery or
chemotherapy before the cancer spreads.

   The procedure was licensed to Progenitor in 1975. The company, which moved
last year from Columbus to Menlo Park, Calif., hopes to begin clinical trials by
the turn of the century.

   But it could be 2003 before the Wagner-Chen therapy is approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration for cancer patients, said Progenitor research chief
Ralph Snodgrass.

   That's nothing unusual. Typically, it takes decades and hundreds of millions
of dollars to get a new drug to market.

   And despite two decades of scientific excitement about gene therapies, the
FDA has yet to approve its first gene product, Snodgrass said.

   Impatient with this pace, Wagner is moving to Greenville, S.C., where he'll
head up a hospital-based research program more directly linked to cancer
treatment. Such experimental clinical programs, Wagner said, usually get FDA
approval in about two years.

   Wagner said his move shouldn't be seen as a criticism of Ohio University -
which doesn't have such clinical cancer programs - or of the Biotechnology
Institute's focus on basic laboratory research.

   ''I was very fortunate for 28 years to spend my time understanding the
disease without having to treat it,'' he said last week. ''That's a luxury that
people in clinical settings don't have.''

   David Lore is science reporter for The Dispatch. He is online at:

   dlore@dispatch.com

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1998


                             2029 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     March 27, 1998, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E03

LENGTH: 325 words

HEADLINE: Human Genome Sciences, Transgene Form Alliance

BYLINE: Justin Gillis, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Human Genome Sciences Inc. of Rockville said yesterday it had struck a deal
with a French biotechnology firm in which the companies will combine their
expertise to bring new genetic treatments to market.

   Human Genome Sciences runs an elaborate research program that uses robots to
decode the structure of human genes. The company believes it has discovered
about 95 percent of the genes in the human body, though the exact purpose of
many of them is still a mystery.

   The idea behind genetic therapy is to introduce normal genes into the cells
of a person whose body lacks them, thus giving the cells a blueprint for making
normal proteins. If it works, this strategy might cure many inherited diseases,
such as cystic fibrosis.

   It is difficult to get the genes into cells in a way that they become useful,
but that happens to be the French company's specialty. Transgene of Strasbourg
has developed five potential methods for introducing the genes, including
several harmless viruses that could be used, in effect, as containers. Many of
Transgene's competitors have only one or two potential transfer methods, or
"vectors," a fact that strongly influenced the decision by Human Genome Sciences
to enter the collaboration.

   The deal between the companies took effect when Transgene went public
yesterday on the Paris Stock Exchange. As part of the transaction, Human Genome
Sciences received a 10 percent stake in Transgene, valued at more than $ 25
million. In exchange for that stake and the promise of future payments,
Transgene won the right to try to commercialize as many as 10 genes discovered
by Human Genome Sciences.

   On its first day of trading, Transgene, which maintains laboratory facilities
in Boston as well as Strasbourg, closed at $ 18 3/4 per American depository
receipt on the Nasdaq National Market, up $ 4 1/4 from the initial offering
price. Human Genome Sciences closed at $ 40.62 1/2, down 62 1/2 cents.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1998


                             2030 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1998 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            March 26, 1998 Thursday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. C08

LENGTH: 797 words

HEADLINE: PERILS OF CLONING NEXT CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT MAY BE ABOUT GENETICS
RIGHTS, SO PAY HEED TO WHAT MOLECULAR BIOLOGISTS ARE DISCOVERING

BYLINE: Clarence Page, The Chicago Tribune<

BODY:

   Thursday, March 26, 1998 PERILS OF CLONING

   NEXT CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT MAY BE ABOUT GENETICS RIGHTS, SO PAY HEED TO WHAT
MOLECULAR BIOLOGISTS ARE DISCOVERING

   If you could preprogram your future children to be tall, strong,  smart,
good-looking and resistant to diseases, including cancer or AIDS, would you do
it? Who wouldn't?

   You might even be viewed as negligent, even abusive, if you didn't.

   But would there be social consequences if the practice was limited to only
those who could afford it?

   How about a world genetocracy, a society in which a genetically enriched,
superhealthy, superintelligent minority dominates a serflike majority of  people
with normal, untampered genes?

   Molecular biologist Lee Silver of Princeton described that possibility in
last year's "Remaking Eden: Cloning and Beyond in a Brave New World" (Avon).  He
foresees a world segregated into "Gen Rich" and "Gen Naturals. . . entirely
separate species with no ability to crossbreed and with as much romantic
interest in each other as a current human would have for a chimpanzee."

   If that possibility sounds more chilling than thrilling to you, you're not
alone. So far, scientists have limited their tinkering with the human genetic
code to changes that would not be passed on to the subject's children or
grandchildren. But that may be about to change.

   The American Association for the Advancement of Science, the nation's
largest general science organization, recently named 20 experts to a panel to
consider whether to venture into versions of genetic therapy that could be
passed on to future generations.

   Last week, another group of distinguished molecular biologists and
geneticists, including Silver, met on their own at the University of  California
at Los Angeles to discuss how, why and when the intergenerational  process,
called "germline" genetic engineering, should proceed.

   Last year's stories about sheep cloning only scratched the surface of the
new science. The modern marriage of computer technology with genetic research
has brought about the creation and patenting of artificial human chromosomes,
the scientists reported. For example, Dr. Leroy Hood, chairman of the  molecular
biotechnology department at the University of Washington in Seattle, said he has
developed a way to create an entire custom chromosome on a  computer chip
containing DNA.

   "It didn't get as much attention as allegations about President Clinton's
sex life, but, to my mind, this is the most important scientific breakthrough
since the landing of a man on the moon or dropping of the atomic bomb," Jeremy
Rifkin, president of the Washington-based Foundation on Economic Trends, told
me in a telephone interview.

   In his new book, "The Biotech Century: Harnessing the Gene and Remaking the
World," (Tarcher/Putnam) Rifkin warns of a revival of "eugenics" -- a belief  in
selective breeding or elimination to "improve" the characteristics of a
species, including humans.

   Genetic research, while offering exciting possibilities, also encourages a
belief that nature is more important than nurture in determining one's  destiny,
a belief that lies at the root of eugenics. Eugenics was a popular  field of
study on American campuses at the turn of the century. It fell out of favor
after it was embraced in a genocidal way by Nazi Germany.

   The future may not be that bad. Rifkin's critics often accuse him of
overstating perils. His last book, for example, "The End of Work: The Decline
of the Global Labor Force and the Dawn of the Post-Market Era," (1994) foresaw a
steady long-term decline in jobs in the industrialized world. Since then
millions of new jobs have been created, at least in the United States.

   But Rifkin is right to observe how rapidly genetic science is speeding  ahead
with remarkably little public attention or government oversight.

   Is the future of genetic research, then, to be jeered more than cheered?  Not
quite. It holds terrific possibilities for the elimination of diseases and
improvement of life. But it also calls for a cautious skepticism regarding the
changes we unleash on generations to come.

   Either way, the next big civil rights movement may be the genetics rights
movement. Politically, it is an issue that crosses party lines. The
anti-abortion movement is concerned about what constitutional rights a cloned
fetus may have. The civil rights and workers' rights movements are outraged by
mounting reports of genetic discrimination by employers and insurance  companies
discriminating against workers known to have inheritable diseases in their
families.

   As Yogi Berra has been quoted as saying, the future is hard to predict,
since it hasn't happened yet. But the decisions we make now will determine  what
kind of future is going to happen.

   1998 Chicago Tribune

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2031 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                March 26, 1998, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A10

LENGTH: 852 words

HEADLINE: SWISS ARE DIVIDED ON GENE-SCIENCE BAN;
REFERENDUM TO PROHIBIT ALTERED CROPS, ANIMALS HAS COMPANIES WORRIED;
MONSANTO IS AMONG THOSE TRYING TO DEFEAT IT

BYLINE: Bill Lambrecht; Post-Dispatch Washington Bureau

DATELINE: BASEL, SWITZERLAND

BODY:


   Microbiologist Arthur Einsele knew that a referendum seeking to ban genetic
engineering in Switzerland had momentum when his daughter, Claudia, a theology
student, confronted him one day.

   " 'Daddy, is what your company does ethical?' " Einsele said his daughter had
asked him. He recalled the episode at the headquarters of his Swiss company,
Novartis, a leader in the business of biotechnology.

   Father and daughter may cancel one another's vote when the Swiss decide a
national referendum with implications beyond Europe. The referendum would ban
genetically modified crops, prohibit livestock grown with altered DNA and deny
companies patents on plants and animals.

   The vote on June 7 will be a test case for a country's ability to close its
doors to an entire technology. Polls have shown public sentiment running
neck-and-neck on the question.

   Monsanto Co., of St. Louis, is one of many companies worried about the
outcome. Monsanto has contributed $ 250,000 to an industry campaign to defeat
the proposed ban, company officials said last week.

   Ironically, companies with more on the line are based in Switzerland. Besides
Novartis, Switzerland is home to Nestle and Hoffman LaRoche. These companies are
waging a potent advertising campaign that could provide a model for countering
opposition in Europe and elsewhere.

Fearing genetic control

   The Swiss are known as a discerning and peaceful people whose opinion is
valued outside their borders. Switzerland, population 7 million, is a small but
wealthy country and it is home to United Nations offices, the World Health
Organization, the World Trade Organization and other international
organizations. The Swiss clout in the world is one reason companies are spending
upwards of $ 25 million to defeat the proposed ban.

   "People respect Switzerland, as they should," observed Tom McDermott,
Monsanto's spokesman in Europe. "Its a very important country with a lot of
important companies. It would be a very negative signal about the future of
biotechnology" if the referendum passed.

   So far, not just Switzerland but most of Europe has proved a challenge for
Monsanto and rivals marching ahead with their new technology to grow food. Why?
An abundance of food on the continent, a distrust of scientists as well as
regulators and the keen interest of Europeans in where their food comes from.

   The stakes are enormous as companies seek regulatory authority for what
amounts to changing the genetics of what many people eat. These changes, which
are happening swiftly in the United States, range from crops better able to
resist pests to seeds compatible with certain brands of herbicides to designer
foods with special traits.

   In Switzerland, critics of modified crops point to unknowns, among them the
potential of genes in newly cultivated plants spreading to wild species.
Spontaneous hybridization, they call it. Skeptics express fears, too, about what
they see as a consolidation of control by a handful of companies over the food
chain.

   In the Swiss town of Munchenstein, Florianne Koechlin, a leader in the
referendum drive, asserted that patenting of genes gives companies undue control
over life.

   "Should they be able to own plants and animals like their machines?" she
asked. "What kind of monopoly control does that give Monsanto and Novartis, not
just here in Europe but around the world?"

   Koechlin comes from a family of scientists, and she's a biologist herself.
Yet she rejects the notion that genetic engineering can lead to food production
with better efficiency.

"They are giving us food we don't want," she said.

Beating the ban

   Such sentiments - without regard to economics - prompt Einsele of Novartis to
wave his arms in mock despair.

   "We have no resources in Switzerland, no oil and coal. All we have is what's
up here," said Einsele, pointing with an index finger to his temple. He directs
communications and public affairs for Novartis.

   "People say we don't need biotechnology because we have so much food. In
Switzerland they do not look at a tomato; they look at how a tomato is made."

   Political ads on television are banned in Switzerland. Therefore, companies
are waging an aggressive campaign with print ads in hopes of turning the tide
against the referendum. Examples:

   - A gap-toothed little girl playing with her father. "Thanks to gene
technology, Daddy survived a heart attack."

   - A smiling young woman cooling down from exercise and sipping mineral water.
"Thanks to gene technology, I have a higher quality of life."

   - A middle-aged man who had survived cancer. "Thanks to gene therapy, my life
is again worth living."

   Organizers of the ban argue that these ads mislead because they are based on
the premise that pharmaceutical research can't proceed without transgenic mice
and other gene-altered test animals.

   If it passes, the ban's scope surely would be tested in courts. Rather than
wait for interpretation, companies might follow through with threats to move
research out of Switzerland rather than fall behind in the genetic engineering
race.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Photos
 (1) This ad has appeared in Swiss newspapers in opposition to a referendum that
would ban genetic engineering. The headline reads: "Thanks to gene technology, I
have a higher quality of life."
 (2) Florianne Koechlin, a leader in the referendum campaign, says the patenting
of genes gives companies too much control over life.

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 1998


                             2032 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    March 25, 1998, Wednesday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 02B; Pg. 02B

LENGTH: 1016 words

SERIES: Metro Final Today's News

HEADLINE: TODAY'S TOPIC: TECHNOLOGY;
In the genes: Biotech dilemma approaches

BYLINE: MICHAEL E. KANELL

BODY:


   We stand on the brink of radical change, but not the kind everyone is talking
about, says Jeremy Rifkin.

   The talk is of the information age, of computers and wireless communications,
but the potential to reshape the world in the next few years is also about the
human ability to engineer the basic building blocks of life, he said.

   "Two revolutions are running on parallel tracks. They are now fusing into a
single revolution that is creating a whole new epoch."

   Biotech is reaching into medicine, agriculture, energy and other fields.

   The new techniques have potential to forge a new economy, to remake --- or
even destroy --- the environment, to give corporate scientists a power that Dr.
Frankenstein could hardly have imagined and to recast the very definitions of
family and humanity. Most of the needed skills exist, and the decisions about
everything from gene therapy to cloning are being made, Rifkin said. "What we
don't have yet is the public debate."

   Cloning has been in the spotlight, but there has been little discussion of
the steady patenting of human genes by large pharmaceutical companies.
Meanwhile, trade organizations have lobbied --- successfully, so far --- to
prevent federal legislation stifling genetic engineering, he said. Rifkin, in
Atlanta to promote his book, "The Biotech Century," said he supports research
and biotech use. But first he wants democratic decisions on how to proceed after
a full discussion of potential dangers.

   For example, it will soon be possible to deactivate genes, even of unborn
children. Knowing they were passing along a predisposition to conditions such as
sickle-cell anemia or cystic fibrosis, what parent wouldn't want to protect
their kids? Yet we may act before we understand what we are doing. Genes that
might produce sickle-cell anemia also help prevent malaria. Genes for cystic
fibrosis can prevent cholera. Once gene-tinkering changes the makeup of future
generations, big companies are "engineering millions of years of evolution for
market purposes," Rifkin said. "We may be limiting our evolutionary potential in
the future. Or we may even be terminating the species."

   Just the social implications are sobering, he said. "Parents become the
engineers for their children. What might that do to change the parent-child
bond?"

   The economic impact also is potentially devastating. For instance, corporate
scientists have isolated the gene that produces the vanilla bean's flavor. In
lab assembly lines, it is now possible to undermine the three small countries
whose farmers live off the bean's harvest, Rifkin said. "The cheapest worker in
the world will not be as cheap as this technology."

   Rikfin suggests what he calls "soft" biotech, use of the technology in ways
that do not reach into the future and that emphasize a harmony with the
environment.

   The stunning turnaround in public debate over cloning --- from disgust to
cautious assent on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times in about three weeks ---
might be a sign that any technology that can be done, will be done. But Rifkin
says he believes biotech can be used in moderation. He cites nuclear power as an
example of a once-inevitable technology now deemed too costly and dangerous to
answer all energy needs.

   "Just because it can be done doesn't mean it will be done. How we apply it is
not fated." Young entrepreneur of year in South Rob Abbanat, president of
Engineered Multimedia, has been named young entrepreneur of the year for the
South by the Small Business Administration.

   Abbanat, 27, in May also is slated to receive the "young alumni award" by his
alma mater, Boston College. His Roswell-based company, founded after graduate
school at Georgia Tech, produces virtual reality and computer simulations.

   The company recently announced completion of a three-dimensional animation
for the Stardust mission planned by NASA for 1999. The mission involves launch
of a space probe to collect dust and particles from a comet and is to return to
Earth in 2006. IBM beach-combing for job applicants Greeks, Geeks --- it's all
on the beach, says IBM. Company scion Thomas Watson might not approve, but IBM
headed south last weekend. In search of engineering talent, IBM sent recruiters
to the traditional spring break in Florida, where many thousands of fraternity
brothers and others gather each spring.

   Presumably not wearing the prescribed white shirts of the Watson era, company
recruiters combed beaches and staffed an IBM booth in Panama City Beach on March
19 and 20. The booth, part of a Spring Break Career Expo, featured a holographic
image of Lenoardo da Vinci talking to Mona Lisa.

   One reason IBM is not waiting for career day at State U is the shortage of
high-tech labor, a problem highlighted recently by Clinton administration
officials.

   Some Silicon Valley executives have called for laxer immigration rules that
would permit talented foreigners easier access to temporary working visas. One
industry group, American Business for Legal Immigration, reports this year's
quota on visas is nearly filled.

   The group has called on Congress to pass legislation aimed at increasing the
number of visas. The bill (S-1723) was sponsored by Sen. Spencer Abraham
(R-Mich.). It is co-sponsored by six other Republicans, including Orrin Hatch
(R-Utah), John McCain (R-Ariz.) and Arlen Specter (R-Pa.).

   Some labor groups have been less enthusiastic about the suggestion, since it
undercuts the bargaining power of American workers. Emory upgrading network by
the Bay Bay Networks recently announced an agreement to upgrade the network for
the Roberto C. Goizueta Business School at Emory University.

   Emory is getting a network from the Santa Clara, Calif. company that uses
Asynchronous Transfer Mode technology, a system that permits videoconferencing.
Emory can use the network for the transmission of lectures from other
universities and let its students take Emory classes while they are off campus.
The Bay Networks equipment will let business school students dial in to the
network. (e-mail: mkanell@ajc.com)

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 1998


                             2033 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     March 23, 1998, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 6B

LENGTH: 365 words

HEADLINE: At Issue: IPOs this week

BODY:

   Among selected initial public stock offerings scheduled for this
week:

                                    Shrs.        Expected
Company (ticker),                   selling      price    Mkt. value
 underwriter                        (mils.)      range    (mils.)
American Medical Providers (AMPZ)    3.7          $10-$12   $64
A.G. Edwards
Provides practice management services and foot-care delivery systems to
podiatric practices
Columbia Sportswear (COLM)           5.6          $15-$17    $390
Goldman Sachs
Designs popular sportswear and ski wear
Earthshell Container (ERTH)          13.2         $17-$21    $1901
Salomon Smith Barney
Produces low environmental-impact fast-food containers
Enact Health Management (ENCT)      3.0          $10-$12      $98
Salomon Bros.
Collects patient physiological data and provides medical reports
ISS Group (ISSX)                    3.0          $14-$16       $269
Goldman Sachs
Provides monitoring and detection software for network security
Onix Systems (ONX)                  3.0         $13.50-$15.50  $222
Donaldson Lufkin
Thermo Electron spinoff of measurement instruments firm
Pentegra Dental Group (PEN)         2.5        $8.50-$9.50       $58
Dain Rauscher
Provides dental management and administration
Transgene (TRGNY)                   3.375      $12.50-$14.50    $211
Lehman Bros.
Provides development stage gene therapy for hereditary diseases
Yanzhou Coal Mining  (YZC)           16.4     $19.55-$23.46     $1071
Bear Stearns
Chinese state spinoff of low-sulphur coal-mining company

   Source: Renaissance Capital, Greenwich, Conn., 1-888-IPO-FUND,
www.ipo-fund.com

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1998


                             2034 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                     March 22, 1998, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TV TOPICS, Pg. 25TV

LENGTH: 698 words

HEADLINE: PICKS OF THE WEEK

BYLINE: News Wire Services

BODY:


   Other than the Academy Awards and the "Barbara Walters Special," other
noteworthy programs this week include an A & E documentary "Hollywoodism: Jews,
Movies and The American Dream," a Learning Channel documentary on the
Spanish-American War and a Showtime thriller starring Treat Williams.

   SUNDAY

   "The Spanish-American War," 9 p.m. TLC (The Learning Channel). It was over in
three months, and many Americans remember it mostly for it's slogan "Remember
the Maine" and Rough Rider Teddy Roosevelt leading a charge up San Juan Hill.
But there was more to it than that, including the economic interests of American
businessmen, as this two-hour documentary reveals. Using footage from the first
war to be captured on film, eyewitness accounts, visit to battle sites and
memorials, headlines, cartoons and songs, the program outlines the tone of the
times as Cuba struggled to gain independence from Spain.

   "Hollywoodism: Jews, Movies and The American Dream," 9 p.m. A & E. Neal
Gabler's best seller "An Empire of Their Own: How the Jews Invented Hollywood"
is the basis for this documentary about the founding fathers of Hollywood. The
founders of the film studios -- Adolph Zukor of Paramount, Carl Laemmle of
Universal, the Warner brothers, Louis B. Mayer of MGM, William Fox of Twentieth
Century Fox and Harry Cohn of Columbia -- were all Jewish immigrants from
eastern Europe. The two-hour special traces how they achieved their vision and
dream despite rampant anti-Semitism prevalent in the country.

MONDAY

   "Toon Heads: Academy Award Winners and Nominees," 7 p.m. Cartoon Network.
Twelve honored cartoons from 1940 through 1996 can serve as your warm-up for
Monday's ceremony. Each stars a different character -- only one Bugs Bunny, only
one Pink Panther, etc.

TUESDAY

   "TNN Live With Lorrie Morgan," 7 p.m. TNN. Country star Morgan will take song
requests on this live concert originating in Nashville. Viewers can request any
song from Morgan's repertoire in the one-hour special.

WEDNESDAY

   "Wild Discovery: "Creatures of the Dark," 8 p.m. Discovery. For nocturnal
animals, "the killing starts when the lights go out." In many cases, such
predators owe their success to night vision and highly evolved senses of smell
and touch.

   "The Life and Times of Deana Carter," 8 p.m. TNN. There's no arguing with the
success of Carter's debut album, "Did I Shave My Legs for This?," but we can't
help wondering why TNN didn't come up with another title when they expanded the
"Life and Times" series to include currently hot artists as well as those whose
reputations have stood the test of time.

THURSDAY

   "A Cinderella Season: The Lady Vols Fight Back," 7 p.m. HBO. As the NCAA
championships approach the Final Four, here's a documentary about Tennessee's
Lady Volunteers as they sought their second straight title during the 1996-97
season.

   "Strange But True," 9 p.m. Discovery. No wonder that flight was late -pilots
tell of encounters with UFOs. Also, film shows what is said to be a UFO incident
in New Zealand.

FRIDAY

   "La Strada," 8 p.m. TCM (Turner Classic Movies). The "31 Days of Oscar"
aren't over yet. This haunting and influential 1954 film from director Federico
Fellini won the Best-Foreign-Film Oscar. Anthony Quinn and Giulietta Masina
star. (Followed at 10 p.m. by the 1959 winner, "Black Orpheus.")

   "The Great Skate Debate," 9 p.m. Channel 4. Viewers at home (using the
Internet) and fans in the stands will determine the winners as top skaters,
including Scott Hamilton, Kristi Yamaguchi, Ekaterina Gordeeva and Katarina
Witt, compete at the Chicago Pavilion of the University of Illinois.

SATURDAY

   "Evidence of Blood," 9 p.m. TMC (The Movie Channel). David Strathairn and
Mary McDonnell star in this thriller about a mystery writer who returns to his
hometown for the funeral of a friend and winds up trying to solve a decades-old
murder. As he delves into the case, he finds his own life in jeopardy.

   ABC News Saturday Night: 10 p.m. Channel 7. "The Pulse" The role of smell in
sexuality and relationships; diet and weight-loss; gene therapy; sports
consultant identifies potential athletic standouts.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1998


                             2035 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     March 22, 1998, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2918 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE ON THE ETHICAL FRONTIER: Engineering the Unborn; The Code of
Cross-Generation Cures

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   In 1990, a 4-year-old Ohio girl with an inherited immune system disease sat
quietly in a small room at the National Institutes of Health and became the
first patient to receive a radical new treatment called human gene therapy.

   The experimental procedure, in which millions of copies of a gene that the
girl lacked were infused into her blood, stirred excitement but also
controversy. It was, after all, the most blatant tampering of the human genetic
code ever attempted, and scientists gained permission to conduct the test only
after assuring regulators that the genetic change would not be passed on to any
children the girl might have.

   Now, researchers are considering a much more contentious kind of gene therapy
that could, for the first time, cross that generation barrier. The goal is to
genetically reprogram patients' "germline" cells -- their sperm or egg cells.
The technique could allow patients to prune unwanted genes from their family
trees forever, and alter the genetic makeup of their unborn descendants.

   Germline gene therapy has always been an ethically worrisome idea. Genes
interact in complicated ways, and the eradication of certain so-called disease
genes could have unexpected side effects in future offspring. Moreover, no
technique is perfect, and an inadvertently introduced error would become a
permanent part of a person's genetic legacy, perhaps wreaking biological havoc
for generations to come.

   Some experts worry, too, that germline gene therapy would give rise to a
market in expensive elective genetic enhancements. Once gene therapy becomes
heritable, these critics say, what will stop wealthy would-be parents from
spiking their sperm or eggs with genes for beneficial traits, such as strong
bones or tall stature, thus exacerbating the gulf between the rich and the poor?

   The United States, Canada, England and other countries have policies that
specifically preclude germline gene therapy. But a recent flurry of technical
breakthroughs in test animals, and a gradual shift in people's perception about
their right to shape their children's genetic inheritance, has prompted federal
officials and others to reconsider the taboo.

   "It was a line that was drawn in the moral sand way back when, and it appears
in virtually all international and national ethics statements and guidances
about genetics, but in the last year or so I have felt it beginning to soften,"
said John Fletcher, a bioethicist at the University of Virginia.

   No one complained when smallpox was eradicated from the planet, advocates
say. If it is ethical to wipe out infectious diseases with vaccines and drugs,
why not make an equal effort to eliminate inherited scourges as well, such as
sickle cell disease and cystic fibrosis?

   "We are gaining the power to intervene in a realm that we've never had access
to . . . by introducing new genes into the flow from one generation to another,"
said Gregory Stock, director of the program on science, technology and society
at the University of California at Los Angeles. "Some people say you can't do
that, you shouldn't do that. But I think we just have to take responsibility and
move forward."

   That sentiment has been heard increasingly at scientific meetings --
including one convened last Friday by Stock and UCLA colleague John Campbell,
addressing the biological and ethical implications of human germline gene
therapy.

   The topic has also emerged as a priority for the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, this country's largest general science organization,
which recently appointed a panel of 20 experts to consider whether the time has
come to open the door to germline alterations.

   The federal government, too, is poised to reexamine the issue. A National
Institutes of Health review of gene therapy regulations, scheduled to begin this
spring, will focus in part on whether the current policy of not accepting
germline proposals should be changed. That decision, experts said, will be among
the most difficult the agency has faced.

   "Alteration of the germline may be the most effective cure for some diseases,
but it also contains unknown hazards," said Claudia Mickelson, chairman of the
NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, which reviews all human gene therapy
proposals in the United States.

   Germline gene therapy could be ideal for diseases that take their toll before
a child is born, Mickelson said, since it is preventive rather than corrective.
On the other hand, she warned, "insertion of genes into germline cells is a
classic method for generating mutants." Given those risks, Mickelson is uneasy
with the prospect of scientists, in essence, tinkering with evolution.

   "Powerful techniques have powerful downsides," said W. French Anderson,
director of the University of Southern California's gene therapy laboratory.
Nonetheless, he said, germline gene therapy is sure to come, because "no parent
will willingly pass on lethal genes to their children if they can prevent it."

   Scientists differ on how imminent germline gene therapy may be; some say the
first proposal may emerge in the next several years, while others think it's
still a decade or more away. Either way, several said, now is the time to start
a national debate on the issue.

   "As opposed to every other decision made in medicine, this involves more than
the patient, the family and the doctor," Anderson said. "The gene pool is not
owned by anyone. It is the joint property of society. And when you manipulate
the gene pool, before one attempts to do that, one needs the agreement of
society."

   A Question of Trust

   Anderson knows how difficult it can be to get that agreement. Before he and
his colleagues gained permission to dribble that first dose of new genes into a
vein of 4-year-old Ashanthi DeSilva in 1990, Anderson weathered years of intense
criticism from ethicists, scientists and the general public for pursuing his
dream of manipulating human genes. DeSilva has improved from the therapy but has
not been cured.

   "More than 3,000 people have received new genes now and no one has grown
mouse fur and people are relaxing a bit," Anderson said. Still, he conceded, not
one patient has been cured by standard gene therapy yet, and with germline gene
therapy the stakes are even higher.

   At its core, the key question is whether people can be trusted to engineer
their own genetic lineage.

   "As with cloning, there are real concerns about whether we are wise enough to
mold ourselves to the extent these technologies may allow us to mold ourselves,"
said Erik Parens, an ethicist at the Hastings Center in Garrison, N.Y. "It
certainly makes me nervous."

   There are many facets to that consideration. One perspective says that, since
there is always the chance that something will go wrong, it is simply unethical
to alter people's genome without their permission. And since future generations,
by definition, cannot consent, the genetic stream into the future should be left
unengineered.

   Following that logic, some countries have gone so far as to view germline
gene therapy in the context of human rights. LeRoy Walters, director of
Georgetown University's Kennedy Institute for Ethics, said a growing number of
countries have included in their human rights manifestos language that says, in
essence, "Every human being has a right to a genetic heritage that has not been
artificially tampered with." Still, Walters said, it is in many cases unclear
whether these countries would consider a genetic cure of a deadly disease to be
a case of "tampering."

   The answer to that question depends in part on how people define "disease."

   "There will be clear-cut cases where everyone in the world will agree, 'this
is a disease,' but the concept of health and disease at the margin will always
involve judgment calls," Walters said. A slippery slope to genetic enhancement
could ensue.

   The distinction between therapy and enhancement can be surprisingly
confusing. Consider vaccination: In some respects it is an enhancement, since it
gives a person immunological powers not previously enjoyed. So what about giving
a person a gene that builds big muscles, since muscle mass can reduce the odds
of falling and breaking a hip? Or genes for good looks, since handsome people
have been shown to get higher salaries, and annual income is closely linked to
general health?

   Ironically, if germline gene therapy veers far from its initial goal of
fighting genetic diseases and into the realm of genetic enhancement, it might
eventually lead to an increase in genetic diseases, said Michael Rose, a
University of California at Irvine biologist. That's because the most popular
genetic traits in an open market may not necessarily be the healthiest.

   "If everyone wants to be blonde with blue eyes and if that's associated with
an increased susceptibility to skin cancer, then you've got a problem," said
Rose.

   Even if people limit germline gene therapy to bona fide inherited scourges,
unexpected side effects may arise from the obliteration of these disease genes.
Scientists know, for example, that the genetic glitch that causes sickle cell
disease also protects many people against malaria. The mutations that cause
cystic fibrosis may, in small doses, protect people against cholera. No one
knows what would happen if all "disease genes" were annihilated.

   "It definitely will affect the variability and diversity that has developed
such wonderful capacities in the human population," said Sherif E. Gabriel, the
University of North Carolina researcher who, while developing a gene therapy for
cystic fibrosis, has studied the potential evolutionary benefits of that
mutation.

   Leaping Technical Hurdles

   None of the premises underlying these arguments has changed over the years to
make germline gene therapy more attractive than before. What has changed,
however, is scientists' ability to manipulate genes in germline cells.

   "In the beginning there was a lot of agreement for various ethical as well as
technical reasons that we would never go ahead with this and everybody was happy
with that," said Parens. "But inevitably, once you have the technical capacity,
everything changes."

   Proof that germline gene therapy could work, at least in animals, first
appeared in the early 1980s. In a key experiment, Leroy Hood and colleagues at
the California Institute of Technology added curative genes to mouse embryos
that were doomed to develop an inherited nervous system disorder. The new genes
got into all the embryo cells -- including those that later developed into sperm
and eggs -- so not only were the mice born free of disease, but all their
offspring were as well.

   No one is ready to conduct gene therapy experiments on human embryos or
fetuses (although a proposal to do so is under development by USC's Anderson and
colleagues and may be ready for federal consideration by this fall). So for now,
scientists who want to make changes in the human germline will have to do so in
the eggs or sperm of adults.

   That is a tricky problem, but not insurmountable, said Ralph Brinster of the
University of Pennsylvania. In the past few years, Brinster has successfully
inserted genes into the cells that give rise to sperm in adult rats and mice. He
has shown that these genetically altered cells can be transplanted into other
animals -- even other species -- where they will grow and produce sperm that
contain the added gene.

   That suggests a scenario: Human sperm-cell precursors could be removed from
the testes of a man with a genetic disease, "fixed" by the addition of a
curative gene, then reimplanted into the man, where they would generate repaired
sperm. Children conceived with such sperm would not have their father's disease,
nor would their offspring.

   If things don't go well, however, the man might now produce sperm even more
defective than before -- perhaps forever. So a better plan, Brinster speculated,
may be to transplant the repaired human sperm precursor cells into mice or rat
testes. The rodents would then produce an endless supply of genetically
corrected human sperm, which could be harvested and tested before getting mixed
with eggs from the man's wife using standard in vitro fertilization procedures.

   One last technical hurdle remains before such a plan can be implemented:
Scientists need to perfect a way of doing in people what Brinster has done in
rodents -- reliably get the desired genes into germ cells. But that problem,
too, appears to be on the brink of being solved.

   Until last year, researchers assumed that new therapeutic genes would have to
be inserted directly into the chromosomes of a patient's cells -- a process that
is inefficient and potentially damaging to the cell.

   Then, last year, scientists announced they had invented artificial human
chromosomes -- miniature, synthetic chromosomes that can be manufactured
complete with one or more genes. These chromosomes make themselves at home
inside cells, and they divide each time the cell divides, just like real
chromosomes do. No artificial chromosomes have been inserted into living
people's cells yet, but several scientists said they think the constructs may be
ideal vehicles for germline gene therapy.

   Revisiting Old Objections

   It is against this backdrop of accelerating technical progress that
researchers and others today are reassessing their objections to germline gene
therapy. Many are concluding that the ethical arguments against the technique
are not as substantial as had been assumed, and that once the issue of safety is
resolved it may be impossible to stop the technology.

   "All of the reasons people have given for saying [germline gene therapy] is
wrong are either irrational or religious-based," said Lee Silver, a Princeton
University molecular biologist. "Some people say we should not go against
nature, but that's illogical because every time we cure a disease or prevent a
disease we go against nature."

   Silver and others dismiss the argument that germline engineering breaks new
ground by allowing people to "design" their children. "People choose a mate,
either consciously or subconsciously, based on their genes," through their
preferences for partners who are fat or thin or blonde or brunette, Silver said.
"So we choose the genes we're going to put into our children right from the
start."

   (Not everyone buys that analogy; germline gene therapy is a much more precise
method of trait selection than is mate choice, and that difference in precision
is relevant, some ethicists said.)

   Advocates also dismiss the argument that people don't have the right to alter
future generations without their permission. "Parents already have the right to
go against their child's wishes," Silver said. "There's not a person in society
who would say it's wrong to give your child a vaccination. So why is it wrong to
give what amounts to a genetic vaccine?"

   If there is one objection to germline gene therapy that even advocates say
they are still deeply concerned about it is the prospect of its evolving into a
cosmetic procedure for the privileged classes.

   "I think it would be a big mistake to think we can say 'yes' to germline gene
therapy and 'no' to enhancement," Parens said. "And if germline gene therapy
could be used to improve the competitiveness of your offspring, and only a few
had access to the technology, then it's easy to see how the technology could
widen the gap between the haves and the have nots."

   But, as with so many of the bioethical quandaries now facing society, misuse
is not assured -- and the potential for helping is real. So ultimately, experts
said, it will be up to everyday people, living in the present, to decide whether
practices like germline gene therapy ought to be plainly precluded or whether
humankind can be trusted to do the right thing as science moves forward.

   "Think about confronting a person in the future with a genetic disease that
you could have prevented," said Walters, the Georgetown ethicist, "and telling
them that even though you knew how to fix it, you stopped because you thought
society might abuse this thing."

   Scientists may indeed misuse their increasingly firm handle on genetics,
Walters said. But the prospect of facing that future patient, he said, is at
least as haunting.

   About This Series

   Biomedical research is proceeding at breathtaking speed.

   Geneticists are gaining insights into how genes work. Biologists are
unmasking the mysteries of how a tiny clump of cells develops into a fully
formed human. Immunologists are deciphering the complexities of the body's
defense systems.

   The research is yielding many potential benefits. Doctors can identify people
at risk for genetic diseases and fashion strategies to save their lives.
Reproductive biologists can help infertile couples have children. Researchers
can engineer animals with organs that may be transplanted into humans.

   But as science speeds ahead, it often pushes the edges of society's readiness
to cope with its consequences. Increasingly, research creates possibilities
before the accompanying ethical, social and legal ramifications have been
resolved. In a series of occasional articles, The Washington Post is exploring
these issues. Today's installment examines "germline gene therapy" -- a highly
controversial technique that for the first time would make changes in the human
genetic complement that would be passed down through generations.


GRAPHIC: Illustration, john anderson; Photo, tom allen, Cleaning Genes One way
germline therapy may be done to ensure a man with a genetic disease doesn't pass
it to his child: 1. Doctors remove the man's sperm-producing cells, which
contain a defective gene.  2. A healthy gene is added to each cell to replace
the defective ones.  3. The cells are put into mouse testes.  4. They mature
inside the mouse and start producing healthy human sperm.  5. Those sperm, once
tested, are used to fertilize a woman's eggs in a laboratory dish.  6. The
resulting embryos are placed in a woman's womb.  7. She gives birth to a child
whose genes are free from the father's disease.  Claudia Mickelson, chairman of
NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, is uneasy with the prospect of
scientists tinkering with evolution.

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1998


                             2036 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    March 21, 1998, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 606 words

HEADLINE: Researchers discuss how, when to use process of 'germline genetic
engineering'; Method to create changes passed along generations

SOURCE: NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:


   LOS ANGELES -- For years, molecular biologists and geneticists have trod
gingerly around the most explosive topic of the new reproductive biology:
purposely making genetic changes in people that would persist for generation
after generation.

   There were so many technological roadblocks to the process, called germline
genetic engineering, that most scientists viewed it almost as science fiction.

   But now, as researchers rush past these roadblocks, a group of eminent
molecular biologists and molecular geneticists met yesterday on the leafy campus
of the University of California at Los Angeles to confront the issue. Their goal
was to discuss how, why and when germline engineering should proceed.

   The scientists, leaders in the field, were meeting on their own, with no
government or other mandate to issue guidelines or regulations and, in fact, no
wish to restrict their work. But they said it was time for science to confront
its growing powers to shape human biology.

   Members of the public and many scientists are unaware of how close science is
to making germline engineering a reality, said Dr. Michael Rose, who studies the
genetics of aging at the University of California at Irvine and who was a
speaker at the meeting. He said the meeting would bring public attention to "one
of the most important questions for the human species: the extent to which it
will direct its own evolution."

   It will, some day, be possible to give people genes to prevent them from
developing certain diseases or to cure them of diseases that stubbornly resist
treatment, like cancer or AIDS.

   "I could imagine a child that never got a cold," said Dr. John Campbell, a
meeting organizer who is a theoretical evolutionary biologist and professor of
neurobiology at UCLA. Eventually scientists might be able to add whole
"cassettes" of genes that could confer enhanced intelligence or rid people of
the plagues of aging.

   Unlike genetic therapies being experimented with today, in which scientists
try to insert genes into specific body tissues, these genetic changes could
become permanent, present in sperm and egg cells and passed from generation to
generation.

   Germline genetic engineering "really touches the essence of who we are, what
it means to be human," said Dr. Gregory Stock, a conference organizer and
director of the Science, Technology and Society program at UCLA's Center for the
Study of Evolution and the Origin of Life. "We are talking about intervening in
the flow of genetic information from one generation to the next. We are talking
about the relationship of human beings to their genetic heritage."

   The speakers, drawn from the ranks of molecular biology and genetics, had the
most august credentials: memberships in the National Academy of Science, a Nobel
prize, editorships of leading journals. Throughout the day, one after the other,
they spoke about possibilities and powerful tools already under development that
could make human germline engineering happen.

   No one could say when this kind of genetic engineering might be put into
practice. But they all agreed that seemingly insuperable technical barriers were
falling year by year and many said they expected to see many techniques in use
within 20 years.

   For example, Campbell said as recently as 15 years ago that putting a
cassette of genes together would have been a Herculean task. Now it's a project
for graduate students.

   Of course, once genetic germline engineering becomes technically feasible,
researchers would want to do animal studies to make sure the techniques are safe
before trying them in people.

   Pub Date: 3/21/98

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1998


                             2037 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 March 21, 1998, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1332 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Brace for Changes In Path of Human Evolution

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, March 20

BODY:

   For years, molecular biologists and geneticists have trod gingerly around the
most explosive topic of the new reproductive biology: purposely making genetic
changes in people that would persist for generation after generation.

   There were so many technological roadblocks to the process, called germline
genetic engineering, that most scientists viewed it almost as science fiction.
But now, as researchers rush past these roadblocks, a group of eminent molecular
biologists and geneticists met here today on the leafy campus of the University
of California at Los Angeles to confront the issue. Their goal was to discuss
how, why and when germline engineering should proceed.

    The scientists, leaders in the fields, were meeting on their own, with no
government or other mandate to issue guidelines or regulations and, in fact, no
wish to restrict their work.  But they said it was time for science to confront
its growing powers to shape human biology.

   The public and even many scientists are unaware of how close science is to
making germline engineering a reality, said Dr. Michael Rose, who studies the
genetics of aging at the University of California at Irvine and was a speaker at
the meeting.

   He said the meeting would bring public attention to "one of the most
important questions for the human species: the extent to which it will direct
its own evolution."

   It will, some day, be possible to give people genes to prevent them from
developing certain diseases or to cure them of diseases that resist treatment,
like cancer or AIDS. "I could imagine a child that never got a cold," said Dr.
John Campbell, a meeting organizer who is a theoretical evolutionary biologist
and a professor of neurobiology at U.C.L.A. They could eventually add whole
"cassettes" of genes that could confer enhanced intelligence or rid people of
the plagues of aging, he said.

   Unlike genetic therapies being experimented with today, in which scientists
try to insert genes into specific body tissues, these genetic changes could
become permanent, present in sperm and egg cells and passed from generation to
generation.

   Germline genetic engineering "really touches the essence of who we are, what
it means to be human," said Dr. Gregory Stock, a conference organizer and
director of the Science, Technology and Society program at U.C.L.A.'s Center for
the Study of Evolution and the Origin of Life. "We are talking about intervening
in the flow of genetic information from one generation to the next. We are
talking about the relationship of human beings to their genetic heritage."

   The speakers, drawn from the ranks of molecular biology and genetics, had the
most august credentials: memberships in the National Academy of Science, a Nobel
Prize, editorships of leading journals. Throughout the day, one after the other
spoke about new possibilities and powerful new tools already under development
to make human germline engineering happen.

   No one could say with certainty when this new kind of genetic engineering
could be put into practice. But they all agreed that seemingly insuperable
technical barriers were falling year by year and many said they expected to see
the techniques in use within 20 years.

   As recently as 15 years ago, Dr. Campbell said, putting a cassette of genes
together would have been a herculean task. Now, he added, it could be a project
for graduate students.

   Of course, once genetic germline engineering becomes technically feasible,
researchers would want to conduct studies in animals to make sure practices were
safe before trying them in people.

   Obstacles now to germline engineering are practical, not theoretical.
Scientists already have a way to add desired genes -- snapping cassettes of them
onto artificial chromosomes and injecting the chromosomes into newly fertilized
eggs. Because every cell in the body is a descendant of that first fertilized
egg, every cell would have a copy of the artificial chromosome.

   Artificial chromosomes, even human artificial chromosomes, have been created
and patented, the scientists reported, and companies have sprung up to exploit
the technology.

   Dr. Leroy Hood, the chairman of the department of molecular biotechnology at
the University of Washington in Seattle, said he has developed a way to create
an entire custom chromosome on a computer chip containing DNA.

   But what if the artificial chromosome is faulty or what if it begins to look
primitive to some future generation that wants the updated version of this
genetic software? No problem, said Dr. Mario R. Capecchi, a distinguished
professor of biology and human genetics at the University of Utah. Biologists
already know how to make artificial chromosomes that can self destruct on
command.

   The lone ethicist speaking at the conference was Dr. John Fletcher, who was
chief of bioethics at the National Institutes of Health and is now a professor
of biomedical ethics at the University of Virginia. He said he had no problems
in principle with giving people genes that would prevent or cure diseases.

   But, he said, he is troubled by the idea of adding genes for certain complex
traits. For example, he said, "somebody talked about genes for 'emotional
stability.' " He said he finds this kind of talk problematic. However, he added,
there is nothing intrinsically unethical about germline genetic engineering.

   Scientists at the meeting also spoke quite seriously about extending the
human life span with cassettes of anti-aging genes. And, they envisioned adding
cassettes of anti-cancer genes and genes that would confer resistance to the
AIDS virus. The cassettes would include control regions that would turn the
genes on only in the tissues where and when needed.

   Dr. Campbell described in detail how an anti-cancer gene cassette might work.
He envisioned providing cells with the equivalent of a loaded gun, its trigger
cocked. But the gun could only go off in certain cells and then only if a person
deliberately pulled it. For prostate cancer, for example, scientists might add a
gene that would kill prostate cells -- and the cancer along with it -- on
command. To control such a gene, scientists would hook it to another gene that
responds to an insect hormone, ecdysone, that normally has no effect on human
cells.

   If a man found he had prostate cancer, he would take an ecdysone pill. It
would activate the added gene, killing prostate cells, but leaving other cells
untouched.

   The cassettes eventually could be enormously sophisticated, scientists said.
If you wanted to enhance the human species, Dr. Hood explained, you would add
entire clusters of genes that would interact and boost or modulate each other's
effects like genes do in nature. The Human Genome Project, an ambitious effort
to determine the sequence of human DNA, is going to find those gene clusters, he
said. When that happens, he added, it will be "only a matter of time" before
they are used in human germline engineering.

   With the genome project, "we have the tools, the data, the vision, to do
systems biology the way it was never done before," Dr. Hood said.

   What is most amazing, said Dr. Lee Silver, a molecular geneticist at
Princeton University and editor in chief of the journal Mammalian Genome, is
that germline engineering, for a variety of technical reasons, should actually
be easier than the more limited genetic engineering that scientists have tried
thus far.

   Dr. James D. Watson, director of the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New
York and winner of a Nobel Prize in 1962 for discovering the structure of DNA,
agreed.

   If scientists wait for conventional genetic engineering to success before
trying germline engineering, Dr. Watson said, "We might as well wait for the sun
to burn out."

   And, he asked, why not try germline genetic engineering when the methods are
ready? "If you could cure a very serious disease, stupidity, that would be a
great thing for the people who otherwise would be born seriously disadvantaged."


LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1998


                             2038 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    MARCH 21, 1998, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 965 words

HEADLINE: A Drug Is Born
 Using the Hollywood model, small firms peddle concepts to industry giants for a
p

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    There's no business like the drug business.

   Two decades after the birth of biotechnology, the small biotech boutiques are
no longer competing with the drug giants known collectively as ''Big Pharma.''

   Instead, biotech and the drugmakers are borrowing a page from the Hollywood
hub-and-spoke studio system -- a few big players in the center control the bucks
and do the marketing, drawing upon hundreds of independent types dishing up
creative juice.

   Just substitute Eli Lilly for 20th Century Fox and Prozac for ''Titanic'' to
get the picture.

   ''The 'scripts,' if you will, for drug discovery will come from the biotech
industry,'' said Carl Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology Industry
Organization in Washington, D.C.

   Analysts say the advent of a more cooperative ''biopharmaceutical'' industry
was a natural evolution given the risks and rewards of bringing a new drug to
market.

   ''Movies and drugs are similar in that both are highly creative endeavors,
both are very risky and both require a high amount of capital,'' said Mark
Lampert, manager of the San Francisco-based Biotechnology Value Fund.

   On average, it costs upwards of $ 500 million -- double even the most
expensive Hollywood movie to date -- to get a new drug to market, and only a
small fraction of drug candidates succeed.

   Drug companies can provide capital and marketing savvy in exchange for access
to promising creative ideas, said Doug Given, chief executive at Progenitor
Inc., a small biotech firm in Menlo Park. He views the pharmaceutical industry
as customers, not competitors.

   Progenitor, along with researchers at Ohio University, yesterday announced
favorable results in a gene- therapy cancer program known as T7. Human trials
could begin as soon as next year, if things go well.

   With the blockbuster Human Genome Project providing the background, bit
players like Progenitor look for leads to new products, peddling creative
concepts to industry heavies in exchange for a piece of the action.

   Ben McGraw, chief executive at tiny Megabios Corp. in Burlingame, said it's
folly for an unknown company like his, a would-be pioneer in gene therapy, to
lust for its name in lights among the industry elite.

   ''The infrastructure for full-scale pharmaceutical development already exists
at the big companies, and the little biotech companies don't need to reinvent
that infrastructure,'' he said.

   Instead of betting the whole company on the success of one or two key
products, biotech firms now like to focus on broad ''technology platforms,''
relying on alliances with Big Pharma to bring particular products through
expensive clinical testing.

   Megabios, for example, claims to have developed a practical system for
delivering therapeutic genes. It's collaborating with Glaxo Wellcome on a gene
therapy for cystic fibrosis and also has a cancer program under way with Eli
Lilly.

   Even though biotech companies sacrifice some potential payoff when they
partner with a bigger player, they dramatically reduce the danger of going broke
before anything proves a winner.

   The field's new model of success is no longer biotech pioneer Amgen Inc.,
which grew into a major pharmaceutical company on the strength of two hit drugs.
Now, it's Alza Corp., the Palo Alto drug- delivery specialist and a longtime Big
Pharma collaborator.

   New York-based Pfizer Inc., for example, used Alza's slow-release technology
to come up with Procardia XL (nifedipine), a heart-disease treatment. Launched
in 1989, the drug has enjoyed annual sales as high as $ 1.2 billion.

   Alza's name doesn't even show up in the fine print of the official product
label. But the company doesn't need fame; it has earned $ 436 million so far in
product royalties.

   That gave Alza enough of a financial cushion to fund its own sales force and
product-development ambitions. Yet it's still an active wheeler-dealer behind
the scenes, peddling an array of drug- delivery ''special effects'' to the
highest bidders.

   In January, for example, Janssen Pharmaceutica, a unit of Johnson & Johnson,
picked up rights to hot wire a skin-patch pain medication with Alza's
''E-TRANS'' technology, which uses a low-power electric current, controlled by
the patient, to regulate how much drug goes through the skin.

   Like a screenwriter who's scripted a string of hits, Alza was able to
negotiate a better deal than in the past, holding onto a bigger share of the
product's eventual sales.

   Analysts said deals are becoming more lucrative throughout the industry,
citing a growing shortage of promising new drug candidates at some of the big
manufacturers. Lilly employees, for example, have taken to calling 2002 -- when
Prozac loses patent protection and will face competition from cheaper generic
drugs -- ''Year X.''

   Drug companies are counting on biotech to fill in the gaps in product
development pipelines. The result is a flood of drug-biotech alliances, often
worth hundreds of millions of dollars over time.

   ''There's a very big premium for creativity,'' said Steven Engel, CEO of La
Jolla Pharmaceutical Co. in San Diego.

   Whether in the entertainment or biotech business, the best ideas often are
found outside big bureaucracies, said Myra Williams, a veteran
pharmaceutical-industry executive who is now chief executive at Molecular
Applications Group, a gene-analysis software firm founded by Stanford scientists
in 1993.

   At small outfits like MAG, everybody has a stake in the company's success,
creating a different kind of culture than exists at the mega-manufacturers.

   ''At the best small companies, you really get an aura of excitement,''
Williams said. ''There's nothing to blunt the impact of success or failure.''

   Still, she added, it doesn't hurt if a high-roller or two can be found to
pick up the tab.


GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC,BY TOM MURRAY, THE CHRONICLE

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1998


                             2039 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1998 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         March 21, 1998 Saturday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 872 words

HEADLINE: ANTI-AGING GENES NOT JUST IN THE MOVIES ANYMORE

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA IT 1998, The New York Times

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   For years, molecular biologists and geneticists have trod gingerly around the
most explosive topic of the new reproductive biology: purposely making genetic
changes in people that would persist for generation after generation.

   There were so many technological roadblocks to the process, called germline
genetic engineering, that most scientists viewed it almost as science fiction.

   But now, as researchers rush past these roadblocks, a group of eminent
molecular biologists and molecular geneticists met Friday at the University of
California at Los Angeles to confront the issue. Their goal was to discuss how,
why and when germline engineering should proceed.

   The scientists, leaders in the field, were meeting on their own, with no
government or other mandate to issue guidelines or regulations and, in fact, no
wish to restrict their work. But they said it is time for science to confront
its growing powers to shape human biology.

   Members of the public and even many scientists are unaware of how close
science is to making germline engineering a reality, said Michael Rose, who
studies the genetics of aging at the University of California at Irvine and who
was a speaker at the meeting. He said the meeting would bring public attention
to "one of the most important questions for the human species: the extent to
which it will direct its own evolution."

   It will, some day, be possible to give people genes to prevent them from
developing certain diseases or to cure them of diseases that stubbornly resist
treatment, such as cancer or AIDS.

   "I could imagine a child that never got a cold," said John Campbell, a
meeting organizer who is a theoretical evolutionary biologist and professor of
neurobiology at the University of California in Los Angeles. Eventually
scientists may be able to add whole "cassettes" of genes that could confer
enhanced intelligence or rid people of the plagues of aging.

   Unlike genetic therapies being experimented with today, in which scientists
try to insert genes into specific body tissues, these genetic changes could
become permanent, present in sperm and egg cells and passed from generation to
generation.

   Germline genetic engineering "really touches the essence of who we are, what
it means to be human," said Gregory Stock, a conference organizer and director
of the Science, Technology and Society program at UCLA's Center for the Study of
Evolution and the Origin of Life. "We are talking about intervening in the flow
of genetic information from one generation to the next. We are talking about the
relationship of human beings to their genetic heritage."

   The speakers, drawn from the ranks of molecular biology and genetics, had the
most august credentials: memberships in the National Academy of Science, a Nobel
prize, editorships of leading journals. Throughout the day, one after the other,
they spoke about new possibilities and powerful new tools under development that
could make human germline engineering happen.

   No one could say when this new kind of genetic engineering might be put into
practice. But they all agreed that seemingly insuperable technical barriers were
falling year by year and many said they expected to see many techniques in use
within 20 years.

   For example, Campbell said, as recently as 15 years ago putting a cassette of
genes together would have been a herculean task. Now it's a project for graduate
students.

   Of course, once genetic germline engineering becomes technically feasible,
researchers would want to do animal studies to make sure the techniques are safe
before trying them in people.

   Today, obstacles to germline engineering are practical, not theoretical.
Scientists have the ability to add desired genes by snapping gene cassettes onto
artificial chromosomes and injecting the chromosomes into newly fertilized eggs.
Because every cell in the body is a descendant of that first fertilized egg,
every cell would have a copy of the artificial chromosome. Artificial
chromosomes, even human artificial chromosomes, have been created and patented,
the scientists reported, and companies have sprung up to exploit the technology.

   Leroy Hood, chairman of the department of molecular biotechnology at the
University of Washington in Seattle, said he has developed a way to create an
entire custom chromosome on a computer chip containing DNA.

   But what if the artificial chromosome is faulty or what if it begins to look
primitive to some future generation that wants the updated version of this
genetic software? No problem, said Mario Capecchi, a distinguished professor of
biology and human genetics at the University of Utah. Biologists already know
how to make artificial chromosomes that can self destruct on command.

   Scientists at the meeting spoke quite seriously about extending the human
life span with cassettes of anti-aging genes. They also envisioned adding
cassettes of anticancer genes and genes that would confer resistance to the AIDS
virus.

   The cassettes would include control regions that would turn the genes on only
in the tissues where and when they are needed. Of course, they noted, no human
would be treated until the methods were thoroughly tested in animals and proved
safe and reliable.

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1998


                             2040 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                             March 20, 1998, Friday

SECTION: NEWS , Pg. 8D

LENGTH: 521 words

HEADLINE: OU CANCER SCIENTIST MOVING TO S. CAROLINA;
RESEARCHER TO LEAD GENE-THERAPY EFFORT

BYLINE: David Lore, Dispatch Science Reporter

BODY:


   Scientist and cancer researcher Thomas E. Wagner says he's tired of curing
mice while seeing people suffer and die of cancer.

   ''My father died from cancer, my brother had it and two colleagues in my
laboratory - one only 31 years old - have gone through this just since the fall
quarter,'' Wagner said yesterday. ''You feel you ought to be able to get this
(medical research) to people more effectively.''

   This frustration is part of the reason Wagner says he'll retire from his
research post at Ohio University in Athens this summer after 28 years to head up
a new clinically oriented gene-therapy program in Greenville, S.C.

   ''God knows we've cured mice of all sorts of tumors. But that isn't medical
research,'' Wagner explained.

   Wagner, a 56-year-old molecular biologist, is a senior scientist at OU's
Edison Biotechnology Institute, which he founded in 1984.

   The institute, originally called the Edison Animal Biotechnology Center, did
pioneering work in livestock genetic engineering in the 1980s but has refocused
in recent years on medical research.

   In Greenville, Wagner will be director of the oncology research program at
the Greenville Hospital System and a professor of microbiology and molecular
medicine at nearby Clemson University. The move means about a $ 50,000 salary
increase for Wagner over the $ 150,000 a year he received at Ohio University.

   But Wagner said his primary motivation is to get involved in clinical use of
gene therapies that are not subject to the lengthy reviews and delays involved
in getting cancer drugs tested and approved.

   Wagner's group, for example, has been working on a way to make tumor cells
vulnerable to a herpes drug called ganciclovir by altering them with a herpes
simplex gene.

   ''It's gene therapy to make the tumor cells selectively active,'' said
Wagner. ''If we could treat tumors this way, not only is it very effective but
the downside of chemotherapy isn't there - you won't get sick from this.''

   In a report today in the journal Human Gene Therapy, OU researcher Xiao Chen
reports that in animal tests, the gene therapy was 60 percent effective in
reducing tumors and 30 percent effective in eliminating them.

   Wagner, principal investigator on the project, said he expects even better
success rates as techniques for introducing the herpes gene improve.

   The procedure could replace or supplement surgery to remove tumors, he said,
but would not be effective after cancer cells have spread.

   Clinical trials ''are likely sometime in the future,'' said a university news
release. That's what pains Wagner.

   ''We developed this (line of research) five years ago,'' he said. ''It should
have been in patients years ago.''

   The future of gene therapy, he said, lies in tailoring treatments to the
individual patient rather than depending on mass-produced drugs.

   Wagner praised Ohio University's ''remarkable'' record in biomedical
research.

   Wagner's departure ''will have an effect, but a good institute builds teams,
and with Tom's help we've been able to do that,'' said Carol Blum, interim vice
president for research at OU.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Wagner

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1998


                             2041 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                     March 20, 1998, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 844 words

HEADLINE: PITT, CALIFORNIA FIRM FORGE TECHNOLOGY PACT;
STOCK, GENE DELIVERY SYSTEM, KEY TO DEAL

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   University of Pittsburgh scientists haven't quite finished a clinical trial
that is testing the use of gene therapy for treating rheumatoid arthritis, but a
California biotechnology firm has made a deal to license Pitt's technology.

   Megabios Corp., of Burlingame, Calif., will give Pitt 120,000 shares of its
stock and an undisclosed amount of money for continued research. More important,
say scientists, is that it also will let Pitt use gene delivery technologies the
company has developed that should make it easier to insert beneficial genes into
the joints of arthritis sufferers.

   ''We know the gene'' that might relieve the pain of rheumatoid arthritis,
said molecular geneticist Paul Robbins. ''We just need the gene delivery
system.''

   Gene therapy is an experimental approach to treating disease. It involves
inserting a gene that produces a protein that is lacking or in short supply in
the patient. One of the major difficulties facing gene therapy, however, is
getting copies of those genes into numerous cells in the patient.

   In the clinical trial that Robbins and molecular geneticist Christopher Evans
began at Pitt in July 1996, cells from diseased joints are removed from each
patient. Beneficial genes, which direct the production of proteins that ease
pain and halt deterioration of the joint, are inserted into the cells using
specially modified viruses. The modified cells are then injected into the
patient's joints.

   Thus far, seven patients have completed the treatment. Another is undergoing
the process, and the ninth and final patient is about to begin.

   The clinical trial, which was the nation's first gene therapy trial for a
nonfatal disease, was intended only to determine the safety of the technique.
Robbins said investigators have seen no toxic effects. Production of the desired
proteins has occurred, providing hints that the therapy might prove effective at
higher doses.

   Megabios has developed methods of inserting genes into cells without the use
of viruses. Viruses are laborious and complicated to use and, because they
trigger an immune response in the body, might only be used once in each patient,
Robbins said.

   It's likely that repeated infusions of cells may be required for treatment of
chronic conditions such as arthritis, he added.

   Benjamin F. McGraw III, Megabios chairman and CEO, said his company had
developed methods of squeezing genes into packages constructed of lipids fatty
substances found in cell membranes. Different types of lipids are attracted to
different types of cells, he noted. So these lipid-DNA complexes can simply be
injected into a patient and the lipid will be drawn to the desired cells.

   It simplifies gene delivery and eliminates what has been a bottleneck in the
development of gene therapy, McGraw said. His company, which is in partnership
with pharmaceutical giant Glaxo Wellcome, is focused only on gene therapy.

   Arthritis gene therapy is only one of the Megabios' potential products,
McGraw said, but it is a potentially huge one. Last year, he noted, $ 8.4
billion in arthritis drugs were sold worldwide.

   Robbins said the Megabios technology would eliminate the need for the Pitt
researchers to surgically remove cells from joint linings and treat them before
injecting them back into patients. The Megabios technology would allow one-step
treatment.

   The current clinical trial involved only patients who were on the verge of
surgery to replace four diseased knuckles on one hand. Treated cells were
injected into the knuckles a week before the joint replacement surgery. The
patients were then monitored for signs of toxic effects and that the genes were
working.

   In the next clinical trial, which could begin next year, Robbins said the
researchers would treat patients with less extensive disease who did not require
replacement of all their diseased joints.

   That trial will continue to use the virus technique for modifying cells. It
would be perhaps another year before a trial using the Megabios technology could
be launched.

   Robbins said the Pitt team is now trying to identify genes that could be used
to treat osteoarthritis, the most common type of arthritis, as well as identify
genes that might be used to grow new cartilage to repair damaged joints.

   Arthur A. Boni, Pitt's director of technology management, said the
partnership with Megabios was important for both the technology and management
expertise it would bring to Pitt.

   ''To move a gene therapy technology forward is a very complex and expensive
proposition,'' Boni said.

   Acquiring company stock in return for licensing university patents is not
unprecedented at Pitt and is likely to become more common, particularly in cases
of start-up companies, Boni noted.

   ''Many universities these days are taking stock in exchange for technology,''
he added.

   Robbins said he and Evans expected to continue to receive National Institutes
of Health funding for the arthritis research. They continue to work for Pitt,
not Megabios, and do not receive Megabios stock.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1998


                             2042 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                     March 17, 1998, Tuesday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: NEXT, Pg. 12N

LENGTH: 382 words

HEADLINE: WWW.4KIDS.ORG

BODY:


   Kids' Tales

   Traditional children's stories come to life online at Aesop's Fables, where
you'll meet the cats, mice, frogs and goats who star in these fun tales. The Web
site is brought to you by the students at University of Massachusetts-Amherst,
who've illustrated the fables in traditional and modern styles. Race along with
the tortoise and the hare to http://www.umass. edu/acco/projects/aesop/ Read
such classics as the Goose With the Golden Eggs, the Lion and the Mouse, and the
Milkmaid and Her Pail. Just keep an eye out for the Wolf in Sheep's Clothing!

   Cracking the Code

You hear in the news, people saying things about gene testing and gene therapy.
What does it all mean? Blast into the 21st century now by joining the generation
of scientists who are "Cracking the Code." High-tech biomedical research meets
high- tech multimedia in this interactive Web site exploring the amazing
frontiers of gene science. Just park your test tube at http://www.
wnet.org/innovation/ where it's all explained for you. Here's what's waiting
under the microscope: lots of cool Shockwave animations, photos and stories
about real people whose lives have been changed by these new medical
innovations. You'll be surprised how the world is changing now that we're
starting to unlock the secrets of the building blocks of life. This technology
is the future of science, and this Web site is a great place to learn about it!

   Discovering Lewis & Clark

   Explore the Wild West on the Internet at PBS' Lewis and Clark Web site.
Connected with Ken Burns' film, "The Journey of the Corps of Discovery," this is
the place to get the lowdown on the rigorous journey through the American West.
Point your compass toward http://www. pbs.org/lewisandclark and lose yourself in
a world of natural wonders and the cultures of Native America. You'll hear
historians give their thoughts on the expedition and read the journals of the
corps. Try the Language Chain Activity to see if you have what it takes to
communicate with the Indian tribes, or try leading your own western-bound
expedition. You can even download a Lewis and Clark screen saver for your
computer. Get ready to blaze your own trail through America's most rugged
mountains, rivers and forests!

   -- Universal Press Syndicate

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1998


                             2043 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1998 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       March 17, 1998 Tuesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: DENVER & THE WEST; Pg. B-10

LENGTH: 383 words

HEADLINE: 3 Denver hospitals chosen for cystic-fibrosis study

BYLINE: By Dave Curtin, Denver Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   A trio of Denver research hospitals has been chosen to develop new therapies
for cystic fibrosis by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.

   Cystic fibrosis is America's most prevalent fatal, inherited disease with
30,000 people afflicted. It allows mucus to clog the lungs, where infections can
flourish. It's invariably fatal and usually causes death by the age of 30.

   The three hospitals - Children's Hospital of Denver, National Jewish Medical
and Research Center and the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center -
received $ 750,000 for the study. The five-year study will involve patients at
all three.

   The three hospitals make up an accredited cystic-fibrosis treatment center
with 400 patients from Colorado, Wyoming and Montana. The center is one of seven
in the country chosen to develop new treatments.

   "This will give patients access to the latest treatments," said Dr. Frank
Accurso who treats cystic-fibrosis patients at Children's Hospital.

   The new therapies include inhaled antibiotics and inhaled medications that
affect the body's response to infection, Accurso said.

   Denver researchers will study how the lung is injured in cystic fibrosis and
whether there is effective gene therapy - the introduction of a normal gene into
a person with the abnormal gene. That can be done by attaching the normal gene
to a virus, a combination that's inhaled. It is hoped that the virus won't cause
damage and that the normal gene will go where it needs to be - in the lung,
Accurso said.

   Early symptoms of cystic fibrosis include coughing, respiratory infections
and poor growth. Onset may be within weeks after birth or it may escape medical
attention until adulthood, Accurso said. Doctors believe that treatment early in
life is important.

   Colorado is one of only two states that diagnose cystic fibrosis through a
newborn-screening procedure.    One in 25 Americans, mostly whites, carries the
CF gene, discovered in 1989. Only a person who inherits copies of the gene from
both parents has a risk of developing the disease.

   "Progress toward our goal - to move all promising discoveries about cystic
fibrosis from the test tube to the bedside - will be accelerated through this
program," said Robert Beall, medical director of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
in Maryland.

LOAD-DATE: April 02, 1998


                             2044 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                   MARCH 17, 1998 Tuesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BODY & MIND; Pg. 11F

LENGTH: 592 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL NEWS BRIEFS

BYLINE: From Free Press news reports

BODY:

   Yeast infection linked to health workers' dogs

   An important message for health care workers who are dog owners: Wash your
hands after you touch your pet.

   In a study published last week in the New England Journal of Medicine,
researchers attributed an outbreak of an unusual yeast infection, from 1993 to
1995, among 24 sick newborns at Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center in Lebanon,
N.H., to medical staff who had neglected to scrub thoroughly after they had
played with their dogs at home.

   The yeast, known as Malassezia pachydermatis, does not appear to make healthy
people sick, but it can lead to bloodstream and urinary tract infections in
infants born prematurely.

   Emotional support helps female heart patients

   A Yale University study shows elderly women who have been hospitalized for
heart failure and who have no emotional support network have a threefold
increased risk of suffering additional heart problems in the year after being
hospitalized than those who have someone to lean on. The effect of emotional
support was absent in men.

   The study, reported this week in Circulation, a journal of the American Heart
Association, reviewed 292 people ages 65 and older who had been hospitalized for
heart failure.

   After Nancy Reagan, more chose mastectomy

   Soon after Nancy Reagan had a mastectomy, after being diagnosed with breast
cancer in 1987, there was a sharp decline in the number of U.S. women opting for
breast-conserving forms of surgery such as lumpectomy.

   Such is the power of celebrity medicine, even though mastectomy and
lumpectomy are considered equivalent in terms of survival and patient
satisfaction, according to a study in the current Journal of the American
Medical Association.

   For six months after Reagan's surgery, breast cancer patients were 25 percent
less likely than those just before Reagan's mastectomy to undergo the
breast-conserving operation, the study found. The decline of lumpectomies and
other such breast-saving procedures was noted at a time when specialists were
encouraging more women to choose the less radical surgeries.

   The biggest drops were among women demographically similar to Reagan, white
women between the ages of 50 and 79, and among low-income and less-educated
women.

   Brochure tells how to poison-proof home

   For National Poison Prevention Week, which runs through Sunday, the American
Academy of Pediatrics is offering a free brochure filled with tips on
"poison-proofing" your home.

   To locate a poison center near you, call 1-202-362-7217 anytime or write to
the American Association of Poison Control Centers at 3201 New Mexico Avenue,
NW, Suite 310, Washington, D.C., 20016.

   For the free brochure, titled "Protect Your Child from Poison," send a
self-addressed, stamped business envelope to the AAP, Dept. C-poison, P.O. Box
927, Elk Grove Village, Ill. 60009-0927.

   Bone-marrow cells can undergo change

   Italian researchers have discovered that certain bone-marrow cells can
transform into muscle-building cells in mice.

   After injecting bone-marrow cells into the blood of mice with muscle damage,
the researchers showed that some of the nuclei from the bone-marrow cells were
taken up into the muscle tissue, according to a report published in last week's
journal Science. Until recently, scientists had assumed that cells from adult
animals were locked into a predetermined fate.

   But the new research shows that some cells may be more flexible than
previously thought, according to the San Raffaele-Telethon Institute for Gene
Therapy in Milan.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             2045 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      March 17, 1998 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NORTHEAST OHIO; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 487 words

HEADLINE: CYSTIC FIBROSIS CURE SOUGHT;
CWRU, RAINBOW SHARE IN $750,000 GRANT

BYLINE: By KARL TURNER; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   Two Cleveland institutions will share $750,000 over the next five years to
test new treatments researchers hope will lead to a cure for cystic fibrosis.

   The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation chose the LeRoy W. Matthews Cystic Fibrosis
Center at Rainbow Babies and Childrens Hospital and Case Western Reserve
University to form one of seven Therapeutics Development Centers nationwide.

   "This grant will provide funding for the infrastructure - the physicians,
nurses and research staff - necessary to conduct the [expanded] research," said
Dr. Michael Konstan, director of the Matthews Center.

   The project will be funded in yearly $150,000 increments, starting this year.
The centers will test new drugs and genetic treatments aimed at curing the
disease. The results of the centers' research will be shared through
newsletters, medical conferences and a computer network. Patients at the seven
centers will have access to advanced and experimental treatments that otherwise
would have been more difficult to take part in.

   The Matthews Center and CWRU work together to develop new treatments for
cystic fibrosis. Results of the research done at CWRU are tested at the Matthews
Center in what Konstan calls a "bench to bedside" approach to developing
treatments for the disease.

   "Rainbow's Matthews Center has a long history of excellence in cystic
fibrosis research," said Dr. Robert J. Beall, president of the Maryland-based
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. "It's one of the largest centers, and it's one of
the top seven centers. That's why we chose it."

   The Matthews Center treats more than 400 patients with cystic fibrosis.
Researchers there were among the first to study the effect of ibuprofen in
preventing the loss of lung function in patients with cystic fibrosis.

   They are studying drugs and gene therapies researchers hope will treat the
defective genes that cause cystic fibrosis. The present generation of drugs only
treats the symptoms of the disease, Beall said.

   Cystic fibrosis causes a thick mucous to build up in air passages in the
lungs that leads to infection and inflammation of the lungs. About 95 percent of
cystic fibrosis deaths are caused by lung disease; the other deaths are caused
by the disease's effect on other organs, such as the pancreas, Konstan said.

   Parents pass the disease to children, and both parents must pass on the
defective genes for a child to have the disease.

   Cystic fibrosis affects about 30,000 people nationwide. It is the most common
fatal disease in children. The average life expectancy for patients with the
disease is 31.3 years.

   The six other centers involved in the network are Johns Hopkins Hospital,
Baltimore; Children's Hospital, Boston; the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill; Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati; Children's
Hospital, Denver; and Children's Hospital and Regional Medical Center-University
of Washington, Seattle.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1998


                             2046 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                     March 16, 1998, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BAYLIFE, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 438 words

HEADLINE: Genetic emphysema can be treated with drugs if it is diagnosed early

BYLINE: JIM TUNSTALL; of The Tampa Tribune

DATELINE: BELLEAIR BLUFFS

BODY:


   At 28, Richard Heering had 33 percent of his lung capacity.

   By the time he was in his mid-40s, he couldn't walk from one side of his
house to the other without stopping to suck air. At his transplant evaluation,
he made it only 60 feet in a six-minute walk.

   Heering, who got a new lung in 1995 at Shands Hospital in Gainesville, is a
victim of Alpha1 -antitrypsin deficiency. In simple terms, it's genetic or
hereditary emphysema.

   While he was a smoker for 15 years, it's not just a smoker's disease.

   But smoking worsens it.

   "It's a genetic defect that makes your lungs unable to tolerate toxins in the
environment," says Eloise Harman, a University of Florida pulmonary specialist
and professor of medicine.

   Alpha1 is a protein produced by the liver to protect the lungs from damage by
natural enzymes released to fight infections and inflammation.

   Without the protein, says Heering, president of the Florida chapter of the
Alpha1 National Association, the enzymes eat the elastic tissues of the lungs
and cause emphysema.

   While regular emphysema, also called smoker's lung, usually strikes people in
their 50s or 60s, victims of genetic emphysema can be in their 30s and 40s or
even younger, Harman says.

   In infants, the protein's absence can cause sometimes fatal liver disease.

   "But they usually don't develop lung disease for at least 20 years."

   Years ago, genetic emphysema was often wrongly diagnosed as asthma,
bronchitis or smoker's emphysema, Heering says. That's what happened in his
case.

   When he went to a doctor 23 years ago he was told to save his lung capacity
by using a wheelchair and not exercising. The wheelchair, he says, led to an
electric cart, then muscle and bone deterioration.

   Heering and Harman say when genetic emphysema is diagnosed early, it can be
treated with a drug that replaces Alpha1 in the blood. There's also research
being done in gene therapy, Harman says.

   The warning signs: shortness of breath even with minimal activity, a family
history of lung disease, recurring lung infections and an illness diagnosed as
asthma that's not responding to treatment.

   Heering, now 51 and a Belleair Bluffs resident, began getting short of breath
last fall. He says it's a sign of chronic rejection of his transplanted lung.

   "There isn't a cure for chronic rejection," Heering says.

   "I'm looking for a re-transplant."

   There is now an early-warning system for Alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency. A
free blood test can be arranged through the Alpha1 National Association,
1-800-425-7421.  Jim Tunstall works in north Florida and can be reached at (352)
628-5558.

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1998


                             2047 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                             March 15, 1998, Sunday

SECTION: INSIGHT - DISCOVERY , Pg. 7B

LENGTH: 710 words

HEADLINE: FUROR OVER CLONING HAS AMPHIBIAN PRECEDENT

BYLINE: David Lore

BODY:


   The shock that greeted Dolly, the cloned sheep, last year was itself a
replica of the controversy that genetic engineering met a quarter-century ago.

   Dr. Ted Friedmann, a pioneer in gene therapy, remembers the public alarm
arising from animal cloning in Britain, the political reaction and the chilling
predictions that human cloning was imminent.

   His recollections, however, were of the early 1970s, long before look-alike
sheep became something sinister. Geneticists then were more interested in
amphibians.

   John Gurdon, an Oxford University biologist, startled the world in the
mid-1960s when he cloned a frog. This led to predictions in 1969 that science
would be able to clone a human ''within 10 to 20 years.''

   By 1971, Nobel Prize winner James Watson, co-discoverer of the structure of
the DNA molecule, warned Congress that the public was grossly unprepared to deal
with the genetic revolution.

   Watson's warning came several months after an October 1971 conference of
scientists, lawyers, philosophers and theologians alerted the public to some of
the consequences of the new biology.

   ''The discussions . . . have ranged from the morality of abortion to the
theoretical possibility of growing a whole human being from the nucleus of one
living adult body cell,'' reported The New York Times.

   So the pot was well-stirred by 1972 when Friedmann, along with biochemist
Richard Roblin, proposed a voluntary scientific moratorium on gene-therapy
experiments with humans.

   Friedmann recalled this history during a press conference two months ago at
the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science in
Philadelphia.

   The debate in the 1970s in many ways foreshadowed that of last year.

   In 1972, Friedmann and Roblin suggested the moratorium in view of
gene-therapy experiments that had begun in Germany using human subjects.

   Last year, Friedmann and other leading scientists were likewise urging a
go-slow approach after ''Dolly,'' in view of Chicago physicist Richard Seed's
widely publicized vow to begin producing baby clones.

   In both instances, the arguments were similar: The technologies (gene therapy
then, cloning now) are too speculative and dangerous to try with humans,
although nonhuman research should continue.

   For 30 years, Friedmann said, science has had to exercise self-restraint in
genetics because of widespread public suspicion about the new reproductive
technologies.

   ''All this came upon us with great suddenness,'' he said, leaving the public
ambivalent because of genetics' great potential for both good and evil.

   Speculation about cloning only made things worse because of the folklore and
fears associated with that word.

   The names have changed, but not the nature of the debate.

   In the 1970s, people were joking about cloning actress Raquel Welch or
basketball player Kareem Abdul-Jabbar; today's frequently mentioned candidates
are billionaire Bill Gates or basketball superstar Michael Jordan.

   Meanwhile, because restrictive legislation was avoided in the 1970s, gene
therapy research has continued for three decades.

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration effectively controlled human
experimentation while basic research and animal testing laid the groundwork.

   Today, opposition remains strong to widespread genetic screening or the use
of genetic engineering for cosmetic or eugenic purposes.

   Human trials, however, have begun on many fronts to test the effectiveness of
gene therapies to treat or prevent genetic diseases.

   ''We have already made the transition from the recent past, when the notion
of using genes as a medical tool was widely held as a 'desperate appliance,' to
the era when gene therapy is a reality,'' wrote biologist Thomas F. Lee in his
1993 book, Gene Future.

   Friedmann thinks the same evolution can occur with cloning to make available
the medical benefits of that technology.

   Human cloning is inevitable, Friedmann said, but many decades may pass before
it becomes a predictable, efficient and safe way to produce a child. Until that
changes, he said, he supports ''an absolute restriction on the cloning of a
human being.''

   David Lore is science reporter for The Dispatch. He is online at:

   dlore@dispatch.com

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 1998


                             2048 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    March 15, 1998, Sunday, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 1398 words

HEADLINE: SYNTHETIC BRAIN GENE IS BEST HOPE FOR GIRL, 3, WITH DISORDER

BYLINE: KELLY LECKER, BLOCK NEWS ALLIANCE

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN, Conn.

BODY:


   In a sterile, barren room in Yale-New Haven Children's Hospital, 3-year-old
Brianna Burkett of Gibsonburg, Ohio, slept fitfully last week as her mother
Yulinda rocked her, keeping a close eye out for a spiking fever or nausea.

   Brianna had just been through the last part of an experimental treatment
program that doctors hope will reverse a genetic brain disorder that claims most
victims before they're teens. The little blond girl was among the first to be
treated since the procedure was approved for the United States earlier this
year.

   The program at Yale is the only one exploring a treatment for Canavan
disease. Right now it's Brianna's best hope.

   Researchers in labs and classrooms at the Yale School of Medicine were
keeping an anxious watch over Brianna, too. If the process of injecting a
healthy, synthetic gene into a brain to replace a defective gene works, there
could be hope for many other brain diseases. And the research might eventually
lead to answers for other illnesses, including Parkinson's disease.

   Brianna and other children with Canavan disease have a mutated gene,
inherited from both parents, that keeps their brains from developing normally.
The disease deteriorates the brain's white matter, which is where nerve impulses
are sent to the spinal cord or other parts of the brain.

   This is why most of Brianna's problems stemming from Canavan involve her
nerves or muscles. She is legally blind and is fed through a tube in her stomach
because swallowing is difficult. She can't hold her head up, and her especially
rigid muscles cause her arms and legs to stick straight out from her body. She
can't talk or walk. She's prone to seizures and pneumonia.

   Brianna's mother was given two days' notice to be in New Haven. After a
scramble to arrange transportation and a connecting flight almost missed because
of a delay, the family arrived at Yale on March 3.

   Doctors drilled a hole in the top right part of Brianna's skull and inserted
a reservoir with tiny tubes that extended into her brain. A bump on Brianna's
head marks the spot where the reservoir will stay, in case more injections are
needed.

   Brianna woke from the surgery almost immediately, laughing, her mother said.

   Researchers cloned a healthy gene to replace the defective one. The first
injection of the healthy, synthetic gene into the fluid surrounding Brianna's
brain was given Tuesday. Doctors put a cloth over Brianna's face to keep the
injection from splattering and held her arms, legs and head so she wouldn't
move.

   Brianna's mom could hear her wailing from the room across the hall.

   ''I couldn't go in there. I blame myself because I'm the one who signed her
up for this. When she started to cry, I started to cry,'' she said. ''It's hard
to see these happy, laughing children go through this.''

   Brianna's temperature soared after the injection, which was an expected side
effect. Doctors waited two days before trying the second treatment.

   This time, Brianna did not cry. Her temperature was not as high, and she
didn't become sick as she the first time around. For most of the afternoon, tiny
Brianna lay covered in her Precious Moments blanket, dwarfed by the large white
hospital bed, drifting in and out of sleep. Yulinda Burkett and doctors are
optimistic.

   She said she is holding on to the hope that the treatment will not only stop
the disease's progression but will give Brianna the ability to walk, talk, and
develop.

   ''I think all the families are thinking that way,'' she said. ''At least now
there's not a life sentence hanging over her head. There's hope.''

   But firm results could take years of tests and treatments, and some worry
that the project isn't financially stable enough to last that long. Yulinda
Burkett is concerned that the program may end before treatments on her daughter
are finished, and all the current research, fund-raising, and medical procedures
would be wasted.

   ''It's there, all the time,'' Burkett said, fixing her daughter's yellow,
clown-spotted gown. ''There's a real possibility'' that the program could end
before treatments are complete.

   So far, the treatments have been paid for through private donations and
fund-raising by the families of children with Canavan disease. But treatment of
the first eight children has depleted many of the resources, and the children
need brain scans to monitor progress and more injections of the gene if the
current dose stops being effective. Researchers are applying for grants, but so
far the money hasn't been available.

   Dr. Roger Karlin, who helped prompt the first research into treating the
disease, said if better ways are found to administer the healthy gene, hundreds
of thousands of dollars might be needed to carry it out.

   Parents of Canavan children, including families from South Africa and Salt
Lake City, met to share their experiences and talk about ways to keep the
program alive.

   ''If this works, we could go to the insurance companies and say see, this
will save you money in the long run,'' said Dr. Sarah Rockwell, director of the
office of scientific affairs for the school of medicine. ''Until we know that,
we need to depend on grants and private donations.''

   Burkett felt something was wrong with Brianna from the time she was born. It
took doctors seven months to diagnose her.

   No research programs were working to find a cure for Canavan's disease until
Karlin's daughter, Lindsay, was diagnosed as having the illness.

   Lindsay's father called hundreds of colleagues and experts from around the
world until he convinced Dr. Matthew During at Yale to head a research program
in New Zealand. The Karlins and another family raised $ 200,000 to start the
program.

   ''There was nothing. Zero. Zilch,'' Karlin said. ''It was called an orphan
disease because there was nobody there to take care of it.''

   Lindsay and another girl, Alyssa Mushin of Derby, Conn., had the experimental
gene therapy two years ago. Both girls have improved head control, eyesight, and
other nerve functions.

   But even more encouraging to Karlin is the fact that Lindsay's brain scans
show signs that the white matter in her brain has not only stopped
deteriorating, it's growing.

   Burkett, who had been quizzing doctors and scouring literature to save her
daughter, read about Karlin's daughter. She wrote him a letter, wishing him luck
and asking if her daughter could join the program. She was among the first eight
people called to receive the treatment in the United States. Five, including
Brianna, have completed the first round of injections. Two others are just
starting the procedure, and one child became ill and had to wait.

   To be tried at Yale, the program went through various university committees
comprised of doctors, administrators, and ethicists. The treatment had to pass
the standards set by the Food and Drug Administration.

   ''We have a totally new disease to be treated and it's a very vulnerable
population. These are babies. These are sick babies,'' Rockwell said.

   Gene therapy is a new field, and this is the first time it has been used on a
disease that affects the brain's development, she said.  ''We have every reason
to believe it will work,'' Rockwell said.

   Researchers won't know for months or even years whether the treatment was
effective for Brianna and how long the injected gene will continue to help the
brain develop. Doctors will measure progress through brain scans and tests of
the child's development and motor skills.

   The life expectancy of children with Canavan is between three and 10. But
some have lived through their teens.

   Burkett, 24, a single mother, spends much of her time caring for Brianna,
exercising her muscles, singing and talking to her, and shuffling her between
doctors. She spent hours one of her first days here searching for strawberry
formula to give her daughter some variety in the food she takes through a tube
in her stomach.

   Burkett's 7-year-old daughter, Donika, is keeping Brianna company at the
hospital each day. She wants to hold her, but the wires leading from under
Brianna's clown-filled hospital gown to machines that monitor her health prevent
that.

   ''It sometimes bothers me that I don't have all the time in the world for
Donika,'' said. Burkett, who spends much of her time planning fund-raisers to
pay for treatments her insurance won't cover.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, PHOTO: Janet Durrans/Toledo Blade: Brianna Burkett, 3, gets a
kiss; from her sister Donika, 7, at the hospital.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1998


                             2049 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1998 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             March 15, 1998 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1759 words

HEADLINE: Weighing the risk of pig transplants

BYLINE: Kitta MacPherson and Edward R. Silverman, Star-Ledger Staff

BODY:

   It could be a science fiction fantasy, replete with a Light and Dark Side.

    Scientists find a way to implant animal organs in humans, forever doing away
with the problem of persistent donor shortages.

    A band of Cassandras warns, however, that such transplants risk the creation
of a super infectious agent, aping the way the AIDS virus was created.

    This is no futuristic fairy tale. A small, but growing band of scientists,
industrialists and entrepreneurs, many based in New Jersey, are pioneering the
field of animal-to-human organ surgery known as "xenotransplantation." And
they're quickly closing in on the human experiments that will, once and for all,
prove what this technology can do. They will be inserting pig parts in people.

   At the same time, in a quiet, behind-the-scenes battle being mediated by the
Food and Drug Administration, these xeno-scientists are combating fears held
even by some of their own colleagues that, in trying to save thousands of
individuals who would otherwise certainly die, they will be endangering many
more, perhaps all of society. The fear is that, by transplanting a foreign
species into a human, scientists could transmit a virus that could bloom and
spread among people.

   Minimizing the risk, therefore, is essential. So as early as May, the FDA is
expected to release long-awaited guidelines that will shape the field - and
affect the lives of millions of people around the globe - for years to come.

    "The science is very exciting," conceded Jay Fishman, a practicing physician
and research scientist who heads up the transplantation department at
Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston and counts himself as one of the
"worriers" in the debate. "It's at the point where researchers have reached
their Holy Grail.

    But since many of these are corporate entities who are not necessarily
driven by service to mankind, we have to be very circumspect about the role they
are playing in ethical decisions." Organs in demand Certainly, there's a need
for more organs. As of March 4, there were 54,403 patients waiting for a
transplant in the U.S., according to the United Network for Organ Sharing, a
nonprofit group that oversees the national organ exchange network.

    And two years ago, 3,916 people died waiting for a transplant. With the
numbers expected to grow, the promise offered by xenotransplantation takes on a
greater sense of urgency.

    True to any new scientific endeavor, this controversial field includes a
wide variety of players, from some of the biggest health care companies running
laboratories with the most expensive research equipment in the world to
hard-bitten entrepreneurs operating out of briefcases as they juggle the
intricate demands of reconciling cutting-edge science, public policy and
profits.

    Among them is Novartis AG, the huge Swiss pharmaceuticals manufacturer that
has U.S. offices in East Hanover and Summit.

    A leader in xenotransplantation research, Novartis also dominates the $1
billion global market for cyclosporine, a so-called immunosuppressant drug used
to combat organ rejection.

    With interests in both research and post-operative treatments, Novartis
stands to reap huge profits if the technology eventually boosts the number of
transplantations performed each year.

    "Right now, the market is only limited by the number of organs available for
transplantation," said Sergio Traversa, a securities analyst with Mehta
Partners, an investment firm that specializes in health care.

    Traversa calculates the market for the drugs is growing by 10 percent
annually. "Xenotransplantation is going to be a big change. But without it, the
market for immunosuppressant drugs is pretty limited." A medical harvest At the
other extreme is Ari Marshall, an aviation consultant originally from Turkey who
several years ago struck a deal to commercialize xenotransplantation technology
being developed in Bulgaria. Working out of a Woodbridge condominium a stone's
throw from the town's sprawling shopping mall, he works a telephone, fax and
computer in a furious attempt to interest scientific leaders and pharmaceutical
executives in his rural Bulgarian pig farm and the experimental operations he
has scheduled for next month.

    "Nobody else is doing this," says Marshall, as he holds aloft test tubes
containing freeze-dried arteries and veins taken from his specially bred
Bulgarian pigs. "There are no live cells. It's virus-free. We freeze-dry the
tissue and apply a solution before the operation. We want to do this with a
person soon and invite Western experts to watch. It was already being done under
the Communist regime, but there were no records."

    Even with the wider debate, there is controversy over technique. And while
few experts say they have heard of Marshall or his company, Cryobiogenics Corp.,
his approach to extracting pig parts for later use in humans prompts, by turns,
doubt, amazement and curiosity. His efforts also take on an air of mystery,
however, because his company's work is being conducted in Eastern Europe, out of
the purview of the FDA and the widely accepted standards governing clinical
research.

    More typical is Nextran Inc. The fledgling biotech company, based in
Princeton, is owned by Baxter Corp., one of the largest suppliers of medical
devices and blood products. Like Cryobiogenics, Nextran breeds special pigs, but
its farm is in Ohio. Nextran has achieved a high degree of visibility through
its research into making pig organs palatable to the human body. In the hands of
the FDA Sooner, not later, each of these companies and the nearly dozen others
pioneering this field will have to answer to the FDA. The agency recently asked
the firms to halt their clinical trials, the necessary round of medical studies
conducted before a drug or device can be approved. Nonetheless, research is
proceeding at a rapid pace and regulators expect to devise guidelines spelling
out safety procedures and monitoring efforts without inhibiting the experiments
under way. The biggest fear among some scientists is that a so-called porcine
endogenous retrovirus - a virus that is normally found in pigs - could be passed
along to humans and prove fatal.

    The argument against xenotransplantation goes like this: each individual
whose life may be saved with a pig organ could, nonetheless, jeopardize untold
numbers of other people if a previously unknown virus is created, then
transferred among the population. That is how AIDS and the fearsome Ebola virus
spread.

    With AIDS, scientists believe that a monkey passed the virus to a human,
probably through a bite, transferring what had principally been a latent virus
to a new medium. No one knows what the host organism for Ebola is; it could
possibly pass to humans through insects or rodents like other hemorrhagic
fevers, but it causes death in most humans infected with the deadly pathogen.

    Science fiction has explored these ideas for decades. Organ transplantation
and transferring genetic material between animals and humans has appeared in
H.G. Wells' "The Island of Dr. Moreau" and more recently, in Robin Cook's
current medical thriller "Chromosome 6." Now, though, the possibility that a
virus hiding deep inside an anonymous pig will contaminate the human race has
put even experts on notice.

    "Right now, there's a big yellow sign up that says caution," acknowledged
Amy Patterson, the FDA's deputy director of the division of cellular and gene
therapies. "Infectious diseases don't carry passports. But we have to balance
this against the recognition that this technology can save lives." Success with
an old idea Researchers began experimenting with organ transplantation in the
18th century. Over the years, a veritable zookeeper's roster of animals - sheep,
goats, rabbits, pigs, cows, chimpanzees - were experimented on in China, Russia
and other corners of the world.

    Transferring human organs into other humans, a fantastically complex
business, was attempted successfully by the mid-20th century. And now,
transplants of kidneys, livers, hearts, pancreases and lungs are considered an
integral part of medical treatment.

   In the last 20 years, key breakthroughs occurred, such as the development of
drugs that suppress the human immune system and, therefore, thwart organ
rejection. This allowed for a larger number of organ transplants and a longer
survival rate for transplant recipients. Most notable was Jean Borel's discovery
of cyclosporine, culled from a soil fungus in the mid-1970s. The drug was
approved for commercial use in 1983.

    Until now, the best-known case of xenotransplantation may have been Baby
Fae, an infant born with a heart defect that within a month would kill her. In
1984, physicians operated on the 2-week-old baby, replacing her heart with one
from a young baboon. Three weeks later, Baby Fae died. Her immune system had
done what it was designed to do, successfully waging war on the foreign organ.

    Now, though, researchers believe they have a much clearer idea as to why the
human body fiercely rejects organs from other animals. And they've figured out
various ways to circumvent that destructive process. The future, as they see it,
is in pigpens.

    Pigs are easy to raise, they mature quickly, produce large litters, and have
organs that are comparable in size to humans. And since they're widely raised
for food, using their organs for xenotransplantation would likely raise fewer
ethical concerns among most Americans, as opposed to using organs from non-human
primates, such as chimpanzees and baboons.

    "Biologically, pigs are perfect," said Marvin Miller, Nextran's chief
executive. "And we believe we can justify using them on an ethical basis, too."

    But even if xenotransplantation can save lives, it's not clear whether the
procedure will save money. Nextran, for instance, says the cost of one of its
pig organs will eventually carry the same price tag as an organ donated by a
human - between $12,000 and $18,000. As is typical in the widening debate over
the technology, even discussion of its economic benefits produces little
agreement.

    "At this point, it's hard to say if anything could be saved," said Roger
Evans, an economist at the Mayo Clinic's health services evaluation division.
"We don't freeze the cost of dying by doing a transplant. If we become more
effective in our ability to save lives, we increase health care costs, because
those people will live longer and eventually die of something else. We're not at
the point where technology has developed to be able to make any claims. It's
going to cause a whole social dilemma."

GRAPHIC: Cutting edge

 Companies experimenting with human/animal medical technology.

 COMPANY LOCATION PROCEDURE STATUS

 VivoRx Inc. Santa Monica, Calif. cell replacement Phase I/II*

 therapy

Neocrin Co. Irvine, Calif. cell replacement lab experiment

 therapy

Cryobiogenics Corp. Woodbridge, NJ/ cryo-preserved

 Sofia, Bulgaria tissue lab experiment

 Fujisawa USA Inc. Deerfield, Ill./ transplant

 Osaka, Japan rejection drug

Alexion New Haven, Conn. developing unigraft lab experiment Pharmaceuticals Inc.


 (collaboration with

organ products

US Surgical Corp.)

Circe BioMedical Inc. Lexington, Mass. cryo-preserve cells Phase I*

 subsidiary of

W.R. Grace

Novartis AG Summit, NJ organ replacement lab experiment

 Nextran Inc. Princeton, NJ organ lab experiment

 (unit of Baxter

replacement

Healthcare Corp.)

Diacrin, Inc. Charlestown, Mass. brain cell approved for

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2050 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1998 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          March 13, 1998 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1495 words

HEADLINE: HOPING AGAINST HOPE;
A GENETIC DISEASE ROBS A BABY GIRL OF COOS, CRAWLING

BYLINE: By JOHN POPE Staff writer

BODY:

   Cradled in her father's arms on the living room sofa, 10-month-old Lisette
Guth sucks lustily on her dinnertime bottle as the evening shadows gather
outside her Algiers home.

   Even though Lisette should be able to hold the bottle, her father must do it
for her. That's only one of the problems that have started to afflict her brief
life.

   Lisette has no control over her head, which has swollen out of proportion to
the rest of her body and simply flops around. She cannot sit up or roll over or
grab at objects that might catch her fancy. And when she is set down, she stays
put, without the cooing and gurgling that would let her parents know that their
child is entertaining herself.

   "A healthy 10-month-old should be crawling and trying to stand," said her
father, Doug Guth, 42.

   "She acts like she's 3 months old," said her mother, Desiree Guth, 37, a
registered nurse.

   It is unlikely Lisette will advance any further. She has Canavan disease, a
rare, progressive, inevitably fatal genetic disorder that sabotages the nervous
system.

   Put simply, Canavan disease short-circuits the brain by breaking down a
protective coating around nerve fibers.

   Without such insulation, the nervous system looks like a network of frayed
electrical wires. Normal childhood development - walking, speaking and even
chewing, to name a few functions - is impossible, and most children with this
disorder die before they are 10 years old.

   While no treatment can reverse Lisette's condition, Yale University
researchers have developed an artificial gene they hope will touch off a process
to hold the disease in check. Under the supervision of the federal government,
they are testing the gene therapy that offers hope of normal neural development
in Lisette and other Canavan sufferers.

   Lisette is on the waiting list for the treatment because, her parents said,
there's nothing else they can do for their only child.  The Guths said they
first thought something was wrong when Lisette wasn't doing the things babies
should be doing at 4 months, such as holding up her head, rolling over and
grabbing at whatever came into view.

   Testing confirmed their suspicions.

   "It was an incredibly difficult call," said Dr. Stephen Deputy, a pediatric
neurologist at Children's Hospital. "I told the Guths, 'I'm very, very sorry,
but we have a diagnosis of Canavan disease, and we don't have treatment.' "

   Until that moment, the Guths had never heard of the disorder, which is
similar to Tay-Sachs disease, another fatal genetic disease. Because both
ailments are in the category of diseases known as recessive disorders, no child
can develop them unless both parents carry the defective gene.

   The principal victims of Tay-Sachs and Canavan diseases are the descendants
of Eastern European Jews. Because the Guths are in that group, they had been
tested for Tay-Sachs, which is much more widely known. He is a carrier; she
isn't.

   Even though the Canavan gene has been isolated and a test is available,
neither was screened for it because they knew nothing about the disease.

   This is a major problem in working with recessive inherited diseases, said
Mary Z. Pelias, a geneticist at Louisiana State University Medical Center.

   "Most of the time when babies are born with these problems, they're born to
parents who have no problems," she said. "They usually don't find out they're
carriers until they have a baby with this problem."

   The root of Canavan disease is a defective gene that shuts down production of
an enzyme called aspartoacylase that is needed to break down N-acetylaspartic
acid in the brain.

   If the body cannot perform this chemical reaction, the brain becomes
overloaded with the acid, which destroys myelin, a protective coating that
surrounds nerve cells and helps transmit the electronic impulses that relay
information.

   Without this insulation, there is no communication, and development is
impossible. Regression occurs, including stiffness, a sharp decline in muscle
tone, seizures and blindness.

   And because of the unchecked buildup of the harmful acid, the brains of
children with Canavan disease swell. Like other parents of children with the
disease, the Guths give their daughter a diuretic to reduce this effect of the
illness.

   To keep Lisette as limber as possible for as long as possible, Guth, a
special-education teacher, works his daughter's muscles daily. To help Lisette
develop movements that come naturally to older children, her parents are
considering hiring a speech therapist to help her with feeding and swallowing,
and an occupational therapist to teach her to move normally and hold her own
bottle.

   The researchers at Yale have a much bigger goal in mind: nothing less than
triggering the development of the nervous systems of Canavan sufferers.

   To do this, they're introducing their artificial gene directly into the
brain. Using a method common in other brain treatments, the gene is injected
into a reservoir just under the scalp, which feeds a thin catheter running to
the brain. Five children have participated in this test, which the Food and Drug
Administration is monitoring closely. The cost per patient, including follow-up
treatment, is about $51,000, the Guths said.

   "It's a pretty straightforward neurosurgical procedure. It doesn't seem to be
something children have difficulty tolerating," said Dr. Margretta Seashore, a
clinical biochemical geneticist at Yale who is leading the team.

   This trial is being conducted to determine whether the introduction of the
gene is safe; later tests will let the scientists know whether it is effective.

   The main side effect has been fever, which has been about 5 degrees above
normal, and fairly well tolerated, she said.

   Seashore has not met the Guths. But parents of other children with Canavan
disease who have gone to Yale do not harbor hopes of reversing damage that has
already been done, Seashore said.

   "They're very reality-based," she said. "They're pretty realistic that this
is the first step and probably not the ultimate step that will really work,
optimally. I feel confident that we will learn from this how to do the next
step. The Wright brothers didn't have the ultimate plane, but they learned how
to go to the next step."

   For Deputy, the New Orleans doctor who diagnosed Lisette's disease, the test
poses ethical problems.

   "Are you going to prolong the life of a child who's greatly disabled?" he
said. "What is the quality of that child's life? Even if they live longer,
they're very handicapped."

   But, he said, the Yale experiment represents "one ray of hope for parents
that these children will do better."

   ====================================================

   #ART:

   CANAVAN DISEASE

   What it is: A rare, fatal disorder caused by the

   deficiency of an enzyme that breaks down a chemical

   in the brain. Without the enzyme, the chemical

   builds up and destroys myelin, which forms

   protective sheaths around nerve fibers, much like

   insulation around electrical wires. Without myelin,

   normal neural communication is impossible, and there

   is no development. In fact, there may be a

   regression of any development that has already

   occurred. Blindness, muscle weakness and seizures

   arise.

   How it's spread: It's transmitted by a genetic

   defect that each parent must contribute. If two

   carriers have a child, chances are 1 in 4 that the

   child will receive both genes, develop the disease

   and die, usually in childhood. Chances are 2 in 4

   that the child will inherit one of each kind of gene

   and become a carrier, like the parents. Chances are

   1 in 4 that a child will receive both normal genes.

   The odds are the same for each pregnancy.

   Who is vulnerable: Descendants of eastern

   European Jews are at greatest risk. The carrier rate

   among this population is about 1 in 40. A test for

   the defective gene is available.

   How many people have it: No accurate case count

   is available.

   What to look for: An abnormally large head and a

   failure to achieve such developmental milestones as

   rolling over, using the eyes to follow objects and

   reaching for objects. These signs usually appear

   when a child is 3 to 6 months old.

   Treatment: Nothing is available to alter the

   course of the disease, although an experimental

   therapy is being tested at Yale University.

   The origin of the name: It's named for Myrtelle

   Canavan, who first described the disorder in 1931.

   Sources: National Tay-Sachs & Allied Diseases

   Association Inc., Mary Z. Pelias, Dr. Stephen Deputy,

   Dr. Margretta Seashore, staff research

   =====================================================

   =====================================

   WHAT IS CANAVAN DISEASE?

   A genetic disorder that causes the

   protective sheats around nerve fibers

   in the brain to disintegrate, short

   circuiting the brain's communication

   system. Mental and physical

   development stops. Children afflicted

   usually die before they turn 10.

   =====================================

   2 GRAPHICS

GRAPHIC: Lissette Guth gets a massage from her mother, part of the physical that
keeps the baby limber. Lisette, 10 months has a genetic disorcer that sabotages
her nervous system so that she cannot sit up, roll over or grab at objects, and
she does not gurgle like other babies. [COLOR] Desiree Guth shares a laugh with
her daughter, Lisette, as she messages her. She acts like a 3 month old, said
her mother a register nurse.  2 STAFF PHOTOS BY JENNIFER ZDON

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 1998


                             2051 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                    March 10, 1998, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1650 words

HEADLINE: LONELY WARRIORS;
PARENTS OF CHILDREN WITH RARE DISEASES FIGHT UPHILL BATTLES TO WIN SCARCE;
RESEARCH FUNDS

BYLINE: MARY NIEDERBERGER

BODY:


   Tracy Szemanski of Jefferson sells dozens of raffle tickets and Avon products
each year to help her son Zach, 10.

   Kathy Swoboda of Poland, Ohio, recently held a celebrity sports memorabilia
auction to raise money for her son, Joey, 7.

   But the money won't go to such childhood pursuits as soccer leagues or Boy
Scouts. These mothers are raising money to save their children's lives.

   Joey and Zach have incurable genetic diseases that are slowly eroding their
bodies. Children with these diseases normally don't live to adulthood.

   Joey has had five strokes. Zach has lost much of his hearing and can no
longer speak.

   ''Some years I've sold as much as $ 900 in raffle tickets,'' Szemanski said.
''I know that's not what's going to find a cure. It takes millions. But we can't
just do nothing.''

   The 1992 Pittsburgh-made movie, ''Lorenzo's Oil,'' dramatized the quest of a
Fairfax, Va., couple who helped discover a solution that partially reversed the
effects of their son's normally fatal genetic disease, adrenoleukodystropy.

   For most families touched by rare diseases, however, such success is beyond
reach. Their lives are filled with frustration, isolation, sorrow, anger and
little hope.

   There are 5,000 rare disorders - each defined as affecting fewer than 200,000
people in the United States. Many affect just a few hundred people.

   These diseases are so rare that medical science has little to offer their
victims; the care and treatment so expensive that the financial demands are
overwhelming.

   While caring for their sick children, many parents like Swoboda and Szemanski
spend precious time raising money - even if it's just one raffle ticket at a
time - for research or to pay medical bills.

   The National Organization for Rare Disorders, a nonprofit group based in New
Fairfield, Conn., that oversees 140 disease organizations, was founded 15 years
ago to help raise awareness and money for research.

   The group played a key role in spurring Congress in 1983 to create the Orphan
Drug Act, which stimulated research into rare disorders and provided market
incentives for pharmaceutical companies, even though few medicines would be
sold.

It is impossible for the federal government to appropriate enough money to find
cures for all 5,000 disorders, said Stephen Groft, director of the National
Institutes for Health Office of Rare Diseases.

   Small hope & resignation

   ''I understand that we are a medical throwaway, although the doctors don't
like me to say that,'' Swoboda said recently.

   Swoboda's son, Joey, suffers from MELAS - Metabolic Encephalopathy with
Lactic Acidosis and Stroke. It affects about 350 people, mostly children, in the
United States.

   This disease causes the mitochondria, the tiny structures that provide each
of the body's cells with energy, to mutate. This process causes a buildup of
lactic acid that destroys tissues.

   Kathy Swoboda and her husband, Barry, are placing their hope for Joey on an
experimental drug treatment being conducted at University of Florida's Shands
Hospital in Gainesville. He's been involved in the study for three years.

   ''I think we are being given time and it's good quality time,'' Kathy Swoboda
said. ''He's active and alert.''

   Dr. Peter Stackpoole at Shands is testing the effects of sodium
dichloracitate, known as DCA, to see if it lowers lactic acid levels in the
blood and spinal fluid.

   Doctors hope that lowering the level will relieve at some of the symptoms of
the disease, which include strokes, hearing loss, fatigue, heart defects,
diabetes, cardiomyopathy, slow growth, learning disabilities and dementia.
Patients often die from uncontrollable seizures.

   In the second year of the study, Joey's strokes ceased. Although the study
ended in June, the Swobodas continue to fly their son to Gainesville every three
months for the drug, which costs $ 450 a liter - or $ 3,000 a year. None of this
is covered by insurance.

   In addition, they spend $ 5,000 in health costs each year before their
medical insurance kicks in. Family friends have set up a trust fund for
donations and fund-raising proceeds to help defray costs.

   Tracy Szemanski and her husband, Larry, don't hold out much hope for their
son, Zach.

   The couple have been through the experimental treatment process before with
Sanfilippo Syndrome, the disease afflicting Zach.

   Another son, Clinton, 4, had this syndrome, part of the Mucopolysaccharide
Disorders - known as MPS. Children with the syndrome are missing an enzyme that
breaks down a type of sugar. Without this enzyme, sugar builds up in cells,
causing progressive damage.

   Clinton died in March 1989 after undergoing an experimental bone marrow
transplant.

   Shortly before Clinton's transplant, the Szemanskis learned Zach also had the
disease. They have two other children, Jacob, 7, and Ali, 6, who don't have it.
To develop a MPS disorder, both parents must pass on the gene.

   Today, Zach has severe hearing problems, can't talk, is losing his
coordination and spends much of his day walking in circles.

   His parents frequently talk with Zach and hold him, but they don't know how
much he understands. He communicates with grunts, giggles, cries and smiles, and
has never been toilet trained.

   They decided not to pursue a similar transplant with Zach. Their goal, they
said, is to make his last years as happy and comfortable as possible.

   ''What I tell other parents is that you only cry for about the first three
years,'' said Larry Szemanski. ''Then you get used to it and you go on.''

   Their private insurance and state medical assistance available to children
with catastrophic illnesses so far has covered medical costs. However, the
family anticipates having to buy and handicapped van and expensive medical
equipment in the future as Zach's health deteriorates.

His wife said she will continue to raise funds for the National MPS Society,
even after Zach is gone. ''My hope is to see a cure for this in my lifetime so
that other people won't have to go through what we've had to go through.''

   Different opinions of numbers

   Congress in 1993 created the Office of Rare Diseases at the NIH to carry out
the requirements of the Orphan Drug Act and to provide information.

   It maintains an online database that updates clinical research under way and
holds workshops.

   Groft, the office director, believes the NIH has more than proportionately
funded rare diseases.

   Since 1988, about 20 percent of the total NIH research budget of about $ 13
billion per year has gone toward rare diseases, even though these diseases
affect only 8 to 10 percent of the population.

   ''It's a good amount of money,'' Groft said.

   But Abbey Meyers, director of the nonprofit National Organization for Rare
Disorders, said the financial statistics don't look that good.  The 8 to 10
percent, for example, translates to 20 million people.

   And the money allocated to rare diseases, when split among 5,000 of them, is
a small amount for each disorder.

   Organization members also criticize how some ''popular'' diseases get
disproportionately large amounts of support.  For instance, AIDS in 1995
received $ 31,381 in NIH research dollars for each person who died from the
disease. But the NIH spent only $ 4,525 for every cancer death and $ 1,129 for
each heart disease death.

   Finding cures for rare diseases, Groft said, is more a matter of refining
science than infusing more money for each disorder.

   ''Many are genetic in their origin and science just is not at the point of
identifying and providing interventions that will be effective in treating them.
It's the next step,'' he said.

   With Sanfilippo Syndrome and MELAS, for example, researchers have identified
what is missing from the body.  But they haven't figured out how to replace it.

   Most professionals believe advances in gene therapy will provide the cures
for some of these rare genetic disorders.

   Dr. J. Carlton Gartner Jr., a pediatrician at Children's Hospital who often
diagnoses rare disorders, said it's difficult to tell parents that their child
has a disease that has no cure.

   ''But I always tell them, 'Get on the Internet; get involved in support
groups and find out what is going on out there with the disease. There's got to
be somebody out there who's doing research in that field,' '' Gartner said.

''The earlier the diagnosis, the more likely experimental treatment, if it
exists, will work.''

   Starting 'somewhere'

   Chuck Mohan of Monroeville, whose daughter Gina died from MELAS three years
ago at age 15, continues as president of the United Mitochondrial Disease
Foundation.

   The foundation oversees fund-raising activities across the country and
recently awarded its first $ 30,000 grant to a California doctor interested in
researching the diseases.

   Mohan hopes this grant can spur larger NIH funding.

   ''You have to start somewhere,'' Mohan said.

   But Marie Capobianco of Hicksville, N.Y., who founded the National MPS
Society 20 years ago after she learned two of her children had the disorder,
said many parents are too burdened with day-to-day care of their children to
dedicate any time for raising research money.

   ''These are people who are going to need a lot of help themselves. They are
going to need equipment and medical supplies and specially equipped vans, and no
one is going to buy that stuff for them,'' said Capobianco, whose children died
years ago.

''I tell them to raise money for themselves because they are going to need it.''

   For more information on rare diseases

   *National Institutes of Health Office of Rare Diseases: 301-402-4336

   *National Organization for Rare Disorders: 800-999-6673 or 203-746-6518

   *National MPS Society Inc.: 516-931-6338

   *United Mitochondrial Disease Foundation: 412-856-1297

   Mary Niederberger is a free-lance writer who specializes in children's
health.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, PHOTO: Robin Rombach/Post-Gazette: He's 10, but Zach Szemanski,;
center, has learning and other disabilities caused by a rare genetic disorder;
called Sanfilippo Syndrome, part of a group of diseases called;
Mucopolysaccaride Disorders. Both parents must pass the gene to a child for; the
condition to develop. Zach's brother Jacob, 7, left and his sister Ali, 6,; do
not have it, but another brother, Clinton, died from it.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 1998


                             2052 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     March 10, 1998, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 2110 words

HEADLINE: Whys, hows of breast cancer start with genes

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   Two months ago, a 36-year-old writer at this newspaper discovered
that she had advanced breast cancer. By the time it was diagnosed,
it had spread to her lymph nodes and to the bones in her hips.

   Cathy Hainer has been my noontime running partner for the last
couple of years. Two or three times a week we flee the newsroom
and huff our way down the Potomac River, up to Arlington National
Cemetery and back toward the Iwo Jima monument and the paper's
headquarters in Arlington, Va.

   The conversation on these midday runs invariably has focused on
current romantic interests. Cathy updated me regularly on progress
with her boyfriend. But she rarely talked about the breast cancer
that took the life of her mother three years ago. Nor did Cathy
mention her grandmother's breast cancer or the breast cancer her
cousin developed in her early 40s.


   Cathy is Ashkenazi (Eastern European) Jewish, which describes
90% of Jewish people in the USA. That means she has a higher-than-average
chance of having inherited one of three specific gene mutations
known to raise the risk of breast cancer 15- to 20-fold.

   Experiments offer little to bank on

   When Cathy explained one day that she was giving up running to
undergo chemotherapy, I offered to check with a variety of scientist
sources and find out what else might be out there to help with
her cancer treatment.

   But I felt ashamed at what little information of real value I
would be able to offer. I have written hundreds of stories the
past decade about studies of experimental cancer treatments, using
phrases like "new hope" and "promising research" and "effective
new treatments in the near future."

   Some of the scientists involved have created clever analogies
for their experiments to attract the attention of reporters. It
is hard to resist descriptions like "guided missiles," "Trojan
horses" and "magic bullets."

   These sexy-sounding treatments worked pretty well in mice. But
I couldn't think of a single one that had lived up to its promise
and become a lifesaving mainstay of cancer treatment. There is
no magic bullet or guided missile here today for Cathy.

   Her option is high-dose chemotherapy of taxol followed by adriamycin,
then mastectomy and possibly more chemo combined with radiation.
It is the currently recommended experimental option for young
women with advanced breast cancer, says Amy Langer, National Alliance
of Breast Cancer Organizations, New York.

   Cathy's treatment protocol may be the one that works. But the
real progress in breast cancer is being made through early detection,
understanding risk and learning about the genes that turn the
cells of a breast into a tumor.

   Indeed, genetics is the area that offers the greatest hope for
understanding the biology of cancer and for developing promising
therapies for women in the future.

   "The level of understanding of the molecular basis of cancer
gained in the last 10 years is incredible compared to everything
else," says geneticist Larry Brody, National Human Genome Research
Institute, Bethesda, Md. "But most of the progress has led us
to understand how complex these cancers are."

   Knowing the genes that are involved and which pathways have gone
awry in a cell may help determine the right chemotherapy agent
or whether radiation or some combination might be more effective.
Having the MO of the gene culprits also might lead to more cell-specific
treatments with fewer harmful side effects.

   Recent researchpoints to genetics

   For now and the near future, scientists are working hard at learning
the basic biology and genetics. What they can tell Cathy is that
miscreant genes are surely the underlying cause of both the inherited
and noninherited, or sporadic, forms of breast cancer. It is also
clear that cancer commands the complex interplay of numerous genes
along many different pathways.

   A wealth of knowledge is developing around the inherited breast
cancers. Two genes have been identified in the past four years
that appear to account for 90%-95% of inherited cases. These genes
are called BRCA1 and BRCA2.

   Cathy does not know yet whether she carries a mutation in either
of these genes. She is still deciding whether she wants to be
tested. A positive test would have significant implications for
other members of her family. A negative test would not rule out
any number of other genes, known and unknown to science.

   If she does carry a BRCA1 or 2 mutation, she will be at further
jeopardy for developing cancer in her other breast and for developing
ovarian cancer. If she carries a BRCA2 mutation, her brothers
might be at increased risk for male breast cancer and, potentially,
prostate cancer.

   That her mother and grandmother had breast cancer is the strongest
suggestion of all that Cathy inherited a gene mutation of some
type. The fact that her father is of Ashkenazic origin raises
the possibility that the mutation is in a BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene.

   Studies show that 2 in 100 Ashkenazic Jews carry one of three
common mutations found in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. Icelanders
appear to have their own common mutation, as do members of a population
studied in Holland. Studies in the general population suggest
these mutations occur in 1 in 300 to 1 in 800 people.

   If a woman in the general population has one of the BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutations, her lifetime risk of breast cancer is estimated at
60% to 70%. If she has a family history of breast cancer or is
of Ashkenazic origin, her lifetime risk is 80% to 90%, and she
is much more likely to develop breast cancer before menopause.

   The average woman has about a 10% risk of developing breast cancer
by age 80, and most of that risk is loaded in the decades after
menopause.

   Genetic mutation or simply chance?

   While Cathy's cancer may be related to a mutated BRCA1 or 2, it's
important to keep in mind that it could have developed entirely
by chance.

   Inherited breast cancer accounts for only 5% to 10% of the 180,000
women who will be diagnosed this year. The remaining 90% to 95%
of women develop so-called sporadic breast cancer. That means
the genetic changes that cause their cancer happen after they
are born, because of environmental causes or chance.

   Scientists are uncovering information about genes involved in
sporadic breast cancer. But the extent to which BRCA1 and BRCA2
are involved in sporadic cases is unknown, Brody says. Brody says
no BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations have been identified in tumors from
sporadic cases.

   What is clear, however, is that the risk of breast cancer posed
by genes in sporadic cancers is far less than that posed by BRCA1
and BRCA2, even though genes involved in sporadic cancer wreak
havoc on a far greater number of women.

   One key gene identified in sporadic cases is p53, which is found
in many cancers.

   P53 is considered a tumor suppressor gene. It was initially believed
to behave as a brake on cell growth. If p53 is damaged by a mutation,
either inherited or acquired or both, then cells grow out of control
and form a tumor.

   More likely, however, p53 serves as the grim reaper of cells that
have accidentally acquired DNA damage. P53 makes a protein that
induces these potentially cancer-causing cells to commit suicide.
If p53 can't do its job, the DNA damage accumulates in a cell,
and it begins to multiply and lead to cancer.

   Perhaps the difference in function is subtle. But making the distinction
is vital to planning ways to use healthy p53 genes or their protein
as a treatment.

   A spreading mystery

   Scientists also are studying genes that appear to be involved
in spreading the cancer from the primary tumor to other parts
of the body. These genes quite likely played a role in disseminating
Cathy's cancer cells to her hipbone.

   Other genes under investigation in sporadic cases are GADD repair
genes, Her-2/neu oncogene, the retinblastoma suppressor gene and
various genes involved in regulating the life cycle of a cell.

   For BRCA1 and BRCA2, debate rages over their functions. The safest
bet is that they aid the repair of DNA in cells or help ensure
the proper formation of DNA in a dividing cell, says Daniel Haber,
director of the Center for Cancer Risk Analysis at Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston.

   In the cell, BRCA1 and 2 proteins have been seen holding hands
with other proteins known to aid DNA repair and ensure integrity.
So BRCA1 and 2 genes probably work closely with other genes, including
p53, to do their job. This guilt by association is the strongest
evidence on BRCA1 and 2 function, Haber says.

   If Cathy carries a BRCA1 or 2 mutation, scientists have a good
idea about how she developed cancer. BRCA1 and 2 mutations perfectly
fit the classic "two-hit" hypothesis of cancer development,
Brody says.

   According to the scenario, Cathy is born with a mutation on one
copy of the BRCA1 or 2 gene -- the first hit. Remember that everyone
has two copies of each gene in every cell. It's nature's way of
giving us a backup system for cellular operations. She grows up
healthy and unaware that her body is relying on a single copy
of the BRCA1 or 2 gene to maintain the stability of her DNA. At
some point, that remaining copy takes a hit, like a bullet from
a carcinogen or radiation, and its function is lost.

   The DNA-damaged cell begins to grow copies beneath her breast,
and they attach to the chest wall as a tumor. Another tumor forms
on the side of the breast. Before Cathy knows they are there,
they have infiltrated her bloodstream and formed a metastasis
on her hipbone.

   The complex task of tracking mutations

   Complicating the study of the BRCA genes is their size. Both are
goliaths. More than 450 mutations have been found in BRCA1 and
more than 250 in BRCA2, Brody says. And apparently a very small
mutation that changes the coding or sequence of the gene in the
right place can significantly alter the gene's ability to make
its normal protein.

   Most studies of the two genes have found that when mutations occur,
the protein becomes shortened, or truncated.

   The protein seems essential for many species during development,
and it appears at different times in life in different tissues.
Mice that are missing both copies of the BRCA1 gene die after
seven days of embryonic development.

   In people, the protein appears in all cells and may increase when
exposed to higher levels of hormones. The fact that it appears
in all cells indicates that its normal function is key to life.

   All this knowledge does little for improving Cathy's chances of
survival. But it may shed light on how and why a healthy young
woman developed such a devastating disease.

   It also shows how complex cancer actually is and how multiple
genes must be involved. The complexity makes it less likely that
gene therapies or cell-specific treatments, which spare the shotgun
blast of chemotherapy and radiation, will be a reality in the
near future.

   Still, researchers are gaining in their understanding of the biology
and genetics of breast cancer. Someday it will bear fruit for
women with breast cancer. It really will.


   Prognosis is improving

   Women with breast cancer are surviving longer today than women
diagnosed 30 years ago, according to new figures reported in the
Journal of Clinical Oncology.

   An analysis of data on 25,000 breast cancer patients found that
median survival after diagnosis improved from 4.4 years in 1965
to 7.2 years in 1993 among women with tumors that had spread to
nearby lymph nodes.

   Michael Edwards, University of Louisville School of Medicine,
and colleagues also found that for women whose tumors had not
spread, median survival increased from 8.5 years in 1963 to 11.7
years in 1993.

   Edwards says the improvement probably is the result of better
and earlier detection, increased use of chemotherapy and radiation
along with surgery, and better techniques for finding that cancer
cells had in fact spread.

   A second study, by Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center researchers,
found that removal of the breasts or ovaries can prolong survival
for young healthy women who test positive for mutations of the
BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene.

   Women studied were age 30, had a positive gene test and either
had a strong family history of cancer or were of Ashkenazi Jewish
origin. Those who had both mastectomy and removal of ovaries lived
up to six years longer than if they did not have the procedure,
while women who had only mastectomy lived 3.4 years longer.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Genevieve Lynn, USA TODAY; GRAPHIC, B/W, Genevieve Lynn,
USA TODAY (Diagram); GRAPHIC, B/W, Genevieve Lynn, USA TODAY (Illustration, 3);
PHOTO, B/W, Eileen Blass, USA TODAY

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1998


                             2053 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      March 9, 1998, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Health; Part S; Page 7; View Desk

LENGTH: 1159 words

HEADLINE: ON THE JOB;
A BLOODLESS BLOOD-SUGAR TEST?;
 A Maryland Executive Who Helped Commercialize Gene Therapy Bets That a Tiny
Implant Can Take the Pain Out of Glucose Checks for Diabetics

BYLINE: MARK GUIDERA, THE BALTIMORE SUN

DATELINE: GERMANTOWN, Md.

BODY:


   M. James Barrett and his lean team of scientists and engineers are hot on the
trail of overcoming a challenge that has stumped medical-device makers for
years: developing a fast, accurate blood-sugar monitor small enough to be
implanted in diabetics.

   Barrett puts the task before him succinctly: "The field is littered with the
dead bodies of those who have tried and failed at this."

   Nevertheless, the 56-year-old executive is no stranger to the high-wire risk
involved in launching a new company to develop breakthrough technologies. Among
his recent accomplishments: He started and headed up one of the first companies
to test gene therapy in humans, Gaithersburg, Md.-based Genetic Therapy Inc.

   In fact, said those who know Barrett well, it's the derring-do involved with
the micro-sensor project that may have enticed him out of semi-retirement last
year to head up the new company, Germantown-based Sensors for Medicine and
Technology, dedicated to developing and commercializing the glucose device.

   "Jim has an uncanny ability to look at a new technology and see the future of
where it can go, and the importance of getting there," said French Anderson,
director of USC's gene therapy laboratories and a former National Institutes of
Health researcher.


   *

   In 1987, Anderson and Barrett co-founded Genetic Therapy Inc. to capitalize
on Anderson's groundbreaking work on gene therapy at a time when many skeptics
were predicting that the obstacles were so great that it could take 30 years to
get to human testing.

   Anderson recalls it was Barrett's vision of how the technology should be
developed--and then his focusing all of GTI's resources on achieving that
goal--that led to the company and the NIH winning government approval just three
years later for the first human test.

   Barrett stepped down from GTI in July 1996, a year after the former Sandoz
Pharmaceuticals Ltd., now Novartis, bought the company for $ 295 million. In his
latest venture, Barrett, who holds degrees in chemistry, biochemistry and
business administration, is focusing on a tiny sensor developed by Arthur "Skip"
Colvin, a former research scientist who had worked under him in the mid-1980s at
Bethesda Research Laboratories, now Life Technologies Inc.

   Said Barrett, "Let's face it, you only go around once in life and you might
as well do something that is worthwhile. To me, this technology has enormous
potential to make a lasting difference in people's lives and if we make money
doing it, that's worthwhile too."

   Barrett will need more than altruism to make Sensors for Medicine a success,
said analysts of the medical-device industry.

   For one, it faces competition. At least three other small U.S. companies are
attempting to develop devices to make glucose monitoring easier. They include
MiniMed Inc. of Sylmar, SpectRX of New York, and Implanted BioSystems Inc., a
subsidiary of Synthetic Blood International, of Kettering, Ohio. All are
publicly held.

   Also, regulatory and government hurdles still must be overcome. Chief among
them is tweaking the design of a molecule to be embedded on a microchip that
will monitor blood glucose levels.


   *

   If Sensors for Medicine is successful, the glucose monitoring device has huge
market potential.

   There are an estimated 8 million diagnosed diabetics in the United States,
the American Diabetes Assn. says. An estimated 8 million others are either
misdiagnosed or undiagnosed. Also, it is one of the fastest growing chronic
diseases in the country.

   The market for blood glucose monitoring strips and meters is estimated by
analysts to be a $ 2.5-billion global industry.

   It's unclear yet whether Sensors for Medicine's device would replace how
diabetics monitor their blood sugar levels today or if big medical equipment
companies would be interested in licensing it for sale. But the patented
technology behind the device has potential applications in industries as diverse
as pollution control monitoring and food packaging, said Charles W. Newhall III,
of Baltimore-based New Enterprise Associates, the venture capital group backing
Sensors for Medicine with $ 2 million in seed financing.

   Meanwhile, there is an enormous need for a simpler way to monitor a
diabetic's blood sugar than the way it is commonly done today, diabetes experts
say.

   Diabetics monitor their blood glucose levels by taking a blood sample up to
eight times a day by pricking a finger and swabbing the sample on a small strip
treated with an enzyme. The strip is fed into a hand-sized meter, which provides
a blood sugar level reading. From that, a diabetic can determine whether an
insulin shot is needed.

   The process can be painful, particularly for children and the elderly, and
requires daily discipline.

   As a result, parents of young children anguish over the regimen, and many
diabetics don't take regular readings. That can lead to complications and
worsening of the disease.

   Barrett said he expects in a few months to have a clearer picture of his
company's chances for success. That's when Colvin and other researchers should
wrap up work on the blood sugar-recognizing molecule, and Barrett wants to pitch
investors for more funding.

   Engineers at Sensors for Medicine have designed a microchip as small as the
eye on a Lincoln penny on which the new molecule will be embedded.

   The chip would then be injected into the fatty tissue layer of a diabetic's
arm or other area. From there, it would transmit blood glucose readings to a
meter worn on the wrist like a watch.

   The sensor uses a common light-emitting diode, the same light source found in
calculators and other consumer electronics to "excite" the fluorescence of
Colvin's indicator molecule. The light from the fluorescence is affected by the
presence of glucose molecules. Another diode tracks the weakness or brightness
of the fluorescence and sends a signal to a wrist meter.

   The sensor would be run by a power source in the wrist device, eliminating
the need for a battery implanted in the sensor.


   *

   As Newhall puts it, the appeal--and potential pitfall--of Colvin's invention
is that it has "literally hundreds of potential applications" in a diverse array
of industries.

   Where Barrett's skill came to bear early on the technology was in determining
which application to target first and then getting everyone, from investors to
company engineers, focused on that one goal, said Colvin, the inventor.

   Colvin said he started out attempting to design a new sensor for the
fermentation industry. But after he approached Barrett for advice on how to
market the invention, Barrett suggested a better opportunity may lie in
medicine.

   "The great thing about Jim is, he not only has sharp business judgment, but
he's deep technically," Colvin said. "He doesn't get mired in the details of
what an engineer may be working on, but he understands a lot of complex
disciplines and can see the broad picture."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: "The field is littered with the dead bodies of those who have
tried and failed at this," says M. James Barrett, in the Sensors for Medicine
lab.  PHOTOGRAPHER: JOHN MAKELY / The Baltimore Sun

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1998


                             2054 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1998 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          March 9, 1998 Monday, THIRD

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 810 words

HEADLINE: ANIMAL RESEARCH VITAL TO MEDICINE

BYLINE: By SUSAN E. PARIS

BODY:

   Paul McCartney struck a sour note the other night in his appearance on an ABC
network television tribute to Christopher Reeve.

   An impressive lineup of musicians and Hollywood stars - close friends of the
paralyzed actor - took part in the two-hour extravaganza designed, in the words
of comic Robin Williams, to raise money to help my friend and 250,000 other
people get back on their feet.

   The Christopher Reeve Foundation has been set up to finance research on
spinal cord injury.

   Hope was the theme of the entertaining evening. Discussing the new advances
in spinal cord research, Tom Hanks told the audience, "Imagination and science
are converging and, for the first time, real hope is on the horizon."
Christopher Reeve added, "If the public demands politicians make that investment
(in research), I'll be up and walking around again." Stevie Wonder sang "Hold
Onto Your Dream." Mary Chapin Carpenter offered "Keep the Faith."

   In a brief taped appearance, McCartney sang the love song "Calico Skies" as
part of a segment profiling a young couple who are both confined to wheelchairs.

   What made his appearance on the program so discordant is McCartney opposes
the very research that provides the hope that Reeve, the young couple and
thousands of others will be able to walk again.

   As Dr. Wise Young of Rutgers University, one of the legion of scientists
working on treatments for spinal cord injuries, explained in another taped
segment of the show, important research is being done on rats. Doctors have been
able to regenerate nerve tissue and rats with severed spinal cords can once
again walk. "This is what is so exciting," Young said. "We have to move these
therapies from rats to humans. The vast majority of scientists believe not only
that we have a chance to get these therapies - but that it will be done."

   McCartney's opposition to animal research is no secret. He and his wife,
Linda, are heading up a campaign against the March of Dimes that is being run by
a radical animal rights group. The McCartneys are trying to stop donations to
the March of Dimes. The reason? In its quest to end the tragedy of birth
defects, the March of Dimes supports vital research that involves mice, rats and
other laboratory animals.

   March of Dimes-sponsored research has already contributed to infant health.
Vaccines for Rubella and RH, the use of ultrasound to detect and treat heart
defects, gene mapping and gene therapy, diabetic control during pregnancy, PKU
screening for newborns and treatment of Respiratory Stress Syndrome have saved
thousands of lives.

   If he wishes to do so, Paul McCartney has every right to oppose research that
makes babies healthier and offers hope to Reeve and so many others.

   It is McCartney's hypocrisy that strikes that sour note. His alliance with
the radical animal rights group PETA, which zealously fights to abolish animal
research, has led him to attack publicly this key component of medical science.
Privately, however, he avails himself and his family to the benefits derived
from research with animals.

   In 1996, when Linda McCartney was battling breast cancer, she and Paul flew
to Los Angeles so she could obtain cutting-edge treatments that were brought
about through animal research. Protocols for chemotherapy and radiation are
developed in animals before being used on women. Most of the latest information
we have about breast cancer has come through studies with mice, rats and fruit
flies.

   Scientists are waging heroic battles against illness, injury and disease. We
are seeing the results of their work almost daily in news reports of medical
advances. New drugs extend the lives of people with AIDS. Pig cell transplants
transform the lives of those who had been crippled by Parkinson's disease.
Hormone replacement therapies from animal products fight heart disease and
osteoporosis in women. New surgical procedures are less invasive and drastically
reduce recovery time. And yes, rapid progress is being made in repairing injured
spinal cords.

   But McCartney has refused to admit the connection between medical advances -
aimed at ensuring he, his wife and their children will have longer and healthier
lives - and scientists' work with laboratory animals.

   Other celebrities PETA has recruited have turned away when they learned how
the group's war against animal research is destroying the hopes of their loved
ones struggling with cancer, AIDS and other grave diseases.

   Could McCartney's appearance on the Christopher Reeve TV special indicate he
now understands that animal research is absolutely vital to medical progress?

   For those who wait for a cure for spinal cord injuries, the hope is in animal
research, but McCartney's defection from PETA is a fervent wish.

   Susan E. Paris is president of Americans for Medical Progress, which is
headquartered in Alexandria, Va.

GRAPHIC: Paul McCartney: Will he give up his alliance with those opposed to any
animal research that would benefit humans?  CHRISTOPHER REEVE Hoping to walk
again 2 FILE PHOTOS

COLUMN: SUSAN E. PARIS

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1998


                             2055 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      March 8, 1998, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: NORTH WEEKLY; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1493 words

HEADLINE: College kids on the weekend;
Program lets young students study the things they like;
NORTH WEEKLY

BYLINE: By Coco McCabe, Globe Correspondent

BODY:

    It was dark in the room - and absolutely quiet - after teacher Paula Burke
turned out the lights, lit the Bunsen burner, and let the specks of barium,
potassium, and iron work their magic in the flame. Reds, purples and greens
danced before the kids' eyes as oohs and aahs of delight broke the silence.

   And that was just the first day.

   Since then, the kids have spit in test tubes to watch their enzymes at work.
They have used lemons to power a clock. And they probably know more about
anthrax, the biological weapon that recently sent the FBI into overdrive, than
the average news junkie could ever pick up from TV. That's what college does for
9-year-olds: it lights them up like that Bunsen burner.

   Though it has been around since 1975, the Kids to College program may be one
of the best-kept secrets in the North Weekly region. Run by North Shore
Community College at its campuses in Danvers and Lynn, the program is open to
all kids between the ages of 5 and 14 who are curious about whales or stars, who
dream of becoming cartoonists, or love the feel of cold clay.

   It's for budding linquists who want to study French or Spanish, for young
chefs who will learn how to whip up Chinese and Italian dishes, and for those
kids who just have to know how DNA works, what bugs look like under a
microscope, and what water is made of.

   There's a catch, though. You've got to roll out of bed Saturday morning -
early - to get there. Classes start at 9 a.m. But in this world that's so far
removed from the usual school routine, no one seems to mind a bit.

   Smoothing out the papier-mache creature she was working on one recent
Saturday morning, Emily Duran-Poli, 12 1/2, paused for a moment, her hands
dripping, to think what drew her to the "Young Sculptors" class at the Danvers
campus taught by Corinne Champagne.

    "It's cool," said the Lynn resident. "I had art class, but we didn't do it
too much because our school is cheap. They don't even have enough budget for
good books."

   So, once a year, when her family can afford it, Duran-Poli scans the
offerings in the catalog (there are usually about 20 courses a semester and each
costs $ 85), makes a pick, and spends seven Saturday mornings in late winter
soaking up the college vibes. She has taken classes in Native American crafts
and culture, creative cuisine and acting.

   "Proposition 2 1/2 took away a lot of things from schools, and this, in its
way, replaces some of that," said George Traicoff, president of the college. And
no, the intent is not to shove youngsters into the hurried child syndrome, he
added, even if they are on a college campus.

   "What happens here is the kind of thing you want to have happen on a weekend.
They leave here full of emotions and excitement," Traicoff said. "I don't see
kids leaving here burned out and worn out."

   Allie Steinberger certainly doesn't. A Peabody fourth-grader who spends many
of her spare moments drawing, Steinberger signed up for one cartooning class and
then another.

   "I loved it," she said, settling into her seat in the advanced section taught
by Al Stevens in Danvers. "You think of your own characters. You use your
imagination a lot and when you're finished it looks good. You're proud of it."

   Stevens's approach is not to squelch enthusiasm or overwhelm his junior
cartoonists with the superior works of professionals. Instead, he lets the kids
develop their own styles. He insists that they be the creative artists and
rewards them at the end with a comic book compiled from the cartoons they drew
during class. But there are standards he makes sure they're aware of.

   One of his dictums? Do not scribble. "A scribble is a scribble in any country
in the world," he reminded his students.

   But they didn't look like they needed much nudging. Heads down, pens and
pencils flicking over the white pages, intense concentration was the order of
the day in this classroom. These were serious students, bent on learning how to
create believable characters and put together a story line.

   And that's one of the secrets to the success of this program: kids, for the
most part, want to be there.

   "Out of 24 kids I have one troublemaker, and he's not really a troublemaker,"
said Lori Bunnell, a teacher at the Lynn campus who has launched a new course
this year called "Fun With Forensics."

   The first day, her students walked into the classroom and encountered a crime
scene from which they had to collect evidence. What were those suspicious white
powders? They've been conducting experiments to find out and now know that salt,
sugar, cornstarch and flour all react differently when iodine, water or vinegar
is added.

   It helps that class sizes are limited to 12. Everyone gets involved, whether
it's with twirling a beaker full of a strange pink liquid or dunking their arms
up to their elbows in glue and water.

   "The whole program is really hands-on. I don't believe we have a textbook in
the entire program," said Tom Petelle, director of Kids to College. "The major
charm of the classes is the small size. When you have eight kids, the teacher
can individualize. You can do amazing things with small numbers."

   And when it comes to the sciences or math, that's especially important. The
Kids to College program was launched during the Cold War, Petelle said, when
there was concern about the country lagging in science. The motivation was to
give kids an early foundation in the sciences.

   "Even to this day you go into the elementary schools and they do not have
science labs," Petelle said. "Science subject areas are dealt with along with
the reading. It's one thing to read an article and another to get into a lab and
use the microscopes and glass tubes."

   Starting early also may take some of the anxiety out of science for students,
even if all the specifics about orbitals and bonds, electrons and molecules grow
foggy.

   "I don't know educationally how much they retain, but it gives them good
exposure," said Carol Rozen of Boxford, whose son, Jeremy, is enrolled in
"Chemistry for Kids" taught by Paula Burke. "It doesn't seem scary. He'll enjoy
it when he goes in to take chemistry" in high school.

   Since the program first started, it has grown substantially to include an
array of arts offerings as well as a sprinkling of remedial courses such as
"Study Buddies," which shows students how to create their own climate for
learning.

   Among the public colleges in the region, North Shore is the only one to offer
Saturday classes for youngsters. Salem State College has a three-week summer
course called the SEA program for gifted students in fourth through eighth
grades, and Northern Essex Community College in Haverhill is launching a new
program for 11- to 13-year-olds this July. It will focus on science and the arts
and will include some sports.

   Between 375 and 400 students sign up each semester for Kids to College at
North Shore. Classes are held in the fall, winter, and spring, and during the
summer camps are offered in Lynn, while a regular session continues in Danvers.

    While some of the offerings may touch on heavy-sounding topics - gene
therapy, bacteriology, plant hybridization - the program is by no means just for
academic hotshots.

   "I think it might scare some people off. They might think 'this is too much
for my kid,' " said Karen Jarzylo of Lynn whose daughters have attended the
program. "But when it comes right down to it, I think that if the child were
allowed to choose something, any child might benefit from it. They don't have to
be scholastically superior at all."

   That's what 15-year-old Larissa Jarzylo, an honors student, found. "When you
walk in, everyone's on the same level. It's all fresh and new," she said. "Even
if the kid's having trouble in school it gives them an edge and it sparks an
interest. And you'll definitely remember things."

   For some students, it's an opportunity to take a chance, to try something
without making a long-term commitment, until they know whether they like it. In
Sallee Slagle's ballet and jazz class this semester every student but one is
testing the waters for the first time. No small dance studio for this personal
experiment: The entire gym at the Lynn campus is their's to leap around in.

   "It's a special moment," said Slagle of this semester. "They're all excited."

   Part of it has to do with the surroundings. Coming from crowded and
occasionally run-down school buildings of their own, it can be inspiring to kids
to walk into uncluttered and well-equipped college classrooms. Suddenly, college
seems accessible, inviting, worth aiming for.

   "I like that she's coming to a college and she's getting comfortable at a
college at a young age," said Debbie Duran-Poli, the mother of the young
papier-mache sculptor. "It does inspire her to continue on with education." Both
at North Shore - and beyond.

   What does Emily Duran-Poli see in her future? More college, of course.

   "I want to go to Yale," she said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. Pencil ready, Allie Steinberger of Peabody listens to an
instructor in a cartooning class for youngsters offered by North Shore Community
College. / GLOBE PHOTO/BETHANY VERSOY 2. Instructor Al Stevens discusses art
with Allie Steinberger, a fourth-grader from Peabody, during a Saturday morning
cartooning class in North Shore Community College's Kids to College program. /
GLOBE PHOTO/BETHANY VERSOY

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1998


                             2056 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1998 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                          March 7, 1998, Metro Edition

SECTION: Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 726 words

HEADLINE: People

BYLINE: Mark Brunswick; Ingrid Sanden; Staff Writers

BODY:

   Newspaper delivery gets couple labeled as litterbugs

    Police in Creve Coeur, Ill., say that Jim Rogy should pay a $ 50 fine for
leaving litter in yards around town.

    His offense? Delivering newspapers.

    Rogy's wife, Amanda, delivers the East Peoria Times-Courier, a free weekly
sent to 2,500 homes. Rogy often helps his wife, and last week he hung bagged
newspapers from mailboxes or threw them into yards.

    Rogy says police never complained - until now. The couple got a call after
finishing their route to come to the station.

    Rogy was ticketed - initially for throwing a "missile/bottle," but that was
changed to littering. "I was speechless," he said.

    Police Chief Frank Thatcher says people have complained about the newspapers
ending up in their yards.


    On TV from D.C.

    Minnetonka Mayor Karen Anderson is scheduled to be a guest today on C-SPAN's
"Washington Journal." The program is scheduled to air at 8:30 a.m.

    Anderson, who is attending National League of Cities activities in
Washington, D.C., will appear along with Kenneth Barr, the mayor of Fort Worth,
Texas. She's expected to talk about problems facing cities similar in size to
Minnetonka.

    - Mark Brunswick


    Under the microscope

    William Greenleaf ranks first in his class at Rochester's Mayo High School,
but will find tough competition this week in Washington, D.C., when he competes
with other budding scientists for a Westinghouse scholarship.

    Greenleaf will present details of his project on gene therapy and his work
will be reviewed by a panel of 10 judges. He's competing against 40 other
students selected by the Westinghouse Science Talent Search.

    - Ingrid Sanden


    Tribute to a master

    Burt Bacharach is getting the star treatment from his fellow musicians. The
famed composer will be honored in a concert special on TNT next month, with
several artists performing their renditions of Bacharach songs arranged by the
man himself.

    Sheryl Crow, Dionne Warwick, Luther Vandross, Elvis Costello, Noel
Gallagher, Chrissie Hynde and Ben Folds Five will participate. Comedian Mike
Myers will give his own rendition of "What's New, Pussycat?"

    The cable network will tape the New York concert, the first of the "TNT
Master Series" on major figures in entertainment and sports, and air it April
15.


    He's remembering more

    The sole survivor of the car crash that killed Princess Diana is recalling
the accident bit by bit, his lawyer said Friday after bodyguard Trevor
Rees-Jones met with an investigating judge in Paris for the fourth time.

    Rees-Jones "is remembering more details, not many . . . and is hoping to
remember more," Christian Curtil told reporters after the 75-minute meeting with
Judge Herve Stephan. "Everything he says is what he is absolutely sure of."

    He refused to elaborate or recount what Rees-Jones told the judge.


    Wynette stood by her suit

    Two supermarket tabloids settled an invasion-of-privacy lawsuit in which
country music star Tammy Wynette claimed that exaggerated coverage of her
illness last year hurt her career. The terms of the settlement with The Star and
the National Enquirer are confidential, her attorney said Thursday.

    The singer sued over stories about her hospitalization last year in
Pittsburgh, about eight months after she recovered from a liver infection.


    Blown out of proportion?

    Hootie & the Blowfish have a bone to pick with a splintmaker.

    A lawsuit filed Thursday accuses North Coast Medical Inc. of San Jose,
Calif., of using the band's name without authorization to advertise the latest
plastic used in splints. The ad, which has run in trade journals, features a
Chubby Checker record changing into a Hootie compact disc. The band is seeking
unspecified damages.

    "We're not doing anything malicious. We just thought it was a slightly
humorous way of approaching a product," said North Coast spokeswoman Kathy
DeStories.


    Happy birthday to:

    - Actor Daniel J. Travanti, 58.

    - Actor John Heard, 52.

    - Singer Taylor Dayne, 33.

    - Musician Randy Guss of Toad the Wet Sprocket, 31.

    - Compiled by Tonia E. Moore


    Associated Press

    Give us a kiss

    Brody, an 800-pound Kodiak grizzly, made a public display of his affection
for trainer Jeff Watson before they opened Thursday at the Sportshow in Des
Moines, Iowa. He didn't seem to mind - much.


GRAPHIC: Photograph; Photograph; Photograph; Cartoon; Cartoon

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1998


                             2057 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                March 5, 1998, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A5, HEALTH UPDATE COLUMN

LENGTH: 802 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH UPDATE

BYLINE: From News Services

BODY:


TUBERCULOSIS

New, aggressive strain worries health officials

   The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has warned doctors to be
vigilant to prevent an outbreak of a highly contagious strain of tuberculosis
that can spread after only two hours of exposure.

   The disease center said such an outbreak took place in rural Kentucky and
Tennessee from 1994 to 1996. It said the aggressive strain has not reappeared
since infected people were treated.

   The new strain was first discovered in a preschool child in Tennessee who
received a standard tuberculosis skin test. Her case was later traced to a
21-year-old uncle in Clinton County, Ky., who suffered from a chronic cough.

   In all, 20 people became ill with the new strain of TB and the disease spread
to both people who came in close and casual contact with sufferers.

   Usually, the bacteria responsible for TB grow slowly, giving the immune
system plenty of time to create a barrier to the infection. Only in about 5
percent of the cases does the disease progress and people become ill.

   Details of the case appeared in today's New England Journal of Medicine.

SKIN CANCER

Melanoma vaccines are advancing, researchers say

   Researchers report they had made progress toward vaccines that work against
melanoma, a deadly form of skin cancer.

   Both vaccines give extra help to the body's immune system by changing
antigens - the chemical markers that help immune cells recognize enemies such as
invading bacteria or defective tumor cells.

   The changes made the antigens more recognizable to the body's killer immune
cells known as cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTLs), which then seemed to destroy the
cancer cells.

   Steven Rosenberg and colleagues at the National Cancer Institute, slightly
changed a peptide known as gp100 which appears on the surface of cancer cells.

   They then mixed this modified protein with interleukin-2 (IL-2), an immune
signaling chemical or cytokine.

   When they injected skin cancer patients with their vaccine, 42 percent showed
tumor shrinkage, they reported in the journal Nature Medicine.

OBESITY

When kids lose 'baby fat' has impact on adult size

   Children who reach the thinnest point of childhood before age 5 are more than
twice as likely to become obese adults as children who lose their baby fat
later, researchers say.

   The finding held true regardless of whether parents were overweight, which is
already known to be a strong indicator of a child's future size, according to a
report in this month's issue of Pediatrics.

   Most children grow leaner after the first year of life until age 5 or 6, when
they become fatter again, said researchers led by Dr. Robert Whitaker, a
pediatrician at Children's Hospital Medical Center in Cincinnati.

   The age of greatest leanness is called "adiposity rebound," and researchers
compared differing ages at which it occurred among 390 subjects who were tracked
until they were 21 to 29 years old.

   Whitaker said the age range apparently is a "critical developmental period,
just as it is for language development or capacity for listening to music or any
of a number of things."

GENETICS

'Repairman' molecule gives hope for future fixes

   Scientists have altered a gene in rat livers by injecting a "repairman"
molecule into the bloodstream, a startling advance that may lead to cures for
such genetic diseases as hemophilia and cystic fibrosis.

   The treatment produced a specific change in about 40 percent of the liver's
supply of the targeted gene. Other techniques have success rates more like one
in a million in much easier tests, where cells were in laboratory dishes rather
than in an animal.

   If it works in people, the technique might someday be able to cure a host of
disorders caused by defective genes, like hemophilia, cystic fibrosis, sickle
cell anemia and an inherited form of high cholesterol that affects about one in
500 people, producing heart attacks around age 40. But gene therapy experts
cautioned that it's unclear whether the technique would apply to a range of
disorders. They also said many scientists have been unable to make it work.

BLOOD THINNER

Coumadin patients should limit use of painkillers

   Patients being treated with the blood-thinning drug Coumadin should avoid
taking large doses of Tylenol and similar painkillers because of the risk of
internal hemorrhaging, a study published this week said.

   Coumadin, manufactured by DuPont Pharma, is an anti-clotting drug with the
generic name warfarin that is often prescribed to heart patients susceptible to
stroke.

   Tylenol and similar painkillers contain the active drug acetaminophen, which
has not previously been associated with blood thinning. Aspirin, another type of
painkiller, does act as a blood thinner.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1998


                             2058 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       March 3, 1998 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 032

LENGTH: 527 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFCASE

BODY:

   TAX LASHING: President Clinton lashed out yesterday at a GOP proposal to
abolish the federal tax code as an irresponsible scheme that would generate
uncertainty and jeopardize America's economic strength. Clinton found an easy
target in a proposal from Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott (R-Miss.) to
terminate the tax code by the end of 2001. Lott's idea is to use deadline
pressure to create momentum for a different way of taxing people such as through
a single rate income tax or a national sales tax. Clinton told a meeting of
bankers that an alternative should be chosen before dismantling the old system.
He claimed the current system has helped power the economy to millions of new
jobs, low interest rates and the prospect of the first balanced federal budget
in 30 years.   - R

   WIRELESS CUT: Bell Atlantic Mobile yesterday cut rates by up to 20 percent on
its digital wireless phone service, which it introduced last May. The company
cited competition and the desire to bring new subscribers to its digital network
as motivation for the price cuts.  - HS

   NEW DIVISION: Bull Worldwide Information Systems has decided to base its new
software division in Billerica, where it has 500 workers. Henry Ancona was named
chief executive of the $ 100 million unit. Ancona said the headquarters decision
will immediately bring a couple dozen more jobs to the area and more later on.
- HS

   PROMOTED: Fleet Financial Group promoted four high-level executives
yesterday: William C. Mutterperl and Anne Szostak were named executive vice
presidents, while Douglas L. Jacobs and Brian T. Moynihan were made senior vice
presidents.  - HS

   MEDIA BUY: McDermott-O'Neill & Associates, Inc., a Boston-based public
relations firm, yesterday bought Boston marketing communications and public
relations firm Kennedy & Company. Terms of the deal were not disclosed. Kennedy
& Co. will move to McDermott's One Beacon Street headquarters. McDermott also
has offices in Springfield, Cape Cod, and Washington.  - HS

   WARNING: Cabletron Systems Inc., feeling the bottom line pressure from the
closing of its digital network products business, issued a profit warning late
yesterday. The Rochester, N.H., firm said Q4 earnings could fade entirely and
could wind up in the red before $ 390 million in pre-tax one-time charges kick
in. Most Wall Street analysts expected the networking company to earn 16 cents a
share for the period, First Call reported.  - R

   GENE WONDER: Scientists altered a gene in rats' livers by injecting a
"repairman" molecule into the animals' bloodstreams, the Journal Nature Medicine
reported. The technique might lead to a cure someday for hemophilia and some
other inherited diseases in people. The treatment produced a specific change in
about 40 percent of the rat liver's supply of the targeted gene - enough to cure
many genetic disorders. But gene therapy experts cautioned that it's not clear
whether this technique would apply to a range of disorders. They also noted that
many scientists have not been able to make it work.  - AP

   Sources: Herald staff, Associated Press, Reuter, Dow Jones, and Bloomberg
News services

LOAD-DATE: March 03, 1998


                             2059 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                      March 3, 1998, Tuesday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 188 words

HEADLINE: REPAIR OF RAT GENE STIRS HIGH HOPES FOR HUMANS

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:


   In an astonishing result, scientists altered a gene in rats' livers by
injecting a "repairman" molecule into the animals' bloodstreams. The technique
might lead to a cure someday for hemophilia and some other inherited diseases in
people.

   The startling thing was how well it worked. The treatment produced a specific
change in about 40 percent of the rat livers' supply of the targeted gene. Other
techniques have achieved rates more like one in a million, even when tried on
cells in laboratory dishes rather than in an animal.

   A 40 percent success rate could cure many genetic diseases. But gene therapy
experts cautioned that it's not clear whether this technique would apply to a
range of disorders. They also noted that many scientists have not been able to
make it work.

   If the technique works in people, it might cure an inherited form of high
cholesterol that affects about one in 500 people and gives them heart attacks
around age 40. Other liver targets, apart from hemophilia, are mostly rare
diseases. But with modification, the technique might also treat some other
genetic diseases outside the liver.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1998


                             2060 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1998 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                        March 3, 1998 Tuesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-05

LENGTH: 304 words

HEADLINE: 'Repair' molecule alters gene in livers of lab rats Genetic-disease
cures a possibility

BYLINE: By Malcolm Ritter, The Associated Press

BODY:

   NEW YORK - In an astonishing result, scientists altered a gene in rats'
livers by injecting a "repair" molecule into the animals' bloodstreams. The
technique might lead to a cure someday for hemophilia and some other inherited
diseases in people.

   The startling thing was how well it worked. The treatment produced a specific
change in about 40 percent of a rat liver's supply of the targeted gene. Other
techniques have achieved rates more like one in a million, even when tried on
cells in laboratory dishes rather than in an animal.

   A 40 percent success rate could cure many genetic diseases. But gene therapy
experts cautioned that it's not clear whether this technique would apply to a
range of disorders. They also noted that many scientists have not been able to
make it work.

   If the technique works in people, it might cure an inherited form of high
cholesterol that affects about one in 500 people and gives them heart attacks
around age 40. Other liver targets, apart from hemophilia, are mostly rare
diseases. But with modification, the technique might also treat some other
genetic diseases outside the liver.

   "We were surprised ourselves by how efficient it was," said Dr. Clifford
Steer of the University of Minnesota, who reports the work with colleagues in
the March issue of the journal Nature Medicine.

   Most gene therapy experiments haven't tried to fix a bad gene. Instead,
they've supplied cells with working copies of a gene to step in for the
defective version. Fixing the bad gene would be better, but the low efficiency
in past experiments has been discouraging.

   To show that the technique works, Steer's rat study used the technique to
alter a healthy gene rather than correcting a bad one. But researchers now plan
a study in dogs to fix a flawed gene that causes hemophilia, he said.

LOAD-DATE: March 03, 1998


                             2061 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      March 3, 1998, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 17; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 470 words

HEADLINE: GAINS MADE WITH REPAIR MOLECULE;
 HEALTH: SCIENTISTS USE IT TO ALTER GENE IN RATS. SIMILAR PROCEDURES COULD LEAD
TO CURE FOR HEMOPHILIA AND OTHER GENETIC DISEASES.

BYLINE: From Associated Press

BODY:


   Scientists have altered a gene in rats' livers by injecting a "repairman"
molecule into the animals' bloodstreams. The technique might lead to an eventual
cure for hemophilia and some other inherited diseases in people.

   The startling thing was how well it worked, scientists said. The treatment
produced a specific change in about 40% of the rat liver's supply of the
targeted gene. Other techniques have achieved rates more like one in a million,
even when tried on cells in laboratory dishes rather than animals.

   A 40% success rate theoretically could cure many genetic diseases, but gene
therapy experts cautioned that it is not clear whether the technique would apply
to a range of disorders. They also noted that many scientists have not been able
to make it work.

   If the technique works in people, it might cure an inherited form of high
cholesterol that affects about one in 500 people and gives them heart attacks
around the age of 40. Other liver targets, apart from hemophilia, are mostly
rare diseases. But with modification, the technique might also treat some other
genetic diseases outside the liver.

   "We were surprised ourselves by how efficient it was," said Dr. Clifford J.
Steer of the University of Minnesota, who reports the work with colleagues in
the March issue of the journal Nature Medicine.

   Most gene therapy experiments have not tried to fix a bad gene. Instead, they
have supplied cells with working copies of a gene to step in for the defective
version. Fixing the bad gene would be better, but the low efficiency in previous
experiments has been discouraging.

   To show that the technique works, Steer's rat study used the technique to
alter a healthy gene rather than correcting a bad one. But researchers now plan
a study in dogs to fix a flawed gene that causes hemophilia, he said.

   The repairman molecule had two main parts. One was a tag to make liver cells
grab the repairman when it passed by in the blood. The other part contained a
mix of DNA and its chemical cousin RNA, designed to seek out a particular piece
of the gene for a clotting substance called factor IX.

   Once the repairman showed up there, the cells replaced that piece of gene
with the substitute brought by the repairman. How that works is still a bit of a
mystery, but it probably involves the body's natural mechanism for repairing
genetic flaws, Steer said.

   Dr. James M. Wilson, a gene therapy expert at the University of Pennsylvania,
said a big question is how well the technique would work against a variety of
genetic flaws. "If it . . . only functions in a subset of patients with rare
diseases, it's not going to have the kind of impact that gene therapy needs to
have," he said.

   Steer is optimistic. "We will make it work in people," he said. "This is a
remarkable technology."

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1998


                             2062 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                        MARCH 3, 1998 Tuesday PM EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 692 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH BRIEFS

BYLINE: Daily News wire services

BODY:

   Weight control

   Fat at 5 spells

   grown-up trouble

   Children who start putting on fat before the age of 5 are more than twice as
likely to turn into obese adults as those who don't, according to a study
published yesterday.

   The finding was based on a survey of 390 U.S. children born between 1965 and
1971 who were monitored into adulthood.

   Safety

   Jump in injuries

   from trampolines

   Sure, they keep little Johnny entertained. But at least one researcher is
convinced home trampolines should be banned.

   Gary Smith, of Ohio State University's College of Medicine, says government
statistics show hospital emergency departments treated 58,500 trampoline-related
injuries involving children in 1995, compared with 29,600 in 1990.

   Gene therapy

   Rat gene altered

   Scientists have altered a gene in rats' livers by injecting a "repairman"
molecule into the animals' bloodstreams.

   The technique might lead to a cure someday for hemophilia and some other
inherited diseases in people.

   Recall

   Unsafe magnets,

   mobiles

   Fisher-Price, the maker of infants' and children's toys, is recalling about
21,000 cookie-shaped refrigerator magnet toys and 49,000 crib mobiles.

   The cookie magnet, part of the Regrigerator Activity Magnet Set (No. 71126)
can come apart and release small plastic pieces, presenting a choking hazard to
young children.

   The Magic Motion Mobile (No. 71153) is a round, rotating mobile with a white
plastic ring suspended from a plastic arm attached to a crib.

   Seminar

   Stop dieting,

   start living

   Do you keep putting off life until you reach your ideal weight? The Renfrew
Center in Roxborough is sponsoring "The Body Balance Seminar," focusing on a
non-dieting approach to healthier living. It's from 7 to 9 p.m. March 12 at the
Springside School, Cherokee and Willow Grove avenues in Chestnut Hill.

   Teeth

   New paste

   on the block

   The latest addition to the toothpaste lineup is Colgate's Total, featuring
the antibiotic triclosan. Total won U.S. Food & Drug Administration approval to
be marketed as helping to prevent gum disease.

   Americans spend about $1.5 billion annually on toothpaste. In the past two
years alone, manufacturers have launched a mind-boggling 130 or so varieties
boasting tartar-control properties, baking soda, peroxide and whitening
ingredients. There are sparkling neon-bright gels for kids, too.

   Children

   A better nit-picker

   The insecticidal shampoos designed to vanquish head lice don't always work,
as parents are well aware. School nurses say that mechanical removal is more
certain than chemical killing, but those little plastic nit-removal combs that
come with the shampoos often break. Sturdier metal combs are available at most
drug stores. And the National Pediculosis Association (781-449-NITS) sells a $15
metal comb it calls the LiceMeister, with a larger handle and longer, tapered
teeth, that it claims glides more smoothly through the hair. This removal ritual
must be repeated every night for a few weeks, to make sure you've found every
nit, including new ones laid by any live lice you can't see.

   * ABS-SESSION

   How to make yours fabulous

   Want abs of steel?

   Philadelphia's own supermodel-in-the-making and BET air personality Garfield
Yuille has these tips for getting your abdominal muscles in "washboard"
condition.

   1) VARY YOUR WORKOUT. "For one thing, you can't do the same ab workout every
day. You have to trick the muscles in your stomach because, after a while, you
won't feel anything with the same routine. I do a whole lot of different
exercises like crunches and variations of sit-ups."

   2) CRUNCH, LIFT AND CRUNCH AGAIN. Another trick is to do ab work between each
set of weight-lifting exercises.

   3) EAT RIGHT. "The most important thing to do when you do ab work is to
breathe. And, of course, you have to stay on a diet with little fat and drink a
lot of water." To aid in the fat-burning process, Yuille uses a diet supplement
called chromium picolinate that "helps cut the body fat while you're working
out."

   4) EDUCATE YOURSELF. Yuille recommends Men's Fitness magazine as a good
source for ab workouts.

   - Mister Mann Frisby

NOTES: Essentials
A tipsheet on better living

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
BET'S Garfield Yullie (ANNE RAE MASSIMIANO, DAILY NEWS)

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             2063 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       March 3, 1998 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 361 words

HEADLINE: 'REPAIRMAN' MOLECULE CHANGES GENES IN RATS

BYLINE: By MALCOLM RITTER; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   In an astonishing result, scientists altered a gene in rats' livers by
injecting a "repairman" molecule into the animals' bloodstreams. The technique
might lead to a cure someday for hemophilia and some other inherited diseases in
people.

   The startling thing was how well it worked. The treatment produced a specific
change in about 40 percent of the rat liver's supply of the targeted gene. Other
techniques have achieved rates more like one in a million, even when tried on
cells in laboratory dishes rather than in an animal.

   A 40 percent success rate could cure many genetic diseases. But gene therapy
experts cautioned that it is not clear whether this technique would apply to a
range of disorders. They also noted that many scientists have not been able to
make it work.

   If the technique works in people, it might cure an inherited form of high
cholesterol that affects about one in 500 people and gives them heart attacks
around age 40. Other liver targets, apart from hemophilia, are mostly rare
diseases. But with modification, the technique might also treat some other
genetic diseases outside the liver.

   "We were surprised ourselves by how efficient it was," said Dr. Clifford J.
Steer of the University of Minnesota, who reports the work with colleagues in
the March issue of the journal Nature Medicine.

   Most gene therapy experiments haven't tried to fix a bad gene. Instead,
they've supplied cells with working copies of a gene to step in for the
defective version. Fixing the bad gene would be better, but the low efficiency
in past experiments has been discouraging.

   To show that the technique works, Steer's rat study used the technique to
alter a healthy gene rather than correcting a bad one. But researchers now plan
a study in dogs to fix a flawed gene that causes hemophilia, he said.

   Dr. James M. Wilson, a gene therapy expert at the University of Pennsylvania,
said a big question was how well the technique would work against a variety of
genetic flaws. "If it's not generic, and it only functions in a subset of
patients with rare diseases, it's not going to have the kind of impact that gene
therapy needs to have," he said.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1998


                             2064 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     March 03, 1998, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. C01; DIGEST

LENGTH: 1423 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST

BODY:


   Texas Utilities bid $ 7.10 billion for Energy Group, the parent company of
Britain's largest electric utility, topping an offer from rival PacifiCorp.
Texas Utilities said that if the bid succeeds, it will sell one of Energy
Group's subsidiaries, No. 1 U.S. coal producer Peabody Holding, to the
investment bank Lehman Brothers for $ 2.3 billion.

   The Supreme Court rejected the appeal of Elizabeth Cockrell, a New York City
woman who contends she is an "innocent spouse" who should not have to pay the $
650,000 the Internal Revenue Service says she and her ex-husband owe in back
taxes and penalties. Cockrell, who testified before the Senate Finance Committee
last month, was married to a tax-shelter promoter and commodities trader and
filed joint tax returns with him for 1980 and 1981. In both years they claimed
sizable deductions for losses from commodities transactions that later were
disallowed.

   American International Group increased its offer for Miami insurer American
Bankers Insurance Group to $ 2.7 billion, matching rival Cendant's $ 58-a-share
hostile bid. The offer, boosting American International's original offer by $ 11
a share, or 23 percent, is the latest step in an increasingly nasty fight
between AIG and Cendant, a marketing juggernaut. While the amount doesn't top
Cendant's hostile bid, it could give AIG the edge with shareholders because it
is a friendly pact.

   Americans' personal income increased a strong 0.6 percent in January,
bolstered by cost-of-living increases for Social Security recipients and pay
raises for federal employees. Without those and other special factors, incomes
would have increased a still-healthy 0.5 percent, the Commerce Department said.
Incomes had increased 0.4 percent in December and 0.7 percent in November.
Consumer spending rose a moderate 0.4 percent in January, the same as in
December and November.

   Manufacturing growth increased in February on rising production and new
orders, topping economists' expectations, without signs of rekindled inflation.
The National Association of Purchasing Management said its monthly index of
business activity, compiled from interviews with corporate purchasing executives
nationwide, rose to 53.3 from 52.4 in January.

   Stock mutual fund inflows rebounded strongly in the three days ended Feb. 26,
Mutual Fund Trim Tabs reported. The 491 international and U.S. stock funds
tracked by the newsletter reported inflows of $ 715 million in the three-day
period. That's compared with outflows of $ 312 million in the previous two-day
period, the newsletter said.

   Construction spending rose 0.7 percent in January, the Commerce Department
said, the second consecutive increase and the largest in three months. Increases
in housing and commercial construction more than offset a drop in government
projects.

   Corning agreed to sell its stake in its consumer housewares business to
privately owned Borden for $ 603 million, relinquishing its leading Corning
Ware, Revere Ware and Pyrex brands. Corning said it will get $ 583 million in
cash from the deal, which will allow it to focus on high-growth, technology-
driven operations.

   Bell Atlantic agreed to market the DirecTV and USSB satellite TV services to
its telephone customers. Bell Atlantic, which once planned to offer its own TV
service, will receive fees for signing up customers for the small-dish service.
SBC Corp., another regional Bell company, signed a similar agreement with the
satellite companies.

   T-bill rates were mixed. The discount rate on three-month Treasury bills
auctioned yesterday fell to 5.120 percent, from 5.140 percent last week. Rates
on six-month bills rose to 5.125 percent from 5.035 percent. The actual return
to investors is 5.258 percent for three-month bills, with a $ 10,000 bill
selling for $ 9,870.60, and 5.334 percent for a six-month bill selling for $
9,740.90. Separately, the Federal Reserve said the average yield for one-year
Treasury bills, a popular index for making changes in adjustable-rate mortgages,
rose to 5.42 percent last week from 5.28 percent the previous week.

   Anheuser-Busch is suing Miller Brewing, accusing Miller of interfering with
its agreements with 54 distributors of beers made by both companies. Miller in a
letter gave the distributors until March 20 to disavow an Anheuser-Busch
contract requiring them to "maximize" Busch products, or stop distributing Busch
beers, which include Budweiser and Michelob.

   SBC Communications filed an application with the Texas Public Utilities
Commission seeking permission to offer long-distance phone service to customers
in the state. SBC, a regional phone company based in San Antonio, is also
seeking permission to offer long-distance phone service in Oklahoma, Arkansas,
and Kansas.

   Steelmaker WHX sweetened its bid to acquire diversified manufacturer Handy &
Harman, offering $ 645 million, or $ 35.25 a share, up from the $ 30-a-share
offer it made in December. The boards of both companies have approved the deal.
WHX, whose chairman is New York financier Ronald LaBow, already had accumulated
a 13.7 percent stake in Handy & Harman.

   Compaq Computer, the world's largest supplier of personal computers, cut U.S.
prices for its Armada notebook line from 5.4 percent to as much as 41.2 percent.
The company also said that customers who buy some Armada models will receive
special incentives, including free memory upgrades, discounts on the
ArmadaStation desktop expansion base and free mobile CD units.

   INTERNATIONAL

   Fuji Bank, one of Japan's largest, saw its long-term debt ratings cut to one
grade above junk status due to the economic woes sweeping Japan and the rest of
Asia. Ratings agency Standard & Poor's cut Fuji's long-term debt rating to BBB
plus from A-minus, one grade above its so-called speculative rating, better
known as junk bond status.

   Wang Laboratories agreed to buy the information technology unit of Olivetti
in a $ 390 million deal that will make the Italian company Wang's largest
shareholder with an 18.6 percent stake. The combined business will generate more
than $ 3.6 billion in annual revenue and employ 20,000.

   RECALLS

   Fisher-Price, a maker of infants' and children's toys, is recalling about
21,000 cookie-shaped refrigerator magnet toys and 49,000 crib mobiles. The
cookie magnet can come apart and release small plastic pieces, presenting a
choking hazard to young children. Fisher-Price said it has received 59 reports
of cookie magnets coming apart and 78 reports of mobile parts detaching.
Cookie-shaped magnets with date codes from 224 through 228 sold after Sept. 1,
1997, are involved in the recall. The date code is imprinted on the back of the
magnet and is the first three digits of an alpha-numeric code. The magnet is
sold as part of a three-piece Refrigerator Activity Magnet Set, Fisher-Price No.
71126. The crib mobile is a round, rotating mobile with a white plastic ring
that is suspended from a plastic arm attached to a crib.

   LOCAL BUSINESS

   Intersolv, a Rockville-based software company, has acquired privately held
SQL Software based in Hertford, Britain, in a deal valued at about $ 20 million.
Intersolv said it expects to incur one-time charges of $ 18 million to $ 22
million related to the acquisition in the fiscal quarter ending April 30, 1998.

   Eastbrokers International, a Rockville investment company that focuses on
Eastern Europe, said it will buy Cohig & Associates, a Denver firm that operates
retail brokerage offices in 17 U.S. cities, trades over- the-counter stocks and
raises money for small firms. Eastbrokers said it will acquire the company for
stock but did not say how many shares it will pay or estimate the transaction's
value.

   American Mobile Satellite of the District reported a fourth-quarter loss of $
39 million, compared with a loss of $ 31.3 million for the same period last
year. For the year the mobile satellite service company lost $ 119.2 million,
down from a loss of $ 134.6 million in 1996. The company pointed to the reduced
loss as a sign of the company's future strength and cited increased revenue and
a growing customer base as further indications of that.

   Human Genome Sciences of Rockville announced an agreement to collaborate with
Transgene, a French biotechnology start-up company, to develop gene therapy
drugs. Under a 10-year agreement, the closely held Transgene will have rights to
license up to 10 genes from HGS's database and to develop, manufacture and
commercialize any resulting gene therapy products.

LOAD-DATE: March 03, 1998


                             2065 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1998 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          March 2, 1998 Monday, THIRD

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 664 words

HEADLINE: TULANE TEAM FORGES NEW CANCER WEAPON;
SCIENTISTS ALTER DISEASED CELLS

BYLINE: By JOHN POPE Staff writer

BODY:

   A Tulane University team is developing a new weapon against ovarian cancer
using genetically altered versions of the cancer's cells.

   The scientists' battle plan is designed to touch off a two-stage attack by
making cancer cells vulnerable to chemotherapy and jump-starting the immune
system to launch a second wave against any remaining malignancy, said Dr.
William R. Robinson, section chief for gynecologic oncology at Tulane University
Medical Center.

   Because the procedure uses modified cancer cells to challenge the immune
system, it is, in essence, vaccine therapy. But that term does not imply that it
would be given to every woman to prevent this form of cancer, said Jan Adams, a
research nurse at Tulane who is the study's coordinator.

   Robinson discussed the project recently at the Society of Gynecologic
Oncologists' annual meeting.

   "I think it's very exciting," said Dr. Ronald Alvarez, associate professor of
obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. "We're
just really at the beginning of what's going to be an exciting explosion of
these kinds of therapies in the next 10 to 20 years."

   In this case, the fight is being waged against an enemy expected to attack
25,400 American women this year and kill 14,500, according to the American
Cancer Society. Decisive treatment is vital because women with this disease
exhibit no obvious symptoms until the cancer is far along in development.

   This form of gene therapy, which has been used to fight cancers of the brain
and neck, relies on something known as a suicide gene, which is added to cancer
cells to make even the most chemotherapy-resistant of them susceptible to
ganciclovir, an antiviral drug.

   In a process nobody understands, the altered cells migrate to tumors,
Robinson said. "They can effectively become part of the native tumor so that
when you give ganciclovir, not only are altered cells killed but cancer cells
die, too. It's called the bystander effect."

   And as these cells start to die, the body's immune system is activated to
finish the slaughter.

   The first test of this procedure was to determine whether it is toxic. In
tests on 18 gravely ill women for whom nothing else had worked, researchers
found virtually no toxicity, he said. However, all but three women have died,
and only four of the 18 responded to treatment.

   Nevertheless, Robinson wants a second round of tests, possibly as early as
summer, to determine the method's effectiveness. That project would need about
200 volunteers and cost about $100,000.

   Because the results of the first test showed the method has promise, "we
would be interested in seeing how this would work in a broader population,"
Adams said.

   There is no way to predict when trials will be complete and when - or whether
- the federal Food and Drug Administration will approve it, she said.

   In discussing a branch of cancer treatment less than a decade old, Alvarez
tried to put these initial results in perspective.

   "You've got to realize this is the first generation of clinical trials in
ovarian-cancer patients," he said. "We can't expect a home run right now. We can
expect that we'll refine what we do and overcome the limits of treatments."

   Gene therapy makes sense in cancer treatment, Alvarez said, because the
disease appears to be the result of cell abnormalities that develop within their
genes.

   Cancer is regarded as a genetic process that lets cells develop properties
allowing for uncontrolled growth, the invasion of surrounding tissues and,
eventually, migration to other parts of the body.

   With this in mind, Alvarez said, "it makes a lot of sense to try to alter
these genetic events using genes themselves."

   The Tulane researchers are working with scientists from the University of
Rochester in New York. Working with Robinson at Tulane are Drs. April Gale
O'Quinn and Scott Freeman, as well as Anupuma Munshi. The Rochester researchers
are Drs. Depaak M. Saharsabudhe and Camille N. Abboud.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1998


                             2066 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     March 02, 1998, Monday, Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. F13

LENGTH: 2259 words

HEADLINE: The Right Connections

BYLINE: Beth Berselli, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   You've seen the headlines, read the stories. A small, never-heard-of biotech
company signs a multimillion-dollar deal with a pharmaceutical giant.

   Biotechnology is unlike the rest of the business world. Forget hostile
takeovers or amiable mergers; welcome to the world of "strategic alliances."

   Here's how they typically work: The pharmaceutical company agrees to fund
most of the research and development activities for a drug and then, if it is
actually approved, the drug firm -- and not the biotech company -- takes home
the bulk of the profit. It's a cheaper alternative to flat-out buying the often
pricey, high-risk companies.

   Experts say these deals are so common because bringing a drug to market costs
big bucks -- $ 300 million is one industry estimate -- and can take as long as a
decade. Also, the quest for the next billion-dollar drug is a risky proposition;
only 20 percent of the drugs that enter human clinical trials actually make it
to market.

   In many ways, it makes sense for the biotechs to ally themselves with the big
drug outfits. The deals provide quick cash, validate the company's science and
signal to investors the stock's value. And more important, these collaborations
can get drugs to market much faster.

   The deals can be golden for drug makers, too. The biotechs supply the
cutting-edge research that fills the drug company's product pipeline, leaving
the company free to focus on what it does best -- dealing with the Food & Drug
Administration and selling drugs. And in the end, Big Pharma gets to ring up big
profits.

   But despite the obvious benefits, experts say that up to half of all deals
fail to meet the partners' expectations. Deals go sour for a number of reasons:
The science doesn't pan out, a partner decides to refocus its investigative
efforts, or yet another drug company mega-merger leaves the biotech companies
out in the cold.

   Here is a look at the phenomenon of strategic alliances through the eyes of
two local biotech companies at two very different stages of development.
MedImmune Inc. of Gaithersburg is the seasoned veteran, with more than a dozen
of these deals under its belt. NeuralStem Biopharmaceuticals Ltd. of College
Park is a small, incubator company that is looking for its first big deal. Read
their stories on the following pages . . .

   MEDIMMUNE

   The Industry Model of Self Control

   A $ 60 Million Deal With Abbott Laboratories Keeps the Lion's Share of the
Profit at Home

   In the early days of their company, Wayne T. Hockmeyer and Franklin Top often
moseyed down to the local Roy Rogers for lunch. During the three-block walk, and
later over burgers and fries, their talk frequently turned to the fate of their
fledgling Gaithersburg biotech company, MedImmune Inc.

   They discussed science -- what research was seeing the best results, what
wasn't doing so well. They pondered strategy -- should they focus on vaccines
only or explore other areas? And what about money? Would they meet next week's
payroll?

   During these lunch-time chats, one issue invariably came up: the need to find
a corporate partner.

   The men realized right from the start they would eventually have to ally
themselves with a big-name drug company -- a Merck, a SmithKline Beecham, or an
Abbott Laboratories. That was the way the biotech industry worked in the late
1980s, the way it had always worked since its birth a decade earlier. Not even
the most high-flying of biotech start-ups believed they were capable to going it
alone.

   Today, MedImmune has 400 employees, $ 81 million in annual revenue and sells,
with the help of corporate partners, two drugs: RespiGam, which prevents lower
respiratory infections in infants, and CytoGam, which combats disease in kidney
transplant patients.

   But it is a third drug, one not even on the market, that shows how far
MedImmune has come since the Roy Rogers days of a decade ago.

   In December, the company signed a $ 60 million deal with Abbott Laboratories
to market a drug called Synagis, also used to treat respiratory infections. But
unlike previous partnerships, this deal will leave the bulk of the profit with
MedImmune.

   "This is a very, very savvy structure -- not something you see often with
biotech companies," said Doug Lind, an analyst at Morgan Stanley Dean Witter.
"You can't do this kind of deal unless you've really proven positively the
commercial potential of the product."

   He added, "On their lead products, MedImmune has really maintained commercial
control, serving as a real example in the industry."

   The agreement uses a "threshold" structure, which means Abbott only receives
a commission on sales above a certain level. That's a big switch from the
typical deal in which the biotech company gets royalties of 8 percent to 12
percent, analysts said.

   Being an industry model hasn't come easy. MedImmune has survived despite
obstacles that have doomed other biotech companies -- research that failed,
deals that went bad, drugs that bombed in testing.

   Virtually from day one, MedImmune has been working on a treatment for
respiratory syncytial virus, the leading cause of pneumonia and bronchiolitis in
infants. The disease is responsible for 90,000 hospitalizations and 4,500 deaths
in the United States each year.

   RespiGam, which was first sold in 1996, was the company's initial response to
the disease, pulling in $ 45 million in sales last year.

   MedImmune is now pinning much of its hopes -- and future profit -- on
Synagis, the second-generation product for the virus. Because it is easier to
administer to children, the company expects it will reach a broader population.

   In 1993, MedImmune gave American Cyanamid Co. the rights to market Synagis,
but in 1995, after that company was bought by American Home Products Corp.,
MedImmune reacquired the sole rights to sell the drug.

   It was a move that Hockmeyer, the company's 53-year-old chairman and chief
executive, called "one of the smartest things we ever did." Indeed, Lind, the
analyst, projects the drug's sales will reach $ 270 million in 2000.

   Given this profit potential, Abbott had to do some fast talking to persuade
MedImmune that it did, in fact, want help selling the drug. It was not an easy
discussion.

   "They had many of the cards when we came to the table," said Steve Weger,
vice president of corporate planning and development at Abbott. "We really had
to provide a lot of value-added services -- including the fact we have a very
good relationship with pediatricians and with expectant mothers -- to convince
them they wanted to share the market."

   It was a new kind of clout for MedImmune, a position that Hockmeyer and Top,
now the company's medical director, admit they enjoy. It's certainly a far cry
from the cash-strapped early days of the company.

   "Now we only do deals if it benefits us. It's a different ingredient today --
we can be much pickier," said Hockmeyer, who is proud of how his company has
handled its strategic alliances with drug makers.

   "By and large, we've been able to keep control of our products," said
Hockmeyer, former chairman of the department of immunology at the Walter Reed
Army Institute of Research. "We're a fully integrated company, sort of like a
mini-SmithKline Beecham -- we do everything they do, from developing drugs to
selling them.

   "I'd rather not do these deals, in an ideal world," Hockmeyer said. "But you
have to be pragmatic. These partnerships are absolutely essential and can bring
huge value to your company."

   NEURALSTEM

   Looking To Lasso A Partner

   But on the Ride to Market, Who Will Hold the Reins?

   Richard Garr, president and CEO of NeuralStem Biopharmaceuticals Ltd., thinks
he has a drug that could ease the suffering of the millions of Americans with
Parkinson's disease and other degenerative disorders.

   Now all he has to do is get it to market.

   That's easier said than done. As every biotech company knows, the road to
market is fraught with failed research, clinical trials that go awry and cash
that vanishes faster than you can count it. After years of hard work, a company
can still end up with nothing to sell.

   Garr's plan -- and it's one shared by virtually all biotech executives -- is
to hook up with a drug giant. The idea is to find someone with the know-how to
run clinical trials, the savvy to navigate the regulatory process and the sales
force to take the drug beyond the laboratory walls -- all without losing control
of the drug that is his company's brainchild.

   "Nobody cares as much about your product as you do," Garr said. "That's our
single most important consideration, that we keep control of our own destiny,
our technology."

   But when it comes to corporate alliances, his two-year-old College Park
company is a wide-eyed innocent. Part of the University of Maryland's technology
incubator program, NeuralStem has lots of promise but no profit. It's got
blockbuster technology but no major investors.

   To make a go of it, NeuralStem has to find a dance partner.

   "If you're an unknown biotech and you can do a deal with Glaxo Wellcome or
someone, it's going to do a lot to your credibility," said Erik Rule, a partner
at Coopers & Lybrand Consulting in Toronto. "You're just going to get the halo
effect. It's going to make it easier for you to do other deals, raise capital,
do an IPO."

   Garr said NeuralStem is in discussions with several big-name drug companies
for rights to develop its potential gene therapy treatment for symptoms of
Parkinson's disease, which affects about 2 million Americans. The company is
looking for a deal that could bring in about $ 200 million before the drug
reaches market.

   NeuralStem's treatment is based on technology developed at the National
Institutes of Health by scientist Karl Johe. Essentially, the technology enables
scientists to grow neurons in a laboratory and then surgically put those cells
into the brain of a patient suffering from a wide array of degenerative
diseases, including Huntington's disease, Alzheimer's disease and spinal cord
injuries. (NeuralStem is initially concentrating on the Parkinson's treatment,
which is being tested in rodents.)

   The cells, which would be put in a syringe and injected as liquid into the
brain, would replace the cells that are lost or damaged by the disease, the
company believes.

   A sense of urgency drives Garr, a 45-year-old lawyer by training. He knows
the pain that a brain illness can cause; a few years ago, his 4-year-old son had
surgery to remove a brain tumor. The treatment and rehabilitation process was
long and hard, although his son has now fully recovered.

   "It's a labor of love; fighting for what we believe we have is very easy," he
said.

   Johe and Garr met several years ago when their sons were classmates in
Potomac. Garr persuaded Johe to leave NIH and bring his technology with him to
start a company. Garr raised several million dollars from investors and when NIH
agreed to let Johe have the rights to commercialize his technology, NeuralStem
was born. Today, the company has no revenue and a dozen employees, all of whom
are scientists except for Garr.

   NeuralStem began shopping around for a pharmaceutical partner not long after
the company was formed in 1996. It was hard getting noticed at first. "I knocked
on every door till they opened; I literally cornered people in elevators," he
recalled.

   The patent for NeuralStem's technology was approved in January and since then
the pace of its discussions with the drug companies has picked up considerably,
Garr said.

   In all this negotiating and deal-making, Garr has one major concern: how to
keep enough control of the product so that 10 years from now, if it actually
makes it to market, his company isn't left with a sea of regrets and no profit.

   Which is why NeuralStem is waiting for the right deal. "We could have already
done several deals," Garr said. But he's holding out for an arrangement that
gives his company half of any sales that may result from its technology.

   Biotech companies rarely have the upper hand in negotiating these
partnerships, warns Harvard Business School professor Josh Lerner. He said
alliances with drug firms have become the single largest source of financing for
biotech companies in recent years. The alliances are an alternative to the stock
market for biotech companies seeking capital. Biotech shares are notoriously
volatile.

   Garr said he realizes the 50-50 split isn't the norm, but he's confident
NeuralStem will be able to secure the control it wants.

   "Our real leverage comes from the actual substance of our science," he said.
"We have the actual drug, the actual therapy. No one else is in our playing
field in terms of the science."

   Still, Garr admits it is tough not to give in to the lure of easy cash.

   "We're at the point where we really need the money," he said. Garr said he is
prepared to pound the pavement for more money, perhaps seeking out venture
capital, if he can't forge the kind of deal he wants. He estimates that the
company needs $ 30 million to cover the cost of initial tests on human patients,
which could start next year.

   Experts said that the optimism felt by Garr and other first-time deal seekers
is typical. It quickly turns to pragmatism.

   "They start out saying, 'The world's my oyster,' " said Mark Edwards,
managing director of Recombinant Capital, a San Francisco consulting firm
specializing in biotech alliances and capitalization. "Later they say, 'The
world's the world and I may be an oyster in it.' "


CORRECTION-DATE: March 4, 1998

CORRECTION:
An article about MedImmune Inc. in Monday's Washington Business section ended in
mid-sentence. The final quotation by MedImmune chairman and chief executive
Wayne T. Hockmeyer should have read, "These partnerships are absolutely
essential and can bring huge value to your company."

GRAPHIC: Photo, dayna smith; Chart ; Photo ; Illustration ; Photo, tom allen,
MedImmune's Deals A look at the company's major deals with pharmaceutical
companies: Partner: Connaught Laboratories Inc.  Date signed: August 1990 Terms
of deal: Under two separate research and license agreements, Connaught got
rights to develop vaccines to prevent certain infectious diseases, including
Lyme disease, using MedImmune's technology. Also, under another agreement,
Connaught got rights to market and distribute MedImmune's drug called CytoGam,
which combats disease in kidney transplant patients.  Potential value: $8.5
million for the research and license agreements; company did not disclose amount
for CytoGam deal Actual value: $3.5 million* for the research and license
agreement Status: Research and license agreements expired in November 1993 and
were not renewed. The distribution agreement was amended in 1992, and MedImmune
reacquired the rights to market CytoGam, henceforth paying Connaught royalties
on sales. Another amendment in early 1996 reduced that royalty rate on sales of
CytoGam after Sept. 30, 1995.  Partner: Merck & Co.  Date signed: November 1990,
November 1991 Terms of deal: Under the 1990 research and licensing agreements,
Merck got rights to develop an AIDS vaccine using MedImmune's technology; the
1991 agreements gave Merck rights to develop and co-promote AIDS
immunotherapeutic products based on MedImmune's antibodies for preventing HIV
infection.  Potential value: $13 million for the 1990 deal; $13.3 million for
the '91 agreements Actual value: $5.4 million* for the 1990 deal; $8.1 million*
for the '91 agreeements Status: Companies terrminated all agreements because the
scientific results did not demonstrate significant promise to warrant further
development.  Partner: American Cyanamid Co./American Home Products Date signed:
November 1993 Terms of deal: American Cyanamid and MedImmune agreed to
co-develop and co-market three products to prevent lower respiratory infections
in inf

LOAD-DATE: March 02, 1998


                             2067 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       March 1, 1998 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. 1I

LENGTH: 1757 words

HEADLINE: THINKERS TRYING TO PLOT HOW FAR GENETIC TECHNOLOGY SHOULD GO;
HUMAN CLONING;
WILL TIME ERODE QUALMS ABOUT PRODUCING COPIES OF PEOPLE?

BYLINE: By KAREN R. LONG; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   While a local TV reporter finished her rave report on the "miracle" in vitro
conception, some of the nation's most prominent scientists and ethicists were
across town, in a Washington think tank, fretting over the moral perils of new
medical technology.

   Grabbing her stomach and announcing a due date of June 5, ABC affiliate
reporter Kate Sullivan was giddy about the technology that helped her conceive a
child. So was the expectant couple she interviewed on a recent news broadcast.

   Twenty years ago, Louise Brown of England shocked the world as the first
"test-tube baby." Some of the same experts who condemned her conception outside
the womb were raising similar complaints - this time speaking doom at the
American Enterprise Institute about human cloning.

   "Occupying the moral high ground of compassionate healing, biomedical
technology usually receives a royal welcome in our society, even when it raises
challenges to other traditional moral norms," said Dr. Leon R. Kass, a
University of Chicago scholar and leading critic of human cloning. "Make no
mistake. The price to be paid for producing optimum babies is the transfer of
procreation from the home to the laboratory and its coincident transformation
into manufacture."

   Plenty of politicians and people in the street share Kass' repulsion over the
prospect of human cloning, the manipulation of a single cell into an entirely
new individual. Presidents Bill Clinton and Jacques Chirac of France renewed
their calls in January for an international ban. Nineteen European nations
signed a treaty this year declaring human cloning a violation of human dignity.
And 17 states, including Ohio, have introduced legislation against it.

   But it is worth remembering that today Louise Brown is a normal and contented
young woman, said Eric T. Juengst, a Case Western Reserve University
bioethicist. He pointed out that the public horror over her mode of conception -
mixing eggs and sperm in a petri dish and implanting the embryos - has all but
evaporated.

   Just as the National Bioethics Advisory Commission suggested last summer that
the physical risks to a potential cloned human baby were too high to accept,
many experts 20 years ago argued the unknown risks of in vitro fertilization
were morally intolerable.

   "Both the risk boundary and the public revulsion boundary are flexible,
expandable, maybe infinitely expandable as our future shock wears off," said
Juengst, who tweaked Kass by quoting some of his 20-year-old objections to in
vitro fertilization.

   But while the public - if not Kass - eventually relaxed its objections to
human conception in a dish, society does not embrace every technological
"advance," said Clarisa Long, a molecular biologist, lawyer and scholar at the
American Enterprise Institute.

   How to limit the new genetic technologies so that they remain within
acceptable moral boundaries was the task put to Juengst, Kass, Long and a
handful of pre-eminent scientists meeting at the American Enterprise Institute,
a moderately conservative think tank in Washington, D.C. Congressional staff
from Capitol Hill and other policy-makers came to take notes.

   "The specter that is most frightening is the specter of eugenics," said
panelist Dr. Robert F. Murray Jr., chief of medical genetics in the pediatrics
department of Howard University College of Medicine. "Who can say whose genetic
enhancement should be pursued? It raises the specter of the classification of
human beings even more rigidly than we are classified now.

   "If we don't guide or set limits to the application of this technology, we
will surely do more harm than good."

   But while many Western nations quickly put cloning limits in place, the
United States has hesitated. California is the only state so far to outlaw human
cloning.

   "We have in the United States a culture that resists with great energy and
dexterity the notion of limits altogether," said Daniel Callahan, a renowned
ethicist who co-founded the Hastings Center. "The enormous cultural and
political power of science erodes a serious search for limits. And those who
override the limits are seen as furthering progress."

   Kass raised another impediment: "The piecemeal formation of public policy
tends to grind down large questions of morals into small questions of
procedure."

   Theologian and panelist David H. Smith of Indiana University observed,
"Pandora's box is open for business. Obviously, this knowledge can be used for
good or for ill."

   Potential bonanza

   The good includes the prospect of an agricultural, medical and pharmaceutical
bonanza. When Scottish researcher Ian Wilmut announced a year ago that he had
taken a single mature mammal cell and manipulated it to create a new animal, the
sheep Dolly, the potential in his discovery was jaw-dropping. The director of
the U.S. National Institutes of Health declared Wilmut's work might lead to some
day turning on the cells needed to regrow an injured spinal cord and turning off
the cells grown amok with cancer.

   For some, the downside looked even steeper. "Genetic technology really is
different," Kass said, "because it can and will go to work directly and
deliberately on our basic, heritable, life-shaping capacities, at their
biological roots."

   A human clone would be the identical, delayed twin to the person whose
genetic instructions were coaxed into a new being. The arrival of the first
humans via asexual reproductrion would confound the universal human heritage of
a mother and a father - and the personal distinctiveness that derives from a
genetic contribution from each.

   Kass ticked off a list to illict shudders: "the prospect of mass production
of human beings, with large clones of look-alikes, compromised in their
individuality; the idea of father-son or mother-daughter twins; the bizarre
prospects of a woman giving birth to and rearing a genetic copy of herself, her
spouse or even her deceased father or mother; the grotesqueness of conceiving a
child as an exact replacement for another who has died."

   Some are not disturbed by such scenarios. A man from the Cato Institute, a
libertarian Washington think tank, asked the panelists, "If people want this,
why isn't it a private decision that the government should stay out of?"

   Ethicist Callahan answered, "Once somebody procreates a child, that action
has consequences in the world. It's not a pure, private decision, it affects the
social realm."

   Dr. Nelson A. Wivel, the senior federal scientist who oversaw and approved
the first human gene therapy trials, said actual human cloning was much farther
off than the breathless public debate indicates.

   Part of the fearfulness stems from the boasts of maverick Chicago physicist
G. Richard Seed, who claimed in January that several couples were ready to
become his customers for the first cloned human babies.

   In truth, cloning studies in cows, sheep, pigs and monkeys are reporting very
high rates of miscarriages. Wilmut needed 277 attempts with sheep embryos to
make one living animal. And new scrutiny of the ewe from which Dolly was cloned
asks if it being pregnant at the time Wilmut used its udder cell has clouded his
accomplishment.

   "Wilmut himself has said Dolly's cloning is just a data point, not the
demonstration of a successful technique," Long said.

   Wivel, now deputy director of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the
University of Pennsylvania, stressed that results in the field were humbling.

   "We've had a lot of trouble treating single-gene disease," he said. "After 6
years of clinical trials, and more than 180 protocols, nobody has been cured as
a result of a gene transfer, although we've been able to prove the idea in
principle.

   "Manipulating multigene traits is in the very distant future if it's even
doable at all."

   Diluting objectives

   Wivel believes a more concrete moral threat looms once gene therapies are
ironed out, and pressure mounts to use them for "enhancements," rather than to
treat disease.

   A new gene therapy being tested now to improve the circulation of diabetic
people could be hijacked easily by athletes looking to boost circulation to
their muscles, Wivel said.

   "How does one decide which enhancements are ethical and which are not?" Wivel
asked. "It's an ethical nightmare. And banning genetic enhancement is impossible
under our current regulatory system."

   That is because it is legal to prescribe drugs for "off-label" purposes,
reasons other than the ones the Food and Drug Administration certifies for
original use. And the FDA treats genetic innovations as it treats new drugs.

   Moreover, the market for cosmetic improvements would be much richer than the
one for athletic advantages, or even that for treating disease. "If Singapore
decides to become the enhancement capital of the world," Wivel said, "it will
happen."

   Ethicist Callahan said, "I don't believe we'd be having a debate on genetic
technologies unless there was the promise of a lot of money to be made. Profit
is going to be the powerful engine here...

   "We Americans are a society addicted to scientific progress. With genetic
technologies, you can't prove the harm in advance. That is our great difficulty
here."

   Some of the "harms" attached to genetic tinkering are subtle. Stephen G.
Post, another bioethicist at Case Western Reserve University, writes "the very
idea of cloning tends to focus images of the good self on the physiological
substrate, not on the journey of life and our response to it ... The idea of the
designer baby will emerge, as though external form is as important as the inner
self."

   But another distinguished group dismisses these worries as hopelessly
outmoded. They include Francis Crick, the Nobel laureate for his DNA work,
sociobiologist E.O. Wilson and novelist Kurt Vonnegut.

   "Views of human nature rooted in humanity's mythical past ought not to be our
primary criterion for making moral decisions about cloning," they write as
members of the International Academy of Humanism. "The potential benefits of
cloning may be so immense that it would be a tragedy if ancient theological
scruples should lead to a Luddite rejection of cloning."

   A majority of Americans, however, tell poll-takers they worry whether human
cloning amounts to "playing God."

   "As a species, we humans are simultaneously the most intelligent, inquisitive
and adaptive of the animals, and we are also painfully aware that we are mortal,
foolish and flawed," Long said. "How do we eat from the tree of knowledge of
good and evil with our flawed moral judgment?"

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC : NO CREDIT; Human Cloning; PHOTO BY: PLAIN DEALER FILE (Page
4I); Eric T. Juengst: "It's a form of injustice, of genetic prejudice, to treat
others as if all we needed to know about them is their genes."

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1998


                             2068 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1998 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          March 1, 1998 Sunday, FIRST

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1764 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE RACES TO MAP SEQUENCE OF DNA;
BRAVE NEW WORLD WORRIES ETHICISTS

BODY:

   Along the eastern edge of Forest Park rise the stone and brick monoliths of
Washington University's medical school. Above a neighborhood of small shops,
homes and restaurants, the buildings reach to the sky, reminders of the power of
knowledge.

   Between them is a smoked-glass and brick building that looks exactly like the
boring home of an insurance company, which it used to be. Inside the front door
a guard checks visitors.

   "Fourth floor?" he said. "Sometimes I wonder what goes on up there."

   Upstairs the office is sterile and professional, with subdued carpet and
gleaming brass doorknobs. On the wall next to the entrance of a reception
office, raised letters announce "Human Genome Project."

   Down the white-tiled corridor are four research teams named for pioneers in
genetic research: Watson, Crick, Avery and Franklin. The teams pursue science
that stands to change the world more than putting a man on the moon or inventing
the A-bomb did.

   "Two decades ago, and maybe less than that, what we're doing today was
considered science fiction," said Rick Wilson, a geneticist who heads this lab.
"Of course, up until last year, cloning was science fiction. But in comparison
(to the genome project), cloning is very simple.

   "It really makes you wonder what will be possible two decades from now."

   Critics shudder at the possibilities.

   The Human Genome Sequencing Project is an attempt to mark the exact order of
the 6 billion pieces that make up human DNA - considered the genetic program
that makes humans human. If a human body was stripped of everything but its DNA,
there would be a glob left about the size of a football.

   But the project also is an attempt to understand our nature, why we are what
we are, and whether we can control and change ourselves.

   The project has plenty of money. And plenty of critics. Biologists complain
it has dried up money for other science. Ethicists fear the project could lead
to legions of Frankenstein monsters, people designed at the whim of human
creators.

   As one researcher explained: In the year since yeast was successfully
sequenced, "we can make you any kind of yeast you want. If we needed to, we
could make yeast lie down, roll over and play dead."

   Does a similar fate await humanity?

   "On one level, the genome project is simply knowledge, and knowledge is
neutral," said Mary Maholwald, a professor at the University of Chicago's Center
for Clinical Medical Ethics. "But you don't spend billions simply for knowledge.
This project lays the groundwork for applications: gene therapy, designer
generations, abortion, advanced cloning.

   "Does all this happen? Probably not. But I have to wonder how different the
world would be today if Adolf Hitler had possessed this knowledge."

   Examples exist of what such knowledge might create.

   At a large medical center, a 40-year-old pregnant woman got a routine genetic
test to make sure her child wouldn't have Down's syndrome. The test results
showed it wouldn't be a problem. But the fetus had an extra Y chromosome, an
abnormality tied to an increased chance of criminality, tall physical stature
and severe acne.

   Frightened by this unexpected news, the couple talked to doctors and friends,
and decided on an abortion.

   Among medical ethicists the case raised questions, such as: Is XYY syndrome a
disease? If not, why were the parents warned?

   Arthur Caplan, director of the University of Pennsylvania's Center for
Bioethics, in Philadelphia, said the importance of the case is that it points
out a much greater issue.

   The point of genetic correction is to eliminate defects and diseases. Some of
those, such as cystic fibrosis and cancer, are obvious. There are 4,000 diseases
tied to genetics.

   But many other diseases and defects, Caplan points out, are less obvious and
often subject to the whims of society.

   In Germany, for instance, low blood pressure is a common health concern. In
the United States it's considered a blessing.

   On a more sinister note, in the last century alone, societies have determined
that variations in skin color, eye color, weight and attention span have been
defects.

   "The first question is obvious," he said. "Who decides what qualifies as
disease?"

   Wilson hears the criticism.

   Standing next to a classroom-sized marker board in a back hallway, he uses
words and colored pens to offer his defense and explain this work: the
sequencing of the human genome.

   "This is a base of information that is coming into existence, whether people
like it or not," he said. "It's the next steps people will take with what we've
done that cause all the excitement.

   "But believe me, genetic manipulation, genetic therapy - I'm not convinced
they'll happen."

   A decade ago few were convinced that the human genome - the entire set of
human genes - could ever be sequenced. The numbers involved were daunting.

   Imagine landing on the California shore. You've been dropped there and
ordered to prepare a detailed map of the United States.

   Given enough time - maybe - you could outline the country, mark each state,
rough out the mountain ranges and rivers and cities. But you've been ordered to
do more than that.

   You must map each city, each park, each street, each block and each house.
You must note who lives where. You must identify every detail any person could
find helpful in understanding anything about this country. And you must do it in
such a way that the relationship between each landmark is clear and easily
understood.

   By the time you're finished, your map should include 6 billion bits of
information.

   And for this task you've been given a compass, a sheaf of papers and some
pencils.

   That's what the genome project looked like 10 years ago, when a group of
geneticists at a microbiology conference in California called for the race to
begin.

   This is what they knew:

   About 100 years earlier, Gregor Mendel, an Austrian monk, observed
similarities from generation to generation of a family and suggested that these
traits were inherited.

   By the 1940s, scientists determined that traits passed from generation to
generation through genes. They named the entire set of human genes the human
genome and determined that genes consisted of DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid.

   The DNA is found inside the 23 pairs of chromosomes coiled within each of the
100 trillion cells in the human body.

   In 1953, James Watson and Francis Crick discovered the structure of DNA - the
double helix. The structure showed that DNA was composed of 6 billion units
called nucleotides, which appeared as 3 billion pairs.

   There were only four different types of nucleotides, assigned the letters A,
C, T and G, and they always paired up the same, A with T, C with G.

   Sounds simple. But here's the trick: The same four nucleotides that make up
the human DNA strand make up the DNA strands of every other creature on earth.
What's more, the DNA strands of all creatures on earth are similar.

   It's the length and order of these letter-chains at key points in a DNA
strand that differentiate humans from German shepherds, tuna or yeast. Arrange
these letters one way, and DNA makes chemicals that produce human brains, legs
and hearts. Jiggle the arrangement slightly, and that DNA strand produces fins,
scales and gills.

   Among humans, the differences are even more slight. The DNA of Wilt
Chamberlain, Woody Allen and George Brett are about 99 percent identical. Slight
differences in the last 1 percent account for their huge differences in
appearance.

   When the genome project first was visualized, the biggest problem facing
scientists was the enormousness of the task.

   Geneticists knew something about the series of nucleotides in the strings
that formed genes, but they'd never tried to make up a blueprint on one. And
genes account for only about 20 percent of the DNA chain, anyway.

   Using 1980s methods and technology, sequencing would have taken about 100
years.

   "No one wanted to wait that long," said Robert Waterston, head of the
department of genetics at Washington University. "At the very least, we wanted
some of us to still be alive when it was finished."

   For that to be possible, three things had to happen.

   First, scientists - and those who finance science - had to be convinced it
was possible. The best way to do this was sequence the DNA in a less complex
organism.

   At Washington University, Waterston would attack this issue by studying a
tiny worm.

   Second, someone would have to map the human genome. Genetic mapping is less
detailed than sequencing. Essentially, it's equal to coming up with mileage
markers for a long highway instead of detailing each inch of the roadside.

   This was John McPherson's mission.

   Third, for sequencing to be possible, they'd need technology capable of
speeding up what otherwise would be a tedious process: the counting of
individual pieces of the DNA strand.

   Elaine Mardis would attempt this, looking for a way to use robotics in areas
previously restricted to human hands and eyes.

   "We will sequence the human genome," said Wilson, the geneticist. "It's just
a matter of time and willpower."

   Wilson said that when the project began, sequencing 1 million base pairs in a
year seemed difficult. Now they're at a pace to sequence 50 million a year, and
they're ready to double that within a year. Given that their portion of the
genome is about 1 billion, that means an additional 10 years to go.

   "We can speed up a bit more, though," he said. "Conservatively, I'd have to
say 2007 is the outside of when we'll be ready. But we could be finished by 2005
or before."

   So at Washington University, Wilson, Mardis, McPherson and Waterston continue
to work long hours, long weeks, inching closer to the finish line, the peak of
their careers and modern science.

   And that's a good thing, isn't it?

   Caplan, the bioethicist, isn't so sure.

   "It's not so much the evil the Hitlers of the world would make us do that
should worry us about this science," he said. "It's the good we'll want to do
for ourselves and our children that should be the greatest cause for concern.

   "Don't we owe it to our children to give them greater musical potential,
greater memory capacity, if we can?" Caplan asked philosophically. "Don't we owe
it to them to make them more attractive, if we can?

   "Don't we?"

   =============================================================

   #ART:

   ". . . replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have

   dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the

   air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earh."

   --Genesis 1:28 (King James Version)

   GRAPH

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1998


                             2069 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   February 28, 1998, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. H01

LENGTH: 489 words

HEADLINE: Glaxo May Make Hostile Bid for SmithKline, Media Reports Say

BYLINE: Tim Smart, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Shares of SmithKline Beecham PLC traded in the United States rose slightly
and those of Glaxo Wellcome PLC dipped yesterday after reports in London that
the British drugmakers might still combine in the largest merger ever, though
this time with Glaxo launching a hostile bid for SmithKline.

   The companies announced plans to merge earlier this month, though the deal
quickly fizzled after SmithKline accused Glaxo officials of refusing to honor
terms of the agreement. The proposed $ 60 billion union disintegrated, analysts
said at the time, over which company would have management control of the
combined entity.

   Neither company would comment on the latest news accounts, which appeared in
yesterday's editions of the Financial Times and the Independent.

   Shares of SmithKline's American depositary receipts rose yesterday by 93 3/4
cents to $ 61.87 1/2, while Glaxo's fell $ 3.18 3/4 a share to $ 54.31 1/4.

   Investors and analysts said they were skeptical about whether a hostile deal
would occur because it would require a premium price above the value of the
aborted deal. The British press pegged the price of a hostile deal at 50 billion
pounds, or $ 82 billion.

   "That's a reach, I would say," said Edmund Debler, an analyst with Mehta
Partners in New York. "The share prices are already high. Now, there's a premium
above a premium."

   Still, the possibility of SmithKline remaining an independent company seemed
to grow less likely with the latest speculation. The company broke off a merger
deal with American Home Products Corp. in December and the surprise agreement
with Glaxo signaled its willingness to find a new partner. At the time of the
deal with American Home, SmithKline said the high cost of researching new drugs
and bringing to market promising technologies based on gene therapy made it
necessary to become part of a larger company.

   "I definitely expect to see SmithKline's name pop up again on the merger
screen," Debler said.

   Possible buyers for a company the size of SmithKline, which has more than $
13 billion in annual sales, are few, as many of the larger drug firms are still
digesting earlier deals. This is especially true of the Swiss pharmaceutical
companies, which have been among the most aggressive acquirers. A 1996 merger of
Ciba-Geigy AG and Sandoz AG created Novartis AG, for example.

   Jonathan Roberts, a senior vice president with Klingenstein, Fields & Co., a
New York investment firm that holds more than 1 million of Glaxo's ADRs, said he
had not been contacted by Glaxo but was hoping the company would be able to find
a way to combine with SmithKline.

   Roberts said it was "plausible" that accounts in the British press were being
used to pressure SmithKline's board of directors to return to the bargaining
table.

   "There are a lot of different games people play," he said. "It certainly
sounds like a less good alternative than a merger of equals."


GRAPHIC: Chart, The Washington Post, A LESS FRIENDLY BID(This graphic was not
available)

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1998


                             2070 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   February 24, 1998, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 415 words

HEADLINE: Protein injection in heart creates new blood vessels; Scientist says
study offers 'huge possibilities'

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   DALLAS -- Scientists have made human hearts grow tiny new blood vessels by
injecting proteins, raising hopes that the procedure may one day be used to
treat people with clogged heart arteries.

   The study was published in today's issue of Circulation, a journal of the
American Heart Association.

   Growing new vessels, or angio-genesis, "has huge possibilities," said Dr.
Ronald Crystal, who is pursuing a somewhat different method. "I think that it is
going to be a major strategy in parallel with bypass surgery and angioplasty."

   In bypass surgery, doctors graft a piece of blood vessel to create a detour
around a clog. With angioplasty, a doctor inserts a balloon-tipped catheter into
a clogged artery to push the blockage aside.

   The angiogenesis study was conducted by scientists at the Fulda Medical
Center in Fulda, Germany. They studied 14 men and six women, all at least 50
years old.

   The patients received an injection of the protein, a human growth factor
known as FGF-1, directly into areas of their hearts where blood flow was reduced
by clogged arteries. The injections were delivered while the patients were
undergoing bypass surgery because of blockages.

   In all 20 of the patients, new networks of blood vessels began growing as
early as four days after the procedure, said Dr. Thomas-Joseph Stegmann, one of
the researchers.

   Stegmann said that on average, the patients had a two- to threefold increase
in blood flow to the heart. But how much of that was due to the surgery or the
new vessels is not known, he said.

   So far, the procedure has produced only capillaries, blood vessels that are
smaller in diameter than human hairs. But scientists hope to grow larger
vessels.

   "If we prolong the study, maybe we can say in a one- or two-year period that
it is efficient to bypass capillaries and larger vessels," Stegmann said.

   It is too soon to say whether the procedure would eventually be used by
itself or in addition to bypass surgery or angioplasty, he said.

   The new therapy could be especially useful for treating patients whose
blocked arteries cannot be treated with bypass surgery, said Dr. Elizabeth
Nabel, chief of the cardiology division at the University of Michigan.

   Previously, scientists have used gene therapy to grow vessels in other parts
of the body, including the legs.

   But Stegmann's research is the first published account of the direct use of
proteins to induce the growth of vessels in the heart.

   Pub Date: 2/24/98

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1998


                             2071 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 24, 1998, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 926 words

HEADLINE: Doctors report inducing growth of new blood vessels in heart

BYLINE: By Richard A. Knox, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Doctors have succeeded in growing new blood vessels to nourish the hearts of
patients whose coronary blood supplies have been choked off by atherosclerosis -
a landmark achievement that is expected to open a new era in the treatment of
heart disease.

   "I put this right up at the top of recent advances in treatments for
cardiovascular disease," said Dr. Elizabeth Nabel, chief of cardiology at the
University of Michigan. "These studies are weaving a story that these growth
factors are likely to be very potent therapies."

   In a German study published today and in US studies presented at recent
scientific meetings, researchers have shown for the first time that blood vessel
growth factors can boost the blood supply of oxygen-starved cardiac muscle in
humans.

   Potential beneficiaries include many of the 1 million Americans yearly who
undergo coronary bypass operations or artery-clearing angioplasty procedures.

   Beyond that, researchers said, the ability to grow new coronary vessels might
also help many of the estimated 3.2 million Americans who have heart failure due
to advanced atherosclerosis.

   It is too soon to know whether injections of blood vessel growth factors will
one day allow some patients to cancel bypass surgery or angioplasty. But even if
that hope is not realized in the near future, researchers said, the new
technique might help the 10 to 15 percent of patients now referred for surgery
who have obstructions in arteries too small to bypass or clear.

   Inducing a fresh blood supply in such regions could rescue heart muscle at
risk of a heart attack or suffering from a phenomenon specialists called
"hibernation," in which oxygen-starved muscle stops contracting effectively.

   "If this thing works in further studies, it will completely change the way we
approach patients" with clogged coronary arteries, said Dr. Michael Simons of
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, who has treated 21 patients thus far with
a natural substance called FGF-II, which stands for fibroblast growth factor,
type II.

   "We have seen some unbelievable evidence" of new blood vessel growth in
patients treated so far, Simons reported. Some of his patients have had pellets
impregnated with FGF-II implanted in their hearts during bypass surgery, while
others have received injections of FGF-II through a flexible tube threaded
through arteries into the heart.

   Simons's results have so far been presented at conferences but not yet
published in a scientific journal.

   A German group, whose report appears today in the American Heart Association
journal Circulation, represents the first published study showing new blood
vessel growth in human hearts. The report documents angiogenesis, as new blood
vessel growth is called, in 20 patients who received injections of FGF-I, a
growth factor similar to the one Simons is investigating.

   The new growth occurs in a striking pattern that resembles spokes radiating
from the hub of a bicycle wheel, according to the report. The hub is the point
at which the researchers injected FGF-I into patients' heart muscle while they
were undergoing conventional coronary bypass surgery.

   All the patients who had the injections showed such new growth, but it didn't
occur in patients who got injections of a deactivated form of the growth factor,
said Dr. Thomas-Joseph Stegmann of the University of Marburg near Frankfurt.
Stegmann and his colleagues did not know at the time of injection which patients
got the active growth factor.

   Blood flow in the region of the new vessels was increased almost threefold,
Stegmann said in a telephone interview.

   The German patients who got injections of active FGF-I had greater
improvements in heart function, as measured by the amount of blood their hearts
were able to expel with each stroke. However, Stegmann and others cautioned
against drawing conclusions from this difference because all the patients also
had coronary bypass grafts, making it difficult to know how much improvement was
due to the growth factor versus the surgery.

   So far Stegmann and Simons say they have seen no ill effects from growth
factor treatments. If the growth factor leaked into general circulation,
researchers worry it might stimulate overgrowth of blood vessels in the retina
of the eye. Another concern is that the growth factor could spur the growth of
hidden cancerous tumors.

   Dr. Victor Dzau, chief of medicine at Brigham and Women's Hospital, said the
German study does not answer all questions, but does represent "a significant
advance."

   "Certainly it is proof of concept that an angiogenic factor can stimulate new
blood vessel formation in the human heart," Dzau said. "But one would like to
know that there is a beneficial outcome to the patient, not just a blush of new
vessels."

   The field is moving so fast, researchers said, that clues to clinical benefit
should emerge within the next year or two. In addition to the work in Germany
and Boston, Dr. Ronald Crystal of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center has
treated several patients using a different approach; he injects patients' hearts
with a disabled virus carrying the gene for a different growth factor called
VEGF, for vascular endothelial growth factor.

   Dr. Jeffrey Isner and his colleagues at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in
Boston announced last November that they produced new vessel formation by
injecting the VEGF gene into patients with severely clogged leg arteries.

   Isner's group hopes to get federal approval this spring to try the gene
therapy approach in heart patients.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1998


                             2072 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                    February 24, 1998, Tuesday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 404 words

HEADLINE: PROTEIN INJECTIONS PROMPT HEART TO GROW BLOOD VESSELS

BYLINE: C. BRYSON HULL; Associated Press

DATELINE: DALLAS

BODY:


   Scientists have made human hearts grow tiny new blood vessels by injecting
proteins, raising hopes that the procedure may one day be used to treat people
with clogged heart arteries.

   The study was published in today's issue of Circulation, a journal of the
American Heart Association.

   Growing new vessels, or angiogenesis, "has huge possibilities," said Dr.
Ronald Crystal, who is pursuing a somewhat different method. "I think that it is
going to be a major strategy in parallel with bypass surgery and angioplasty."

   In bypass surgery, doctors graft a piece of blood vessel to create a detour
around a clog. With angioplasty, a doctor inserts a balloon-tipped catheter into
a clogged artery to push the blockage aside.

   The angiogenesis study was conducted by scientists at the Fulda Medical
Center in Fulda, Germany.

   The patients -- 14 men and six women, all at least 50 years old -- received
an injection of the protein, a human growth factor known as FGF-1, directly into
areas of their hearts where blood flow was reduced by clogged arteries. The
injections were delivered while the patients were undergoing bypass surgery for
blockages.

   In all 20 of the patients, new networks of blood vessels began growing as
early as four days after the procedure, said Dr. Thomas-Joseph Stegmann, one of
the researchers.

   Stegmann said that on average, the patients had a two- to threefold increase
in blood flow to the heart. But how much of that resulted from the surgery and
how much from the new vessels was not known, he said.

   So far, the procedure has produced only capillaries, blood vessels that are
smaller in diameter than human hairs. But scientists hope to grow larger
vessels.

   It is too soon to say whether the procedure eventually would be used by
itself or in addition to bypass surgery or angioplasty, Stegmann said.

   The new therapy could be especially useful for treating patients whose
blocked arteries cannot be treated with bypass surgery, said Dr. Elizabeth
Nabel, chief of the cardiology division at the University of Michigan.

   Previously, scientists have used gene therapy to grow vessels in other parts
of the body, including the legs. Patients with severely clogged arteries in
their legs received injections of laboratory-made versions of the human gene
that makes vascular endothelial growth factor, a protein that prompts blood
vessel development during growth in the womb.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1998


                             2073 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 24, 1998, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Page 7; Column 1; Science Desk; Health Page

LENGTH: 1296 words

HEADLINE: Injectable Heart Drug Grows Blood Vessels

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN

BODY:

   DOCTORS in Germany have developed an experimental drug that creates new blood
vessels and increases the blood supply to the human heart within days after
injection, they reported yesterday in an American medical journal.

   It is the first time that a drug has led to growth of new coronary blood
vessels by mimicking the way collateral vessels naturally develop in some people
with blocked arteries. The drug, a protein known as a growth factor, is called
F.G.F.-1 (for fibroblast growth factor). The doctors made it with genetic
engineering techniques in their laboratory in Fulda, Germany.

    F.G.F.-1 was injected into heart muscle near the grafts that surgeons made
to create new channels around blocked coronary arteries during standard bypass
operations at the Fulda Medical Center. For now, the drug could not replace
bypass surgery, the German doctors said.

   But they and American experts expressed hope in interviews that with more
research, F.G.F.-1 or another drug might be injected directly in the heart
without surgery. One idea is simply to inject the growth factor or a similar
drug in an arm to find its way to the heart to grow bypasses without surgery.
But these experts were divided in speculating whether that could ever be done.

   Dr. Thomas-Joseph Stegmann, the head of the team, said the chief objective
was to prove the concept that F.G.F.-1 could safely produce new blood vessels in
the heart. Although other growth factors are now used safely in medical
practice, some experts had warned of dangers with F.G.F.-1. One, Dr. Wolfgang
Schaper of the Max Planck Institute in Bad Nauheim, Germany, wrote in 1993 that
he doubted that the growth factor would have more than moderate benefit and said
"its pronounced toxicity would preclude its use in human patients."

   Among the fears were that F.G.F.-1 might worsen heart disease, produce
excessive growth of vessels and cause tumors.

   "Now we know it works," Dr. Stegmann said.

   But because of the way the experiment was designed, the German team could not
determine how much improvement was due to the drug and how much was due to the
bypass operation, since both were performed at the same time.

   In 1993 and early 1994, Dr. Stegmann's team performed bypass operations on 40
men and women 50 years and older who agreed to be divided into two equal groups
by random choice. One group received active F.G.F.-1. As a scientific control,
the second group received a version made inactive by heat treatment.

   Beginning four days after injection, a network of tiny capillaries, the
vessels that connect arteries and veins, grew outwardly like the spokes
radiating in a bicycle wheel in all 20 F.G.F.-1 recipients. One type of test
showed that the new vessels sprouted from existing blood vessels in the injected
site, bypassed areas blocked by fatty deposits, and attached to the far end of
the damaged artery. The process, angiogenesis, occurs naturally during
pregnancy, wound healing and other conditions.

   Three months after the injections, another test, X-rays known as angiograms
in which a radio-opaque chemical is injected to outline the coronary arteries,
showed that no new blockages had developed.

   No serious unwanted effects from the growth factor were seen in the 20
recipients, and all are alive, the German team reported in Circulation, a
journal published by the American Heart Association in Dallas.

   F.G.F.-1 has not been patented, Dr. Stegmann said in a telephone interview.
If the growth factor proves its mettle in further tests and comes to market, it
will be expensive, like other genetically engineered drugs, Dr. Stegmann said.
But he said there was no way to put a dollar value on such potential therapy.

   F.G.F.-1 is one of several substances that doctors are testing to try to grow
new heart vessels. The need for such a procedure is particularly great among
patients who have blocked arteries that are not amenable to bypass because they
are so narrowed that surgeons cannot sew a vein or artery into them to bypass
the obstruction.

   Among others seeking to grow new blood vessels in diseased hearts is a team
headed by Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner of St. Elizabeth's Hospital in Boston. His team
has used a different technique, known as gene therapy, to produce new blood
vessels around blocked arteries in legs and is awaiting approval to use the same
material (known as V.E.G.F. for vascular endothelial growth factor) in the
heart.

   At New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York, Dr. Wayne Isom's
team recently started testing gene therapy along with bypass surgery.

   In Germany, the patients' heart function improved as measured by a standard
test known as the ejection fraction before and after the bypass and drug
therapy. The test measures the amount of blood that the left ventricle, the
heart's main pumping chamber, expels with each beat and indicates how well it is
pumping. An ejection fraction from 60 percent to 75 percent is considered
normal, although some doctors lower the limit to 50 percent.

   In important details not included in the scientific paper, Dr. Stegmann said
the fraction improved in both groups over the last three years. In the one that
received F.G.F.-1, it rose to 63.8 percent from 50.3 percent. In the one that
received the inactive substance, it rose to 59.4 from 51.5 percent. The
statistical difference between the groups was marginally significant, Dr.
Stegmann said.

   Other experts said they found the findings encouraging, despite the study's
small size and limitations.

   "Proof of the concept that you can use a protein to create new blood vessels
is an important milestone and step" toward developing such molecular therapies
for heart patients, said Dr. Victor J. Dzau, who heads the department of
medicine at the Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.

   The German experiment is the latest in a decadeslong quest to find a way to
grow new vessels in diseased hearts. In the 1930's, American surgeons sprinkled
talc in the sac that surrounds the heart as an irritant to produce inflammation
and indirectly improve blood supply to the heart. But the therapy was soon
abandoned because it had limited benefit, in part because the inflammation could
not be directed to a specific site and the death rate from surgery was high.

   The quest has continued even after more recent advances like bypass
operations and a technique known as angioplasty in which a balloon-tipped tube
is inserted and then inflated to remove obstructions. The reason is that many
patients do not benefit from such procedures.

   In coronary bypass operations, surgeons use arteries and veins from elsewhere
in the body to fashion new channels to restore blood flow around blockages in
the coronary arteries to nourish the heart.

   Dr. Stegmann said that the new findings grew out of research that Dr. Band
Schumacher, a co-author who is a biochemist and a heart surgeon, started in 1991
during a visit to Dr. Tom Maciag's laboratory at the American Red Cross in
Rockville, Md.

   Dr. Schumacher prepared the F.G.F.-1 in cultures of E. coli bacteria,
isolated and highly purified the protein, and then tested it in animals. He said
his team learned to grow and purify the protein in large enough amounts when
others had failed.

   Dr. Stegmann said his team stopped after 20 patients because he wanted to
wait for angiograms performed three years after injection of F.G.F.-1 before
testing it in more patients. The angiograms are expected to be done later this
year.

   Then, if all is well, Dr. Stegmann said his team will take the next step:
injecting the growth factor without surgery. Injection will probably be through
cardiac catheterization, a technique in which a tube is inserted through a
vessel in the leg or arm and then guided to the heart.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Four days after an injection of a human growth factor into the
heart segment on the left, blood vessels began spiraling out from the site of
the injection, the large dark area in the center of the photograph at right.
(American Heart Association)

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1998


                             2074 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      FEBRUARY 24, 1998 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: IN A STUDY, SCIENTISTS GROW BLOOD VESSELS IN HEARTS OF PATIENTS /
INJECTIONS WERE GIVEN DURING BYPASS SURGERY. THE PROCEDURE RAISED HOPES FOR
TREATING CLOGGED ARTERIES.

BYLINE: C. Bryson Hull, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: DALLAS

BODY:

   Scientists have made human hearts grow tiny new blood vessels by injecting
proteins, raising hopes that the procedure may one day be used to treat people
with clogged heart arteries.

   The study, conducted in Germany, was published in today's issue of
Circulation, a journal of the American Heart Association.

   Growing new vessels, or angiogenesis, "has huge possibilities," said Ronald
Crystal of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, who is pursuing a somewhat
different method. "I think that it is going to be a major strategy in parallel
with bypass surgery and angioplasty."

   In bypass surgery, doctors graft a piece of blood vessel to create a detour
around a clog. With angioplasty, a doctor inserts a balloon-tipped catheter into
a clogged artery to push the blockage aside.

   The angiogenesis study was conducted by scientists at the Fulda Medical
Center in Fulda, Germany. They studied 14 men and six women, all at least 50
years old.

   The patients received an injection of the protein, a human growth factor
known as FGF-1, directly into areas of their hearts where clogged arteries
reduced blood flow. The injections were delivered while the patients were
undergoing bypass surgery because of blockages.

   In all 20 patients, new networks of blood vessels began growing as early as
four days after the procedure, said Thomas-Joseph Stegmann, one of the
researchers.

   On average, the patients had a two- to-threefold increase in blood flow to
the heart, Stegmann said. How much of that was due to the surgery to or the new
vessels is not known, he said.

   So far, the procedure has produced only capillaries, blood vessels smaller in
diameter than human hairs. But scientists hope to grow larger vessels.

   "If we prolong the study, maybe we can say in a one- or two-year period that
it is efficient to bypass capillaries and larger vessels," Stegmann said.

   It is too soon to say whether the procedure would eventually be used by
itself or in addition to bypass surgery or angioplasty, he said.

   The new therapy could be especially useful for patients whose blocked
arteries cannot be treated with bypass surgery, said Elizabeth Nabel, chief of
the cardiology division at the University of Michigan.

   Previously, scientists have used gene therapy to grow vessels in other parts
of the body, including the legs. Patients with severely clogged arteries in
their legs received injections of laboratory-made versions of the human gene
that makes vascular endothelial growth factor, a protein that prompts blood
vessel development during growth in the womb.

   But Stegmann's research is the first published account of the direct use of
proteins to induce the growth of vessels in the heart.

   However, Michael Simons, a researcher with Harvard University and Beth Israel
Medical Center in Boston, said that he also had done it, using a different
protein, FGF-2, in 15 patients last year.

   Simons said he found increased blood flow in patients who had only the
procedure and also in patients who got the injection while undergoing
angioplasty.

   In December, Crystal and his colleagues at the New York Hospital-Cornell
Medical Center also injected genes into patients' hearts to induce the growth of
new blood vessels. He is awaiting results of the study. Several other
researchers are also studying similar gene-based approaches.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             2075 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                   February 24, 1998, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg. F-1, CHILDREN'S HEALTH

LENGTH: 784 words

HEADLINE: LIVING WITH SICKLE CELL;
VICTIMS OF THE HEREDITARY DISEASE BENEFIT FROM TREATMENT ADVANCES

BYLINE: ELLEN MAZO, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   At sweet 16, Simone Benning is a junior at Wilkinsburg High School, where she
is a cheerleader, plays the clarinet in the band, is president of the National
Honor Society and a member of the Student Council.

   Those are important activities for the soft-spoken teen, who sometimes is
debilitated with pains so severe that she cannot stop screaming, or pulling out
her hair.

   Simone has sickle cell disease, an inherited, incurable disorder predominant
among African-Americans.

   First described in 1910, sickle cell disease got its name from the red blood
cells that become rigid and shaped like a crescent or sickle. Healthy red blood
cells are round and flexible.

   The pain comes from the sickling of the cells, which can block blood vessels
and damage organs. The spleen, the body's cleansing organ, functions poorly in
sickle cell patients - leading to an increased risk in developing bacterial
infections.

   Shirley Benning said she did not know that she and Simone's father were
carriers for the disease and only learned their daugther had the disease when
Simone's pediatrician gave her a test during her 13-month checkup.

   Only since 1992 have newborns born in Pennsyvlania been routinely tested at
birth to determine whether they have the sickle cell trait, or disease.

   Up to 25 babies a year are diagnosed each year in Western Pennsylvania, said
Dr. Jeffrey D. Hord, director of Children's Hospital sickle cell program, which
now is treating 198 children with the disease.

   There is no cure. While patients with sickle cell historically lived only
into their 20s, new treatments are extending their lives to the 40s and 50s.

   Still, Hord said that early diagnosis is critical for treatment during a
child's first three years - particularly with advances in research that have
given parents some hope.

   The three most significant advances are:

   *The increased use of penicillin to reduce deadly infections.

   *The still-limited use of the drug, hydroxyurea, a form of chemotherapy.

   *The use of a brain ultrasound to determine if the patient is likely to have
a stroke.

   Within the first two months of birth, children now are prescribed two daily
doses of penicillin indefinitely.

   ''We don't know how long children should continue the regimen,'' Hord said.
''But we have found that the number of infections are reduced, so we continuing
to prescribe it.''

   Chemotherapy also is significant, which is started at age 3.

   ''This is a control, but not a cure,'' Hord said.

   And children in danger of having a stroke can benefit from blood
transfusions, which have been found to prevent strokes, Hord said.

   Ultimately, gene therapy may be the key to a sickle cell disease cure, but
researchers haven't reached that point yet.

   Robert Nichols of Homewood, 5, was diagnosed with sickle cell disease at
birth and received folic acid and penicillin immediately. Sickle cell increases
the body's need for this vitamin.

   But at age 3, he had a stroke.

   He now undergoes regular transfusions to help prevent more strokes.

   His mother, Leslie, 36, fears the transfusions will ultimately destroy his
kidneys. Frequent blood transfusions overwork the kidneys.

   ''My only hope for him is a medical cure,'' she said.

   A kindergartener at Crescent School in Homewood, Robert misses a lot of
school.  He lost peripheral vision in his left eye after the stroke, but he
tries hard to keep up with his friends, his mother said.

   ''It's such anxiety. He'll say to me, ''Mom, I'm hurting,'' and I can't help
him,'' she said. ''He probably handles it better than me.''

   In some cases in which children have had strokes, doctors recommend bone
marrow transplants to try to wipe out the sickle cells.

   But as of June 1997, only about 34 children under age 16 have undergone the
transplants, Hord said. Two died, four rejected the grafts and 26 have done
well.

   But for children with sickle cell disease, the risk of complications from a
transplant are still high, Hord said.

   Leslie Nichols has discussed with Hord the possibility of a bone marrow
transplant for her son.

   She is frightened.

   ''That's a last resort,'' she said. ''But what's next? Another stroke? His
heart failing? His kidneys failing? His liver?  It's all so scary.''

   Shirley Benning, 53, understands.

   ''I cry right along with Simone,'' she said. ''I'm emotionally wrecked each
time. You think it gets easier, but it doesn't.''

   Simone, who kept her illness from her friends for years, said she has learned
to live with not knowing when she will get a painful attack.

   ''You just have to think positive,'' she said. ''You can't let it get you
down. You have to keep your head up and look for brighter days.''

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, PHOTO: Martha Rial/Post-Gazette: Simone Benning of Wilkinsburg
has; lived with sickle cell anemia for most of her 16 years. The hereditary
disease; has no cure, and often causes debilitating pain.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1998


                             2076 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1998 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        February 24, 1998 Tuesday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 385 words

HEADLINE: PROTEIN GROWS NEW BLOOD VESSELS IN HEART

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

DATELINE: DALLAS

BODY:

   Scientists have made human hearts grow tiny new blood vessels by injecting
proteins, raising hopes that the procedure may one day be used to treat people
with clogged heart arteries.

   The study was published in today's issue of Circulation, a journal of the
American Heart Association.

   Growing new vessels, or angiogenesis, "has huge possibilities," said Dr.
Ronald Crystal, who is pursuing a somewhat different method. "I think that it is
going to be a major strategy in parallel with bypass surgery and angioplasty."

   In bypass surgery, doctors graft a piece of blood vessel to create a detour
around a clog. With angioplasty, a doctor inserts a balloon-tipped catheter into
a clogged artery to push the blockage aside.

   The angiogenesis study was conducted by scientists at the Fulda Medical
Center in Fulda, Germany. They studied 14 men and six women, all at least 50
years old.

   The patients received an injection of the protein, a human growth factor
known as FGF-1, directly into areas of their hearts where blood flow was reduced
by clogged arteries. The injections were delivered while the patients were
undergoing bypass surgery because of blockages.

   In all 20 of the patients, new networks of blood vessels began growing as
early as four days after the procedure, said Dr. Thomas-Joseph Stegmann, one of
the researchers.

   Stegmann said that on average, the patients had a two- to threefold increase
in blood flow to the heart. But how much of that was due to the surgery or the
new vessels is not known, he said.

   So far, the procedure has produced only capillaries, blood vessels that are
smaller in diameter than human hairs. But scientists hope to grow larger
vessels.

   "If we prolong the study maybe we can say in a one- or two-year period that
it is efficient to bypass capillaries and larger vessels," Stegmann said.

   It is too soon to say whether the procedure would eventually be used by
itself or in addition to bypass surgery or angioplasty, he said.

   The new therapy could be especially useful for treating patients whose
blocked arteries cannot be treated with bypass surgery, said Dr. Elizabeth
Nabel, chief of the cardiology division at the University of Michigan.

   Previously, scientists have used gene therapy to grow vessels in other parts
of the body, including the legs.

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1998


                             2077 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    February 23, 1998, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Health; Part S; Page 1; View Desk

LENGTH: 1570 words

HEADLINE: A NEW ACCEPTANCE;
 CARI BICKLEY, WHO LOST ALL HER HAIR IN 1989, TRIED TO COVER UP HER FRUSTRATING
CONDITION FOR YEARS. BUT SHE FINALLY LEARNED TO EMBRACE IT--AND HERSELF. TODAY
SHE WEARS CAPS AS A FASHION STATEMENT. NOW SHE'S TRYING TO HELP OTHER BALD
WOMEN, ALTHOUGH RESEARCH IN THE AREA IS LAGGING.

BYLINE: MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   If you think it's tough being a bald man, try being a bald woman.

   "Hair is a big part of femininity; all the messages out there tell women that
you're not a woman if you don't have long, gorgeous hair," Cari Bickley says.
"Every man is concerned about losing his hair, but it's still much more socially
acceptable for men to be bald or balding. If you're a woman--or a child--you're
just 'weird.' "

   Bickley knows this only too well.

   Her hair started falling out in 1980, when she was 18. By 1989, after she had
given birth to her third child, all her hair was gone--not just on her head, but
all over her body.

   She is one of an estimated 2.5 million Americans--men, women and
children--who have a baffling condition known as alopecia areata.

   And she is one of nearly 20 million American women who, for a variety of
medical reasons, including chemotherapy treatment, have lost or are losing their
hair.

   Bickley, 36, who lives in Spokane, Wash., with her husband, Rick, and their
children, was the 1997 Mrs. Washington International and made the Top 10 in the
August competition for the Mrs. International title. She wore a wig during the
pageant, but only because she didn't want her baldness to be a distraction to
the judges. In competitions in 1994 and 1995, she appeared both with and without
her wig.

   A former dancer and dance instructor who has traveled the nation speaking out
about alopecia, Bickley is trying to support others who have difficulty
accepting the condition.

   "It is a question of self-esteem," she says. "There are a lot of people out
there who are hiding and feel bad about themselves. They are not comfortable
with how they look and don't go anywhere."


   *

   The cause of alopecia areata is not yet clearly known, although most
researchers believe it is an autoimmune condition--that is, a process by which
the body's immune system responds to some stimulus by attacking itself.
Allergies and certain types of joint disorders are examples of some of the more
commonly occurring autoimmune diseases.

   Recently, however, scientists discovered a gene that might be responsible.
The Jan. 30 issue of the journal Science reported that researchers found a gene
they called "hairless" in studying a Pakistani family plagued for generations by
alopecia. Researchers determined that a gene in the region of Chromosome 8
contained a single mutation that was not present in those family members who
were unafflicted. The work is preliminary and needs to be expanded, researchers
say, but raises the possibility of gene therapy approaches.

   Hair loss is especially frustrating for women because of the dearth of
products and treatments available to help them. Short of wearing wigs and other
cover-ups, there's not much they can do.

   Rogaine (topical minoxidil) and hair transplantation are among the few
options both men and women with pattern baldness--a thinning of hair on the top
and sides of the head--can try. But they don't always work. And they do nothing
for those who have lost all of their hair.

   The latest treatment to fight baldness--Propecia, the first pill for hair
loss--won't help anyone who is totally bald. It is for those who suffer from
pattern baldness--more specifically, it is for men who suffer from pattern
baldness. It has not been approved for women.

   It is known that Propecia can cause birth defects, but has yet to be tested
on post-menopausal women or those for whom reproduction is not an issue.

   "You have to treat different causes of hair loss differently, but it is
nevertheless true that drug companies go where the market is--which is mainly
male pattern baldness," says Fred Wahl, a spokesman for the National Alopecia
Areata Foundation, a national education and support group based in San Rafael,
Calif.

   The foundation is one of the few sources of research dollars for scientists
exploring this problem. Yet the funds are very small: The group awarded 10
grants totaling $ 169,000 for its 1997-98 research program, a paltry figure
compared with the millions routinely targeted for more high-profile ailments.

   The federal government--specifically the National Institutes of Health--is
the major source of funding for the nation's researchers. The National Institute
of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Disease, a part of NIH, sponsors
research on conditions related to hair loss within its dermatology programs. For
specific research into alopecia, the institute awarded $ 475,000 in 1997.

   "Alopecia is not life-threatening," Bickley says. "Researchers are
concentrating on other diseases; they would rather spend their research money on
diseases that take lives. Nevertheless, the investment in research might bring
much information in the understanding of autoimmune disorders."

   NIH regards the problem as significant, and officials there say they would be
eager to support work in this area if scientists would submit grant proposals.
But there doesn't seem to be widespread interest within the research community,
one official said.

   "We are clearly interested in funding it," says the official, who requested
anonymity.

   To that end, NIH plans to sponsor a workshop on alopecia in November with the
hope of inspiring more researchers to become involved. "Usually, having a
workshop does put a greater focus on a particular topic, and often grant
proposals do result," the official says.

   There are some experimental treatments underway, using topical immunotherapy
products, but many have unpleasant side effects or are very inconvenient to use.

   Bickley had some success with a process known as photo chemotherapy, which
involves the use of a drug in conjunction with exposure to a light that
activates the drug internally. But she developed some pigment loss in her skin
and also found the process impractical.

   "I came close to getting a full head of hair back, but it involves treatments
three times a week for the rest of your life," she recalls. "And on the days of
the treatment, you can't go outside and you have to wear special glasses--and I
just did not want to be tied to a treatment like that for the rest of my life."


   *

   Alopecia takes different forms. The most common is patchy alopecia areata,
which appears as small, smooth, circular areas of hair loss. The others are
alopecia totalis--complete loss of scalp hair--and alopecia universalis, which
is the complete loss of all body hair. Heredity is believed to play a role in
about 20% of cases.

   Androgenetic alopecia is commonly known as female pattern hair loss. Hair
loss can be triggered by, or exacerbated by, a range of factors, among them:
medications, hormones, childbirth, and physical or emotional stress.

   Understandably, most women are reluctant to be very public about their
condition. Many don't want to talk about it. Others make jokes. ("I never have a
bad hair day," says one woman who is completely bald. "Mine are always no hair
days." That same woman, however, has commented to family: "I realize this is not
life-threatening--but it would be nice to have hair" and swears that if she
begins losing her eyebrows too, "I will never leave my house.")

   Bickley says she felt this way for a long time too. There was a time when she
would never remove her wig. But one day, eight years ago while teaching a dance
class, she began to worry that her wig would fly off. At that moment, she
decided she'd had enough.

   The next day she showed up to teach wearing a baseball cap. And soon that too
came off.


   *

   Bickley began showing signs of the disease as a teenager. The night of her
senior prom, she found herself penciling in her eyebrows. "I thought I'd gone
overboard with the plucking," she says.

   Following graduation, she went to Reno to dance as an MGM showgirl and one
night noticed a large bald spot at the front of her head.

   "We had to wear these very large, very heavy headpieces, and I thought they
had been pulling my hair out," she says. "But my mom took one look at me and
said, 'That's not normal.' "

   She saw a dermatologist, who diagnosed alopecia and began treating her with
cortisone injections at each hair loss site. This worked for about 10 years,
helping the hair to grow back. But success was temporary.

   The problem worsened after the birth of each of her children: Danielle, 13,
Kyle, 11, and Nick, 8. Finally, in 1989, six months after Nick's birth, all her
hair was gone. She credits her children and husband with enabling her to "come
out of hiding" and feel good about herself.

   "If I didn't have this support, I couldn't have done it," she says. "Without
it, it would have been a whole different story. Rick has never made me feel any
less feminine, any less attractive, any less desirable."

   Most of the time now, "I leave the wigs at home," she says. "When I dress up,
when I go to church, for example, I wear a wig because it is appropriate. But
when I'm around home and my friends in general, doing less dressy things, I wear
a baseball cap, or go bald."

   But, she stresses: "It took me seven years to get to that point, to feel
comfortable enough to do that. This isn't something that came overnight. One of
the things I say in my speeches about this is that it is important for people to
allow themselves the time that they need to be comfortable with it.

   "People expect that 'she's OK with it, so I should be OK with it.' But . . .
they have to give themselves time."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Cari Bickley PHOTOGRAPHER: JASON CLARK / For The Times PHOTO:
Cari Bickley, with husband Rick, wore a wig during the 1997 Mrs. Washington
International pageant, which she won; she thought her baldness might distract
judges.  PHOTOGRAPHER: ROBERT BEHM PHOTO: She and son Nick, 8, chat at his
school.  PHOTOGRAPHER: JASON CLARK / For The Times

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1998


                             2078 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     February 23, 1998 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 483 words

HEADLINE: TINY CHIP MAY HELP DIABETICS;
IMPLANTABLE SENSOR COULD MONITOR BLOOD SUGAR LEVELS

BYLINE: By MARK GUIDERA; BALTIMORE SUN

DATELINE: GERMANTOWN, MD.

BODY:

   M. James Barrett and his Sensors of Medicine team of scientists and engineers
are hot on the trail of overcoming a challenge that has stumped medical-device
makers for years: developing a fast, accurate blood sugar monitor small enough
to be implanted in people with diabetes.

   Barrett puts the task before him succinctly: "The field is littered with the
dead bodies of those who have tried and failed at this." He expects in a few
months to have a clearer picture of his company's chances for success. That's
when researchers should wrap up work on the blood-sugar-recognizing molecule.

   Engineers at Sensors for Medicine have designed a microchip, as small as the
eye on a Lincoln penny, on which the new molecule will be embedded.

   The chip would then be injected into the fatty-tissue layer of a diabetic's
arm or other area. From there it would transmit blood glucose readings to a
meter worn on the wrist like a watch.

   At least three other small U.S. companies are attempting to develop new
devices to make glucose monitoring easier.

   There is an enormous need for a way to monitor a diabetic's blood sugar that
is simpler than the way it is commonly done today, say diabetes experts.

   A diabetic monitors his blood glucose levels by taking a blood sample up to
eight times a day by pricking a finger and then swabbing the sample on a small
strip treated with an enzyme. The strip is fed into a hand-sized meter, which
provides a blood-sugar-level reading. From that a diabetic can determine whether
an insulin shot is needed.

   The process can be painful, particularly for children and the elderly, and
requires daily discipline.

   As a result, parents of young children anguish over the regimen, and many
diabetics don't take regular readings. That can lead to complications and
worsening of the disease.

   There are an estimated 8 million diagnosed diabetics in the United States
alone, according to the American Diabetes Association. An estimated 8 million
others are either misdiagnosed or undiagnosed. Also, it is one of the
fastest-growing chronic diseases in the country.

   The market for blood-glucose-monitoring strips and meters is estimated by
analysts to be a $2.5 billion global industry.

   It's unclear yet whether Sensors for Medicine's device would replace how
diabetics monitor their blood sugar levels today or if big medical-equipment
companies would be interested in licensing it for sale. But the patented
technology behind the device has potential applications in industries as diverse
as pollution-control monitoring to food packaging, said Charles W. Newhall III,
of Baltimore-based New Enterprise Associates, the venture capital group that is
backing Sensors for Medicine with $2 million in seed financing.

   Barrett also recently started and headed up one of the first companies to
test gene therapy in humans, Genetic Therapy Inc., based in Gaithersburg, Md.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: BALTIMORE SUN; M.James Barrett in the lab where he has developed
a micro-implantable sensor for diabetes and other disease management.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1998


                             2079 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    February 21, 1998 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 431 words

HEADLINE: FIGGIE UNIT NAMES NEW PRESIDENT

BYLINE: FROM STAFF REPORTS

BODY:

   Figgie International Inc. named Richard E. Tierney president of its
Interstate Electronics division in Anaheim, Calif. Tierney, 58, succeeds
Lawrence A. LaCotti, 67, who is retiring. Tierney is a former president of
Whittaker Electronics, a Simi Valley, Calif., maker of ground-based radar,
electronic warfare devices and advanced communications products. Interstate
Electronics makes satellite-based guidance, navigation, instrumentation and
communications systems for aviation, defense and commercial markets.

   COPERNICUS PROMOTES MILLER

   Copernicus Gene Systems Inc. named K. Megan O'Neill Miller vice president of
administration. Miller has been director of finance and administration since the
company's incorporation in early 1997. She will manage all administrative
functions, including human resources and information systems. The company also
elected Robert C. Moen to its board. Moen is vice president of clinical and
regulatory affairs at the Gene Therapy Unit of Baxter Healthcare Corp. in Round
Lake, Ill. Copernicus is a privately held biotechnology company in Cleveland.

   INVESTMENT MANAGER FORMED

   Winfield Associates Inc. is a new Cleveland investment management firm.
William W. Baker, a former vice president with McDonald & Co. Investments Inc.
of Cleveland, is president. Other principals include Christopher W. Baker, chief
financial officer, and Donna M. Holland, vice president. Winfield is an
investment manager and adviser to individuals and company retirement plans.

   RUBBERMAID CEO HONORED

   Wolfgang Schmitt, chairman and chief executive officer of Rubbermaid Inc. in
Wooster, was named the first International Businessman of the Year by the
European Council for Global Business. Henri Misrahi, council president, cited
Schmitt's "global vision for Rubbermaid" as the driving force behind the
company's strategic expansion in Europe. Under Schmitt's direction, Rubbermaid
acquired a private manufacturing facility in Poland and is beginning to
penetrate emerging markets in Europe. Last December, Rubbermaid purchased
Curver, a Dutch firm that is Europe's biggest plastic housewares business.
Rubbermaid's European sales have grown for five consecutive years. Rubbermaid
aims to derive 30 percent of its sales from outside the United States by the
year 2000.

   2 SPONSORS FOR MAY SUMMIT

   KeyCorp and National City Bank have signed on as local sponsors of the Urban
League's Second National Economic Summit. This year's summit, May 14-16 at the
Renaissance Cleveland Hotel, will focus on franchising and distribution
opportunities for African-Americans.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY: NO CREDIT; Schmitt

COLUMN: COMPANIES & PEOPLE

   LOCAL TICKER

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1998


                             2080 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                           February 20, 1998, Friday

SECTION: NEWS , Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 524 words

HEADLINE: INNOVATIVE TREATMENTS USE NEW TACTICS TO FIGHT CANCER

BYLINE: Mark D. Somerson, Dispatch Medical Reporter

BODY:


   To complement traditional cancer therapies such as radiation and
chemotherapy, researchers are using lab-created proteins and patients' genetic
material to create treatments specific to their disease.

   A group of scientists discussed new therapies yesterday in New York City at
an American Medical Association conference on biotherapeutic treatments.

   The talks, which also were presented during a national telephone news
conference, focused on three treatments: a form of gene therapy that triggers an
immune response to tumors; lab-made antibodies that attract cancer-fighting
cells to tumors; and drugs that keep blood vessels from boosting tumor growth.

   Cancer is a disease of the genes, said Dr. Michael T. Lotze of the University
of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute.

   ''It is believed that it takes six or seven hits (mutations) in individual
genes in order to end up with full-fledged cancer,'' he said.

   For example, when P53 - a tumor-suppressor gene - is flawed or missing,
uncontrolled cell growth can result and cancer can form. Problems with this gene
are associated with as many as 86 percent of breast cancers.

   But unlike therapies that simply replace flawed genes, Lotze is working on
encoding genes to attract immune responses to fight cancer.

   Lotze said the dendritic cell, a white blood cell, is activated at sites
where there is inflammation or tissue damage. The cell signals to the immune
system to send other cells to attack the threat.

   By genetically modifying this cell to recognize cancer, it can send the same
signal to the immune system, he said.

   The work is being done in head, neck and prostate cancer. He said researchers
hope to begin work soon on children's cancers.

   Dr. Louis M. Weiner of the Fox Chase Cancer Center and Temple University
School of Medicine in Philadelphia said antibodies created in the lab show
success in fighting tumors of the lymphatic system.

   These antibodies are proteins designed to hit specific cancer cells.

   ''While they selectively target cancer cells, they spare normal cells,'' he
said.

   These proteins can induce an immune response to fight the cancer or even
program a cell to commit suicide.

   By tacking these proteins onto radioactive particles or chemopreventive
agents, they target the cancer cells directly and do their work, Weiner said.

   Dr. S. Gail Eckhardt of the Cancer Therapy and Research Center in San
Antonio, Texas, said her lab is developing drugs that inhibit the growth of
blood vessels that tumors need to grow and spread through the body.

   Angiogenesis is the method in which these blood vessels grow to supply
tumors, and angiogenesis inhibitors are the ''smart drugs'' being developed to
stop this system.

   These drugs include a compound derived from the liver of the dogfish shark,
and thalidomide, which was banned in the United States after the drug caused
thousands of birth defects in the 1960s.

   Another compound, called matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor, or MMPI, targets
enzymes particular to cancer that invade and destroy tissue, allowing tumors to
grow and spread.

   The drugs are being tested in clinical trials.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1998


                             2081 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       February 20, 1998, Friday , METRO

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 3, Part B

LENGTH: 578 words

HEADLINE: New cancer treatments may have trouble getting past FDA

BYLINE: Don Finley; Express-News Medical Writer

BODY: Thalidomide, along with a new compound derived from shark liver and other
experimental drugs, is part of a promising new wave of cancer treatments that
starve tumors of the blood supply they need to grow.

   But a San Antonio researcher warned Thursday that getting Food and Drug
Administration approval for these drugs could prove difficult.

   "One of the difficulties we have ... is really garnering the support for
getting these drugs beyond the FDA out into the market," said Dr. S. Gail
Eckhardt, associate director of clinical research with the Cancer Therapy and
Research Center's Institute for Drug Development.

   She spoke to medical reporters in a national conference call organized by the
American Medical Association on new biological- based cancer treatments.

   Researchers long have been interested in a class of drugs called angiogenesis
inhibitors, which prevent the growth of new blood vessels that tumors need to
grow and spread to other parts of the body.

   Eckhardt said that by counting the number of these small blood vessels when a
tumor is removed from the breast, colon, prostate or other areas, doctors can
predict how deadly the disease will be.

   "We find the number of these small blood vessels - meaning the more a patient
has in a specimen - can actually correlate with how they respond to therapy and
with the aggressiveness of the disease."

   Thalidomide, a sedative banned in the 1960s for causing hundreds of birth
defects, has been shown to be a strong angiogenesis inhibitor. So is squalamine,
derived from the liver of the dogfish shark, along with several others.

   But such agents may stop the growth of tumors without killing them, which is
why they are used with standard chemotherapy. Proving effectiveness for FDA
approval usually requires showing experimental drugs shrink or kill tumors,
Eckhardt said.

   "So right now we're working very hard to ... design trials that will really
enable us to get these compounds beyond the early clinical trial stage and into
patients," she said.

   Another class of drug showing promise is monoclonal antibodies, laboratory
crafted proteins that "selectively target cancer cells and (mostly) spare normal
cells," said Dr. Louis Weiner with the Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia.



   Some monoclonal antibodies act alone, triggering a signal deep within cancer
cells to commit suicide. Other antibodies are paired with radioactive or other
toxic substances that attach to and kill the cell.

   The first such antibody to receive FDA approval has been C2B8, which has
demonstrated tumor shrinkage in about half of the lymphoma patients tested.

   "So there's quite good evidence that antibody therapy is here to stay for
patients with lymphoma. It won't replace chemotherapy, but will be a nice
adjunct (combined therapy)," Weiner said.

   Gene therapy is moving beyond early research and could become a mainstay of
cancer therapy over the next five years, said Dr. Michael Lotze with the
University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute.

   "Cancer is fundamentally a disease of the genes," Lotze said. "The defects
that are observed are common. For example, over 60 percent of human cancers have
associated with them a defect in the gene encoding the P-53 protein."

   ONYX-015, a type of genetically altered cold virus, has been given as gene
therapy to patients with P- 53 defective head-and-neck tumors in San Antonio and
elsewhere with good results.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1998


                             2082 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                  February 18, 1998, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1065 words

HEADLINE: Earnings

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   Camco International said its revenues from outside the United States
increased to 66 percent of total revenues in 1997.

   Qtr. to Dec. 31 1997 1996.

   Revenues 252,154,000 221,433,000.

   Net income 26,247,000 20,671,000.

   Per share 0.68 0.54.

   Full year 1997 1996.

   Revenues 913,841,000 764,535,000.

   Net income 88,852,000 68,004,000.

   Per share 2.31 1.78.

   Camco is an oil-field services company.

   Group 1 Automotive reported higher revenues for the year, the result of both
dollar and volume increases in new and used vehicle sales, with its Toyota,
Lexus and Honda dealerships being the top performers. The company was founded in
October through the combination of 30 dealer franchises and a simultaneous
public offering. All results are reported on a pro forma basis.

   Qtr. to Dec. 31 1997 1996.

   Revenues 213,245,000 197,963,000.

   Net income 2,311,000 1,073,000.

   Per share (basic) 0.16 0.07.

   Per share (diluted) 0.15 0.07.

   Full year 1997 1996.

   Revenues 902,295,000 821,913,000.

   Net income 11,413,000 9,447,000.

   Per share (basic) 0.78 0.64.

   Per share (diluted) 0.76 0.63.

   Group 1 Automotive is an operator and consolidator in the automotive
retailing industry.

   Metals USA reported higher earnings for the fourth quarter and fiscal year,
as the company started to see some financial benefits from its acquisition
strategy.

   Qtr. to Dec. 31 1997 1996.

   Revenues 211,438,000 153,357,000.

   Net income 4,888,000 2,829,000.

   Per share 0.16 0.09.

   Full year 1997 1996.

   Revenues 739,838,000 627,183,000.

   Net income 18,566,000 17,298,000.

   Per share 0.61 0.58.

   Metals USA buys metal processing and distributing companies.

   American Oncology Resources expanded its network in the fourth quarter with
33 additional doctors. The company had a 30 percent increase in net income per
share in the quarter.

   Qtr. to Dec. 31 1997 1996.

   Revenues 89,626,000 63,635,000.

   Net income 6,166,000 4,840,000.

   Per share 0.13 0.10.

   Full year 1997 1996.

   Revenues 321,840,000 205,460,000.

   Net income 22,867,000 17,650,000.

   Per share 0.48 0.37.

   American Oncology is a national physician practice management company
focusing on oncology.

   The York Group reported that growth during the fourth quarter and fiscal year
exceeded the casket-manufacturing industry in general.

   Qtr. to Dec. 31 1997 1996.

   Revenues 47,115,000 37,783,000.

   Net income 3,109,000 2,832,000.

   Per share (basic) 0.35 0.35.

   Per share (diluted) 0.34 0.33.

   Full year 1997 1996.

   Revenues 178,690,000 149,178,000.

   Net income 12,063,000 10,785,000.

   Per share (basic) 1.38 1.43.

   Per share (diluted) 1.34 1.37.

   York Group is the nation's second-largest manufacturer of caskets and casket
components.

   Kirby Corp. reported a net loss from discontinuing its offshore tanker and
harbor service operations.

   Qtr. to Dec. 31 1997 1996.

   Revenues 82,794,000 82,260,000.

   Net income 2,889,000 6,657,000.

   Per share (basic) 0.12 0.27.

   Per share (diluted) 0.12 0.27.

   Full year 1997 1996.

   Revenues 335,244,000 320,016,000.

   Net income 21,682,000 27,229,000.

   Per share (basic) 0.89 1.07.

   Per share (diluted) 0.88 1.06.

   Kirby is a marine transportation company.

   Cliffs Drilling Co. said it posted record net income for 1997 due to improved
operating results from its day work drilling and engineering services business
segments.

   Qtr. to Dec. 31 1997 1996.

   Revenues 74,166,000 46,756,000.

   Net income 13,782,000 4,428,000.

   Per share (basic) 0.90 0.30.

   Per share (diluted) 0.88 0.29.

   Full year 1997 1996.

   Revenues 263,632,000 133,109,000.

   Net income 46,659,000 14,422,000.

   Per share (basic) 3.06 1.05.

   Per share (diluted) 3.01 1.02.

   Cliffs is an international offshore contract driller.

   Trico Marine Services said it had record results in its fourth quarter.

   Qtr. to Dec. 31 1997 1996.

   Revenues 41,601,000 20,599,000.

   Net income 10,853,000 5,691,000.

   Per share (basic) 0.65 0.39.

   Per share (diluted) 0.61 0.36.

   Full year 1997 1996.

   Revenues 125,480,000 53,484,000.

   Net income 35,299,000 9,974,000.

   Per share (basic) 2.22 0.90.

   Per share (diluted) 2.11 0.81.

   Trico Marine has a fleet of vessels that serve the offshore oil and gas
industry.

   Dril-Quip said its 1997 earnings improvement was because of strong demand for
its products due to expanded drilling and production in offshore areas
throughout the world.

   Qtr. to Dec. 31 1997 1996.

   Revenues 40,150,000 32,663,000.

   Net income 4,305,000 3,065,000.

   Per share (diluted) 0.26 0.21.

   Full year 1997 1996.

   Revenues 146,823,000 115,864,000.

   Net income 12,938,000 9,118,000.

   Per share (diluted) 0.87 0.63.

   Dril-Quip makes offshore drilling and production equipment for the oil and
gas industry.

   The ForeFront Group reported its second consecutive profitable quarter as it
continued its shift toward selling and developing computer-based training
materials and away from Internet-based applications.

   Qtr. to Dec. 31 1997 1996.

   Revenues 5,356,705 4,340,932.

   Net income 837,222 (1,694,532).

   Per share (basic) 0.12 (0.28).

   Per share (diluted) 0.10 (0.28).

   Full year 1997 1996.

   Revenues 18,407,770 13,798,466.

   Net income (4,128,571) (7,332,588).

   Per share (basic) (0.63) (1.22).

   Per share (diluted) (0.63) (1.22).

   (Figures in parentheses are losses.) ForeFront develops and sells software
used to train computer industry professionals.

   GeneMedicine attributed its losses to the high costs for research and
development during the early stages of drug development.

   Qtr. to Dec. 31 1997 1996.

   Revenues 1,531,593 2,091,113.

   Net income (3,532,475) (2,308,086).

   Per share (0.26) (0.18).

   Full year 1997 1996.

   Revenues 6,813,145 6,584,462.

   Net income (11,753,701) (10,652,972).

   Per share (0.86) (0.84).

   (Figures in parentheses are losses.).

   GeneMedicine develops gene therapy products designed for the treatment or
prevention of diseases.

   Hondo Oil & Gs Co. posted a net loss of $ 3.2 million in its fiscal first
quarter ended Dec. 31, compared with a net loss of $ 2.4 million in the same
quarter a year ago.

   Qtr. to Dec. 31 1997 1996.

   Revenues 147,000 15,000.

   Net income (3,213,000) (2,433,000).

   Per share (0.23) (0.18).

   (Figures in parentheses are losses.)

   Hondo is an independent oil and gas company with interests in Colombia.



LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1998


                             2083 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                           February 16, 1998, Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 694 words

HEADLINE: Scientists using plastic matrices, genetics to regrow tissues

BYLINE: SCRIPPS HOWARD NEWS SERVICE

BODY:

   PHILADELPHIA -- Whether grown on an artificial matrix or coaxed into
re-growth through genetic manipulation, scientists reported major developments
this weekend toward the ability to replace damaged tissue in animals and,
ultimately, in humans.
"We're a long way from being able to replace a broken heart, but we may be able
to do quite a bit for a leg or hip in a matter of five or six years," said Dr.
Cato Laurencin, an orthopedic surgeon and chemical engineer at Allegheny
University Hospitals here, during a presentation before the American Association
for the Advancement of Science's annual meeting.
Laurencin and many others in the field have made major advances using
biodegradable plastics as scaffolding for the regrowth of tissue in animal
models. While the skin is furthest along, Laurencin said his colleagues and he
are well on their way to developing plastic matrices that could be used to
foster regrowth of bone.
"We can make these polymers dissolve over as long as 10 years or as little as 10
minutes depending on the duration we need," Laurencin said. These advances offer
the prospect of not only healing fractures but of repairing bone lost to tumors,
osteoporosis and other disease.
Laurencin and his colleagues have been able to add bone growth hormones to this
scaffolding to create what he calls a "smart matrix," which can speed up healing
of fractures, and even began leaning toward making repairs to injuries like a
crushed hip.
More recently, the Allegheny researchers have teamed with UCLA orthopedic
researcher Jay Lieberman, who has successfully cloned a gene that spurs bone
growth. By inserting cells implanted with that gene into a matrix, "we can drive
those cells to produce bone mass around them," Laurencin said.
Work on isolating the growth factors for muscle is not as far advanced,
Laurencin said, but his team is working with biotechnology firms on that front
as well.
A more remote but tantalizing prospect is that doctors may one day be able to
use gene therapy to adjust immune system cells to regrow tissue, organs, even
entire limbs.
A researcher from the Wistar Institute here discussed her discovery of the
"healer mouse," the first mammal capable of regenerating tissue. Dr. Ellen
Heber-Katz said her team is well on the way to identifying the genes responsible
for the mouse's ability to replace parts of itself.
"I think this could be a very good model for regeneration in humans, and it's
also clear that immune response is involved in this process," said Heber-Katz,
an immunologist.
Ultimately, the findings could make it possible to promote organ replacement,
enhance healing of chronic wounds and repair burns and spinal cord injuries.
Heber-Katz and an assistant stumbled upon the special strain of mouse more than
five years ago when they pierced some of the animals' ears to mark them for
identification during an experiment. When they checked the mice several weeks
later, all their ears had completely healed.
"The holes are used for marking because they never close. But we couldn't tell
where they'd ever been," Heber-Katz said.
In later experiments, the mice have been found to regrow liver tissue and bits
of their tails when they've been removed.
In people, Heber-Katz speculated that regeneration might be sparked by taking
the necessary genes and putting them directly at the sites of wounding.
Until now, regeneration could be studied only in frogs and other amphibians,
which are biologically, genetically and immunologically different from mammals.
In frogs, for instance, the area around a lost limb quickly develops a blastema,
a mass of immature but rapidly dividing cells that can differentiate into
cartilage, blood vessels, muscle, etc. They also lack a layer of protein that
forms around different types of tissue to maintain structure. The same blastema
and breakdown of the protein structure occurs in the mice.
Heber-Katz has also found that as the mice age, they do not regenerate as
quickly or as well. But when they're given a specific antibody to disable a
class of immune cells that normally attack tumors, the mice heal as if they're
youngsters.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1998


                             2084 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    February 16, 1998, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Health; Part S; Page 6; View Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words

HEADLINE: FIRST PERSON;
AMERICAN HEART MONTH;
 Signs Force Him to Listen to His Heart

BYLINE: NANETTE MAGUIRE VAUGHAN, SPECIAL TO THE TIMES

BODY:


   It was Sunday, Nov. 2, 1997, around 4:30 p.m.

   Santa Barbara was experiencing another heat wave. I had just returned home
from the beach with our daughter, Jeannie. My husband, Bill, and son, Jimmy, had
spent the day doing guy stuff and were getting ready for dinner. Bill said that
he wasn't feeling well and went to lie down. I thought that was rather odd since
we were expecting friends to join us that evening.

   I went back to the bedroom to take a shower and check on Bill. I found him on
all fours in front of the fan. He said he was "flashing."

   I reached over to touch his forehead. It was wet and cold. I told him I was
going to call the doctor, and he said, "No, I'm feeling better."

   Then he threw up in the sink and said again that he felt better.

   "Right!"

   He said he didn't want me to call the doctor because he hadn't signed his new
life insurance policy! He was going to do it when he got to the office in the
morning.

   "It's not going to do me much good if you drop dead tonight!" I said.

   When he told me his chest felt tight, I said, "That's it. I'm calling 911."
As soon as I hung up the phone, I heard the sirens sound at our neighborhood
fire station.

   What Bill did not tell me was that he had been having symptoms for a good
week: tightness in the chest, shortness of breath and tingling in his hands. On
Saturday, he left the tennis court early, complaining of nausea. Of course, it
was 100-plus degrees that day and I had attributed his nausea to the heat.

   Then, while playing golf the next morning, he experienced tightness and
shortness of breath. In complete denial, he blamed it on the hot weather. When
the symptoms went away, he kept on going--even surfing that afternoon. When I
came home at 4:30 and the symptoms returned, he could no longer hide them.

   In a way, I was prepared for something like this. Knowing that his father had
died at age 46 of a massive heart attack made me ever watchful for the symptoms.

   When the paramedics arrived, they gave Bill nitroglycerin and took us to St.
Francis Hospital. There, cardiologist Dr. Alan Brown performed an angiogram. It
indicated a 99.9% blockage in Bill's left main artery. Dr. Brown recommended
angioplasty or bypass surgery. An angioplasty would probably be successful, but
the blockage could return within a year.

   Open heart surgery, on the other hand, offered long-term results and, given
Bill's family history, it might be a better choice. Bill turned 53 only last
May. While we were discussing the pros and cons of both surgeries, Bill began
complaining of tightness in his chest again. We looked at each other and agreed
right then on bypass surgery.

   Since St. Francis didn't provide bypass surgery backup, Bill was once again
transported by ambulance to Cottage Hospital, which, fortunately, was nearby.

   We met Dr. Richard Westerman, the heart surgeon, in the intensive care unit.
We liked him immediately and felt Bill was in the best of hands. He told us that
there was only a 1% chance of failure. We could live with those odds. Dr. Brown
also mentioned that his own father flew in to Dr. Westerman when he needed
bypass surgery.

   After Bill was shaved and prepped, he was ready to be transported to the
operating room. It was now about 8 o'clock. As the attendants wheeled him past
me, I gave him the thumbs-up sign and a big smile. What I really wanted to do
was cry. But, for now, I didn't have the time. They told me the surgery would
last about 2 1/2 hours. I went out to the waiting room to make dreaded phone
calls to Bill's family and mine. There I found our good friends, Julie Teufel
and Charlie Cappel. Julie came to be with me at St. Francis and followed us over
to Cottage.

   Julie was quite taken by Dr. Brown. He was tall, dark and handsome. If you
didn't have a heart condition, he could give you one! I teased Julie that I was
going to call her husband and tell him that Bill was OK but that she had
developed a heart problem! It was one of the lighter moments of the evening.

   Two hours later, I met Dr. Westerman in the waiting room and was informed the
surgery was successful. I saw Bill once more before I went home for the night.
He was still completely out of it and had tubes attached all over.

   Early the next morning, I returned to the hospital and again met with Dr.
Westerman. He said Bill would now be able to see his great-grandchildren
someday! We also learned Bill's blockage is commonly referred to as the "widow
maker's lesion" because a heart attack stemming from a blockage in the left main
artery is usually fatal.

   By 2 p.m. Monday, Bill was able to take his first walk, and by 5 p.m., he was
out of ICU. He remained hospitalized for two more nights and was sent home
Wednesday morning.

   Bill now has a new artery from his mammary and is feeling better. Recovery
from open heart surgery is slow, but he improves daily. When he first returned
home, he was like a little old man. He walked hunched over, took short, quick
breaths of air, and a five-minute walk really tired him out.

   Now he's walking 30 minutes a day and recently began cardiac rehab with Bob
Huhn at the Human Performance Center. He's also been attending lectures at
Cottage Hospital on lifestyle and dietary changes to maintain a healthy heart.

   In the future, he will be monitored closely. Unfortunately, as our internist,
Dr. William Morton-Smith said, "it took an event" to get Bill to pay attention
to his heart.

   Last year, he had skipped a treadmill test. Since he had low cholesterol and
was in pretty good shape, he figured he needn't bother. But his genetic history,
combined with a type A personality and high-stress job, made for a lethal
combination.

   I just hope gene therapy will be performed by the time our children reach
middle age.

   For now, we are enjoying our good fortune and faith in the successful surgery
and continuing care and treatment of Bill's heart condition. We have a new
appreciation for healthy foods and exercise, and plan on making them part of our
everyday lives.

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1998


                             2085 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         February 16, 1998 Monday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 6

LENGTH: 805 words

HEADLINE: Plastics serve as scaffolding for new tissue
 Scientists believe they will be able to stimulate the regrowth of body parts

SOURCE: Scripps Howard News Service

DATELINE: Philadelphia

BODY:

   Scientists reported major developments this weekend toward the ability to
replace damaged tissue in animals and, ultimately, in human beings.

   "We're a long way from being able to replace a broken heart, but we may be
able to do quite a bit for a leg or hip in a matter of five or six years," said
Cato Laurencin, an orthopedic surgeon and chemical engineer at Allegheny
University Hospitals in Philadelphia, during a presentation before the American
Association for the Advancement of Science's annual meeting.

   Laurencin and others in the field have made major advances using
biodegradable plastics as scaffolding for the re-growth of tissue in animal
models. While the skin is furthest along, Laurencin said his colleagues and he
were well on their way to developing plastic matrices that could be used to
foster re-growth of bone.

   "We can make these polymers dissolve over as long as 10 years or as little as
10 minutes depending on the duration we need," Laurencin said. These advances
offer the prospect of not only healing fractures but also of repairing bone lost
to tumors, osteoporosis and other disease.

   Laurencin and his colleagues have been able to add bone growth hormones to
this scaffolding to create what he calls a "smart matrix" that can speed up
healing of fractures and even started to be able to make repairs to injuries
such as a crushed hip.

   More recently, the Allegheny researchers have teamed with UCLA orthopedic
researcher Jay Lieberman, who has successfully cloned a gene that spurs bone
growth. By inserting cells implanted with that gene into a matrix, "we can drive
those cells to produce bone mass around them," Laurencin said.

   Work on isolating the growth factors for muscle is not as far advanced,
Laurencin said, but his team is working with biotechnology firms on that front
as well.

   A more remote but tantalizing prospect is that doctors may one day be able to
use gene therapy to adjust immune system cells to re-grow tissue, organs, even
entire limbs.

   A researcher from the Wistar Institute here discussed her discovery of the
"healer mouse," the first mammal capable of regenerating tissue. Ellen
Heber-Katz said her team was well on the way to identifying the genes
responsible for the mouse's ability to replace parts of itself.

   "I think this could be a very good model for regeneration in humans, and it's
also clear that immune response is involved in this process," said Heber-Katz,
an immunologist.

   Ultimately, the findings could make it possible to promote organ replacement,
enhance healing of chronic wounds and repair burns and spinal cord injuries.

   In people, Heber-Katz speculated, regeneration might be sparked by taking the
necessary genes and putting them directly at the sites of wounding, or "they
might be put in some soluble material that could be used with gene therapy."

   Until now it had been possible to study regeneration only in frogs and other
amphibians, which are biologically, genetically and immunologically different
from mammals.

   Researchers have long known that fetal and newborn mammals have superior
ability to heal from wounds without scarring because the T-cell portion of their
immune system has yet to be developed.

   "It's intriguing to speculate that mammals at some point in evolution gave up
this ability to regenerate tissue in favor of repairing wounds in order to
develop a more complex immune system to protect against tumors," Heber-Katz
said.

   In other science news:

   Cancer increase: Russian scientists reported the first indications that a
much-feared increase in breast cancer is occurring in the wake of the 1986
Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident.

   Anatoly Romanenko reported that in outlying areas around Chernobyl, where
people received moderate exposure to radiation, breast cancer cases have
increased by about 150%. However, among people evacuated from the village of
Pripyat and a zone within 18 miles of the plant, breast cancer cases have
increased by 236%. Medical workers and other women working at the plant are
experiencing about a 236% increase in breast cancer.

   Also scientists from Baylor University reported "extraordinarily high" levels
of cancer and birth defects in the Semipalatinsk region of Kazakstan in Central
Asia, a major nuclear testing site for more than 40 years.

   Genetic risks: Scientists said they were building a strong case that genetic
variations influence how the human body processes foods, particularly fats,
predisposing some people to have high "bad" cholesterol levels and be at higher
risk for heart attack or stroke, as well as to obesity.

   But as researchers gain better understanding of how gene variations affect
response to diet, the scientists said, it may be possible to make more
sophisticated adjustments to compensate.


LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1998


                             2086 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                   February 16, 1998, Monday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-14

LENGTH: 287 words

HEADLINE: GENE EXCUSE WON'T FLY

BYLINE: MICHAEL WOODS, SCIENCE EDITOR, BLOCK NEWS ALLIANCE

BODY:


   Contrary to growing public belief, there is little scientific basis for the
''my-genes-made-me-do-it'' rationale for crime, drug abuse, violence and other
forms of unacceptable behavior, a scientist reported Saturday.

   Dr. Garland E. Allen, of Washington University in St. Louis, criticized
scientists and the news media for placing undue emphasis on gene defects as
possible causes of human personality and mental traits.

   Studies linking social behaviors such as homosexuality, mental illness,
alcoholism with gene defects often receive a splash of media publicity when
first announced. Follow-up studies found that most of the original studies were
flawed, or had to be retracted.

   The studies have created an impression that responsibility for social
problems such as crime, drug abuse, and poverty rest with an individual's
genetic make-up.  In reality, the best explanation remains in the family,
community setting, and other social circumstances in which people live.

   Allen described this shift of responsibility from society to an individual's
own genes as ''a perverse ethos being promulgated in our culture that science -
in this case genetics - can solve most, if not all, of our current human
problems.''

   If the impression persists, individuals who behave in ways deemed undesirable
by society may be forced to undergo treatment, he warned.  It may be gene
therapy or conventional drug therapy provided in an effort to change their
behavior.

   Far from being far-fetched, it would be another instance of history repeating
itself, Allen said.  He noted that the eugenics movement in the late 1800s and
early 1900s resulted in forced sterilization of thousands of supposedly
defective individuals.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1998


                             2087 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1998 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      February 15, 1998 Sunday 2D EDITION

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. F-06

LENGTH: 776 words

HEADLINE: Anti-clone hysteria is dangerous

BYLINE: James Glassman

BODY:

   Ever since Galileo ran afoul of the Inquisition by propounding the idea that
the planets move around the sun, the powers that be have reflexively tried to
halt the progress of science into areas unknown and uncomfortable.

   The latest effort is underway right now in Congress, where a bill to ban
human cloning is moving swiftly. Introduced by Republicans Bill Frist and Kit
Bond, it is a colossal mistake - a triumph of superstition, government coercion,
self-righteousness and fear over good sense, health, family values and
confidence in the future.

   The bill makes it a felony, punishable by a prison term of up to 10 years,
for scientists to conduct research using "somatic nuclear cell transfer" - the
same dazzling procedure that created the cloned sheep Dolly - to produce a human
clone or a cloned human embryo.

   Nearly all bans on research prove to be temporary; science eventually trumps
politics. But in the meantime, as Gregory Benford writes in Reason magazine,
there is a high cost in "lives lost because the resultant technology arrives too
late for some patients."

   Also, with scientific change coming faster, the cloning ban sets a dangerous
precedent, validating a knee-jerk response to technology. Even Frist
acknowledged last week that "we're banning something before it's fully
understood." In my book, that's an excellent definition of ignorance.

   Frist and Bond aren't alone. President Clinton, who banned federal cloning
research a year ago, calls the procedure "morally unacceptable." Majority Leader
Dick Armey is the most egregious anti-cloning zealot of all. "Congress should
enact a permanent ban on human cloning," he said recently, "to keep this
frightening idea the province of the mad scientists of science fiction."

   In fact, scientists who are interested in cloning aren't mad at all. They
want either to help sick people live longer, healthier lives or to help
infertile people have babies.

   A year ago, Ian Wilmut, a Scottish embryologist, created a little lamb by
taking a normal sheep egg cell, removing the nucleus (the cell structure that
contains the genes) and placing a cell from the mammary tissue of an adult sheep
alongside it.

   An electrical charge then fused the two cells into one. Remarkably, the new
cell reverted to its embryonic state and started dividing. It developed into a
fetus and then a newborn lamb that was identical, in its genetic makeup, to the
sheep that contributed the mammary cell. Anti-cloning hysterics say that 276
embryos were destroyed to create Dolly, but Gina Kolata, the New York Times
reporter who broke the story, and the author of the new book "Clone," told me
this was "a gross distortion."

   Here's what happened, according to the paper in the journal Nature: 277 eggs
underwent fusion but only 29 survived for as much as five days. These clumps of
cells were then transferred into 13 female sheep. Three months later, ultrasound
tests found that only one fetus (Dolly) survived. "There were no monsters, no
miscarriages, nothing," says Kolata. Immoral?

   Today, she adds, the technology is so advanced that even these inefficiencies
are an anachronism.

   The technique will speed many kinds of medical research. For instance, by
studying the way cells revert and divide, we may be able to find cures for
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases and to grow new organs to replace damaged
ones.

   A report by NIH says that somatic nuclear transfer "might also be used in the
future to create skin grafts for people who are severely burned" and to generate
new cells to treat liver damage, leukemia, sickle-cell and heart disease.

   In addition, the technology could be used in gene therapy, which can replace
a patient's defective DNA (which will cause disease) with a normal gene, perhaps
very early in life, and prevent AIDS and cancer.

   Some of this can be accomplished with cloning techniques that manage to get
around the restrictions in the Frist-Bond bill, but why have limits at all?
Because such research is somehow "unnatural"? Because people should have babies
only by "natural" means?

   Remember the uproar over "test-tube" babies just two decades ago? With
in-vitro fertilization, the sperm and egg are combined in the lab and surgically
implanted in the womb. To date early 30,000 such babies have been born in the
U.S alone. The only difference between these babies and clones is that the
combined DNA of the egg and sperm is replaced by the DNA of only one adult
donor, inserted into a "hollowed-out" egg. Now politicians want to pass a law
that says that one combination is fine but the other is criminal. James K.
Glassman writes for The Washington Post.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1998


                             2088 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                          February 15, 1998 Sunday All

SECTION: Crossroads Pg. 1

LENGTH: 942 words

HEADLINE: Fear of human cloning can't halt the march of science

BYLINE: JAMES K. GLASSMAN

SOURCE: The Washington Post

BODY:

   Ever since Galileo ran afoul of the Inquisition by propounding the idea that
the planets move around the sun, the powers that be have reflexively tried to
halt the progress of science into areas unknown and uncomfortable.

   The latest effort is under way in Congress. One bill, introduced by
Republicans Bill Frist and Kit Bond, to ban human cloning was derailed last
week, but the issue isn't settled. General opposition among lawmakers to human
cloning remains strong.

   The Frist-Bond measure would have outlawed research using "somatic nuclear
cell transfer" the same dazzling procedure that created the cloned sheep Dolly
to produce a human clone or a cloned human embryo. The legislation was was a
triumph of superstition, government coercion, self-righteousness and fear over
good sense, health, family values and confidence in the future.

   Nearly all bans on research prove to be temporary; science eventually trumps
politics. But in the meantime, as Gregory Benford of the University of
California writes in Reason magazine, there is a high cost in "lives lost
because the resultant technology arrives too late for some patients."

   Also, with scientific change coming faster, a cloning ban would set a
dangerous precedent, validating a knee-jerk response to technology. Even Frist
acknowledged that his bill would have banned something "before it's fully
understood." In my book, that's an excellent definition of ignorance.

   Frist and Bond aren't alone. President Clinton, who banned federal cloning
research a year ago, calls the procedure "morally unacceptable."

   Majority Leader Dick Armey whose letterhead, ironically, carries the slogan
"Freedom Works" is the most egregious anti-cloning zealot of all. "Congress
should enact a permanent ban on human cloning," he said recently, "to keep this
frightening idea the province of the mad scientists of science fiction."

   In fact, scientists who are interested in cloning aren't mad at all. They
want either to help sick people live longer, healthier lives or to help
infertile people have babies.

   A year ago, Ian Wilmut, a Scottish embryologist, created a little lamb by
taking a normal sheep egg cell, removing the nucleus (the cell structure that
contains the genes) and placing a cell from the mammary tissue of an adult sheep
alongside it.

   An electrical charge then fused the two cells into one. Remarkably, the new
cell reverted to its embryonic state and started dividing. It developed into a
fetus and then a newborn lamb that was identical, in its genetic makeup, to the
sheep that contributed the mammary cell.

   Anti-cloning hysterics say that 276 embryos were destroyed to create Dolly,
but Gina Kolata, the New York Times reporter who broke the story, and the author
of the new book "Clone," told me this was "a gross distortion."

   Here's what happened, according to the paper in the journal Nature: 277 eggs
underwent fusion but only 29 survived for as much as five days. These clumps of
cells were then transferred into 13 female sheep. Three months later, ultrasound
tests found that only one fetus (Dolly) survived. "There were no monsters, no
miscarriages, nothing," says Kolata. Immoral?

   Today, she adds, the technology is so advanced that even these inefficiencies
are an anachronism.

   The technique will make all kinds of medical research easier and faster. For
instance, by studying the way cells revert and divide, we may be able to find
cures for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases and to grow new organs to replace
damaged ones.

   A report by NIH says that somatic nuclear transfer "might also be used in the
future to create skin grafts for people who are severely burned" and to generate
new cells to treat liver damage, leukemia, sickle-cell and heart disease.

   In addition, the technology could be used in gene therapy, which can replace
a patient's defective DNA (which will cause disease) with a normal gene, perhaps
very early in life, and prevent AIDS and cancer.

   Some of this can be accomplished with cloning techniques that would have
gotten around the restrictions in the Frist-Bond bill, but why have limits at
all? Because such research is somehow "unnatural"? Because people should have
babies only by "natural" means?

   "If humans have a right to reproduce, what right does society have to limit
the means?" wrote Nathan Myhrvold, chief technology officer of Microsoft Corp.,
last year in Slate, the electronic magazine.

   Remember the uproar over "test-tube" babies just two decades ago? With
in-vitro fertilization, the sperm and egg are combined in the lab and surgically
implanted in the womb. "To date," writes Myrhvold, nearly 30,000 such babies
have been born in the U.S. alone. Many would-be parents have been made happy.
Who has been harmed?"

   The only difference between these babies and clones is that the combined DNA
of the egg and sperm is replaced by the DNA of only one adult donor, inserted
into a "hollowed-out" egg. Now many politicians want to pass a law that says
that one combination is fine but the other is criminal.

   It's astounding that groups that represent Americans with serious diseases
aren't outraged not to mention infertile couples and scientists and physicians
who value their freedom of inquiry.

   And it's astounding that Republicans whose political hopes lie not with
reactionaries who fear the future but with people (comfortable with high
technology and the Internet) who embrace it should be in the vanguard of the
cloning ban. Dumb and dumber.

    ------------ James K. Glassman is a fellow at the American Enterprise
Institute and a columnist for The Washington Post.

GRAPHIC: Photo color

   JAMES K. GLASSMAN

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1998


                             2089 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               February 14, 1998, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 479 words

HEADLINE: Creator of Cloned Sheep Says He Will Try to Repeat Process

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, Feb. 13

BODY:

   Dr. Ian Wilmut, the scientist who created the cloned sheep Dolly, said today
that he intended to try again to clone an adult animal. He said he expected to
use cells from a live animal rather than those from the dead ewe that he used to
create Dolly.

   Dr. Wilmut, who works at the Roslin Institute in Edinburgh, stunned the world
a year ago when he announced that he had taken an udder cell from an adult sheep
that had died three years earlier and used it to create a lamb that was the
identical twin of that sheep.

    Speaking today at the annual meeting of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, Dr. Wilmut focused mainly on his personal objections to
the cloning of humans. But in remarks afterward, he responded to recent
criticism of his work.

   One critic was Dr. Norton D. Zinder, a microbiologist at Rockefeller
University in Manhattan, who published a letter in the journal Science
contending that Dr. Wilmut had not provided sufficient proof that Dolly was
indeed the clone of an adult. One of Dr. Zinder's criticisms was that the ewe
that provided the udder cells was dead before the experiment began so Dolly
could not be directly compared with the donor. Some scientists said that until
the Dolly experiment had been repeated they would retain a seed of doubt.

   Dr. Wilmut said in an interview after his talk that the inefficiency of his
cloning method meant it was not worthwhile for him to use the original udder
cells to make a new clone. He estimates that it would take well more than 1,000
attempts for him to have a good chance of getting a live lamb in the end.

   "That would cost half a million dollars and would be half of what I could do
in a year," Dr. Wilmut said.

   Dolly was the only pregnancy out of 300 attempts to clone from the udder
cells.

   Dr. Wilmut restated that further tests were being done by other laboratories
that would prove that Dolly was indeed a clone derived from the adult sheep.

   As for the cloning of humans, Dr. Wilmut said he thought it would be possible
one day, when scientists had improved the safety and effectiveness of cloning by
working with animals. But he said he was uncomfortable with the unusual family
relationships that would be created.

   For example, he said, if he was cloned, "my wife would grow up not just with
me but with a copy of me." And, he asked, "How would my wife respond to a
teen-age copy of me?" Or, he said, "how would I respond to a teen-age copy of
me?"

   Others were not persuaded by such arguments. Dr. Raymond Spier, a philosopher
at the University of Surrey in England, argued for a more pragmatic approach.
Cloning is a tool, Dr. Spier said, and is not intrinsically good or evil.

   Dr. Ted Friedmann, a gene therapy researcher at the University of California
at San Diego, said, "We will never reach an ethical consensus on this any more
than on abortion."

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1998


                             2090 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   February 12, 1998, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 13A

LENGTH: 304 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy raises hopes in fighting ovarian cancer; First round of
lab tests yields promising results against often-fatal disease

SOURCE: KNIGHT RIDDER/TRIBUNE

BODY:


   ORLANDO, Fla. -- Scientists might have one of the most effective weapons yet
in the fight against deadly ovarian cancer if a treatment presented yesterday in
Orlando succeeds in clinical tests.

   "My prediction is that we will be using this in addition to chemotherapy to
get a substantial increase in the success rate," said Dr. William Robinson, a
Tulane University researcher.

   So far, the experimental treatment has reduced ovarian cancer in laboratory
mice and has not shown any harmful effects to women. The next step is a broad
study testing its effectiveness against ovarian cancer in women.

   For the treatment, scientists created a vaccine using gene therapy, a method
that already has been used successfully on some other diseases, Robinson said.

   In a laboratory, Tulane researchers attached part of an ovarian cancer gene
to a gene from the herpes virus. The result, a so-called "suicide gene," is
injected into the patient's abdomen. There, it seems to affect the other ovarian
cancer genes so that when a doctor treats the patient with a standard herpes
drug, the woman's immune system also attacks the cancer cells.

   Ovarian cancer has been the most stubborn of the women's cancers because it
is difficult to diagnose early. Doctors usually don't catch the disease until it
is in its final stages. At that point, the survival rate is only 30 percent.
Doctors operate and remove the cancer, but it returns in most patients.

   "Virtually all of them are going to die when the cancer recurs," said
Robinson, who presented his study yesterday on the final day of a five-day
conference of the Society of Gynecologic Oncologists.

   Doctors and cancer specialists are eager for anything they can add to
standard surgery and chemotherapy treatments to increase chances of survival.

   Pub Date: 2/12/98

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1998


                             2091 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                   February 12, 1998, Thursday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL PAGE, Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 723 words

HEADLINE: BANNING CLONING WOULD BE A MAJOR MISTAKE

BYLINE: James K. Glassman

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Ever since Galileo ran afoul of the Inquisition by propounding the idea that
the planets move around the sun, the powers that be have reflexively tried to
halt the progress of science into areas unknown and uncomfortable.

   The latest effort is under way right now in Congress, where a bill to ban
human cloning is moving swiftly. Introduced by Republicans Bill Frist and Kit
Bond, it is a colossal mistake -- a triumph of superstition, government
coercion, self-righteousness and fear over good sense, health, family values and
confidence in the future.

   The bill makes it a felony, punishable by a prison term of up to 10 years,
for scientists to conduct research using "somatic nuclear cell transfer" -the
same dazzling procedure that created the cloned sheep Dolly -- to produce a
human clone or a cloned human embryo.

   Nearly all bans on research prove to be temporary; science eventually trumps
politics. But in the meantime, as Gregory Benford of the University of
California writes in Reason magazine, there is a high cost in "lives lost
because the resultant technology arrives too late for some patients."

   Also, with scientific change coming faster, the cloning ban sets a dangerous
precedent, validating a knee-jerk response to technology. Even Frist
acknowledged last week that "we're banning something before it's fully
understood." In my book, that's an excellent definition of ignorance.

   Frist and Bond aren't alone. President Clinton, who banned federal cloning
research a year ago, calls the procedure "morally unacceptable."

   Majority Leader Dick Armey -- whose letterhead, ironically, carries the
slogan "Freedom Works" -- is the most egregious anti-cloning zealot of all.
"Congress should enact a permanent ban on human cloning," he said recently, "to
keep this frightening idea the province of the mad scientists of science
fiction."

   In fact, scientists who are interested in cloning aren't mad at all. They
want either to help sick people live longer, healthier lives or to help
infertile people have babies.

   The technique will make all kinds of medical research easier and faster. For
instance, by studying the way cells revert and divide, we may be able to find
cures for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases and to grow new organs to replace
damaged ones.

   A report by NIH says that somatic nuclear transfer "might also be used in the
future to create skin grafts for people who are severely burned" and to generate
new cells to treat liver damage, leukemia, sickle-cell anemia and heart disease.

   In addition, the technology could be used in gene therapy, which can replace
a patient's defective DNA (which will cause disease) with a normal gene, perhaps
very early in life, and prevent AIDS and cancer.

   Some of this can be accomplished with cloning techniques that manage to get
around the restrictions in the Frist-Bond bill. But why have limits at all?
Because such research is somehow "unnatural"? Because people should have babies
only by "natural" means?

   "If humans have a right to reproduce, what right does society have to limit
the means?" wrote Nathan Myhrvold, chief technology officer of Microsoft Corp.,
last year in Slate, the electronic magazine.

   Remember the uproar over "test-tube" babies just two decades ago? With
in-vitro fertilization, the sperm and egg are combined in the lab and surgically
implanted in the womb. "To date," writes Myrhvold, nearly 30,000 such babies
have been born in the United States alone. Many would-be parents have been made
happy. Who has been harmed?"

   The only difference between these babies and clones is that the combined DNA
of the egg and sperm is replaced by the DNA of only one adult donor, inserted
into a "hollowed-out" egg. Now politicians want to pass a law that says that one
combination is fine but the other is criminal.

   It's astounding that groups that represent Americans with serious diseases
aren't outraged by what Congress is doing -- not to mention infertile couples
and scientists and physicians who value their freedom of inquiry.

   And it's astounding that Republicans -- whose political hopes lie not with
reactionaries who fear the future but with people (comfortable with high
technology and the Internet) who embrace it -- should be in the vanguard of the
cloning ban. Dumb and dumber. Washington Post

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1998


                             2092 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                  FEBRUARY 11, 1998, WEDNESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 375 words

HEADLINE: Biotech Firm Tularik Grabs Biggest Slice of Bay Area Pie

BYLINE: Peter Sinton, Chronicle Senior Writer

BODY:

    Investors may be shunning many biotech companies, but not Tularik Inc.

   The South San Francisco firm -- which is developing drugs that regulate genes
to fight disease -- received the biggest chunk of venture capital during the
past quarter of any Bay Area company.

   A giant Swiss investment firm, Pharma Vision 2000 AG, invested $ 55 million
into the pioneering 6-year-old Tularik. Two years ago, Pharma Vision committed $
32.8 million to Tularik -- which remains Pharma Vision's first and only stake in
a private company.

   Pharma Vision has health care holdings of $ 5 billion, including major stakes
in Roche, Glaxo Wellcome and Hoechst.

   Tularik doesn't have any blockbuster drugs on the market yet. But it has some
promising prospects.

   Last month, Tularik received U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval to
begin human clinical trials of an organic compound for treatment of cancer.

   Early cell and animal testing indicate that the substance, dubbed T138067,
might prevent cell division, which could be useful in treating an array of
cancers. It does this by binding to a cell component called tubulin and keeping
it from forming intercellular highways across which chromosomes move in cell
division.

   ''Most pharmaceutical companies try to regulate diseases from outside the
cell,'' said John McLaughlin, who joined Tularik as president in December after
10 years at neighboring Genentech Inc. ''Our point of intervention is inside the
cell. Most diseases are caused by genes being on or off when they shouldn't
be.''

   Tularik has other Genentech connections. Its chairman is Genentech co-
founder Robert Swanson, and its chief executive is David Goeddel, one of
Genentech's top scientists in its early years.

   Tularik's basic approach is to identify strands of DNA involved in major
diseases, figure out how the culprit genes function and then find compounds to
regulate the genes' activity. To make gene therapy even more elegant, Tularik is
working on ''small molecule'' drugs that can be swallowed in pill form rather
than injected.

   Besides its cancer-fighting compound, the company is working with Merck & Co.
on potential gene therapies to combat HIV. It also is researching treatments of
obesity and bacterial diseases.


LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1998


                             2093 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

             February 10, 1998, TUESDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; BETWEEN THE LINES; FROM NAGANO; Pg. 96

LENGTH: 835 words

HEADLINE: A skating revolution: the clapper;
Changes are slow but make big noise

SOURCE: MICHAEL PROBST; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BYLINE: Phil Rosenthal

DATELINE: NAGANO, Japan

BODY:

   Not much had changed in speedskating since the days when Hans Brinker
strapped on his silver skates. Taking the competition indoors a few years back
was seen as nothing short of revolutionary.

   But the 20th century has arrived just in time for the 21st. In the last year,
a simple sport of skaters flying around the ice at 40 m.p.h. has seemed to take
a quantum leap forward.  It is akin to when pole vaulters abandoned bamboo poles
for fiberglass, tennis players adopted big-headed graphite racquets and even,
perhaps, when distance runners took to wearing shoes.

   Speedskaters are wearing spring-loaded hinged skates, nicknamed "clap
skates," to give them more leverage. Some are applying silicon racing "stripes"
to their racing suits to reduce wind resistance. The sport is changing before
our eyes, so much so that no one knows what's coming next.

   "For the next year or so, as people get used to the clap skates, we're going
to see world records broken at a pretty fast rate," said Eric Heiden, a
five-time gold medalist at the 1980 Games. "Clap skates have revolutionized
skating. Skates hadn't changed in probably a hundred years. . . . But people
have found that, indeed, if you want to be competitive, you have to use these
skates."

   The thing about clap skates, which are named for the sound they make, is that
they work. Not every advance does. Johann Olav Koss of Norway arrived at the
Lillehammer Games in 1994 with skates he said were made of powdered metal. After
he won three gold medals, speedskaters everywhere scrambled to test the new
blades.

   "It turned out to be actually slower," Canadian coach Derrick Auck said. "It
was a mind game. But that's all right. That's part of it. If they can keep some
skater out of focus because of that, good for them."

   Auck similarly discounts the Dutch claims that these "stripes," applied to
the calves and heads of racers, tested in wind tunnels and approved by skating
officials just days before the Games, are the reason behind their speedy times.
"That's what they say," he said. "We don't think so."

   Still the flying Dutchmen swept the top four spots in the men's 5,000 meters
earlier this week, three breaking the previous world record. While it's not
unusual for Olympic records to fall every four years, one in four skaters
eclipsed the old mark on the first day of the two-day men's 500 meters.

   "Let's get back to skating," said Dan Jansen, a '94 gold medalist in the
1,000 meters. "You know? Forget about all this. It's getting frustrating, all
these things. . . . I don't like to see it happening to our sport. If they can
put some restrictions on some of the things now, maybe they'll stop it before it
gets out of control."

   TECHNICALLY SPEAKING: The problem with clap skates is they're in short
supply. Not every nation got theirs at the same time and not every skater has
figured out how to make them work.

   American Casey FitzRandolph finally figured his skates out, taking a surprise
third in the first day of the 500 meters Monday behind Japan's Hiroyu Shimizu
and Canada's Kevin Overland and well ahead of pre-race favorites Jeremy
Wotherspoon of Canada and Jan Bos of the Netherlands.

   "Casey's one of the guys struggling to get his technique back because of
these new skates and, out of the blue, he throws in a great 500 meters," Heiden
said.

   FitzRandolph conceded that "if we still had conventional skates, I wouldn't
be in third," mainly because his skates are adjusted to favor a quick start, a
big factor in the 500. Clap skates will have their biggest impact on the longer
races.

   "Look at the 1,000," Jansen said. "They'll beat my time by over two seconds.
You feel the extra power. It's leverage and more power with each stroke because
of the blade staying on the ice.

   "But I still believe Shimizu could have skated faster on his old skates. I
may be the only one in the world who believes it, but I do believe it. He seems
to have adjusted to it well, but he looked more solid in his old skates than he
does in these."

   THE PRIDE OF CHAMPAIGN: Bonnie Blair -- the most decorated U.S. woman in
Winter Olympics history with six speedskating medals, including five gold -- is
at her fifth games, but as a spectator. Retired from competition, she's here to
root for husband David Cruikshank, a long-track sprinter from Northbrook who
finished in the middle of the pack after the first day of competition. But you
don't compete for as long as Blair did without learning a few tricks.

   "I always carried my own jar of Skippy (peanut butter) everywhere in the
world," Blair, 33 and pregnant with the couple's first child, told Newsday. "You
know, sometimes you don't know what kind of food you will get, so it worked for
me. I ate a peanut butter and jelly sandwich before every single race."

   THE LAST WORD: We asked Heiden what might be the limit of technological
advancement for skaters. "They are going to be put in a wedge so they're only (a
few inches) wide," he joked. "There's going to be gene therapy."

GRAPHIC: Speedskater Casey FitzRandolph of Verona, Wis., was in third place
after the first day of the 500 meters.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1998


                             2094 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                           February 10, 1998, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS , Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 533 words

HEADLINE: ANTI-HIV GENE THERAPY HAS VALUE

BYLINE: Mark D. Somerson, Dispatch Medical Reporter

BODY:


   While many geneticists are striving for the Holy Grail of AIDS research - a
vaccine - others are looking at manipulating genes to treat those already
infected.

   Combinations of drugs have been used to slow the progression of the human
immunodeficiency virus, but researchers are discovering new ways of attacking
the disease on the molecular level.

   Bruce A. Bunnell, a scientist at the Wexner Institute for Pediatric Research
at Children's Hospital, has spent four years on a team developing anti-HIV gene
therapy.

   ''This is the first time anyone has demonstrated that using gene therapy
against HIV can produce some benefits,'' Bunnell said.

   ''It has been shown in tissue cultures but never in an animal model.''

   The researchers tested their gene therapy in rhesus monkeys using simian
immunodeficiency virus. SIV causes an AIDS-like disease in monkeys and is
considered the best HIV model in animals.

   SIV and HIV attach to white blood cells, enter them and fuse their own DNA
into them, forcing the cells to churn out new viruses that infect and destroy
more cells.

   The research team, based at Johns Hopkins University and the National
Institutes of Health, manipulated healthy cells to prevent them from producing
more virus when the monkeys became infected.

   They did this by attacking the molecule SIV uses to make two essential
proteins that aid viral reproduction.

   Three monkeys were treated with gene therapy; three others were used as a
control. The monkeys then were infected with SIV.

   The virus did not progress in the three monkeys that received the gene
therapy. Those untreated eventually developed the AIDS-like disease and died.

   The study lasted about 14 months.

   A second study is under way to see whether the therapy affects monkeys
already infected with SIV. Researchers are just beginning to analyze their
results.

   Bunnell's team's research was published this month in the journal Nature
Medicine.

   The studies will aid human research, said Bunnell, who worked at the Clinical
Gene Therapy Branch of the National Human Genome Research Institute before going
to Children's in the fall.

   He said that before this study, researchers weren't sure whether the gene
therapy or medication was reducing the virus in patients.

   ''In human studies, the patients are on the triple (drug) therapy already,
and they show no viral load,'' he said, meaning the amount of HIV virus is so
low it can't be measured. ''Animal models allow us to test efficacy.''

   Bunnell said gene therapy could be used to complement standard drug
therapies.

   Efforts to create an HIV vaccine have been slow, and most scientists are wary
of testing a vaccine on healthy humans.

   If HIV can survive the onslaught of drugs, it probably will work just as hard
to outsmart genetic manipulation, said Dr. Michael Para, director of the AIDS
Clinical Trials Group at the Ohio State University Medical Center.

   ''My biggest concern is virus mutation,'' Para said.

   ''If you fix the cells in somebody so that they are resistant to most HIVs,
the virus may mutate a little bit. Then what?''

   Researchers say this concern will have to be addressed as gene therapy for
HIV progresses.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Mike Munden., Bruce A. Bunnell, a scientist at the Wexner
Institute for Pediatric Research at Children's Hospital, removes sample cells
from a refrigerator. He has spent four years on a team developing anti-HIV gene
therapy.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1998


                             2095 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   February 10, 1998, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 934 words

HEADLINE: Who's Afraid of Human Cloning?

BYLINE: James K. Glassman

BODY:


   Ever since Galileo ran afoul of the Inquisition by propounding the idea that
the planets move around the sun, the powers that be have reflexively tried to
halt the progress of science into areas unknown and uncomfortable.

   The latest effort is underway right now in Congress, where a bill to ban
human cloning is moving swiftly. Introduced by Republicans Bill Frist and Kit
Bond, it is a colossal mistake -- a triumph of superstition, government
coercion, self-righteousness and fear over good sense, health, family values and
confidence in the future.

   The bill makes it a felony, punishable by a prison term of up to 10 years,
for scientists to conduct research using "somatic nuclear cell transfer" -- the
same dazzling procedure that created the cloned sheep Dolly -- to produce a
human clone or a cloned human embryo.

   Nearly all bans on research prove to be temporary; science eventually trumps
politics. But in the meantime, as Gregory Benford of the University of
California writes in Reason magazine, there is a high cost in "lives lost
because the resultant technology arrives too late for some patients."

   Also, with scientific change coming faster, the cloning ban sets a dangerous
precedent, validating a knee-jerk response to technology. Even Frist
acknowledged last week that "we're banning something before it's fully
understood." In my book, that's an excellent definition of ignorance.

   Frist and Bond aren't alone. President Clinton, who banned federal cloning
research a year ago, calls the procedure "morally unacceptable."

   Majority Leader Dick Armey -- whose letterhead, ironically, carries the
slogan "Freedom Works" -- is the most egregious anti-cloning zealot of all.
"Congress should enact a permanent ban on human cloning," he said recently, "to
keep this frightening idea the province of the mad scientists of science
fiction."

   In fact, scientists who are interested in cloning aren't mad at all. They
want either to help sick people live longer, healthier lives or to help
infertile people have babies.

   A year ago, Ian Wilmut, a Scottish embryologist, created a little lamb by
taking a normal sheep egg cell, removing the nucleus (the cell structure that
contains the genes) and placing a cell from the mammary tissue of an adult sheep
alongside it.

   An electrical charge then fused the two cells into one. Remarkably, the new
cell reverted to its embryonic state and started dividing. It developed into a
fetus and then a newborn lamb that was identical, in its genetic makeup, to the
adult lamb that contributed the mammary cell. Anti-cloning hysterics say that
276 embryos were destroyed to create Dolly, but Gina Kolata, the New York Times
reporter who broke the story, and the author of the new book "Clone," told me
this was "a gross distortion."

   Here's what happened, according to the paper in the journal Nature: 277 eggs
underwent fusion but only 29 survived for as much as five days. These clumps of
cells were then transferred into 13 female sheep. Three months later, ultrasound
tests found that only one fetus (Dolly) survived. "There were no monsters, no
miscarriages, nothing," says Kolata. Immoral?

   Today, she adds, the technology is so advanced that even these inefficiencies
are an anachronism.

   The technique will make all kinds of medical research easier and faster. For
instance, by studying the way cells revert and divide, we may be able to find
cures for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases and to grow new organs to replace
damaged ones.

   A report by NIH says that somatic nuclear transfer "might also be used in the
future to create skin grafts for people who are severely burned" and to generate
new cells to treat liver damage, leukemia, sickle-cell and heart disease.

   In addition, the technology could be used in gene therapy, which can replace
a patient's defective DNA (which will cause disease) with a normal gene, perhaps
very early in life, and prevent AIDS and cancer.

   Some of this can be accomplished with cloning techniques that manage to get
around the restrictions in the Frist-Bond bill, but why have limits at all?
Because such research is somehow "unnatural"? Because people should have babies
only by "natural" means?

   "If humans have a right to reproduce, what right does society have to limit
the means?" wrote Nathan Myhrvold, chief technology officer of Microsoft Corp.,
last year in Slate, the electronic magazine.

   Remember the uproar over "test-tube" babies just two decades ago? With
in-vitro fertilization, the sperm and egg are combined in the lab and surgically
implanted in the womb. "To date," writes Myrhvold, nearly 30,000 such babies
have been born in the United States alone. Many would-be parents have been made
happy. Who has been harmed?"

   The only difference between these babies and clones is that the combined DNA
of the egg and sperm is replaced by the DNA of only one adult donor, inserted
into a "hollowed-out" egg. Now politicians want to pass a law that says that one
combination is fine but the other is criminal.

   It's astounding that groups that represent Americans with serious diseases
aren't outraged by what Congress is doing -- not to mention infertile couples
and scientists and physicians who value their freedom of inquiry.

   And it's astounding that Republicans -- whose political hopes lie not with
reactionaries who fear the future but with people (comfortable with high
technology and the Internet) who embrace it -- should be in the vanguard of the
cloning ban. Dumb and dumber.

   The writer is a fellow at the American Enterprise Institute.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1998


                             2096 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    February 09, 1998, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 3146 words

HEADLINE: Fertility Innovation or Exploitation? Regulatory Void Allows for Trial
-- and Error -- Without Patient Disclosure Rules

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Stacie McBain was just 20 years old last fall when doctors told her the
cancer treatment she needed would leave her infertile. But there was hope: an $
11,000 experimental procedure in which researchers would remove pieces of her
ovaries and freeze them for later use.

   The novel approach was not guaranteed to work. But McBain jumped at the
opportunity after the doctors running the experiment told her that animal
studies had been successful.

   "I love kids and I always wanted to have them," McBain said in a recent
interview. "They said they'd tried it in sheep and it worked."

   What McBain and her parents were not told, however, was that only one sheep
has ever become pregnant by this method.

   That kind of omission would be unusual in most medical research settings. Yet
by fertility clinic standards, several experts agreed, McBain was relatively
well informed; she at least was told she was part of an experiment.

   Fertility clinics receive no government funding, so the women who use them
are not covered by federal laws that protect human subjects in research. And
although doctors in all types of medicine have the prerogative to try novel
techniques that may help their patients, reproductive technology is evolving so
fast that the line between cutting-edge medicine and using women as guinea pigs
is no longer clear, observers say.

   "We have in many respects far better protections for hamsters than for human
fertility patients," said R. Alta Charo, a professor of law at the University of
Wisconsin and a member of the National Bioethics Advisory Commission, which is
investigating abuses of human subjects in research.

   "We can tell you how many swabs are used on animals in a year in this
country, but we can't tell you how many people were involved in fertility
research in this country or how many adverse events there were or anything,"
Charo said. "We require all of that for non-human animals, but not for people."

   Unlike the high-profile legal cases that have emerged recently in the
reproductive technology arena -- dramatic cases of embryos placed in the wrong
women or of babies created from dead people's sperm or eggs -- abuses of
research subjects in the fertility field remain largely invisible. The scope of
the problem remains unknown, since there is no system of oversight.

   But more than 1,000 women undergo in vitro fertilization procedures every
week in this country, and countless others receive other kinds of fertility
treatments. And at least some of the recent exciting breakthroughs in
reproductive medicine, critics say, have been the result of ethically
questionable practices, in which women served as subjects in ill-defined
research projects or their eggs or embryos were sidetracked to laboratories
without the donors' knowledge, to be used in experiments and eventually tossed
in the garbage.

   Fertility doctors say they are just trying to give women the best odds of
getting pregnant. Patients want nothing less than the latest technology, they
say, even if it is still experimental. And, they argue, since the federal
government has decided not to fund fertility research, it is up to the private
sector to conduct that work.

   "Many patients feel they have the right to the most innovative treatment
around, especially since a lot of them are paying out of pocket," said Mark
Sauer, chief of reproductive endocrinology at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical
Center in New York.

   Others, however, say the lack of regulations over fertility research makes it
too easy to cross the line from assistance to experimentation -- especially
since these patients' urgent desire for a baby makes them especially susceptible
to exploitation.

   "It's an extremely vulnerable patient group," said Gary Ellis, director of
the office for Protection From Research Risks at the National Institutes of
Health. "Desperation reigns."

   Help, Hope and Harm

   McBain's ovarian preservation procedure is a case in point of how difficult
it can be to tell the difference between modern reproductive medicine and
unregulated human research. Like many of the country's larger fertility clinics,
the Fairfax, Va.-based Genetics & IVF Institute, where the procedure was done,
has voluntarily instituted many of the protective measures required of
researchers at federally funded venues.

   The clinic had McBain sign a consent form, for example, that says in part "we
cannot guarantee that you will benefit" from the procedure. Yet accompanying
materials refer to "extraordinary results" in sheep and call the experimental
procedure "a revolutionary improvement" in fertility preservation for women with
cancer.

   Such mixed messages are at best confusing and at worst unethical, but are not
uncommon in the fertility arena, according to Lori Andrews, a professor of law
and bioethics at Chicago-Kent College of Law. "Patients are being told they're
getting the latest clinical evaluation and treatment, but they're rarely told
that there have only been, say, three births before," Andrews said.

   Michael S. Opsahl, a physician at Genetics & IVF, said human studies of
frozen ovary transplants were justified because many sheep that have undergone
the procedure have regained normal hormonal cycles, even if they have not become
pregnant yet, suggesting that they could become pregnant. Equally important, he
said, is the sense of empowerment a cancer patient can gain from trying
something experimental. "It really does give them some hope," Opsahl said. "They
are willing to take the chance because there are no alternatives."

   Indeed, McBain says she has no regrets about going ahead with the treatment.
"It made me feel easier, knowing that I had some babies on ice," said the
Macomb, Mich., woman, who calls the frozen tissue slices her parents'
"grandcicles."

   It's a classic bioethical dilemma, Andrews said: No one wants to undermine a
cancer patient's hopes or place undue restrictions on new and reasonably
promising techniques for infertile women. At the same time, people should not
underestimate the harm that can come from raising false hopes. And in
reproductive medicine, she said, false hopes are the great untallied commodity.

   "In other areas of medicine, if you do something terribly wrong, the patient
usually gets worse. But in the fertility business, when the success rate is only
20 percent, you can do a lot of wrong to a lot of people and they just disappear
into that 80 percent," Andrews said. "So you can try all kinds of things. You
can harm these people psychologically and financially and it doesn't show up as
physical harm. That's why we need to pay more attention to consumer protections
in this area."

   Experimenting With Eggs

   No one was paying attention two years ago when doctors at the Reproductive
Biology Associates in Atlanta -- a nationally renowned and respected fertility
center -- were figuring out how to make babies from frozen eggs.

   The research required many eggs to practice on, said Joe B. Massey, the
clinic's director, so RBA doctors turned to women who were donating eggs to
infertile women and used some of the leftover eggs for research. "We call it
sharing with the lab," he said.

   RBA researchers used such eggs, in some cases without the donor's knowledge,
to try various freezing and thawing techniques until they found a way that
seemed not to damage the eggs, Massey said. Some eggs that looked good after
thawing were mixed with sperm to see if a normal embryo would develop.

   "When we started getting some [embryos] that lived, we approached a patient,"
Massey said. "We told her, we don't know if this will work. We won't charge you,
but if we make an embryo with one of these thawed eggs and your husband's sperm,
would you take it?"

   The woman, who like many fertility patients could barely afford her
treatments, said yes. Last year, she became the first in this country to give
birth to a baby from a frozen egg.

   The experience with frozen eggs at RBA demonstrates the ease with which
women's eggs may be diverted for research and the ease with which new fertility
techniques can be tried on women. And although that story had a happy ending,
some question whether she would have agreed to the procedure had she and the
researchers been fully aware of the uncertainties associated with it.

   Very little is known about whether freezing might damage the genetic material
inside eggs and boost a woman's odds of giving birth to a deformed baby. Indeed,
a few months after the Atlanta woman gave birth to her apparently healthy baby,
researchers in Korea published a report suggesting that the freezing process
often does damage the DNA inside human eggs -- a finding that Massey said has
made him rethink the wisdom of making babies from frozen eggs.

   "I must say, it makes me want to take another look at this," Massey said. "It
raises a real caution flag."

   Questions of Consent

   In other instances, clinics openly ask women to donate some of their extra
eggs or embryos for research -- a practice that some critics call ethically
questionable since these women, who already feel vulnerable, may worry that if
they don't cooperate then they won't get the best medical care.

   "People are going to these clinics with the hope of bringing home a baby, not
to participate in research," said Ami Jaeger, principal of the BioLaw Group, a
Santa Fe, N.M.-based organization that provides legal and consulting services in
genetics and assisted reproduction. "But they may be more inclined to say yes to
some of these offers if they think it will get them better care."

   Federal research guidelines provide explicit protections to make sure that
people are not coerced into participating in research. But there is no mechanism
for reviewing such offers in the private fertility sector. In one recent case,
for example, a woman from Texas felt she was misled by a fertility clinic that
offered her a discount if she would donate half of her eggs. But when she looked
into whether the clinic's offer violated any medical or ethical rules of
conduct, she quickly became lost in a regulatory void.

   "I found out there is nothing out there to protect me as a consumer; no legal
recourse, no statute," said the woman, Carol Garcia of Austin. "Technically I
wasn't even their patient yet."

   Ethics Review Optional

   The main way that research subjects are protected in this country is through
something called an "institutional review board," or IRB. Any federally
regulated research lab wanting to conduct human research needs approval from an
IRB, consisting of independent scientists and ethicists. But fertility clinics
don't have that restriction.

   Massey said his clinic used to show its research protocols to the review
board at a nearby hospital, but the hospital dropped out of that role some time
ago. "They didn't want to look at this strange stuff," Massey said. "Why would
they take the potential medical legal risk on embryo freezing, for crying out
loud, when no one knew if it would work?"

   Instead, Massey said, the clinic simply worked without any outside review for
a while, and lately has been using an agency that reviews research proposals for
$ 1,500 apiece -- a system that some have criticized as being potentially
problematic, since for-profit ethics review companies may be disinclined to be
tough on their paying customers.

   "There is a real concern that these companies are going to be under pressure
to make sure they are not financially a burden to their clients," said the
University of Wisconsin's Charo. "There's very little accountability."

   At the Genetics & IVF Institute, McBain was assured that the frozen embryo
procedure had passed muster with an IRB. But the five-person review board that
gave that green light consisted of three of the clinic's own doctors and the
director's administrative secretary -- all of whom stand to profit at least
indirectly from the business -- and a lawyer who is a close friend of one of the
clinic's doctors. Opsahl, the overseeing physician, said the experiments were
also approved by an IRB at the nearby hospital where McBain's surgery was
performed.

   In addition, because of a federal regulatory quirk, many fertility center
laboratories are not subject to the inspections and proficiency testing imposed
upon other medical laboratories in this country.

   "A fertility doctor can literally set up a lab in his garage and hire his son
or daughter who might have a bachelor's degree to run it, and it would be
perfectly legal," said Brooks A. Keel, professor of obstetrics and gynecology
and associate dean for research at the University of Kansas School of Medicine
in Wichita. "A woman gets more regulatory oversight when she gets a tattoo than
when she gets IVF."

   Medical laboratory rules in the United States break down along gender rules,
Keel said. Labs that conduct sperm counts or other kinds of semen analysis are
subject to the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988, an act of
Congress that sets strict quality control standards for medical laboratories and
requires lab directors to have a minimum level of training.

   But labs that deal with women's eggs are exempt from those standards -- or at
least claim they are, by arguing that egg manipulations are not "diagnostic
tests." Keel, who is president-elect of the American Association of Bioanalysts,
which represents laboratory professionals, is spearheading an effort to persuade
the department of Health and Human Services to bring fertility labs under the
1988 law's federal regulatory umbrella.

   Policy and Enforcement

   Fertility clinic doctors argue that much of the criticism of human fertility
research is misplaced. In fact, they say, there is a powerful camaraderie among
fertility patients, and many ask to participate in reproductive research.

   "These patients understand that no one in society supports their problem, so
many seek an opportunity to participate in a protocol," said Richard T. Scott
Jr. of the Institute for Reproductive Science at St. Barnabas Hospital in
Livingston, N.J. "Personally, I think there is a lot of good work being done."

   Moreover, some doctors said, it is paternalistic to presume that fertility
patients -- many of whom are very well educated and informed -- need to be
protected from their doctors or themselves. "It can be a slippery slope kind of
question, where at some point people are going too far, but mostly these women
know what they are doing," said Richard Paulson, director of reproductive
endocrinology and infertility at the University of Southern California.

   Things may be getting better. Many clinics now use institutional review
boards, and consent forms are becoming more complete and routine -- especially
at the larger of the nation's 300 or so fertility clinics.

   Sauer, the chief of reproductive endocrinology at Columbia-Presbyterian in
New York, said he thinks a split is occurring in the fertility field, with
larger centers adhering more closely to standards that would apply in the
federal sector while some smaller clinics are cutting corners to break into the
field.

   "There is an increasing amount of cavalier behavior out there, even though
the stuff we've done is with strict protocols and approval of institutional
review boards," Sauer said. "We don't really have a public policy for fertility
patients in this country. I wish we did."

   The question of what that policy should be or how it should be enforced
remains one of the most difficult now facing the field of reproductive medicine.
Sauer and many other doctors argue that it would be unusual and inappropriate to
impose federal regulations on a specific branch of medicine, and they fear that
such rules could stifle the rapid progress now sweeping through the field.
Professional standards promulgated by groups such as the American Society for
Reproductive Medicine would be preferable, Sauer said.

   Critics counter that voluntary professional standards are too easily breached
and offer no mechanism for surveillance or enforcement. And while states could
pass laws restricting embryo research in various ways, only 10 have done so and
each one differently, creating a confusing regulatory patchwork.

   Congress has passed a law that requires the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, along with various professional societies, to start collecting data
from fertility clinics. Perhaps, some said, there is a way to expand that
federal infrastructure to include some kind of scientific and ethical oversight.

   Solutions may come to light this week when the CDC and other organizations
convene in Washington to discuss these and other regulatory options.
Representatives from the United Kingdom, Australia, France, Canada and various
consumer organizations will meet for the first time to try to create a
regulatory scheme appropriate to this country's unique constellation of
conditions, including the federal government's desire to distance itself from
embryo research, the intense demand for high-tech medical care and the need to
protect consumers.

   At a minimum, said Bartha Maria Knoppers, a professor at the University of
Montreal Law School, the United States needs some kind of centralized data
collection system that would clarify the extent of questionable research
practices in the fertility field. Today, Knoppers said, "you don't have the
statistics, the oversight or the accountability that allows you to answer the
question of whether women are being harmed. And that in itself is a very
worrisome situation."

   ABOUT THIS SERIES

   Biomedical research is proceeding at breathtaking speed.

   Geneticists are gaining insights into how genes work. Biologists are
unmasking the mysteries of how a tiny clump of cells develops into a fully
formed human. Immunologists are deciphering the complexities of the body's
defense systems.

   The research is yielding many potential benefits. Doctors can identify people
at risk for genetic diseases and fashion strategies to save their lives.
Reproductive biologists can help infertile couples have children. Researchers
can engineer animals with organs that may be transplanted into humans.

   But as science speeds ahead, it often pushes the edges of society's readiness
to cope with its consequences. Increasingly, research creates possibilities
before the accompanying ethical, social and legal ramifications have been
resolved. In a series of occasional articles, The Washington Post is exploring
these issues.

   SUNDAY - The first part of a two-part third installment in the series
examines how advances in treating infertility and the proliferation of fertility
clinics is blurring the definition of the word "parent."

   TODAY - The second part of the installment explores how fertility clinics
experiment on women, their eggs and embryos with relatively little oversight.


GRAPHIC: Illustration, The Washington Post; Photo, dudley m. brooks; Photo,
andrew cutraro for The Washington Post, EMBRYO RESEARCH REGULATION Only 10
states regulate embryo research, including screening for genetic diseases or
gender before implantation, gene therapy or even basic research.  Minnesota
Maine New Hampshire North Dakota Michigan Pennsylvania Rhode Island
Massachusetts Louisiana California SOURCE: Lori B. Andrews and Nanette Elster,
Chicago-Kent College of Law Stacie McBain hopes novel process will allow her to
become pregnant. At right is boyfriend Jim Kiely.  Edward F. Fugger, left, and
Michael S. Opsahl, physicians at Genetics & IVF in Fairfax, display compartment
for freezing cells.  When Stacie McBain, left, learned that cancer treatment
would make her infertile, she had parts of her ovaries experimentally frozen for
future use. A consent form stated that success was not guaranteed, but
accompanying materials referred to "extraordinary results" in sheep.

LOAD-DATE: February 09, 1998


                             2097 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                            February 8, 1998, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS - INSIGHT , Pg. 7B

LENGTH: 720 words

HEADLINE: EFFECTIVE GENE THERAPY DOESN'T COME INSTANTLY

BYLINE: Mark D. Somerson

BODY:


   For years, medical researchers and clinicians gazed into their crystal balls
and saw their future: gene therapy.

   While they tinkered with drugs and surgery to right genetic wrongs, they
pined for the day when science would catch up with their insight.

   Fixing the body's flawed blueprints, they swore, would answer age-old
questions of why we are the way we are. What goes wrong along the strands of our
DNA translates into the development of health problems.

   In 1989, the Human Genome Project was created to identify and figure out the
function of the estimated 100,000 genes in human cells. Organizers estimated
that unlocking this information would help fight more than 3,500 diseases.

   Cancer, cystic fibrosis, neurological disorders, immunodeficiency conditions,
heart disease - the list is endless.

   Grant money came fast and furious, and in no time researchers began isolating
and cloning genes: This mutated gene can cause breast cancer. That flawed one
can lead to Alzheimer's disease.

   Then what? What do you do with these genes? How do you use them in cures?

   ''I think everyone and their brother is looking for these genes,'' Judith
Westman, director of the clinical cancer genetics program at the Arthur G. James
Cancer Hospital, said last year. ''It's glamorous, cool and funded. It's like
climbing Mount Everest.

   ''We need people to find out what these genes do. We need to know how we can
modify what they do.''

   Piece by piece, researchers began finding methods of repairing the genes and
using them - on the blackboard anyway - to trick the body into fixing itself.

   Then came the practical problem of how to deliver the genes. Do you simply
inject them into the body? Will this approach do more harm than good?

   Viruses seem to be the answer. Modified cold viruses, or adenoviruses, have
been used to deliver genes to the right cells in a number of studies.

   Dr. Jerry Mendell is one of the latest researchers to employ this method. A
neurologist at Ohio State University Medical Center, he sees his patients die
virtually untreated every day. Drugs and therapy help in some cases, but really
all they do is prolong the inevitable.

   One of the diseases Mendell sees regularly is muscular dystrophy, and in
particular, Duchenne's and Becker's muscular dystrophies, the most common forms
of the incurable disease. Both affect only males.

   Duchenne's patients lack nearly all the essential muscle protein, dystrophin,
which is believed to be responsible for maintaining the structure of muscle
cells.

   The gene that is responsible for producing dystrophin is either missing or
flawed. The disease, which progressively destroys muscles, generally kills by
age 20.

   Boys diagnosed with Becker's muscular dystrophy still produce dystrophin, but
it is oversized and doesn't properly function.

   In 1991, a team of OSU doctors led by Mendell began a study in which boys
with Duchenne's were treated in a process called myoblast transfer. The therapy
involved injecting millions of healthy muscle cells containing dystrophin into
12 patients' biceps.

   In previous studies, cultured human muscle cells were efficiently
incorporated into mice after such injections.

   But when the three-year study ended, the outcome was mixed. In September
1995, Mendell published his results in the New England Journal of Medicine,
showing that only one patient retained significant dystrophin and that the
transfer didn't translate into increased muscle strength.

   In an interview that fall, a frustrated Mendell predicted treatment one day
for this deadly disease would revolve around gene therapy.

   He was right.

   Using an adenovirus developed at the University of Michigan, Mendell plans to
inject 12 boys this year in hopes of delivering genes that carry the dystrophin
protein.

   For the study, Mendell is selecting patients with Duchenne's and Becker's
muscular dystrophies, to test simply whether the adenovirus is safe. Larger
studies will follow to test whether it works.

   Mendell is but one pioneer on the genetic front. While it will take hundreds
of trials and many years before lab work and practical treatment are in synch,
researchers know they are chasing the right angle.

   Mark D. Somerson is medical reporter for The Dispatch. He can be reached at

   msomerso@dispatch.com

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1998


                             2098 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                    February 8, 1998, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1D, The Outlook

LENGTH: 745 words

HEADLINE: Smaller drug companies' success challenges merger mentality

BYLINE: Compiled by David Novich

BODY:


   WHEN SmithKline Beecham PLC said it had entered merger talks with Glaxo
Wellcome PLC, it sent shares of drug companies soaring on expectations that more
mergers were on the way.

   SmithKline announced its talks with Glaxo at the same time it stopped
negotiations with American Home Products Corp., giving traders the impression
that SmithKline was serious about increasing its size.

   But smaller pharmaceutical companies have been a success even without huge
investments in genetic research, and some of the conglomerates are still trying
to boost profits.

   Warner-Lambert Co. discovered two money-making drugs last year, the
cholesterol-lowering Liptor and the diabetes drug Rezulin, with only $ 572
million in research, a fraction of its competitors' resources. Pharmacia &
Upjohn Inc. is still struggling after its $ 7 billion merger in 1995.

   While genetic research has become more expensive and testing more complex,
analysts and scientists are not always convinced that bigger means better.

   Alan Lyles

   Assistant professor of health policy and management, Johns Hopkins University
School of Public Health

   It's not my impression that [companies need to merge to produce new drugs].
There are a number of agents that have been produced, and the amount of time
before being approved has been shortened. Merck, for instance, has said it does
not plan to be acquired.

   But on the other hand, patents are expiring on big-name drugs, creating a lot
of potential threats to the revenue side with generic drugs becoming
commercially available. Through mergers, if they are able to achieve economies
of scale, it might mean lower prices, and that the companies can take advantage
of a wide range of new drugs, including gene therapy.

   [These mergers] are not new phenomena, and are not something that does not
happen in other areas. The questions that have to be asked are intrinsically,
does it make sense, and from a competitive standpoint, will it help the company
involved.

   There have also been increases in mergers with large companies in managed
behavioral health care for many years. In the drug industry, merged companies
will need to keep overhead low, as well as absorb [research and development]
expenses. There will be more drug mergers. But which ones, who knows?

   Jason Reed

   Biotech analyst for Mehta Brothers in New York

   Mergers are good for the industry because they bring a lot of resources to
the companies, specifically research and development, including genomics -- gene
sequencing and cellular biology.

   Research has become more expensive, and gene therapy is new and expensive to
implement, but with the two companies merging, they can streamline their costs.
We believe [SmithKline and Glaxo] can double, or more than double, the number of
drugs going to the clinical stage and move ahead in research by realizing the
synergies in the merger.

   Neil Sweig

   Analyst with Southeast Research Partners in New York

   Megamergers [in the pharmaceuticals industry] will be a rare event but they
will happen on occasion.

   Some [merging companies] want economies of scale, but economies of scale do
not represent as much fire as smoke. In general, you don't need to spend $ 3
billion on research to get out good products.

   There's nothing new about this. When companies are not doing well, they make
excuses for mergers even when they do not need it.

   William Haseltine

   Chairman and chief executive of Rockville-based Human Genome Sciences Inc.

   It [the merger] is the result of two problems. The drug industry has not
produced new drugs at a rate sufficient to support itself. A company needs three
to four new drugs each year to grow at 15 percent a year, but the average
company has been producing only one drug every other year.

   Also, the cost of bringing a drug to market has tripled in the past three
years. The revolution in new technologies has opened a cornucopia of new ideas,
and there has been a tremendous explosion in the opportunity to create new
drugs. But getting it approved and tested and making it through the clinic will
cost a lot of money.

   For the $ 3.3 billion they [SmithKline and Glaxo] expect to spend on
research, about one-third will be in pre-clinical and two-thirds in testing.

   With that amount of money, the merger should be able to be a success. If that
reasoning is correct, other companies wil do the same, and this is a harbinger
for the future.

   Pub Date: 2/08/98

TYPE: COLUMN

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1998


                             2099 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    February 5, 1998, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Life & Style; Part E; Page 1; View Desk

LENGTH: 1835 words

HEADLINE: THE SKY'S THE LIMIT;
 MORE AND MORE MEMBERS OF AMERICA'S OVER-50 SET ARE INTO SKYDIVING, ROCK
CLIMBING AND OTHER VIGOROUS ACTIVITIES. WHAT'S AGE GOT TO DO WITH IT? THEY ASK.
NOT MUCH, THE EXPERTS SAY.

BYLINE: BETTIJANE LEVINE, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Mildred Hunter has always wanted to soar. But what with one thing and another
(two marriages, raising a child and full-time work) she never got the chance.

   So five years ago, at 75, Hunter took the plunge. She began skydiving in
tandem with her son, Bob.

   "It's so exciting each time that I can hardly wait to go back," Hunter
reports from a Houston hospital bed--where she's nursing a broken leg acquired
in her most recent parachute jump. Within the last year, the 80-year-old Hunter
has also gone up in a hot air balloon, taken a glider ride and ventured aloft in
a paraplane.

   "I'm going to live it up as much as I can for as long as I can," she says.
"My age has nothing to do with it."

   Hunter is representative of thousands of the venturesome mature, part of what
may be called the "new old" population of America. These are the millions of
people who have passed well beyond the half-century mark and don't think twice
about it. Blessed with good health, they continue to do what they've always
done, or what they've always wanted to do.

   They are surprising even the experts who have been predicting all this.

   Dr. Terrie Wetle was skiing down an Oregon mountainside recently and stopped
at a lodge for food.

   "I saw this bunch of old people finishing lunch. They looked to be in their
70s and 80s," Wetle says. "I watched them leave, put on their skis, and go down
that big mountain so beautifully that I was amazed. It was a kind of
confirmation."

   Wetle, 51, is a grandmother, gerontologist and deputy director of the
National Institute on Aging. She intends to ski "for another 20 or 30 years" and
believes she'll be part of a crowd of her peers.

   Because despite the snipes and jeers of the under-50 set, those who have
passed that mythical landmark are shining in all sorts of activities and sports,
extreme and otherwise.

   Is America ready for that? No way. After Sonny Bono died on the slopes at 62,
and Sen. John Glenn (D-Ohio) announced that he'll travel into space again at 77,
radio talk shows were awash with jokes and comments from listeners repulsed that
"geezers" are risking their lives in such dangerous ways. One caller couldn't
understand why old people, "who've already had their day," would do anything
risky at all. "What are they trying to prove?"

   He can be forgiven for not understanding. On one hand, America is aware that
people are living longer, healthier lives with every passing decade (life
expectancy has climbed to 76.1 years). They know that with gene therapy and
other breakthroughs, the longevity statistics will almost surely continue to
improve.

   On the other hand, many Americans still believe anyone older than 50 is old.
Anyone older than 60 is very old. And anyone older than 70 is fragile,
diminished mentally and physically, and should be on wheels, a cane or in a pine
box. They believe it because the popular culture has told them to.

   Most Americans have not yet heard about "successful aging," a concept born 10
years ago as the result of a research program supported by the MacArthur
Foundation. Dr. John D. Rowe, the principal investigator, concluded that medical
research has placed too much emphasis on the deficits that come with aging and
were always thought to be caused by the aging process itself.

   Rowe showed, through various studies, that these declines may really be
explained in terms of lifestyle, habits, diet and an array of psychosocial
factors having nothing to do with the aging process.

   In other words, while getting old does cause physiological changes of all
sorts, it does not cause the mental and physical declines that have always been
associated with age, he says. If no disease is present, a healthy old person can
be expected to continue the same activities as when he or she was younger,
although not necessarily on the same level.

   "A revolutionary increase in life span has already occurred," Rowe wrote in a
1987 Science magazine article. "A corresponding increase in health span and the
maintenance of full function as nearly as possible to the end of life" is the
goal doctors and older Americans must now set for themselves.


   *

   Bill Jones is already on this course. At 66, he climbs mountains, skis,
skydives and is an active rancher in Utah. He flies planes for business and
pleasure, and just bought an airport in Alaska, where he plans to start a
tourist business.

   "I don't perceive myself as young or old. I am what I am--an active,
interested person. I see no reason not to continue to be that," he says. "Of
course, I can't bench press 300 pounds anymore, but I can certainly continue to
function in the world I've created for myself. You don't die when you hit 60.
People ask me all the time, 'Are you still doing all that?' I say of course. And
I plan to continue."

   So does Patrick Moorehead, 66, of Long Beach. He is president of Skydivers
Over 60, a group formed in 1992 "as a kind of lark." It now has more than 400
members, he says. Moorehead retired at 50 from his job as a fire department
battalion chief "because the job was inherently dangerous." But he maintains his
lifestyle, including a healthy diet and regular exercise--both mental and
physical--and he jumps at least 10 times a month and participates in skydiving
competitions all over the world.

   Moorehead says he's "frankly disappointed in the amount of people that
succumb to advancing years. My wife and I just got back from Las Vegas. We saw
so many people who have let themselves deteriorate, who seem to have no interest
in physical activity that will keep them healthy and in shape. They are doing
themselves a disservice," he says, because "they perceive themselves as society
perceives them. They think once you get past that certain milestone that society
calls old age, you must back down from life. What a waste."

   Dr. Robert Butler, founding director of the National Institute on Aging and
now chief executive of the International Longevity Center and professor at Mount
Sinai School of Medicine in New York, agrees.

   "I remember George Bush's skydive, at 72, got so much attention that I was
asked to discuss it on TV shows," Butler says. "But the truth is many people
much older than Bush are doing the same or similar things. It's not talked about
because it's still not socially acceptable" to be so active at an advanced age,
Butler says.

   "Although our population is growing older, the rates of disability are
declining. In other words, people are vigorous and healthy longer than they used
to be. Someone 80 today may be the equivalent of a 60-year-old in the last
century. Part of the decline is physiological. But the big constraint is
sociological," he says. That's because the reaction of people is still
relatively negative, Butler says.

   "My point is, the sociology may not yet have caught up with the physiology.
An older person has to be very careful about being looked upon as too sexy, or
too vigorous, or too interested in life because society may frown upon such
people."

   The experts seem to agree that America is in a state of transition. The "old
old" group still sees themselves as they used to see their own grandparents:
frail and decaying. Many who have had a lifetime of poor nutrition and little
physical activity accept as inevitable the physical consequences of their
choices and incorrectly consider the results to be a normal part of aging.

   The "new old" population consists of people who have led active and healthy
lifestyles, who have benefited from recent medical advances or are simply
genetically blessed with good health in advanced age. They are the cutting edge
of what experts say will soon be considered the norm.

   The theory of "successful aging" is not just a theory, Butler says. It's
happening quietly every day. "Consider this: On any given day in America, of all
our population over 65, 81% are doing more than OK physically." By that he
means, they are independent and fully functional.

   And gerontologist Wetle reports that "the old assumption that loss of mental
abilities is a natural part of aging has now been proven false. We now know that
some people lose memory and the ability to reason, but those losses are always
caused by disease." The primary and growing example of this is Alzheimer's
disease. Those with no disease do not lose their faculties in old age, she says,
although society believes otherwise. And as medical science is able to eradicate
more age-associated disease, an even bigger segment of the population will
retain full faculties into very old age, she predicts.


   *

   Robert Ward Parker, 75, maintains status quo on all fronts. The Santa Fe,
N.M., resident lives minutes from the mountains, where he skis "a minimum of
twice a week," often with a group of men who are his age or older. His friend
Robert Nordhaus, 88, skied with him until this year, when a "minor physical
setback" took him off the slopes.

   A member of the 10th Mountain Division of the U.S. Army during World War II,
Parker was in the elite force that fought on skis in mountain terrain. The
members of the 10th have remained buddies and athletes ever since, with many of
them instrumental in founding outdoor survival groups and such ski resorts as
Vail, Colo., Parker says.

   In 1995, he organized his buddies for a trip to Europe, where they repeated
climbing a 2,000-foot mountain in the Appenines; they climbed it the first time
in 1945.

   "Seven veterans, ages 72 to 80, climbed to the top again," Parker says. This
time they were joined in friendship by some of the German and Italian mountain
troops they had once fought. "It was a wonderful experience," he says.

   He also rock climbs, writes poetry and engages in what he calls "independent
archeological research that involves miles and miles of walking in rough
country, usually by myself. I've made three discoveries that no one else has
made in this state where so many archeologists are working," he says with pride.
These days, he's working on an "astrological alignment of stone structures in
eastern New Mexico." If he confirms the alignments, he'll submit the data to an
archaeo-astronomical journal, he says.

   His view of aging? "I think of myself as maybe 35. My body functions as if I
were a normal 55-year old. And mentally, I'm still a teenager in terms of
wanting to explore the world."

   Parker and so many others like him are what Butler predicts will be typical
of old people in America's very near future.

   "When the baby boomers reach Golden Pond, they are going to transform the
image of old age. It will be a much more vigorous, active and vibrant period of
life," Butler says. "The boomers will be physically active and continue to work
longer. We can't have 40 million people sitting around doing nothing. It's a
waste. That's really the main point of all this.

   "It's not just skiing and jumping out of planes--but continuing to contribute
to our society. Have you heard about the airline pilots? They're fighting to fly
past the age of 60."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Robert Ward Parker, 75, climbs toward a friend. Top left:
Mildred Hunter, 75, skydives with son Bob.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Courtesy of Robert
Ward Parker

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1998


                             2100 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 3, 1998, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 254 words

HEADLINE: Debate on Human Cloning Ignores Some Benefits

BODY:


   To the Editor:

   Arthur L. Caplan's advice to go slow on regulating human cloning (Op-Ed, Jan.
28) fails to mention its potential benefits. One use would be by couples who,
because of infertility or the threat of genetic disease, must now turn to
anonymous strangers for egg, sperm or embryo donations, thus preventing a
genetic tie with children.

    Couples might also choose to clone a child who has been born healthy or who
has been treated successfully with gene therapy to avoid the risk of a less
successful outcome in their next child. Cloning would also enable a family to
obtain tissue suitable for transplant to an existing child from embryonic stem
cells, fetal tissue or postbirth donation.

   In each case, and in others that will arise when cloning is shown to be safe
and effective, a responsible couple committed to the well-being of their
children could rationally find that cloning is the best means to treat their
fertility or genetic problems. It should therefore be treated like the other
assisted reproduction and genetic selection techniques that are now widely
available and be included in a couple's right to have healthy, biologically
related offspring.

   Regulation to protect health and safety, to require the consent of
third-party clone sources and to limit the number of children born in this way
is justified. A Federal ban on all human cloning is not.

JOHN A. ROBERTSON
Austin, Tex., Jan. 28, 1998

The writer a professor of law and bioethics at the University of Texas.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1998


                             2101 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1998 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                            February 1, 1998, Sunday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 003

LENGTH: 381 words

HEADLINE: STRICKEN CHILD REUNITES FEUDING INGELS AND LEWIS

BYLINE: DAREH GREGORIAN

BODY:

   A bitter feud between Jerry Lewis and comic Marty Ingels didn't stop the King
of Comedy from rushing to the rescue when he discovered the nephew of his
longtime pal had muscular dystrophy.

   "He put aside our personal differences to help this kid out, God bless him,"
said Ingels.

   The Post's Cindy Adams reported New Year's Eve that the two were feuding
after Ingels agreed to do the audio version of the unauthorized Lewis tell-all
bio, "The King of Comedy."

   Lewis felt betrayed by his friend and protege of almost 40 years. He stopped
talking to him and wouldn't return his phone calls.

   Ingels credits Lewis with giving him his first big break.

   "He put me on the map," said Ingels, 59, whose successful movie and TV career
includes credits ranging from Mel Brooks' "Silent Movie" to "Baywatch."

   They didn't speak for six months - until Ingels' wife, Shirley Jones of
"Partridge Family" fame, discovered her nephew, Stephen Stepanian, 7, had been
diagnosed with Duchenne's, a deadly form of muscular dystrophy.

   Ingels reached out to his old pal, who's spent more than 40 years doing
volunteer work for the Muscular Dystrophy Association and has hosted the annual
MDA Labor Day telethon for years.

   The King of Comedy proved he was also the King of Compassion.

   "He called back right away and asked for Stephen's name and address. I said,
"Jerry, what about the book?' He said, "Forget about the book. Life is too
short. This is important,'" Ingels said.

   Within days, Stephen's parents, Brian and Jill Stepanian, called the worried
aunt and uncle from their home in Alabama.

   "They said they were inundated with research people trying to help because
Jerry asked them to," Ingels said.

   But the outlook remained bleak for Stephen. Then Jerry called with hope about
a breakthrough - a gene therapy that has fought off the disease in animals.

   It will be tested on about a dozen children this fall, and Lewis has
recommended that Stephen be one of them.

   Ingels said the experience made him see his old friend in a new light.

   "He raises $50 million to $60 million a year for Muscular Dystrophy, and
that's why this boy now has a chance," he said.

   "He's a hero. For whatever reason he does it, who cares? The bottom line is,
humanity is the beneficiary."

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1998


                             2102 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    January 30, 1998, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 414 words

HEADLINE: New discovery of gene is called 1st shot in assault on baldness;
Extreme form of hair loss linked to follicle 'switch'

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   WASHINGTON -- Scientists have discovered a gene that causes a rare and
extreme form of hair loss, a finding they say could one day point to better
remedies for common hereditary baldness.

   Researchers found the gene -- appropriately named "hairless" -- by studying a
Pakistani family plagued for generations by an inherited form of alopecia
universalis. Sufferers are born without eyelashes or eyebrows, quickly lose the
hair on top of the head and never grow any body hair.

   It's a far cry from the more common male pattern baldness, which sends
millions of men racing for hair-growth drugs or toupees.

   But because the hairless gene regulates the same hair follicle and appears to
switch on other hair-related genes, it provides a vital clue to understanding
hair growth and loss, said lead researcher Angela Christiano of Columbia
University.

   "We're hoping this will lead us to the next gene and the next," said
Christiano, a dermatology professor who has begun test-tube experiments to
uncover exactly how the hairless gene works.

   "This is sort of like getting your foot in the door," agreed Dr. David Valle,
a medical geneticist and pediatrician at Johns Hopkins University, who praised
the study, which is being published today in the journal Science.

   There are several forms of hereditary hair loss, but scientists until now had
been unable to find any of the genes responsible.

   Scientists believe hair growth "needs to pass through certain checkpoints
before a new hair can grow," Christiano said. "We're hoping this is the first
checkpoint."

   If so, then following the hairless gene's trail as it makes proteins that
switch on other genes could uncover where milder forms of baldness originate and
lead to possible therapies.

   It's a field already attracting interest. Drug giant Johnson & Johnson has
recruited balding families for its own gene hunt. And a California company has
proved that if genes to stimulate hair growth are found, it has the technology
to transfer them into empty hair follicles for gene therapy.

   But a more immediate question, Valle said, is whether the hairless gene is
affected by hormones, because male pattern baldness occurs when there is a
buildup of a testosterone byproduct in the scalp.

   Christiano's discovery "is certain to lead to some very interesting biology,
and that biology is certain to resonate with the vast majority of the population
who are worried about losing their hair," he said.

   Pub Date: 1/30/98

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1998


                             2103 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                            January 30, 1998, Friday

SECTION: News; Pg.  36

LENGTH: 384 words

HEADLINE: HAIR-RAISING BALDNESS DISCOVERY

BYLINE: BY JORGE FITZ-GIBBON

BODY:


   Ever think of going to your local genetic scientist for a perm or a
hair-dying treatment?

   It may not be too far in the future, according to Columbia University
researchers, who said they have discovered that genes can be triggered to grow
hair, a find they said means hair can be genetically manipulated in other ways.

   "Hair is a genetically controlled structure," said researcher Dr. Angela
Christiano, who found the hair-producing gene.

   "I mean, there are over 100 genes known to make hair hair protein, hair
shape, hair color," she said. "I don't think it's unreasonable now to speculate
that an easily accessible organ could be treated, permed, tinted, colored,
grown, using genes."

   Christiano, whose research team started probing an inherited form of baldness
two years ago, said the find could mean a commercial hair-producing cream or
lotion within five years.

   It would simply be applied to the scalp to work, she said.

   "Because the hair follicle is actually a pore in the skin, the liquid slides
down the hair follicle and imbeds itself in the root of the gene, the base of
the follicle," Christiano explained. "It's not that far in the future. This is
gene therapy. This is our generation."

   Officials at Columbia already have patented their discovery, which
researchers concede could be a gold mine in the $ 7-billion-a-year American hair
treatment industry.

   Columbia would work through Innovation Enterprise, its liaison to the
nation's commercial industry, to license the product and market it.

   "To begin to talk about licensing and commercialization is something that is
still premature," cautioned Dr. David Bickers, chairman of the dermatology
department at Columbia's College of Physicians and Surgeons.

   "The excitement surrounding this is understandable, but we don't want to be
premature in terms of any potential impact."

   Nonetheless, the idea of a hair-growing cream on the market certainly
appealed to follically challenged New Yorkers.

   "My interest in it would be very real," said Manhattan attorney Peter Mullen.
"They can grow all kinds of things these days. I don't see why they can't grow
hair."

   "If it works, I'd give it a try," agreed 47-year-old Tim Hurley. "I'd be a
little skeptical at first, but if it works, I'd give it a try."

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1998


                             2104 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 January 30, 1998, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1167 words

HEADLINE: Trek in Remote Pakistan Leads to Hair-Loss Gene

BYLINE: By DENISE GRADY

BODY:

   It must have been one of the more unusual requests for scientific
collaboration to reach Quaid-i-Azam University in Islamabad, Pakistan: a list of
Dr. Angela Christiano's research credentials, along with a snapshot of three
bald spots on her head.

   "I said I'd just been diagnosed a week ago with clumps of hair falling out,"
said Dr. Christiano, a geneticist and assistant professor of dermatology at
Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York. A computer search of the
medical literature on baldness had led her to the Pakistani researchers, who had
discovered people in a remote village with a rare, inherited disorder that left
them without a strand of hair anywhere on their bodies. Writing to her fellow
scientists, Dr. Christiano said she suspected that those families held "the only
key" to her condition.

    "They said it was a pathetic letter," Dr. Christiano recalled. "They took
pity on me."

   The result, being published today in the journal Science, is the
identification of the first human gene ever linked to hair loss. The genetic
defect described in the journal causes only the rare condition found in the
Pakistani villagers, and not the more common types of baldness, Dr. Christiano
said, not even the condition that runs in her own family.

   But the newly identified gene appears to play a critical role in the
formation of hair, and Dr. Christiano said that understanding its function might
help scientists devise better ways to prevent and treat various forms of
baldness.

   Dr. George Cotsarelis, director of the hair and scalp clinic at the
University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, who was not involved in the study,
called it "a beautiful piece of work" and said it would provide important
information about factors that control the growth of hair as well as its
untimely departure.

   Dr. Christiano became interested in hair loss in May 1996, when her own hair
began to fall out. Doctors diagnosed alopecia areata, a condition that affects
2.5 million people in the United States and is thought to be related to stress
and a disorder of the immune system. The problem begins with patchy hair loss on
the scalp and sometimes progresses to complete baldness and loss of body hair.

   Dr. Christiano said that when she looked up scientific papers on alopecia
areata, she was shocked to find that little was known about its underlying
causes. Only vague speculations were offered about the probability of several
different unknown genes' playing a part. Similar nebulous theories were
suggested for male-pattern baldness, the far more common type of hair loss that
causes baldness or thinning of the hair in 80 percent of both men and women. The
hair loss in that condition is touched off by male hormones, which are present
in both sexes, but how the hormones stop hair growth is not well understood.

   "As a geneticist, I wanted to look at a very simple, pure, genetic form of
hair loss," Dr. Christiano said. The hair loss in the Pakistani village seemed
to fit the bill, she said. Affecting just 11 people in a large extended family,
it clearly followed the inheritance pattern of a disorder caused by one
recessive gene. A single gene would be easier to trace than a combination and
would make a better starting point for research, Dr. Christiano said.

   Babies with the Pakistani disorder are born without eyelashes or brows,
though they do have scalp hair. But when that first growth falls out, no new
hair grows in to replace it. Adults have few follicles, the saclike structures
in the skin in which hairs develop, and the scant follicles they do have lack
hair.

   The condition is devastating, Dr. Christiano said, especially for women, who
are afraid to venture outside because of their appearance. Arranged marriages
are customary, and in one case, Dr. Christiano said, a groom did not find out
that his bride was hairless until their wedding night.

   To begin the study, Dr. Wasim Ahmad and Dr. Mahmud Ahmad, geneticists at
Quaid-i-Azam University, traveled six hours south from Islamabad by jeep until
the roads ran out and then hiked on to the rural village, Chakwal, to collect
blood samples to be shipped to the United States for genetic testing.

   Nine months later, Dr. Christiano's team had narrowed the search for the gene
to a region on chromosome 8, one of the 23 paired, threadlike strips of genetic
material found in nearly all human cells. But the region was large, and
pinpointing the gene would be arduous.

   "We were stuck for weeks," Dr. Christiano said.

   Then, at a scientific meeting in March 1997, she saw a photograph of some
baby mice that have a mutant gene that leaves them hairless. The mice, like the
hairless people in Pakistan, are born with hair, and in the picture that Dr.
Christiano saw, they were shedding that first and only layer of hair.

   "It was striking," Dr. Christiano said. "The pattern of hair loss resembled
what we had observed in some of the family members."

   The structure of the mouse gene was already known. Because many genes in mice
have nearly identical counterparts in people, Dr. Christiano and her colleagues
decided to look for a version of the hairless gene in their human DNA samples.
They found one, and mapped it to the same stretch of chromosome 8 that their
other experiments had identified.

   The gene carries the code for a type of protein molecule known as a
transcription factor. When the gene exists in a defective or mutant form, as it
does in the hairless mice and people, the transcription factor is missing.
"Transcription factors turn on other genes," Dr. Christiano said. "They're sort
of switches. Sometimes they're considered master regulators. Without them, a
whole program of events, like making a hair, doesn't happen."

   Dr. Christiano said she suspected that the transcription factor carried out
some essential function early in the chain of events known as the hair cycle.
That cycle is the program of cellular activities that creates follicles and
schedules the phases of growth, resting and shedding of hair. Disruptions in the
cycle may play a part in the more common types of baldness, and studying the
transcription factor may give researchers clues about manipulating the cycle to
overcome different types of disorders.

   Americans already spend $7 billion a year trying to fight baldness with
drugs, cosmetics, surgery and wigs. Medications include Rogaine and Propecia for
male pattern baldness, and, for alopecia areata, steroid injections into the
scalp. All act late in the hair cycle, and all have limitations and side
effects, Dr. Christiano said. She has had the steroid injections herself, for
instance, and although her hair has returned, she knows the effects may not
last.

   Her hope is that her discovery will lead to better forms of prevention and
treatment, perhaps gene therapy, for hair loss.

   "I hope this will refocus pharmaceutical interest on the mechanics of the
hair cycle itself," she said, "because that's where the better therapies will be
found."

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Angela Christiano found the first known human hair-loss
gene. (Frances Roberts for The New York Times)


LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1998


                             2105 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      January 30, 1998 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 705 words

HEADLINE: FAMILY BALDNESS LEADS SCIENTIST TO HAIR LOSS GENE

BYLINE: By DENISE GRADY; NEW YORK TIMES

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   It must have been one of the more unusual requests for scientific
collaboration to reach Quaid-i-Azam University, in Islamabad, Pakistan: a list
of Dr. Angela Christiano's research credentials, along with a snapshot of three
bald spots on her head.

   "I said I'd just been diagnosed a week ago with clumps of hair falling out,"
said Christiano, a geneticist and assistant professor of dermatology at
Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York. A computer search had led her
to the Pakistani researchers, who had discovered people in a remote village with
a rare, inherited disorder that left them without a strand of hair anywhere on
their heads or bodies.

   Writing to her fellow scientists, Christiano said she suspected that those
families held "the only key" to her condition.

   "They said it was a pathetic letter," Christiano recalled. "They took pity on
me."

   The result, being published today in the journal Science, is the
identification of the first human gene ever linked to hair loss. The genetic
defect described in the journal causes only the rare condition found in the
Pakistani villagers, and not the more common types of baldness, Christiano said,
not even the condition that runs in her own family.

   But the newly identified gene appears to play a critical role in the
formation of hair, and Christiano said that understanding its function might
help scientists devise better ways to prevent and treat various forms of
baldness.

   Dr. George Cotsarelis, director of the hair and scalp clinic at the
University of Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia, who was not involved in the study,
called it "a beautiful piece of work" and said it would provide important
information about factors that control the growth of hair as well as its
untimely departure.

   Christiano became interested in hair loss in May 1996, when her own hair
began to fall out. Doctors diagnosed alopecia areata, a condition that affects
2.5 million people in the United States and is thought to be related to stress
and a disorder of the immune system.

   Christiano said when she looked up scientific papers on alopecia areata, she
was shocked to find little was known about its underlying causes. Only vague
speculations were offered.

   Similar nebulous theories were suggested for male-pattern baldness, the far
more common type of hair loss that causes baldness or thinning of the hair in 80
percent of both men and women.

   "As a geneticist, I wanted to look at a very simple, pure, genetic form of
hair loss," Christiano said. The hair loss in the Pakistani village seemed to
fit the bill, she said. Affecting just 11 people in a large extended family, it
followed the inheritance pattern of a disorder caused by one recessive gene. A
single gene would be easier to trace than a combination and would make a better
starting point for research, Christiano said.

   Babies with the Pakistani disorder are born without eyelashes or brows,
though they do have scalp hair. But when that first growth falls out, no new
hair grows in to replace it. Adults have few follicles, the saclike structures
in the skin in which hairs develop, and the scant follicles they do have lack
hair.

   To begin the study, Dr. Wasim Ahmad and Dr. Mahmud Ahmad, geneticists at
Quaid-i-Azam University, traveled six hours south from Islamabad by jeep until
the roads ran out and then hiked on to the rural village, Chakwal, to collect
blood samples to be shipped to the United States for genetic testing.

   Americans already spend $7 billion a year trying to fight baldness with
drugs, cosmetics, surgery, and wigs. Medications include Rogaine and Propecia
for male pattern baldness, and, for alopecia areata, steroid injections into the
scalp. All act late in the hair cycle, and all have limitations and side
effects, Dr. Christiano said. She has had the steroid injections herself, for
instance, and although her hair has returned, she knows the effects may not
last.

   Her hope is that her discovery will eventually lead to better forms of
prevention and treatment, perhaps gene therapy, for hair loss. "I hope this will
refocus pharmaceutical interest on the mechanics of the hair cycle itself," she
said, "because that's where the better therapies will be found."

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1998


                             2106 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                        January 30, 1998, Friday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 2, Part A

LENGTH: 594 words

HEADLINE: 'Hairless' gene discovery seen making headway in hunt for baldness
cure

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard; Associated Press

BODY: WASHINGTON - Scientists have discovered a gene that causes a rare and
extreme form of hair loss, a finding they say one day could point to better
remedies for common hereditary baldness.

   Researchers found the gene - appropriately named "hairless" - by studying a
Pakistani family plagued for generations by an inherited form of alopecia
universalis.

   Sufferers are born without eyelashes or eyebrows, quickly lose the hair on
top of the head and never grow any body hair.

   It's a far cry from the more common male pattern baldness, that sends
millions of men racing for hair-growth drugs or toupees.

   But because the hairless gene regulates the same hair follicle and appears to
switch on other hair-related genes, it provides a vital clue to understanding
hair growth and loss, said lead researcher Angela Christiano of Columbia
University.

   "We're hoping this will lead us to the next gene and the next," said
Christiano, a dermatology professor who has begun test-tube experiments to
uncover exactly how the hairless gene works.

   "This is sort of like getting your foot in the door," agreed Dr. David Valle,
a medical geneticist and pediatrician at Johns Hopkins University, who praised
the study, which is being published today in the journal Science.

   "We don't know too much about the hair follicle," explained Valle, whose
patients include several teen-age girls with similar severe baldness. "It's a
chance to begin to understand the role of the genes in controlling and
regulating the function of the hair follicle."

   There are several forms of hereditary hair loss, but scientists until now had
been unable to find any of the genes responsible.

   Christiano began her hunt in a large Pakistani family that had inherited
alopecia universalis - the rarest and most extreme form of hair loss - that
struck at least five generations, including seven still- living patients.

   Extensive DNA testing failed to find a possible gene, but scientists did
narrow the hunt to one region of Chromosome 8 that appeared flawed.

   Stymied, Christiano turned to animal research.

   Scientists already had discovered that knocking out the so-called hairless
gene in mice let them breed bare rodents.

   Theorizing that the gene was a possible human culprit, Christiano used gene
cloning techniques to investigate a database of healthy human DNA and discovered
the human version of the hairless gene.

   But the question was whether the hairless gene was active in people.

   First, Christiano discovered it resides in that same region of Chromosome 8
implicated in the Pakistani hair loss. Then a closer look at the family's genes
showed all the bald relatives had a single mutation that she couldn't find in
150 healthy people.

   If the hairless gene is mutated so that it doesn't make a certain protein,
hair follicles can't form, Christiano concluded.

   Scientists believe hair growth is "regulated like a clock and needs to pass
through certain checkpoints before a new hair can grow," she said. "We're hoping
this is the first checkpoint."

   If so, then following the hairless gene's trail as it makes proteins that
switch on other genes could uncover where milder forms of baldness originate,
and possible therapies.

   It's a field already attracting interest. Drug giant Johnson & Johnson has
recruited balding families for its own gene hunt. And a California company has
proved that if genes to stimulate hair growth are found, it has the technology
to transfer them into empty hair follicles for gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1998


                             2107 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                January 30, 1998, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A12, HEALTH UPDATE COLUMN

LENGTH: 420 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH UPDATE

BYLINE: From News Services

BODY:


BALDNESS

'Hairless' gene could help grow, remove or dye hair

   Researchers said Thursday that they had found a gene that might govern
baldness and that their finding could lead to a gene therapy treatment for
people who want more hair.

   The new gene, appropriately called hairless, could regulate the human hair
cycle, researchers report in the journal Science.

   "The discovery of this new gene gives us endless possibilities that may allow
us to effectively treat hair loss and possibly baldness within the next five
years," said dermatologist Angela Christiano of New York's Columbia-Presbyterian
Medical Center, who led the study.

LUNGS

Intravenous drug can ease high blood pressure

   People who suffer from a rare but deadly form of high blood pressure in their
lungs may get relief from an intravenous drug that uses a naturally occurring
chemical in the lining of blood vessels, researchers report in Thursday's New
England Journal of Medicine.

   The latest study, involving 27 volunteers, is not the first to show that the
drug, epoprostenol, is effective against primary pulmonary hypertension, a rare
form of high blood pressure.

   Earlier tests also concluded that the medicine, sold under the brand name
Flolan by Glaxo Wellcome, can increase the diameter of blood vessels feeding the
lungs, relieving the high blood pressure that can cause the right side of the
heart to become dangerously enlarged. The team, led by Dr. Vallerie V.
McLaughlin of Rush Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center in Chicago, said the
findings showed that epoprostenol "appears to have sustained efficacy in this
disorder."

STROKE

New drug may damage cells in brain, researchers warn

   A new stroke drug known as tissue plasminogen activator, or tPA, may be
dangerous to brain cells, a team of U.S. researchers warned Wednesday.

   They said the drug, an engineered version of a naturally occurring human
enzyme, caused damage in the brain cells of mice they tested.

   The researchers - Yanming Wang, Stuart Lipton and colleagues at Harvard
Medical School - used mice specially bred to lack tPA, which occurs naturally in
the brain and works by converting plasminogen to plasmin, which in turn is able
to dissolve blood clots.

   When stroke was induced, the tPA-deficient mice did not suffer the same
degree of nerve cell destruction as did normal mice. And when they injected tPA
into the brains of tPA-deficient mice, twice as many brain cells were destroyed
as by the blood clot alone.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Dr. Angela Christiano laughs
during a news conference Thursday announcing the discovery of a gene for
baldness. The Pakistani man in the photograph behind her was among those studied
to find the gene.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1998


                             2108 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1998 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            January 30, 1998 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 43

LENGTH: 784 words

HEADLINE: Discovery of 'hairless' gene could hold key to pattern baldness

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Scientists have discovered a gene that causes a rare and extreme form of hair
loss, a finding they say could one day point to better remedies for common
hereditary baldness.

    Researchers found the gene - appropriately named "hairless" - by studying a
Pakistani family plagued for generations by an inherited form of alopecia
universalis. Sufferers are born without eyelashes or eyebrows, quickly lose the
hair on top of the head and never grow any body hair.

    It's a far cry from the more common male pattern baldness, that sends
millions of men racing for hair-growth drugs or toupees.

    But because the hairless gene regulates the same hair follicle, and appears
to switch on other hair- related genes, it provides a vital clue to
understanding hair growth and loss, said lead researcher Angela Christiano of
Columbia University.

    "We're hoping this will lead us to the next gene and the next," said
Christiano, a dermatology professor who has begun test-tube experiments to
uncover exactly how the hairless gene works.

    "The discovery of this new gene gives us endless possibilities that may
allow us to effectively treat hair loss and possibly baldness within the next
five years," he said. "It is now within our reach to design ways to grow hair,
remove hair, even dye hair genetically and, best yet, this can all be
accomplished topically, reducing possible side-effects."

    "This is sort of like getting your foot in the door," said Dr. David Valle,
a medical geneticist and pediatrician at Johns Hopkins University, who praised
the study, which is being published today in the journal Science.

    "We don't know too much about the hair follicle," explained Valle, whose
patients include several teen-age girls with similar severe baldness. "It's a
chance to begin to understand the role of the genes in controlling and
regulating the function of the hair follicle."

    There are several forms of hereditary hair loss, but scientists until now
had been unable to find any of the genes responsible.

    Christiano began her hunt in a large Pakistani family that had inherited
alopecia universalis - the rarest and most extreme form of hair loss - that
struck at least five generations, including seven still-living patients.

    Extensive DNA testing failed to find a possible gene, but scientists did
narrow the hunt to one region of Chromosome 8 that appeared flawed.

    Stymied, Christiano turned to animal research. Scientists already had
discovered that knocking out the so-called hairless gene in mice let them breed
bare rodents. Theorizing that the gene was a possible human culprit, Christiano
used gene cloning techniques to investigate a database of healthy human DNA and
discovered the human version of the hairless gene.

    But the question was whether the hairless gene was active in people. First
Christiano discovered it resides in that same region of Chromosome 8 implicated
in the Pakistani hair loss. Then a closer look at the family's genes showed all
the bald relatives had a single mutation that she couldn't find in 150 healthy
people.

    If the hairless gene is mutated so that it doesn't make a certain protein,
hair follicles can't form, Christiano concluded.

    Scientists believe hair growth is "regulated like a clock and needs to pass
through certain checkpoints before a new hair can grow," she said. "We're hoping
this is the first checkpoint."

    If so, then following the hairless gene's trail as it makes proteins that
switch on other genes could uncover where milder forms of baldness originate,
and possible therapies.

    It's a field already attracting interest. Drug giant Johnson & Johnson has
recruited balding families for its own gene hunt. And a California company has
proved that if genes to stimulate hair growth are found, it has the technology
to transfer them into empty hair follicles for gene therapy.

    But a more immediate question, Valle said, is whether the hairless gene is
affected by hormones, because male pattern baldness occurs when there is a
buildup of a testosterone byproduct in the scalp.

   Christiano's discovery "is certain to lead to some very interesting biology,
and that biology is certain to resonate with the vast majority of the population
... who are worried about losing their hair," he said.

    At present there are two different treatments for baldness - Merck and Co.'s
Propecia, a one-a- day pill based on hormones, and Pharmacia & Upjohn Inc.'s
Rogaine (minoxidil), which is rubbed into the scalp and which stops hair loss in
80 percent of men who use it for a year. Another test shows 80 percent grow some
hair back after a year.

    The American Hair Loss Council in Chicago estimates that more than 33
million American men and more than 19 million women have hair loss.

GRAPHIC: 1. Angela Christiano, lead researcher at Columbia University, tells of
finding a gene that causes a rare and extreme form of hair loss by studying a
Pakistani family, a member of whom is shown in the photo behind her.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2109 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    January 30, 1998, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 287 words

HEADLINE: Gene find could lead to baldness cure

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   Scientists have discovered the first human gene associated with
baldness -- a finding they say could lead to new cures for different
forms of hair loss within five years.

   The gene, named hairless, is involved with a severe form of inherited
baldness. Scientists speculate that the gene is a "master switch"
for the entire hair growth cycle.

   "Hair follicles, like all cells, have cycles. This finding is
the first indication that we may be able to regulate that cycle,
triggering the growth of new hair," says Angela M. Christiano,
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York,
whose study appears in today's Science. "It may be possible
. . . to treat hair loss with gene therapy administered topically
via the hair follicles."

   Christiano and colleagues tracked down the gene first by noticing
similarities between a strain of hairless mice and people with
an inherited condition called alopecia universalis. People who
have it lack all body hair including eyelashes. Christiano had
been working with DNA from families in Pakistan affected by the
disorder.

   The researchers then took the coding or sequence of the known
hairless mouse gene and used it to search for a close match in
human DNA. They quickly found a match for the healthy gene and
a mutated version of the same gene in the DNA of the families.

   "It is now within our reach to design ways to grow hair or to
selectively remove hair genetically," says Christiano, who has
a common type of hair loss called alopecia areata. It affects
2.5 million people and is related to stress or autoimmune disease.

   She says the discovery offers new leads for understanding all
forms of hair loss.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1998


                             2110 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    January 29, 1998, Thursday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: HEALTH WATCH; Pg. 03E

LENGTH: 329 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH WATCH;
NEWS & NOTES

BYLINE: From news services

BODY:


   Pulmonary hypertension: Continuous treatment with a medicine that relaxes the
blood vessels appears to relieve primary pulmonary hypertension, a rare and
often fatal type of high blood pressure. The treatment is prostacyclin, also
known as epoprostenol or Flolan. Patients carry a battery-powered pump in a
fanny pack that delivers the medicine through an implanted catheter in the
chest. Primary pulmonary hypertension strikes one or two people per million.
Although its cause is usually unknown, it can be a rare side effect of the diet
pills Redux and fen-phen. The disease causes high blood pressure in the
pulmonary artery and can destroy the heart. The research, in today's New England
Journal of Medicine, found that 26 of 27 patients on the pumps for an average of
17 months improved.

   AIDS research: Monkeys got unusually mild infections from a cousin of the
AIDS virus after scientists gave them a gene to interfere with the virus'
reproduction. The findings lend support to the idea of treating HIV-infected
people with such gene therapy. The monkeys were infected with the simian
immunodeficiency virus. Those treated with the gene therapy showed much less of
the virus in their bodies and far less damage to their lymph nodes. The study is
in the February issue of the journal Nature Medicine.

   Brain tumor meeting: At an American Brain Tumor Association Town Hall
Meeting, experts will present information on brain tumors and the latest
treatments, 1-4 p.m. Sunday, Westin Hotel-Atlanta Airport, 4736 Best Road,
College Park.

   Dental screenings: Free dental screenings for children ages 2 to 18,
sponsored by Scottish Rite Children's Medical Center, 10 a.m.-2 p.m. Feb. 7,
Kroger, 134 Banks Crossing, Fayetteville. 770-719-1838.

   Hemophilia conference: Free conference for those with hemophilia and their
families, sponsored by Sunrise Health Management of Atlanta, Feb. 7-8, Partridge
Inn, Augusta. Registration: 1-800-310-7995 or 770-441-7995.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1998


                             2111 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   January 29, 1998, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 207 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for SIV seems to help monkeys; Finding could lead to AIDS
treatments

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   NEW YORK -- Monkeys got unusually mild infections from a cousin of the AIDS
virus after scientists gave some of their blood cells a gene to interfere with
the virus's reproduction.

   The findings lend support to the idea of treating HIV-infected people with
such gene therapy.

   The monkeys studied were infected with the simian immunodeficiency virus, or
SIV.

   Those treated with the gene therapy showed much less virus in their bodies
and far less damage to their lymph nodes. They also showed no drop in their
blood counts of disease-fighting CD4 cells, while untreated animals showed a
steep decline.

   The inserted gene blocked chemical "orders" issued by two SIV genes to
infected cells. With those orders stymied, the virus could not reproduce.

   So the treated cells became "a dead end for that virus," said Richard Morgan,
an author of the study in the February issue of the journal Nature Medicine. He
is a researcher at the National Human Genome Research Institute, part of the
National Institutes of Health in Bethesda.

   Dr. Gary Nabel of the University of Michigan Medical Center in Ann Arbor
called the monkey work encouraging. But he cautioned that the implication for
human therapy is not clear.

   Pub Date: 1/29/98

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1998


                             2112 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                   January 29, 1998, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 708 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy first;
Treatment aims to kill cancer cells

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   For the first time, Baylor College of Medicine researchers Wednesday used a
combination of surgery, chemotherapy and gene therapy to fight cancer -
specifically the lethal ovarian cancer.

   In a procedure room at Methodist Hospital, Dr. Dirk Kieback, a Baylor
associate professor, carefully oversaw the administration of a solution
containing the gene-virus combination that is key to the gene therapy.

   The adenovirus used in the treatment is an inactivated cold virus that
carries a thymidine kinase gene that makes the cancer cells susceptible to the
anti-viral drug acyclovir, which is used to fight herpes virus infections.

   The adenovirus is a very infective organism that takes the thymidine kinase
gene into most cancer cells into which it comes in contact.

   A week before undergoing the gene administration, the patient, 72-year-old
Jean DeVito, underwent surgery to remove the largest tumors in her abdomen,
Kieback said. At that time, the doctor also implanted two small tubes called
catheters, which are used to direct the solution into the abdominal cavity.

   The surgery and chemotherapy she received 12 months ago did not cure Devito's
ovarian cancer, which she has had for about a year.

   When it recurred, she agreed to undergo the triple therapy because "it seemed
the best alternative," she said.

   "Otherwise, there wasn't much hope," DeVito said. "It is exciting and
different."

   If it does not help, DeVito hopes it will provide information that may help
someone else.

   Kieback said this study is designed to determine how toxic the treatment is.
He is using acyclovir because it is less toxic than ganciclovir, a drug used in
similar gene therapies against brain and prostate cancer.

   Ovarian cancer, which coats the abdominal lining with small tumors, is a good
disease for trying this treatment because the virus is more likely to come into
contact with most of the cancer cells, Kieback said.

   For the next two weeks, DeVito will receive acyclovir intravenously.

   Inside the cancer cell, the acyclovir is changed into acyclovir monophosphate
by the virus. That is a step the cell cannot take on its own.

   But the cell can transform acyclovir monophosphate into a poison called
acyclovir triphosphate. This poison kills the cell.

   Because the cell makes its own poison, this treatment is sometimes called
suicide gene therapy.

   DeVito also will undergo chemotherapy with a new drug called topotecan.
Topotecan has shown some activity against ovarian tumors. In animal studies, it
was particularly potent when combined with the gene therapy, Kieback said.

   She will receive six treatments of topotecan over four-week intervals to
minimize the risk of the cancer coming back.

   If patients such as DeVito tolerate the treatment well, Kieback may attempt
to increase the dosage of acyclovir to increase the therapy's killing potential.

   High doses of the anti-viral drug are given to infants with herpes virus
infections. Kieback said they tolerate the treatment well, and he expects the
women in his study to do so as well.

   In studies with mice, this particular treatment cured animals when Kieback
thought it was impossible. He cannot promise patients like DeVito a cure, but he
hopes that it will at least buy them some time.

   Ovarian cancer is a lethal disease, killing 36,000 women in the United States
each year. It is fairly rare, striking one in 75 women. It is responsible for
more deaths than any other form of gynecological cancer.

   The disease often is diagnosed late and only about 30 percent of women with
ovarian cancer survive five years.

   Kieback plans to treat 12 to 20 women with the triple treatment.

   The study is partially funded by Baylor and Methodist. Standard treatment
costs for surgery and chemotherapy must be paid by the patient or her insurance
company. Methodist will cover the costs of the gene therapy.

   Physicians or women with ovarian cancer who want more information or to
enroll in the study should call 713-798-7675.

   Also participating in the study are Dr. Estuardo Aguilar-Cordova, Baylor
assistant professor and director of the Cell and Molecular Therapy Laboratories
at Baylor and Texas Children's Hospital; and Drs. Alan Kaplan and Xiao-Wen Tong,
also on the Baylor faculty.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Baylor College of Medicine researcher Dr. Kirk Kieback, center,
takes a gene from Estuardo Aguilar-Cordova at Methodist Hospital on Wednesday as
Jean DeVito, 72, awaits a dose of "suicide gene therapy" to treat her ovarian
cancer, which she has had for about a year; Carlos Antonio Rios / Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1998


                             2113 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                   January 29, 1998, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 641 words

HEADLINE: Study links molecule, short-term memory ;
ADD, Alzheimer's treatments may benefit

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   Short-term memory - at least in fruit flies - depends in part on a molecule
previously studied only in cancer and blood cells, Houston researchers said in a
report published today.

   The finding could someday provide treatment for problems such as
attention-deficit disorder and diseases such as Alzheimer's.

   Researchers determined in the report that the molecule called integrin
apparently determines whether the tiny insects can associate two stimuli, said
Dr. Ronald Davis, Baylor College of Medicine professor of cell biology.

   Davis, Michael S. Grotewiel, Christine D.O. Beck, Kwok Hang Wu and Xin-Ran
Zhu, all of Baylor, published their findings in today's issue of the scientific
journal Nature.

   The fruit flies are put into a small tube, said Davis. An odor is passed
through it, and then the flies are given a mild electric shock. Within about
three minutes, the insects should be able to associate the two stimuli, he said.

   Immediately after that, they are put into a maze. Flies with a normal form of
integrin in their brain avoid the areas of the maze where they sense the odor
they associate with the shock, he said. Those with a mutant form of integrin do
not, he said.

   "From that, we know that the memory has been dramatically diminished," Davis
said.

   To Davis, the exciting part of the experiment is the discovery of a whole new
class of molecules that was not previously believed to be involved in behavior,
he said.

   Integrins have been studied in cancer, blood cells and in apoptosis
(programmed cell death), he said. This is the first time it has been implicated
in the study of the central nervous system, he said.

   But Davis wanted to know where the action involving integrin takes place.
There were two possibilities. Either the molecules were involved in the
embryonic development of the central nervous system or they were integral to the
way that the adult nervous system functioned.

   To determine which was true, he took one of the flies that made the mutant
form of integrin. In a study that was almost gene therapy for memory, he
introduced a form of the normal volado gene that tells cells to make integrin.

   But he included a biological switch called a "hot-shock" promoter. The
promoter turns the gene on when it receives a pulse of heat. When the gene turns
on, it causes cells to produce normal integrin.

   The normal integrin allows the flies to remember that the smell is associated
with the electric shock. "It makes them smart," Davis said.

   If researchers waited 24 hours after giving the flies the heat shock, the
normal integrin produced disintegrates. "They become dumb again. We can make the
flies smart and then dumb," Davis said.

   Understanding that integrin plays a role in short-term memory also gives him
a better idea of how short-term memories are formed, Davis said.

   When one nerve cell or neuron communicates with another, the integrin sits at
the synapse - the area at which the two neurons are closest.

   "The integrin changes the architecture of the synapse to make it work more
effectively," he said.

   Davis said fruit flies are good animal models for studying genes,
particularly in learning and memory. In most instances, the biological functions
of the gene are the same from one animal to the other, he said.

   Frequently, when genes are found in fruit flies, they are also present in
vertebrates such a mice, primates and humans.

   "In the 1970s, there was usually only one drosophila (fruit fly) scientist at
each institution and that scientist usually taught genetics 101," he said.

   "Then drosophila became appreciated and its study spread into medical schools
and other scientific institutions," Davis said.

   Fruit flies, treated well, can live 60 to 70 days, he said. That means that
one day in a fruit fly's life equals approximately a year in the human's, he
said.


LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1998


                             2114 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1998 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                           January 29, 1998, Thursday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 020

LENGTH: 333 words

HEADLINE: HAIR'S GREAT NEWS! GENE FIND MIGHT CURE BALDNESS

BYLINE: ANGELA C. ALLEN

BODY:

   Doctors searching for the cause of baldness have made a dramatic new
discovery that may lead to a cure for the follically challenged.

   Researchers at Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons say they
have made a major breakthrough in the battle to end baldness with the discovery
of a human gene associated with hair loss.

   The gene - called "hairless" - is linked to a severe form of inherited
baldness and may be the invisible trigger that turns on the human hair cycle.

   "With the "hairless" gene, the real basis of hair loss can begin to be
understood," said Dr. Angela Christiano, who led the 16-member research team.

   "The discovery of this new gene gives us endless possibilities that may allow
us to effectively treat hair loss - and possibly baldness - within the next five
years."

   Doctors studied similarities between hairless mice, with a rare genetic form
of balding over the entire body, and families affected by the same disorder in
Pakistan.

   By comparing the mouse gene with human chromosomes, the team identified a
healthy trigger gene for hair growth.

   Optimistic researchers say the discovery of hairless will put them on the
path to other genes that are responsible for hair growth.

   "It's now within our reach to design ways to grow hair, remove hair, even dye
hair genetically and, best yet, this can all be accomplished topically, reducing
possible side effects," Christiano said.

   Male pattern baldness is believed to affect some 80 percent of men, with
consumers spending $7 million annually on such medications as minoxidil to try
to regain their lost locks.

   Christiano said the budding science of hair-loss-gene therapy will likely
prove vastly superior to prescription medications, which often have side effects
and don't provide a real cure.

   "Propecia and minoxidil are treatment-oriented," she said. "Gene therapy's
more of a cure. It's not treatment. It's really trying to fix it at the base of
the problem - at the genetic level."

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1998


                             2115 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       January 29, 1998, Thursday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 6, Part A

LENGTH: 363 words

HEADLINE: BRIEFS

BODY: - Arafat threatens to quit if pressured

   Gaza City, Gaza Strip

   Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat has threatened to resign if the United
States pressures him to accept Israel's skimpy territorial offer, aides said
Wednesday, underscoring Palestinian gloom over the stymied peace process.

   It wasn't clear how serious Arafat's threat was or if he simply was using it
as a negotiating tool. Arafat hasn't groomed a successor, and resignation would
likely bring the peace process to a complete halt - which the United States
would not want to see happen.

   In a blow to U.S. efforts to revive the process, Arafat also rejected a U.S.
proposal for Israel to withdraw troops from West Bank land in very small steps,
each followed by Palestinian compliance with Israel's demands on security and
other issues.

   "The step-by-step formula for withdrawal is rejected," Arafat's spokesman
Nabil Abourdeneh said in an interview Wednesday. "There are agreements that have
specific outlines and formulas - a three-stage withdrawal. Security is a
different issue."

   - Gene therapy helps monkeys in AIDS-like test

   New York

   Monkeys got unusually mild infections from a cousin of the AIDS virus after
scientists gave some of their blood cells a gene to interfere with the virus'
reproduction.

   The findings lend support to the idea of treating HIV-infected people with
such gene therapy.

   The monkeys studied were infected with the simian immunodeficiency virus, or
SIV.

   Those treated with the gene therapy showed much less virus in their bodies
and far less damage to their lymph nodes.

    - U.S. envoy sees hope on N. Ireland talks

   London

   The Northern Ireland peace process is on track to be a success by its May
deadline, the American chairman of the talks said Wednesday, despite three days
of negotiations that ended with no firm progress.

   "These are difficult issues. But it isn't a function of time to resolve them,
it's a function of will - and increasingly, the will is there," said George
Mitchell, former U.S. Senate majority leader.

   Negotiators from seven parties will resume the search for compromise Monday
in Belfast.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1998


                             2116 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1998 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        January 29, 1998 Thursday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 329 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY IN MONKEYS SHOWS PROMISE AGAINST HIV

BYLINE: By MALCOLM RITTER AP science writer

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Monkeys developed unusually mild infections from a cousin of the AIDS virus
after scientists gave some of their blood cells a gene to interfere with the
virus' reproduction.

   The findings lend support to the idea of treating HIV-infected people with
gene therapy.

   The monkeys studied were infected with the simian immunodeficiency virus, or
SIV.

   Those treated with gene therapy showed much less virus in their bodies and
far less damage to their lymph nodes. They also showed no drop in their blood
counts of disease-fighting CD4 cells, while untreated animals showed a steep
decline.

   The inserted gene blocked chemical "orders" issued by two SIV genes to
infected cells. With those orders stymied, the virus couldn't reproduce.

   The treated cells became "a dead end for that virus," said Richard Morgan, an
author of the study in the February issue of the journal Nature Medicine. He is
a researcher at the National Human Genome Research Institute, part of the
National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.

   Researchers treated three rhesus macaques. They drew blood from the animals,
inserted the gene into CD4 cells, and returned them. A week later, the animals
were deliberately infected with SIV.

   At that time, only about 2 percent to 10 percent of CD4 cells in the treated
animals' blood carried the therapeutic gene. But that was enough to dampen the
infection.

   Morgan speculated that those relatively few cells may have proved especially
attractive to SIV because they had been "activated," or turned on to fight
germs, during the treatment. SIV prefers to infect activated cells.

   The treated cells may have acted like sponges, taking in virus but not
allowing it to reproduce and get back out again, Morgan suggested.

   Dr. Gary Nabel of the University of Michigan Medical Center in Ann Arbor, who
is also studying gene therapy for HIV infection, called the monkey work
encouraging. But he cautioned that the implication for human therapy isn't
clear.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1998


                             2117 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 1998 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                          January 28, 1998, Wednesday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 060

LENGTH: 640 words

HEADLINE: THE BEST IN HOSPITAL CARE

BYLINE: KEVIN MCLEAN

BODY:

   We all hope that hospitalization is never going to become a concern for us.
However, the fact remains that at some point most of us will have to seek
medical care. One of the many advantages of living in New York is that outlets
for that care are not only readily available, but are world class and incredibly
diverse. We all know that hospitals abound, but who is offering the specialized,
world class care that we deserve?

   Here is a sample of just a few of the excellent medical options that are
available to you.

   Beth Israel Hospital (307 First Avenue, New York, NY 10003. (212) 420-2000)
has many areas of clinical excellence. They possess the State's only Positron
Emission Topography Laboratory, dedicated exclusively to the diagnosis of heart
disease. This provides the most effective three-dimensional imaging of the heart
available.

   Beth Israel is duly proud of their Departments of Orthopedic Surgery and
Physical Rehabilitation as well. In addition to becoming one of the largest
programs for total joint replacement in New York State, the Center's North
Division is also the site where the New York Knicks receive all their orthopedic
and physical therapy care.

   The Hospital also prides itself on implementing the use of a new aortic
tissue valve which is a significant breakthrough in the field of heart valve
replacement.

   Bellevue Hospital Center (462 First Avenue at 27th Street, New York, NY
10016. (212) 562-4516) enjoys a deserved reputation as a modern, full-service
facility, providing comprehensive inpatient, outpatient and emergency care. It
is also the only hospital in New York City that has concurrent designations as a
trauma center, heart station, microsurgery and transplantation center, and a
regional center for brain and spinal cord injury.

   In April, 1996 Bellevue opened its new Emergency Department, the largest and
most modern trauma center in New York City. Among the many specialized
improvements implemented by the Hospital was a cheerful new pediatric center.
The adult space features a decontamination unit and ten isolation rooms equipped
with negative pressure to control the spread of airborne diseases such as
tuberculosis.

   The Mount Sinai Medical Center (1176 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10029. (212)
241 6500) remains one of New York's leading academic health sciences center,
receiving last year from The National Institutes of Health one of the largest
percentage increases in research support of any private medical school in New
York State. Facilities such as the recently added Institute for Gene Therapy and
Molecular Medicine make certain that Mount Sinai will have a hand in the shaping
of the medicine of tomorrow.

   However, the medicine of today is hardly ignored at Mount Sinai. The Hospital
recently redesigned its system of inpatient care. The new format groups patients
with similar clinical requirements in Care Centers where dedicated clinical,
administrative and support teams can directly provide the services they need.

   The New York Hospital (510 East 70th Street, New York, NY 10021. (212)
746-5050) and The Presbyterian Hospital (180 Fort Washington Avenue, New York,
NY 10032. (212) 305-2500) have long been two of the nation's leading hospitals.
Given their traditions of excellence, this month's historic merger between the
two hospitals, now to be known as The New York and Presbyterian Hospital,
creates a medical powerhouse.

   The new Hospital will incorporate all of the strengths of both facilities
under one administrative umbrella; such as Presbyterian's heart transplant
program and New York Hospital's burn center.

   This is only a small sampling of the myriad, excellent facilities that New
Yorkers have access to. And yet another reason why we never have to leave the
island of Manhattan to get much of the best the world has to offer.

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1998


                             2118 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         January 27, 1998 Tuesday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 1

LENGTH: 491 words

HEADLINE: Medical College to try using gene therapy
 Technique offers a way to kill donated cells if they start to attack healthy
cells

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   The Medical College of Wisconsin announced Monday that it is about to try
gene therapy for the first time, hoping to help patients with leukemia and other
blood cancers who have had a relapse.

   It will be the second attempt at gene therapy in Wisconsin, and the first in
the nation to use this approach against such cancers.

   The novel technique involves inserting a "suicide gene" into donor cells that
a cancer patient receives in a "mini transplant." The suicide gene gives
physicians a way to kill off the donated cells if they start to attack the
recipient's healthy cells a potentially fatal complication called graft vs. host
disease.

   "The thing we're trying to do is not kill the patient with the therapy,"
explained William Drobyski, the physician leading the medical college's part in
the study, which also involves the Northwestern University Medical School in
Chicago.

   Northwestern researchers announced Monday they had treated their first such
patient. The medical college plans to do its first next week, at Froedtert
Memorial Lutheran Hospital.

   The therapy targets leukemias, lymphomas, multiple myeloma and other
malignancies of the blood. Such cancers are very common an estimated 200,000 new
cases will be diagnosed nationwide this year. Treating those cancers often
involves a bone marrow transplant if a suitable marrow donor can be found.

   But a significant number of patients who get such transplants relapse.
Because second transplants are riskier, the next step often is to try giving
such patients an infusion of the same donor's white cells, in hopes that such
cells will attack the patient's cancer. A potentially fatal side effect is graft
vs. host disease.

   The gene therapy gives physicians a way to abort the therapy, hopefully
leaving the patient no worse off than before it was attempted, if graft vs. host
appears.

   Before they're infused into the cancer patient, the donor cells are
engineered to carry a gene that makes them very susceptible to an anti-viral
drug, ganciclovir. If graft vs. host becomes a problem, physicians inject the
cancer patient with ganciclovir, killing off the donor cells so they won't
attack the cancer patient.

   The approach has been tried in Germany and Italy, Drobyski said, and early
signs are that it works best against chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). The
medical college-Northwestern researchers hope to try it on 80 patients with a
variety of blood cancers.

   As for other gene therapy work in Wisconsin, the University of
Wisconsin-Madison in October 1996 started using a "gene gun" to shoot DNA-coated
gold pellets into the tumor cells of certain patients with the deadly skin
cancer melanoma, or cancers called soft-tissue sarcomas.

   St. Luke's Medical Center also has developed a gene therapy lab, and a
spokesman said Monday that the hospital was close to receiving U.S. Food and
Drug Administration approval to start human tests.


LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1998


                             2119 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1998 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                        January 27, 1998, Metro Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 726 words

HEADLINE: Preparing for a life in science;
 A Rochester teen's work with scientists from the Mayo Clinic nabs him a coveted
national honor.

BYLINE: Tatsha Robertson; Staff Writer

BODY:

    If past finalists for the Westinghouse Science Talent Search are any
indicator, William (B.J.) Greenleaf, 18, has a bright future.

    Greenleaf of Rochester, Minn., already is following one trend - studying
science at a major university. The Mayo High School senior has been accepted at
Harvard.  If he follows his predecessors, he will go on to earn a Ph.D. or
become a medical doctor. Perhaps he will win a few awards as have other
finalists - five have won Nobel Prizes, and nine have won MacArthur Foundation
"genius" awards.

    Greenleaf was shoveling snow Sunday when his younger sister, told him he had
a phone call. Reception on the cordless phone was a bit fuzzy so he only heard
the words "Washington" and "finalist," but he knew it meant he was one of 40
finalists for the prestigious Westinghouse scholarship program.  Monday was
filled with interviews from reporters.

    His winning research paper was the result of three summers of work with a
team of scientists at the Mayo Clinic, including his father.

    They improved by threefold the method of "transfecting" selected genes -
putting into a cell a gene that normally isn't there.


    A future in science

    "Potentially, what can be done with this is use it with gene therapy
techniques - correcting malfunctioning genes with normal or fully functional
genes, " he said.

    For Greenleaf, the experience of discovering something that ultimately can
help others assisted him in envisioning his own future.

    "I plan to devote my life to this, so [it was good] to get a real taste of
science and how difficult it is to obtain novel information, novel knowledge. It
was good because I could figure out if that is what I wanted to do with my life
- and it is," he said.

    Since 1942, Westinghouse has sponsored the talent contest, which seeks out
future scientists.  This year's finalists will travel to Washington, D.C., in
March, where they will be grilled by top professors from Princeton and Harvard
and other top universities.

    The top 10 winners will share $ 205,000 in scholarship money, with the
first-place winner taking home $ 40,000. The remaining 30 finalists will receive
$ 1,000 each, said John Armstrong, spokesman for Westinghouse.

    Through the years, 29 Minnesotans have become finalists. It's a small number
compared with the 750 New Yorkers.  New York has so many winners because several
high schools in the state are devoted to preparing their students for the
contest, said Armstrong.

    But what's interesting about Minnesota, said Armstrong, is that 10 of the 29
finalists were among the top 10 winners.  One of them, Jerome Spitzner of St.
James, Minn., won the top award in 1960. There have been four third-place
winners from Minnesota, two fourth-place winners and one fifth-place winner.


    His father used to win

    Greenleaf remembers always being interested in science. His father, Jim
Greenleaf, recalls sitting in their back yard and listening to his son ask
questions, like which leaf fell from the tree first.

    "Then we would have big discussions about it," his father said.

    Every night, the two would play chess together. For a while, his father
could watch television and beat his son at the game, but that changed as
Greenleaf got better. His father kept challenging him, though, promising $ 1 to
$ 5 awards if the boy could beat him with specific moves. But once he won $ 25
and "that was the end of that," said Jim Greenleaf.

    The hobby faded, but Greenleaf said he still uses the thinking skills needed
in chess.

    "I think the mentality for playing chess - the cause and effect, having to
plan ahead - all that affected me in viewing a rational ideology."

    Greenleaf said watching public television, especially "Mr. Wizard's World"
and "3-2-1 Contact," helped him too.

    "I loved those shows," he said. "They really showed me that things can be
explained through rational means."

    Greenleaf is student body president at Rochester Mayo and is academically
first in his class of 506.

    He plans to study some type of science at Harvard, probably biology. "But
I'm not sure. I don't want to close any doors. Maybe I will merge computer
science with biology or physics."


LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1998


                             2120 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1998 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            January 26, 1998 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TECH; Pg. 69

LENGTH: 2147 words

HEADLINE: This chip could save your life

BYLINE: Allan Hoffman, SPECIAL TO THE STAR-LEDGER

BODY:

   Dale Pfost holds a microchip in his hand, ponders the near magical potency of
the thing, and talks about the key to discovering new drugs - and understanding
human illness - in the next century: "Simply, you need to do more experiments."

    For Pfost, the president and CEO of a Princeton biotechnology company, doing
more experiments does not mean hiring scores of chemists and constructing new
labs. Rather, it means moving the lab out of the world of test tubes and beakers
and into the minute and labyrinthine realm of the microchip. Not just any chip,
Pfost explains, but the very special sort of chip made by his company, Orchid
Biocomputer.

    Pfost's vision of the future is widely shared. Orchid is at the forefront of
a field that promises to transform medical care in the early years of the 21st
century. The chips being developed by Orchid - and its competitors - will not
only speed the pace of drug discovery, but very likely decipher the genetic
causes of many diseases, and make it possible to diagnose illnesses more quickly
and accurately, experts say.

   With such chips, it's likely more new drugs will be discovered. Equally
important, more efficient drug development may enable researchers to target new
drugs at specific strains of an illness, reducing side effects and making the
results of treatment more predictable. Eventually, these new microchips -
generally called "biochips" or "gene chips" - will make their way into people's
homes, allowing individuals to test themselves for common ailments and send the
results to the doctor's office by modem.

    Advances in science often seem remote from ordinary lives, but that's not
the case with biochips.

    "You can see that this is very, very directly related to the life of a
human," says Andrea Califano, an expert in computational biology at IBM. "Ten
years from now," he says, "you'll go to the doctor and have your whole genetic
profile on a chip."

    Projects involving gene chips and biochips include these:

    As part of a three-year, $10 million grant from the federal Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency, Orchid is developing a system to identify biological
threats on the battlefield. Rather than placing a lab in a big, bulky HMMV truck
- the current method - a number of calculator-sized sensors would be placed in
the field to detect environmental threats, such as anthrax. The tests will take
15-20 minutes, as opposed to eight or nine hours. Similar systems could be used
to detect infectious agents in hospitals and other settings.

    Nanogen, a San Diego company, is developing a microchip-based system for the
clinical diagnostics market. Rather than sending tests to a lab, a physician
would be able to swab saliva on a microchip and, just minutes later, learn what
was ailing the patient. With a $2 million award from the Advanced Technology
Program of the Commerce Department, the company is also working on a portable
genetic analysis device; the system could be used for forensic analysis, making
it possible to identify casualties on the battlefield.

    Affymetrix, the best known of the companies pursuing biochip technology, has
developed a genetic analysis system, known as GeneChip, now being used by
pharmaceutical companies, academic scientists and biomedical researchers. One of
the Santa Clara, Calif., company's products allows researchers to detect
patterns of mutation in the HIV virus. Learning about the mutation of the virus
should assist in developing drugs for those infected with it.

    If the technology of biochips sounds like something from another century,
that's because, basically, it is. The products being developed by Affymetrix,
Nanogen, Orchid and similar companies will revolutionize medicine - of that,
there's no doubt, industry experts say - but the revolution won't occur in a
day, or a year, or even in several years. Rather, the benefits of biochip
research will lkely gain momentum over the next 10 to 15 years and continue
throughout the next century, as scientists continue to learn more about the
genetic foundations of human life.

    "People need to appreciate how much research has to actually happen before
new drugs and diagnostics come out of this initiative," says Edward Hurwitz,
chief financial officer for Affymetrix. "Ultimately, it will evolve out of a
50-year process."

    The heart of the new field is a combination of molecular biology and
computer technology - its complex, hybrid nature reflected in the unfamiliar
lingo of biotechnology experts. Among the chemists, computer programmers and
mechanical engineers at the companies developing biochips, you'll hear lots of
terms unfamiliar to most people: DNA sequencing, gene expression,
pharmacogenetics, gene therapy, polymorphism, bioinformatics, and so on - a bad
dream for anyone who had trouble in chemistry class.

    But have no fear. Four simple definitions should suffice to form a basic
understanding of the work being done in the field: DNA is a molecular structure
containing the genetic instructions for life; a gene is a segment of DNA that
normally determines a single characteristic in an organism; a chromosome is a
more complex structure composed of genes; and a genome is a complete set of
chromosomes for a species.

    Much of the new field's complexity derives from the awesome volume of the
genetic information being analyzed. In an international effort known as the
Human Genome Project, scientists are identifying and cataloguing the 100,000 or
so genes known to be part of man's genome. Bear in mind that identifying and
cataloguing a gene is a lot simpler and easier than fully understanding its
function. Not to mention how the myriad variations in genes, from person to
person, affect human health.

    Most genetic research of this kind has been based in chemistry. The slicing,
splicing, and identification of genes has involved numerous step-by-step
procedures of mixing and measuring - many of them labor intensive, expensive and
time consuming. The chief appeal of the biochips is that single chips can in
effect incorporate multiple experiments, yielding the results almost instantly.

    Most chips work in a way that's pretty easy to understand. Genes are, after
all, molecular structures, endowed with certain electrical properties - and so
are the chips. The functioning of the chips depends upon the producer's ability
to etch onto their surfaces a kind of reverse image or "socket" for a particular
target sequence of genetic material. A single chip can contain many such
sockets.

    If the socket on the chip comes into contact with the target DNA sequence -
as in, say, a test solution or blood sample - the DNA will bond to the chip. The
presence of the bonded DNA can then be detected electronically, in an instant.
Not only is this method much more practical for individual experiments, it's
digital-friendly nature makes it readily adaptible to research programs
involving thousands of experiments.

    Better understanding of the genetic underpinnings of desease will help
physicians and patients in a number of ways.

    Consider the case of cancer. According to C. Thomas Caskey, a senior vice
president of basic research at Merck, the Whitehouse Station pharmaceutical
company, detailed genetic information about a tumor could be used to help a
doctor decide on a course of treatment. If the test results from a biochip
showed a mutation of a specific gene - a gene indicating a more severe form of
the desease, say - why then a more aggressive therapy might be advised by the
physician.

    "That will happen, and happen in a reasonably short period of time," says
Caskey.

    Caskey points out that test chips would require only a blood sample, as they
would be examining a person's DNA, rather than the genetic composition of a
tumor, for example. He expects that chips will be used to predict a person's
risk of certain gene-related disorders - Alzheimer's disease and schizophrenia,
for instance

    "If you knew that risk," Caskey said, "you might be able to develop a
therapeutic course of treatment or a behavioral modification."

    The chips may give preventive medicine a whole new meaning. A physician
might direct you to take certain precautions - avoid alcohol, say, or change
your diet to reduce your cholesterol level - because of a specific genetic
predisposition for a disease.

    Some of these uses for biochips - their use in biomedical research, for
instance - have already been put into practice. Others seem more distant. Each
company in the field has its own strategy (and proprietary technology), with
some focusing on drug discovery and research, others on clinical diagnostics,
and still others hoping to play a role in a variety of areas.

    Nanogen, for instance, plans to move aggressively into the diagnostics
market, with products that will help diagnose illnesses much more quickly than
is currently possible. With bacterial infections, for example, tests in a
traditional lab can take several days, while a biochip test would take only a
few minutes. Not only that, but the chip will identify the specific bacteria
causing an infection, meaning a doctor will be able to prescribe an antibiotic
with more precision.

    "We think we can take this three or four day process down to 15 or 20
minutes," says James P. O'Connell, vice president of research and product
development for the company. O'Connell expects that commercial versions of
diagnosis chips will be available in two or three years, depending upon the pace
of testing and regulatory approvals.

    At Orchid Biocomputer, the emphasis is on what Pfost calls "the
industrialization of drug discovery." For Orchid, the engine of that discovery
is the company's Chemtel chips, the basis for microelectronic chemistry systems
to be used in drug discovery. With technologies similar to those used for
semiconductors, Orchid aims to shrink the research lab onto a chip, creating a
microscopic version of the liquid-handling devices, like beakers and test tubes,
typically found in labs.

    "What we're doing is borrowing the technologies and the paradigm of the
computer industry and microelectronics to do something else ... chemistry and
biology," Pfost says. "The pharmaceutical industry needs this."

    Joel Bellenson, chief strategist and co-founder of Pangea Systems of
Oakland, Calif., a company specializing in software for the biotech and
pharmaceutical industries, considers Orchid's idea of "the lab on the chip" as
"nothing short of revolutionary."

    "The device they have is so flexible," Bellenson says. "That's what makes it
so amazing."

    Headquartered in the David Sarnoff Research Center (the company is a Sarnoff
"spinoff") Orchid employs about 60 people, a combination of chemists,
biologists, mechanical engineers, electrical engineers and software developers.
As at other biotech firms, Orchid's eclectic combination of experts, many of
them from vastly different fields, makes for an interesting atmosphere for
collaboration.

    Orchid's labs comprise all the paraphernalia of these diverse fields. In one
lab, you're likely to encounter beakers and test tubes, flasks and syringes. In
the next, you'll see a computer sitting next to a mass of tubes, with a square
chip in the center of it all. Orchid's system will eventually be scaled down to
a cassette-like device; but these days, as it's being developed, it's spread
across a table.

    Pfost sees enormous potential in the precision engineering of drugs.
Clinical trials often indicate that a drug works in different ways on different
individuals, he explains. Yet, normally, the reasons for the variations remain
unknown.

    "Why is that drug working in such a broad spectrum of ways?" Pfost asks
rhetorically. "It's because we're all different. If you could decide in what
ways we're different on a DNA level, then we could have the drugs tailored to
individuals. Drugs would be more effective."

    The chips will also allow diseases to be monitored - and treated - in
fundamentally new ways. A person with a tumor, Bellenson says, might have a
biopsy of the tumor on a periodic basis as a way to monitor "the whole
choreography of molecules" as the illness progresses. With that knowledge, more
informed decisions could be made about treatment. "You would know better where
to intervene," says Bellenson.

    Biotech experts recognize that the new technology is likely to raise ethical
questions. Many are concerned about the use of gene chips to indicate
predisposal to certain deseases. What if a chip indicates a risk for breast
cancer? Or schizophrenia? Should that information be provided to the patient? To
an insurer?

    "It's very important that the patient not be harmed by finding out about
this information in advance," says Caskey. Tests should be avoided unless
there's a therapeutic purpose, he says. "You should run the test for the purpose
of benefiting the patient," Caskey says. "If you can't establish a clear cut
benefit of the test, then don't do it."

GRAPHIC: 1. Orchid Biocomputers' Sterling McBride inspects a microfluidic chip.
2. Sterling McBride sets up a chip for DNA synthesis at Orchid Biocomputer labs
in Princeton.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2121 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 January 25, 1998, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 11; Page 7; Column 1; Real Estate Desk

LENGTH: 1500 words

HEADLINE: In the Region/Long Island;
8 New Start-Up Incubators for Business Proposed

BYLINE: By DIANA SHAMAN

BODY:

   SINCE its purchase in 1996 of a 240,000-square-foot office building in
Bethpage from Northrop Grumman, Briarcliffe College has refurbished half the
structure for its academic needs and leased out 104,000 square feet to others.

   But Briarcliffe's Board of Trustees also has another enterprise in mind. With
the nonprofit Briarcliffe Foundation as the sponsor it hopes to turn the
remaining 22,000 square feet on the building's second floor into an "incubator"
to nurture start-up companies involved with software development.

    Two companies, Valid Data, which develops software for the furniture
industry, and Current Legal Resources, which collects and publishes legal
information, have moved into a total of 2,000 square feet. But the incubator is
not yet in operation since more than $500,000 is needed to divide the space for
an anticipated total of up to 19 companies and provide high-speed data lines and
other services.

   "We feel that the computer software industry should be supported and what we
are hoping to do is develop companies that eventually will provide work
opportunities for all Long Island," said Richard B. Turan, president of the
college, which specializes in business and technology.

   New York State has 38 incubators, but only one -- the Long Island High
Technology Incubator on the campus of the State University of New York at Stony
Brook -- is on Long Island. Now there are proposals under way to add eight
including the one at Briarcliffe. The proposals depend on the availability of
public funds to help with construction, but thereafter incubators would be
self-sustaining, according to their proponents.

   A pilot program has been started at another of the proposed locations, the
State University of New York at Farmingdale. The nonprofit Long Island Forum for
Technology now has a 6,000-square-foot incubator there, but is working with the
university and others on the design of an incubator with as much as 40,000
square feet of space.

   "You need incubators to support companies in their formative stages,
otherwise the companies go elsewhere," said Peter S. Goldsmith, director of
economic development for the Long Island Association in Commack.

   The business group started a program called Project Long Island three years
ago to keep high technology manufacturing jobs in the region following job
losses in military contracts.

   The electronics, printing, medical imaging and health information systems,
biotechnology and computer software industries are key to providing those jobs
and must be nurtured, Mr. Goldsmith said.

   Business incubators are becoming increasingly popular economic development
tools throughout the country, growing from only 12 such programs as recently as
1980, to almost 600 today. In addition to providing inexpensive space, their
value lies in giving start-up companies access to other ongoing research because
they are usually situated in an academic setting.

   A RECENTLY completed study conducted by the University of Michigan, the
National Business Incubation Association and Ohio University in Athens and the
Southern Technology Council in Research Triangle Park in North Carolina found
that entrepreneurial companies that graduate from incubators have an 87 percent
survival rate and that 84 percent remain in their communities. In 1996, such
companies created an average of 468 direct jobs and 234 spinoff jobs.

   "I am a firm believer in the ability of incubators to support a spawning
stream of high technology, particularly on Long Island," said James Hayward,
co-chairman of the Long Island Regional Incubator Task Force. The group was
formed two years ago by Charles A. Gargano, chairman of the Empire State
Development Corporation, the state's economic development and job creation
agency.

   The purpose of the task force, whose other chairman is Thomas F. Gallagher,
is to assess the need for incubators on Long Island and recommend ways to
implement them. Dr. Hayward is president of the Collaborative Group of East
Setauket, a biotechnology company. Mr. Gallagher is the director of
manufacturing business development for Empire State.

   The task force received 27 incubator proposals. It combined them into eight,
"ruling out none," Dr.Hayward said. "The eight could provide in excess of 10,000
new jobs over the course of a decade," he added.

   In addition to Briarcliffe and Farmingdale, proposed sites include North
Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, Dowling College in Oakdale, Freeport,
Calverton and additional space at SUNY Stony Brook. The task force is
recommending a five-year program involving both new construction and adaptations
of space in existing buildings.

   The projected cost of the eight proposals would be $95.4 million of which New
York State's share would be $30 million, according to a letter supporting the
incubator proposals that was sent to Gov. George E. Pataki by 19 of 22 of Long
Island's Assembly membersmen. The remaining cost would be paid out of Federal
matching grants and private loans and investment.

   Computer Associates International of Islandia, another leading software
company, already announced earlier this month that it would help finance a
separate 6,000-square-foot software incubator at the Stony Brook campus, with
the university also picking up some of the cost. Computer Associates will
contribute several hundred thousand dollars over three years, said Marc S.
Sokol, the company's senior vice president of advanced technology.

   Stony Brook's existing incubator has attracted mainly biotechnology
companies."There is enough biomedical research being done between New York City
and Long Island to generate enough technology to spawn hundreds of new
companies," said Francis P. Hession, the president and managing director of the
incubator.

   "Unfortunately, there has been a tremendous loss of both brainpower and
economic viability as these companies go elsewhere," he said. "But by having
incubators as a structured way to transfer technology to private industry, we
can attract venture capital, which now goes from New York to California."

   SUNY at Stony Brook had housed start-up companies in various campus buildings
until 1992 when the state provided a $1.2 million grant to build the
42,000-square-foot incubator. The building offers both office and laboratory
space along with support services. Loans, which provided the remaining $5.9
million needed for construction, are being paid off out of rents paid by its 30
tenants.

   IN 1994, 30,000 square feet more were added with the help of a $3.6 million
state grant. The incubator has already graduated 20 companies that now employ
900 people and generate $75 million in revenues annually, Mr. Hession said.

   One graduate is Dr. Hayward's company, the Collaborative Group, which among
other ventures is the world's largest manufacturer of liposomes -- artificial
structures similar to a human cell that are used in gene therapy and in
cosmetics and in skin care.

   The company, started in 1990, has grown from 500 square feet it occupied at
the Stony Brook incubator into a 150,000-square-foot enterprise employing 200
people.

   One of its four subsidiaries, Collaborative BioAlliance, operates a
30,000-square-foot contract research and contract manufacturing complex at the
Stony Brook incubator, where it is the anchor tenant. The facility, which has
Food and Drug Administration approval, makes it possible for biotechnology
companies to bring products to clinical trials without making a major investment
in their own plants and equipment.

   Merrill Garnett, a cancer researcher since 1959, has worked for the last five
years in a 500-square-foot laboratory at the Stony Brook incubator. His company,
Garnett McKeen Lab, will submit its new oral chemotherapy to clinical trials
this spring.  Dr. Garnett, the primary inventor of the chemotherapy agent,
called Palladium Complex, developed it for the treatment of brain tumors,
lymphoma, lung and kidney cancers and a variety of other tumors. It also
benefits patients when used in conjunction with other chemotherapy treatments,
he said. So-called compassionate trials conducted in Canada and Mexico on
patients with glioblastoma, a lethal brain tumor, brought about long-lasting
improvement on some advanced cases within days, Dr. Garnett said.

   Other advances growing out of Stony Brook include a device resembling a
series of pressure cuffs that is used for a painless, noninvasive treatment of
angina pectoris -- a chest pain caused by coronary artery disease. The device,
applied to the lower extremities, reduces angina by using a technology called
enhanced external counterpulsation to increase coronary artery blood flow. The
device is marketed by Vasomedical, a Westbury company, to medical centers around
the world.

   Patients are treated an hour a day for a total of 35 days over seven weeks.
John C. K. Hui and Harry S. Soroff brought the device, which was refined in
China, to Stony Brook in 1989 for its first clinical trials.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Richard B. Turan, president of Briarcliffe College, in space
allotted by his institution, above, for an incubator of start-up businesses.
(Photographs by Maxine Hicks for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1998


                             2122 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                    January 25, 1998, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 1768 words

HEADLINE: A company focused on a monitor; M. James Barrett leads Sensors for
Medicine in developmental quest

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   M. James Barrett and his lean team of scientists and engineers are hot on the
trail of overcoming a challenge that has stumped medical device makers for
years: developing a fast, accurate blood-sugar monitor small enough to be
implanted in diabetics.

   Barrett puts the task before him succinctly: "The field is littered with the
dead bodies of those who have tried and failed at this."

   Nevertheless, the 56-year-old executive is no stranger to the high-wire risk
involved in launching a new company to develop and commercialize breakthrough
technologies. Among his recent accomplishments: He started and headed one of the
first companies to test gene therapy in humans, Gaithersburg-based Genetic
Therapy Inc.

   In fact, say those who know Barrett well, it's the derring-do involved with
the micro-sensor project that may have enticed him out of semiretirement last
year to head the new company, Germantown-based Sensors for Medicine and
Technology, dedicated to developing and commercializing the glucose device.

   "Jim has an uncanny ability to look at a new technology and see the future of
where it can go and the importance of getting there," said French Anderson, the
director of the University of Southern California's gene therapy laboratories
and a former National Institutes of Health researcher.

   In 1987, Anderson and Barrett co-founded Genetic Therapy to capitalize on
Anderson's groundbreaking work on gene therapy when many skeptics were
predicting the obstacles were so great that it could take 30 years to get to
human testing.

   Anderson recalls it was Barrett's vision of how the technology should be
developed -- and then focusing all of GTI's resources on achieving that goal --
that led to the company and NIH winning government approval just three years
later for the first human test.

   Although cancer, AIDS and other diseases offered targets with huge commercial
potential, Barrett chose adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, a genetic defect
that leaves its victims with barely functioning immune systems. The rare, fatal
disorder, he reasoned, would allow researchers to prove quickly whether the
premise behind gene therapy -- in this case, fixing defective cells by inserting
a therapeutic gene -- was valid.

   The experiment's success proved to be the turning point for gene therapy,
galvanizing support for more research.

   Barrett stepped down from GTI in July 1996, a year after the former Sandoz
Pharmaceuticals Ltd., now Novartis, bought the company for $ 295 million.
Barrett says that while he would have liked to have stayed long enough to see a
gene therapy reach the commercial market, he wasn't interested in working again
for a large pharmaceutical concern.

   Indeed, Barrett, said Anderson, is his own best boss. "He knows he's better
off running a company. He wanted an opportunity that would be exciting and put
his energies to their best use," he said.

   In his latest venture, Barrett, who holds degrees in chemistry, biochemistry
and business administration, is focusing on a tiny sensor developed by Arthur
"Skip" Colvin, a research scientist who had worked under him in the mid-1980s at
Bethesda Research Laboratories, now Life Technologies Inc.

   Said Barrett, "Let's face it, you only go around once in life and you might
as well do something that is worthwhile. To me this technology has enormous
potential to make a lasting difference in people's lives and if we make money
doing it, that's worthwhile too."

   Competition

   Barrett will need more than altruism to make Sensors for Medicine a success,
say medical device industry analysts.

   For one, it faces competition. At least three other small U.S. firms are
attempting to develop new devices to make glucose monitoring easier. They are
MiniMed Inc. of Sylmar, Calif.; SpectRX of New York; and Implanted BioSystems
Inc., a subsidiary of Synthetic Blood International, of Kettering, Ohio. All are
publicly held.

   Also, there are regulatory and government hurdles that still must be
overcome.

   Chief among them: tweaking the design of a molecule that will be embedded on
a micro-chip that will monitor blood glucose levels.

   If Sensors for Medicine is successful, the glucose monitoring device has huge
market potential for diabetes alone.

   There are an estimated 8 million diagnosed diabetics in the United States
alone, according to the American Diabetes Association. An estimated 8 million
others are either misdiagnosed or undiagnosed. Also, it is one of the fastest
growing chronic diseases in the country.

   The market for blood glucose monitoring strips and meters is estimated by
analysts to be a $ 2.5 billion global industry.

   "Jim's a true entrepreneur. He has a unique ability to stay enormously
focused, he understands the importance of cash flow, and he's a true motivator
of people," said Charles W. "Chuck" Newhall III, of Baltimore-based New
Enterprise Associates. The venture capital group is backing Sensors for Medicine
with $ 2 million in seed financing.

   But Newhall acknowledges the project is fraught with risk. NEA likely would
have taken a pass on investing in the start-up had someone else approached the
venture group, Newhall said.

   Anderson, another investor, is so confident in Barrett's ability to take a
new technology to market he said he would have invested in almost any new
venture Barrett pitched.

   It's unclear yet whether Sensors for Medicine's device would replace how
diabetics monitor their blood sugar levels today or whether big medical
equipment companies would be interested in licensing it for sale. But the
patented technology behind the device has potential applications in industries
as diverse as pollution control monitoring to food packaging, said New-hall.

   Blood monitoring

   Meanwhile there is an enormous need for a way to monitor a diabetic's blood
sugar that is simpler than the way it is commonly done today, say diabetes
experts.

   Diabetics monitor their blood glucose levels by taking a blood sample up to
eight times a day by pricking a finger and then swabbing the sample on a small
strip treated with an enzyme. The strip is fed into a hand-sized meter, which
provides a blood sugar level reading. From that a diabetic can determine whether
an insulin shot is needed.

   The process can be painful, particularly for children and the elderly, and
requires daily discipline.

   As a result, parents of young children anguish over the regimen, and many
diabetics don't take regular readings. That can lead to complications and
worsening of the disease.

   Barrett said he expects to have a clearer picture in 60-90 days of his
company's chances for success. That's when Colvin and other researchers should
wrap up work on the blood sugar-recognizing molecule, and Barrett wants to pitch
investors for more funding.

   Engineers at Sensors for Medicine have designed a micro-chip as small as the
eye on a Lincoln penny on which the new molecule will be embedded.

   The chip would then be injected into the fatty tissue layer of a diabetic's
arm or other area. From there it would transmit blood glucose readings to a
meter worn on the wrist like a watch.

   The sensor uses a common light-emitting diode, the same light source found in
calculators and other consumer electronics to "excite" the fluorescence of
Colvin's indicator molecule. The light from the fluorescence is affected by the
presence of glucose molecules. Another diode tracks the weakness or brightness
of the fluorescence and sends a signal to a wrist meter.

   The sensor would be run by a power source in the wrist device, a design feat
that eliminates the need for a battery implanted in the sensor.

   As Newhall at NEA puts it, the appeal -- and potential pitfall -- of Colvin's
invention is that it has "literally hundreds of potential applications" in a
diverse array of industries.

   Identifying a goal

   Where Barrett's skill came to bear early on the technology was in determining
which application to target first and then getting everyone, from investors to
company engineers, focused on that one goal, said Colvin, the inventor.

   Colvin said he originally started out attempting to design a new sensor for
the fermentation industry. But after he approached Barrett for advice on how he
might market the invention, Barrett suggested a better early opportunity may lie
in medicine.

   "The great thing about Jim is he not only has sharp business judgment but
he's deep technically," said Colvin. "He doesn't get mired in the details of
what an engineer may be working on, but he understands a lot of complex
disciplines and can see the broad picture."

   An avid golfer, armchair astronomer and wildlife lover, Barrett relishes
stopping by to chat with researchers in the lab to help them trouble-shoot
problems.

   To keep the team at Sensors for Medicine lean -- there are just 11 employees
-- Barrett has lined up research collaborations with two of the top technical
institutions in the country, Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

   Colvin, who holds a master's in biochemistry from Virginia Polytechnic
Institute, has known Barrett since the early 1980s when he worked under him at
the former Bethesda Research Laboratories.

   At the time, BRL was a struggling biotechnology industry equipment supplier
and research outfit in the midst of a financial meltdown. It was losing almost $
2.3 million a month when Barrett, who was recruited from pharmaceutical giant
SmithKline Beechum, took the helm in 1982.

   Newhall, at the time a member of BRL's board, Colvin and others witnessed
Barrett's gift for quickly determining priorities for a company and jettisoning
unpromising directions.

   In BRL's case, Barrett decided the company should focus on being a supplier
of the equipment and tools biotechnology researchers need for their work. He
axed departments dedicated to speculative endeavors.

   Within six months, the executive had brought the company to a financial
break-even point and had boosted the morale of dispirited employees, recalls
Newhall.

   By the time Barrett left in 1987 to co-found GTI, he had taken the company
public, changed its name to Life Technologies and left it well on its way to
becoming a leading supplier to the biotechnology research industry. Today, Life
Technologies has revenue of about $ 400 million.

   "There aren't too many executives I can say this about, but Jim gets an A+
for his performance running companies," said Newhall. "Only time will tell how
this latest venture will work out, but if anyone can do it, it's Jim Barrett."

   Pub Date: 1/25/98

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO 1, JOHN MAKELY: SUN STAFF PHOTOS, Research: M. James
Barrett (above) and a staff of scientists at Sensors for Medicine are working to
develop a blood-sugar monitor (left) that could be implanted in diabetics.;
COLOR PHOTO 2, JOHN MAKELY: SUN STAFF PHOTOS, SAME AS COLOR PHOTO 1; PHOTO, JOHN
MAKELY: SUN STAFF, Innovator: Sensors for Medicine is working on a tiny sensor
developed by Arthur "Skip" Colvin, a research scientist who had worked with M.
James Barrett.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1998


                             2123 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1998 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            January 23, 1998 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TICKET; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 956 words

HEADLINE: 'Microbe' exhibit magnifies unseen world of germs

BYLINE: Michele Howe, Star-Ledger Staff

BODY:

   Microbes: Invisible Invaders . . . Amazing Allies   When: Saturday through
May 3. Center hours are 9:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. Tuesday-Sunday    Where: Liberty
Science Center, Liberty State Park, Jersey City How much: Exhibit only: $9.50
adults; $8.50 students and senior citizens; $6.50 children ages 2-12. Call (201)
200-1000.

   It's a bug! It's a germ! It's yucky and gross!

    It's Microbe Man.

    The grime-fighting superhero was on hand at the Liberty Science Cen- ter to
open a new exhibit on his favorite topic: "Microbes: Invisible Invaders . . .
Amazing Allies."

    The 5,000-square-foot interactive exhibit takes visitors into the heart of
one of today's most compelling topics: how microbes continue to plague mankind
and how scientists track them and find cures.

   " I'm a friend to good germs . . . they're my number-one fan. Bad bugs, watch
out . . . it's me, Microbe Man," the costumed character said at a preview of the
exhibit.

    Visitors will be able to meet the germ-fighting superhero on Saturday from
9:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. when the exhibit opens to the public.

    The smallest forms of life on Earth are microbes. Although microbes have
existed for millions and even billions of years, their presence was not detected
until the 17th century. In 1683 Dutch merchant Antony van Leeuwenhoek, who made
microscopes as a hobby, detected "wee animalcules" in scrapings from his teeth.
Another 200 years would pass, however, before scientists would establish the
relationship between microbes and disease.

    Although some microbes are deadly, most are harmless and some are extremely
beneficial. These microscopic organisms can be found virtually anywhere - in
air, water, plants, animals and humans.

   "This exhibit separates fact from fiction about microbes," said CL Clemente,
senior vice president-corporate affairs for Pfizer Inc., the research-based,
health care company and exhibit sponsor. "By understanding how microbes can hurt
us and also how they help us, families can make smarter choices about their
health and learn about the strides we're making in research to stay one step
ahead."

    The interactive exhibit reveals what microbes are (bacteria, viruses, fungi
and protozoa - "germs" to most people), explores a history of infectious
diseases, and shows how researchers and individuals fight infection worldwide.
The exhibit uses the latest hands-on exhibit techniques: 3-D video, virtual
reality, stage sets, animated video, and volumetric holograms to bring microbes
to life and to separate the good from the bad.

    Exhibit content is organized into 10 sections: Paris Crypt, Egyptian Tomb,
Aztec Ruins, Main Street North America, Microbe TV, Microbial Universe, Body of
Disease, Pete's Place, Microbial Superhighway and New Frontiers.

    In Paris Crypt, a robotic guide in a skull-filled catacomb below Paris
describes the bubonic plague that killed about 56 million Europeans from 1340 to
1420. He is shown wearing a beaked mask thought to protect people from the
plague, which they believed was caused by poison gas rising from the earth.

    In Egyptian Tomb, a photo of the unwrapped mummy of Ramses V shows pockmarks
from the smallpox virus that probably killed the pharaoh around 1151 B.C. In
Aztec Ruins, figurines dating from before 750 AD show evidence of diseases from
which the peoples native to Central America must have suffered.

    Main Street North America describes epidemics of polio, flu and tuberculosis
striking close to home. An iron lung from the 1950s offers a look at one of the
respiration devices that helped save the lives of many polio survivors. A
three-minute video describes the discovery of penicillin in 1928 and the
breakthrough of its mass production as a "wonder drug" during World War II.

    In the Microbe TV area, viewers can look at a 90-second video that
illustrates just how minuscule microbes really are. In Microbial Universe
visitors can explore a new cosmos, the hidden universe of microbes. Images from
microscopes offer a rare, close-up view of real microbes such as HIV, rabies and
Ebola.

    In Body of Disease, exhibit-goers discover how harmful microbes invade the
body and how humans fight back. Five hands-on displays demonstrate how people
fight infection. Interactive displays include a game of "virtual" microbe
combat, a computer game that fires antibiotic artillery, and a video game
featuring a microbe race in 3-D animation.

    In the apartment-like setting of Peter's Place more hands-on displays reveal
the beneficial and essential roles microbes play. In the kitchen, humorous
narratives by talking, cartoon-like microbes relate how microbes affect the
everyday fare people cook and eat. Players of the Gobble De Goop video game can
guide munching microbes as they gobble up an oil spill. The Microbe quiz show,
an interactive TV program hosted by Microbe Man, invites visitors to a
true-false test of microbial knowledge.

    In Microbial Superhighway visitors enter an airplane fuselage to learn how
modern transportation, overcrowding and pollution foster the spread of
infectious disease around the world.

    In New Frontiers, a 3-D video presentation by Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, director
of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), describes
advances in medical research, including gene therapy - delivering therapeutic
genes to cells - and the creation of synthetic drugs.

    "We hope that the next generation of microbiologists will find inspiration
in the science and technology they discover here," Dr. Emlyn Koster, president
and CEO of Liberty Science Center, said at the exhibit's unveiling.

    You can learn more about the subject by visiting the exhibit's Microbes web
site at: http://www.pfizer.com/rd/microbes or the Liberty Science Center web
site: http:www.lsc.org.

GRAPHIC: 1. Youngsters discover the unseen world of viruses in "Microbes:
Invisible Invaders . . . Amazing Allies" at the Liberty Science Center.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2124 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                 JANUARY 22, 1998 Thursday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 345 words

HEADLINE: HUMAN CLONING: THE FDA WISELY STEPS IN WITH A CONTROLLING HAND

BODY:

   The Federal Food and Drug Administration announcement Monday to grant itself
authority to regulate human cloning is a welcome decision, even if it may seem
distressingly premature. Yet given the apparent rush by some to exploit this
technological advance, it may have been the agency's only option.

   The announcement follows the declaration last month by a Chicago-area
scientist, G. Richard Seed, that he would try to clone a person before Congress
could enact a ban.

   Human cloning is considered a form of cellular or genetic therapy. Under the
FDA's decision, it would be a violation of federal law to attempt human cloning
without FDA approval.

   The announcement has the added benefit of allowing Congress time to give
thoughtful, bipartisan consideration to comprehensive legislation dealing with
this issue. This goes for states, too.

   In Michigan, there are three bills to outlaw human cloning in the House of
Representatives. But just like the congressional bills dealing with human
cloning, they were written almost reflexively following the announcement last
year of the cloned sheep Dolly in Scotland and Dr. Seed's announcement last
month. For the most part, the bills are neither thoughtful nor do they give
consideration to any potential benefits of human cloning.

   That potential may be impossible to see right now, and it may turn out that
there will never be an ethical application of this technology to humans. But it
is worth remembering that most of the animal cloning experiments have occurred
in the context of improving human life. Success in cloning cows was announced
this week, and that is but one step in a project aimed at expanding the supply
of serum albumin for people with liver disease and extreme burns.

   Coming to terms with the magnitude of this scientific breakthrough promises
to be a very long process. Any step that is proposed in pursuit of human cloning
obviously must be closely scrutinized, thoroughly debated and - if deemed
acceptable - carefully regulated. In the absence of laws, the FDA took a wise
step.

NOTES: IN OUR OPINION

GRAPHIC: Drawing MARGARET SCOTT, Special to the Free Press

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             2125 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JANUARY 22, 1998 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 596 words

HEADLINE: BAN URGED ON ANIMAL-TO-HUMAN TRANSPLANTS / RESEARCHERS ISSUED A PLEA
TO THE GOVERNMENT. THEY SAID THE PROCEDURES MIGHT CAUSE EPIDEMICS.

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   Concerned that transplanting animal organs into people might lead to new
epidemics, a group of prominent scientists urged the government yesterday to ban
the experiments until the risks are better explored.

   Doctors hope that animal transplants one day could save thousands of lives by
easing a huge worldwide shortage in donated organs. So the call for a
moratorium, published yesterday in the journal Nature Medicine, is highly
controversial.

   "This is a very unusual situation," said Dr. Fritz Bach, a Harvard University
xenotransplantation researcher, who joined six other public health experts and
bioethicists in urging a moratorium. "It is a situation where what we the
medical establishment . . . want to do puts the public at risk" of new diseases
possibly as bad as AIDS.

   The call came as the Food and Drug Administration began a two-day meeting to
propose tightening control over animal transplants and to explore just how big a
risk they pose.

   New concern arose last fall when scientists discovered that the genes of pigs
harbor previously unknown viruses that can infect human cells in test-tube
experiments.

   Nobody knows whether people could catch the viruses or be sickened by them,
but the FDA temporarily stopped pig studies pending virus testing, and
scientists are tracking the recipients of the first pig-to-human transplants
worldwide.

   Xenotransplantation "is still highly experimental," warned Dr. Phil Noguchi,
the FDA's chief of cellular and gene therapies. "While the promise is there . .
. it must be proven to be safe and effective."

   Support for the ban was not universal, however.

   "Keep the benefits in mind," urged Dr. Suzanne Ildstad of Allegheny
University of the Health Sciences in Philadelphia, who performed a controversial
baboon bone-marrow transplant on an AIDS patient last year. "We should proceed
cautiously . . . but we should proceed."

   Dr. Alan Hull of the National Kidney Foundation said that, while spreading
disease from animals to humans "should be a concern," if a moratorium is
imposed, "you'll probably never find out the answers."

   Frustrated by years of failed attempts to get pig or ape hearts, kidneys and
livers to work inside people, scientists are reporting new progress in
overcoming immune-system rejection of these organs.

   Biotech companies have poured more than $100 million into research, and hope
to begin a new round of experimental organ transplants within a few years.
Doctors already are trying smaller-scale transplants of live animal cells, such
as fetal pig cells in the brains of Parkinson's patients.

   The need is stark: 53,000 Americans are awaiting an organ transplant, but 10
of them die every day because there aren't enough donors.

   Animals can spread deadly diseases. For example, monkeys carry the Ebola
virus and are blamed for starting AIDS, and pigs breed flu. Scientists hoped to
avoid such problems by breeding sterile herds. Then came the pig-virus discovery
and new threats such as mad-cow disease.

   Britain last year banned xenotransplants until scientists better understand
the risks.

   The FDA, which already must approve any xenotransplant experiments, is
preparing tighter regulations, including a national registry to track every
American given an animal transplant to enable the government to track down those
who have been exposed and those who received transplants from the same herd if a
new disease appears.

   The FDA plans to treat xenotransplants as strictly as gene therapy, with a
national advisory board to discuss the risks of studies publicly.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             2126 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                   January 22, 1998, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 663 words

HEADLINE: XENOTRANSPLANT BAN URGED

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:


   Concerned that transplanting animal organs into people might cause new
epidemics, a group of prominent scientists urged the government to ban the
experiments until the risks are better explored.

   Doctors hope that animal transplants one day could save thousands of lives by
easing a huge worldwide shortage in donated organs. So the call for a
moratorium, published yesterday in the medical journal Nature Medicine, is
highly controversial.

   ''This is a very unusual situation,'' said Harvard University
xenotransplantation researcher Dr. Fritz Bach, who joined six other public
health experts and bioethicists in urging a moratorium. ''It is a situation
where what we the medical establishment . . . want to do puts the public at
risk'' of new diseases possibly as bad as AIDS.

   The call came as the Food and Drug Administration began a two-day meeting to
propose tightening control over animal transplants and explore just how big a
risk it is.

   New concern arose last fall when scientists discovered the genes of pigs
harbor previously unknown viruses that can infect human cells in test-tube
experiments.

   Nobody knows if people could catch or be sickened by the viruses, but the FDA
temporarily stopped pig studies pending virus testing and scientists are
tracking recipients of the first porcine transplants worldwide.

   Xenotransplantation ''is still highly experimental,'' warned Dr. Phil
Noguchi, FDA's chief of cellular and gene therapies. ''While the promise is
there . . .  it must be proven to be safe and effective.''

   Support for the ban was not universal, however.

   ''Keep the benefits in mind,'' urged Dr. Suzanne Ildstad of Allegheny
University of the Health Sciences, who performed a controversial baboon bone
marrow transplant on an AIDS patient last year while on staff at the University
of Pittsburgh Medical Center. ''We should proceed cautiously . . . but we should
proceed.''

   In addition, Dr. Alan Hull of the National Kidney Foundation said that while
spreading disease from animals to humans ''should be a concern,'' if a
moratorium is imposed, ''you'll probably never find out the answers.''

   Frustrated by years of failed attempts to get pig or ape hearts, kidneys and
livers to work inside people, scientists are reporting new progress in
overcoming immune system rejection of these organs. Biotech companies have
poured more than $ 100 million into research and hope to launch a new round of
experimental organ transplants within a few years. Doctors already are trying
smaller-scale transplants of live animal cells, such as fetal pig cells in the
brains of Parkinson's sufferers.

   The need is stark: 53,000 Americans are awaiting an organ transplant, but 10
of them die every day because there aren't enough donors. For diseases like
Parkinson's, traditional cures have failed.

   Animals can spread deadly diseases. For example, monkeys carry the Ebola
virus and are blamed for starting AIDS, and pigs breed flu. Scientists hoped to
avoid such problems by breeding sterile herds. Then came the pig virus discovery
and new threats like ''mad cow disease.''

   Britain last year banned xenotransplants until scientists better understand
the risks.

   That's what Harvard's Bach wants here until a national advisory committee can
consult the public about whether society accepts the potential risks. Dying
patients want to try xenotransplants, but ''have they got the right, the moral
right, to put the public at risk?'' he asked.

   The FDA, which must approve any xenotransplant experiments, is preparing
tighter regulations, including a national registry to track every American given
an animal transplant to enable government to track down those exposed and those
who received transplants from the same herd if a new disease appears.

   The FDA plans to treat xenotransplants as strictly as gene therapy, with a
national advisory board to discuss the risks of studies publicly instead of the
secrecy that cloaks drug development.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1998


                             2127 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 January 22, 1998, Thursday, THREE STAR EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A9

LENGTH: 340 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS CALL FOR BAN ON ANIMAL-TO-HUMAN ORGAN TRANSPLANTS;
BUT OTHERS SAY, 'KEEP BENEFITS IN MIND'; FDA MEETS TODAY ON DISPUTE

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: BETHESDA, MD.

BODY:


   Concerned that transplanting animal organs into people might cause new
epidemics, a group of prominent scientists urged the government Wednesday to ban
the experiments until the risks are better explored.

   Doctors hope that animal transplants one day could save thousands of lives by
easing a huge worldwide shortage in donated organs. So the call for a
moratorium, published Wednesday in the medical journal Nature Medicine, is
highly controversial.

   "This is a very unusual situation," said Harvard University
xenotransplantation researcher Dr. Fritz Bach, who joined six other public
health experts and bioethicists in urging a moratorium. "It is a situation where
what we the medical establishment . . . want to do puts the public at risk" of
new diseases possibly as bad as AIDS.

   The call came as the Food and Drug Administration began a two-day meeting to
propose tightening control over animal transplants and explore just how big a
risk it is.

   New concern arose last fall when scientists discovered the genes of pigs
harbor previously unknown viruses that can infect human cells in test-tube
experiments.

   Nobody knows if people could catch or be sickened by the viruses, but the FDA
temporarily stopped pig studies pending virus testing, and scientists are
tracking recipients of the first porcine transplants worldwide.

   Xenotransplantation "is still highly experimental," warned Dr. Phil Noguchi,
FDA's chief of cellular and gene therapies. "While the promise is there, . . .
it must be proven to be safe and effective."

Support for the ban was not universal.

   "Keep the benefits in mind," urged Dr. Suzanne Ildstad of Allegheny
University, who performed a controversial baboon bone marrow transplant on an
AIDS patient last year. "We should proceed cautiously . . . but we should
proceed."

   In addition, Dr. Alan Hull of the National Kidney Foundation said that while
spreading disease from animals to humans "should be a concern," if a moratorium
is imposed, "you'll probably never find out the answers."

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1998


                             2128 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               January 21, 1998, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words

HEADLINE: F.D.A. Stand on Cloning Raises Even More Questions

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 20

BODY:

   In announcing that it has the power to block scientists who try to clone
people, the Food and Drug Administration may have thrown a kink into efforts to
ban the practice, pitting the White House and Congress against leaders in
science and industry who say legislation is now unnecessary.

   In separate interviews today, officials of the Biotechnology Industry
Organization and the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association of America said
that while they opposed the cloning of humans, they believed the F.D.A., not
Congress, was the proper forum for controlling it.

    "The F.D.A.'s assertion of jurisdiction would make legislation redundant,"
said Carl B. Feldbaum, president of the biotechnology trade group, which
represents 750 companies. "I think it is the proper agency that has the
scientific expertise to assess it."

   A third organization, the American Society of Reproductive Medicine, which
represents infertility doctors, today unveiled its own bill to ban the cloning
of people. But a society spokeswoman said her group would be just as happy to
let the F.D.A. take care of cloning. "If the F.D.A. can handle it, that's
great," said Heather Kowalski, the spokeswoman.

   The debate was further complicated by questions that emerged over whether the
F.D.A., which typically regulates drugs and therapies used to treat disease, can
stretch its authority to cover baby-making by cloning. While agency officials
insist they have jurisdiction, some experts in food and drug law -- as well as a
Congressman who proposes to ban the cloning of people -- said they were not so
certain.

   "It's hard to argue that a cloning procedure is a drug," said Representative
Vernon J. Ehlers, Republican of Michigan, who has introduced one bill that would
ban Federal financing of experiments to clone people, and another that would ban
similar experiments conducted with private money. "It is certainly open to
question."

   Mr. Ehlers said legislation remained the only way to effectively halt the
cloning of people.

   "A regulatory action can be reversed anytime the regulatory agency changes
its philosophy," he said, and his sentiment was echoed by the White House, where
a spokesman, Barry Toiv, said, "We believe that it is important to enact
legislation, and we're going to pursue it."

   There were several efforts to legislate against the cloning of people last
winter, after the announcement by Scottish scientists that they had cloned the
udder cell of a six-year-old ewe to create a sheep named Dolly. The bills,
including one proposed by President Clinton, faltered in Congress. But the idea
of controlling cloning has picked up steam, since an Illinois physicist, Dr.
Richard Seed announced that he planned to open a cloning clinic.

   Last week, as members of Congress, as well as the President, announced they
would renew their efforts to ban the cloning of people, Mr. Feldbaum's group
sent a letter to Donna E. Shalala, the Health and Human Services Secretary,
suggesting that cloning falls under the F.D.A.'s broad authority to regulate the
products known as biologics.

   Biologics, which historically included blood products and vaccines, are today
considered any product that is composed of a living organism, like human cells
or tissue. Last February, the F.D.A. issued a new set of guidelines governing
cell and tissue products; under the guidelines, the agency may regulate any
product in which the biological characteristics of the cells or tissue are
substantially altered, through "more than minimal manipulation."

   Mr. Feldbaum argues that cloning, which involves taking genetic material from
one cell and inserting it into another, meets the "more than minimal
manipulation standard."

   The F.D.A.'s acting commissioner, Michael Friedman, has publicly agreed with
Mr. Feldbaum, although the agency has yet to issue a formal policy statement on
how it might govern cloning experiments. That may be by design, said Arthur
Levine, who worked as an F.D.A. lawyer for 21 years and is now in private
practice.

   "It is not uncommon, in this kind of sensitive area involving medical ethics,
for the F.D.A. to take a position through various informal statements,
pronouncements, drafts and meetings where they try to explore what the market
will bear," Mr. Levine said. "These are informal ways that F.D.A. tests the
waters."

   While Mr. Levine believed that an argument could be made for the F.D.A. to
regulate cloning, another lawyer who is an expert in food and drug law, who
spoke on the condition of anonymity, said he did not think the provisions cited
by Mr. Feldbaum's group were applicable.

   "Admittedly, you may be moving cells around," the lawyer said, "but it might
not be considered a repair or enhancement or a therapeutic function. It is
really to create a new human being."

   With the F.D.A.'s recent announcements, agency officials now say that any
scientist who wants to create a genetic replica of person will have to submit an
"investigational new drug application," the same request that drug companies
must submit when they want to test a new medicine.

   The application requires researchers to prove that their experiments do not
pose unreasonable dangers to the subjects. In the case of cloning, that would be
difficult; it took Dr. Ian Wilmut, the Scottish scientist who cloned Dolly, 277
tries to create one sheep. There is consensus that any attempt to replicate the
feat in humans would, at this point at least, be extremely dangerous.

   "We regard this as a gene therapy or a cell therapy or both, and these
therapies are subject to F.D.A. requirements that cover clinical trials," said
one agency official who spoke on the condition that he not be identified. "An
investigator would have to come forward and say, 'Here's what I plan to do, and
here's the information that shows it can be done safely in humans.' "

   The official declined to speculate on what the agency would do if a
researcher went ahead without agency permission, but he said the F.D.A. had
several options, from sending a warning letter to asking a judge for a
restraining order to seeking criminal penalties.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1998


                             2129 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                January 20, 1998, Tuesday, CONSTITUTION EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. 05A

LENGTH: 592 words

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF;
FDA steps in on human cloning

BYLINE: From news services

BODY:


   The Food and Drug Administration has decided it has the authority to regulate
human cloning, and agency officials warned Monday that it would be a violation
of federal law to try the procedure without its approval. "Through the Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act we do have the authority to regulate human cloning, and we
are prepared to assert that authority," acting FDA Commissioner Michael A.
Friedman said in an interview.

   The unambiguous declaration by FDA officials confirmed what the agency and
Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala have hinted at since a
Chicago-area scientist announced last month that he would try to clone a person:
Human cloning is a form of cellular or genetic therapy that requires prior
approval by FDA reviewers.

   That means anyone who wants to attempt human cloning legally must file a
formal application with the FDA, which then would undertake a lengthy review,
Friedman said. The FDA will initiate legal action against anyone who fails to
file that application, he said.

PEOPLE First lady says politics behind Clintons' woes

   First lady Hillary Rodham Clinton suggests politics are at play in
accusations such as Paula Jones' against the president. In an interview aired
Monday on Mutual-NBC Radio, Clinton was asked about Jones' sexual harassment
lawsuit. "Oh, I don't comment on the case, but I think certainly when you see
the kind of political maneuvering that goes on against my husband on a daily
basis, there certainly are a lot of agendas out there," she said.

ACCIDENTS Theater wall collapses, injuring 12 people

   A thick wall of an old theater in Jersey City, N.J., being demolished
collapsed and toppled onto an adjacent building, pancaking the roof into the
basement and injuring at least 12 people. One woman's legs were pinned as she
fell partly through the floor into the basement of the retail building.
Completely covered in debris, the woman was trapped for 90 minutes before she
was rescued, said Assistant Fire Director Steve McGill. The 11 others injured
included a 4-year-old girl in critical condition and undergoing surgery Monday
night.

CRIME Kaczynski removed from suicide watch

   Theodore Kaczynski, who tried to kill himself two weeks ago, has been taken
off suicide watch and transferred out of a cell in Sacramento, Calif., where he
was under 24-hour surveillance. Authorities said the decision was made after
psychiatrists deemed the Unabomber suspect "no longer a danger to himself," a
sheriff's spokesman said. Kaczynski was moved late Saturday from a Sacramento
County jail cell equipped with round-the-clock video surveillance to the cell
where he had spent most of the past 18 months before trying to commit suicide
with his underwear Jan 7-8.

SPACE Countdown begins for mission to Mir

   NASA began the countdown for another space shuttle trip to Mir, to drop off
one last American. Endeavour is scheduled to blast off from Cape Canaveral,
Fla., on Thursday night with astronaut Andrew Thomas, who will replace David
Wolf aboard the Russian space station. Wolf has been aboard Mir since late
September. Thomas, an Australian-born engineer, will be the seventh and final
U.S. astronaut to live on Mir.

WEATHER 60,000 still await return of power

   Maine utilities said about 22,000 business and residential customers still
were without service Monday, less than one-tenth of the total during the peak
ice storm outage. Utilities in upstate New York said they still had about 41,000
residential and business customers without power.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1998


                             2130 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                  JANUARY 20, 1998 Tuesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BODY & MIND; Pg. 10F

LENGTH: 377 words

HEADLINE: U-M TESTS GENE THERAPY FOR MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY IN BOYS

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT Free Press Medical Writer

BODY:

   In an important advance against a disease with no effective treatment, the
University of Michigan and two other universities will begin human studies of
gene therapy for muscular dystrophy.

   The studies are the next phase of work by Dr. Jeffrey Chamberlain. He headed
the U-M team that developed a viral vector, or delivery system, to inject the
gene that makes dystrophin, a protein essential to maintain muscle tissue.
Absence of the protein, or defective forms of it, result in injury to cells and
eventual destruction of muscle, causing Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy.

   Boys with Duchenne's, a sex-linked disease, usually lose their ability to
walk in late childhood and most die from respiratory or heart problems by their
20s. Duchenne's occurs in one out of every 3,500 males.

   Those with Becker muscular dystrophy develop similar but less severe
problems.

   The delivery system developed at U-M is a virus stripped of its natural
genetic material to make room for the dystrophin gene. U-M studies found that
mice given the gene therapy could produce high levels of the protein for more
than three months.

   Chamberlain described the step as an encouraging step, but not a cure, at a
national meeting last fall.

   Researchers hope to find enough boys to begin health assessments by March and
actual gene therapy by fall.

   Initially, the study will be limited to 12 boys, ages 5-7.

   If they respond well, additional boys will be added in two phases, according
to a statement from the Muscular Dystrophy Association, which is paying for the
studies.

   Up to now, scientists' ability to find ways to do gene therapy has been
slowed by three problems:

   the size of the gene, the largest ever identified;

   cell rejection problems;

   and the large number of cells that need to contain the gene to improve muscle
strength.

   The U-M team also received additional funding through a federal grant and
another grant from a private Birmingham foundation, Harmonize for Hope. It was
started by Chip and Betsy Erwin, whose son has muscular dystrophy. The
foundation raises more than $75,000 annually for Chamberlain's work.

   For more information, call MDA at 1-800-572-1717, 10:30 a.m.-7 p.m. weekdays,
or visit its Web site at www.mdausa.org

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             2131 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                    January 20, 1998, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 986 words

HEADLINE: FDA will regulate cloning of humans, commissioner says

SOURCE: Washington Post

BYLINE: RICK WEISS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - The Food and Drug Administration has decided it has the
authority to regulate human cloning, and agency officials warned Monday that it
would be a violation of federal law to try the procedure without its approval.

   "Through the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, we do have the authority to
regulate human cloning, and we are prepared to assert that authority," acting
FDA Commissioner Michael Friedman said in an interview.

   The unambiguous declaration by FDA officials confirmed what the agency and
Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala have hinted at since a
Chicago-area scientist announced recently that he would try to clone a person:
Human cloning is a form of cellular or genetic therapy that requires prior
approval by FDA reviewers.

   That means anyone who wants to attempt human cloning legally must file a
formal application with the FDA, which would then undertake a lengthy review,
Friedman said. The FDA will initiate legal action against anyone who fails to
file that application, he said.

   President Clinton banned the use of federal funds for human cloning research
last March, after scientists in Scotland announced they had cloned an adult
sheep. But legislation to ban privately funded human cloning research stalled in
Congress last session. And public fears that someone might try the feat flared
anew when Illinois scientist Richard Seed announced he would try to clone a
person before Congress enacted a ban.

   After reviewing the issue for several weeks, Friedman Monday said the FDA had
determined that the kinds of manipulations involved in human cloning presented
"serious health and safety issues" for the fetus and the mother.

   Another FDA official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said would-be
cloners would have to go through a formal procedure that includes the filing of
an "investigational new drug application" (IND), which is what drug companies
must submit when they want to test new medicines on people.

   The IND process requires researchers to prove to the satisfaction of the FDA
that their proposed experiment does not pose unreasonable risk of harm to human
subjects - a task that currently would be difficult for human cloning, given the
overwhelming failure rate in animal cloning experiments.

   "They will have to answer questions like, "Have you established animal
models? Can you improve the odds? Have you looked at safer alternatives?' " the
official said.

   Moreover, the official said, given the controversy surrounding the issue of
human cloning, the agency might require public hearings as it did last year
while it was considering how to regulate the transplantation of animal organs
into people.

   "It should be done in the open," the official said. "Going through the FDA
regulatory pathways, everyone has a say, and we face our fears in public and
discuss them."

   Seed said Monday night he would have to think about whether to challenge the
FDA's legal interpretation, or simply move his cloning effort offshore, as he
has said he would do if Congress tried to interfere with his plans. "I'm going
to have to talk with a lawyer," he said. "I'd have to evaluate on what basis
they're saying this - what clause of which law."

   The FDA officials' comments came amid mounting pressure from scientific
organizations that the agency make a clear statement about its regulatory
authority over cloning, and as an increasing number of congressional
representatives announced they would introduce legislation to ban human cloning.

   Scientific groups have become concerned that some of the bills aimed at
preventing human cloning would inadvertently or intentionally preclude other
kinds of research. A plain statement about the FDA's authority over cloning
might take some pressure off Congress, sources inside and outside the
administration said, and allow legislators time to craft more carefully worded
legislation.

   A bill proposed by President Clinton and supported by various scientific
organizations has failed to gain any sponsors.

   The one bill that has already been approved by the House Science Committee,
sponsored by Vernon Ehlers, R-Mich., would ban not only human cloning but also
human embryo research - a controversial arena of research that for years has
been mired in the debate over abortion.

   Federal funding for human embryo research has been banned in this country on
an annual basis since 1994 through appropriations language imposed by Congress.
But the Ehlers bill would codify that ban as law and make it much more difficult
to reverse - a situation that concerns scientists who believe that studies of
human embryos could lead to breakthroughs in fertility, genetics, and cancer.

   "We think the issue of cloning a human being is a critical and distinct
issue, and it's wrong to steer it into the political maelstrom of the abortion
debate," said Carl Feldbaum, president of the Washington-based Biotechnology
Industry Organization, which represents about 750 biotechnology and academic
research institutes and supports a carefully worded ban on human cloning.

   "The abortion debate, frankly, will not be settled in 1998 or '99," Feldbaum
said, "while the issue of cloning human beings deserves to be resolved, and can
be."

   Last week, Feldbaum sent an open letter to Shalala encouraging her to assert
HHS authority over cloning in the hope that Congress would not rush into a broad
research ban. In Monday's edition of BioCentury, a San Carlos, Calif.-based
biotechnology industry newsletter, Philip Noguchi, director of the FDA's
division of cellular and gene therapies, said for the first time that the agency
had firmly decided that human cloning involves "more than minimal manipulation"
of human cells.

   That standard, known in FDA parlance as MTMM, has great meaning within the
agency: It is the dividing line between human tissue experiments that do and do
not require prior approval from the FDA.


LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1998


                             2132 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                January 20, 1998, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Page 9; Column 1; Science Desk; Health Page

LENGTH: 583 words

HEADLINE: Genes Are Hope as Alternative to Heart Bypasses

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

BODY:

   WHEN surgeons began a triple bypass operation on a 60-year-old patient in
December, they knew the procedure could not completely help the man's heart.

   He needed surgery because three coronary arteries, the vessels that feed
blood to the heart muscle, were clogged. Bypass surgery installs blood vessels
as detours around such obstructions.

    But for this patient, even the triple-bypass could provide detours for only
two clogged arteries. That would leave an area in back of the man's heart
unhelped.

   So the surgeons tried something new. With 10 needle pricks, they injected
that area of the heart with many copies of a gene. Their hope was that the gene
would make the muscle cells produce a protein called VEGF for a week or so, and
that the VEGF would spur the heart into growing its own new blood vessels.

   It is a "biologic bypass" or "biobypass," said Dr. Ronald Crystal, who held
the man's heart while a colleague, Dr. Todd Rosengart, injected the genes at the
New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York. Dr. Crystal is the
principal investigator of the study.

   It is too soon to know whether the experiment worked. But the researchers
have approval to perform the procedure on 14 more patients in their initial
study of the idea.

   They are not alone. Collateral Therapeutics, a San Diego biotechnology
company, has announced plans to start experiments in people in February, using a
catheter to deliver a different gene without surgery to make the heart grow
blood vessels. A third team of researchers plans to inject the VEGF gene into
patients' hearts through small incisions in the skin, also without surgery. Dr.
Crystal and Dr. Rosengart also hope eventually to give the gene without surgery.

   If the gene therapy works, scientists say, it will provide a tool for artery
blockages that cannot be treated by a bypass. What is more, if it can be done
without surgery, it might give many patients an alternative to bypass operations
and angioplasty, a procedure that reopens clogged arteries.

   Genes are not the only tool under study to get the heart to grow its own
bypasses. Dr. Michael Simons of Beth Israel Medical Center in Boston is working
with the idea of applying the VEGF protein itself, or another called FGF, to the
heart. Both proteins have shown preliminary promise in human studies, Dr. Simons
said.

   Supporters of the gene therapy approach, who cite successes in pigs, may get
their first hint of human results soon. Dr. Seppo Yla-Herttuala of the
University of Kuopio in Finland started treating heart patients with the VEGF
gene in late 1996, and he plans to get his first look at the results in
February.

   Dr. Yla-Herttuala enclosed gene copies in fatty bubbles and slipped them into
the coronary arteries of his patients during angioplasty. His strategy has two
goals.

   Most of the gene copies should have ended up in the artery walls, where he
hopes they will discourage the arteries from clogging up again, a common problem
with angioplasty. And some of the gene copies should have been carried by blood
flow to the heart muscle, where Dr. Yla-Herttuala hopes they have led to the
growth of new blood vessels.

   He has treated 10 patients with the VEGF gene and five others with a sham
treatment. Nobody knows which patients got what because the records are kept in
code as a guard against bias when the patients are assessed.

   In February, Dr. Yla-Herttuala will break the code and get his first look at
whether the gene treatment did any good.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1998


                             2133 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                   January 20, 1998, Tuesday, REGION EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-5

LENGTH: 650 words

HEADLINE: FDA SAYS IT HAS AUTHORITY, BLOCKS ALL HUMAN CLONING

BYLINE: RICK WEISS, THE WASHINGTON POST

BODY:


   The Food and Drug Administration has decided it has the authority to regulate
human cloning, and agency officials warned yesterday that it would be a
violation of federal law to try the procedure without its approval.

   ''Through the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act we do have the authority to
regulate human cloning, and we are prepared to assert that authority,'' acting
FDA Commissioner Michael A. Friedman said in an interview.

   The unambiguous declaration by FDA officials confirmed what the agency and
Health and Human Services Secretary Donna E. Shalala have hinted at since a
Chicago-area scientist announced last month that he would try to clone a person:
Human cloning is a form of cellular or genetic therapy that requires prior
approval by FDA reviewers.

   That means anyone who wants to attempt human cloning legally must file a
formal application with the FDA, which would then undertake a lengthy review,
Friedman said. The FDA will initiate legal action against anyone who fails to
file that application, he said.

   President Clinton banned the use of federal funds for human cloning research
last March, after scientists in Scotland announced they had cloned an adult
sheep. But legislation to ban privately funded human cloning research stalled in
Congress last session. And public fears that someone might try the feat flared
anew when Illinois scientist G. Richard Seed announced he would try to clone a
person before Congress enacted a ban.

   After reviewing the issue for several weeks, Friedman yesterday said the FDA
had determined that the kinds of manipulations involved in human cloning
presented ''serious health and safety issues'' for the fetus and the mother.

   Another FDA official said would-be cloners would have to go through a formal
procedure that includes the filing of an ''investigational new drug
application'' (IND), which is what drug companies must submit when they want to
test new medicines on people.

   The IND process requires researchers to prove to the satisfaction of the FDA
that their proposed experiment does not pose unreasonable risk of harm to human
subjects - a task that currently would be difficult for human cloning, given the
overwhelming failure rate in animal cloning experiments.

   ''They will have to answer questions like, 'Have you established animal
models? Can you improve the odds? Have you looked at safer alternatives?' '' the
official said.

   Moreover, the official said, given the controversy surrounding the issue of
human cloning, the agency might require public hearings as it did last year
while it was considering how to regulate the transplantation of animal organs
into people.

   ''It should be done in the open,'' the official said. ''Going through the FDA
regulatory pathways, everyone has a say and we face our fears in public and
discuss them.''

   Seed, who has said that if the government blocked his efforts he would move
his operations overseas, could not be reached for comment yesterday.

   Scientific groups have become concerned that some of the bills aimed at
preventing human cloning would inadvertently or intentionally preclude other
kinds of research. A plain statement about the FDA's authority over cloning
might take some pressure off Congress, sources inside and outside the
administration said, and allow legislators time to craft more carefully worded
legislation.

   A bill submitted by Clinton and supported by various scientific organizations
has failed to gain any sponsors.

   The one bill that has been approved by the House Science Committee, sponsored
by Vernon Ehlers, R-Mich., would ban not only human cloning but also human
embryo research - a controversial arena that for years has been mired in the
debate over abortion.

   Federal funding for human embryo research has been banned in this country on
an annual basis since 1994 through appropriations language imposed by Congress.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1998


                             2134 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                   January 20, 1998, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A-5

LENGTH: 649 words

HEADLINE: FDA SAYS IT HAS AUTHORITY, BLOCKS ALL HUMAN CLONING

BYLINE: RICK WEISS, THE WASHINGTON POST

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   The Food and Drug Administration has decided it has the authority to regulate
human cloning, and agency officials warned yesterday that it would be a
violation of federal law to try the procedure without its approval.

   ''Through the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act we do have the authority to
regulate human cloning, and we are prepared to assert that authority,'' acting
FDA Commissioner Michael A. Friedman said in an interview.

   The unambiguous declaration by FDA officials confirmed what the agency and
Health and Human Services Secretary Donna E. Shalala have hinted at since a
Chicago-area scientist announced last month that he would try to clone a person:
Human cloning is a form of cellular or genetic therapy that requires prior
approval by FDA reviewers.

   That means anyone who wants to attempt human cloning legally must file a
formal application with the FDA, which would then undertake a lengthy review,
Friedman said.

   The FDA will initiate legal action against anyone who fails to file that
application, he said.

   President Clinton banned the use of federal funds for human cloning research
last March, after scientists in Scotland announced they had cloned an adult
sheep. But legislation to ban privately funded human cloning research stalled in
Congress last session.

   And public fears that someone might try the feat flared anew when Illinois
scientist G. Richard Seed announced he would try to clone a person before
Congress enacted a ban.

   After reviewing the issue for several weeks, Friedman yesterday said the FDA
had determined that the kinds of manipulations involved in human cloning
presented ''serious health and safety issues'' for the fetus and the mother.

   Another FDA official said would-be cloners would have to go through a formal
procedure that includes the filing of an ''investigational new drug
application'' (IND), which is what drug companies must submit when they want to
test new medicines on people.

   The IND process requires researchers to prove to the satisfaction of the FDA
that their proposed experiment does not pose unreasonable risk of harm to human
subjects - a task that currently would be difficult for human cloning, given the
overwhelming failure rate in animal cloning experiments.

   ''They will have to answer questions like, ''Have you established animal
models? Can you improve the odds? Have you looked at safer alternatives?' '' the
official said.

   Moreover, the official said, given the controversy surrounding the issue of
human cloning, the agency might require public hearings as it did last year
while it was considering how to regulate the transplantation of animal organs
into people.

   ''It should be done in the open,'' the official said. ''Going through the FDA
regulatory pathways, everyone has a say and we face our fears in public and
discuss them.''

   Seed said last night he would have to think about whether to challenge the
FDA's legal interpretation, or simply move his cloning effort offshore, as he
has said he would do if Congress tried to interfere with his plans.

   ''I'm going to have to talk with a lawyer,'' he said. ''I'd have to evaluate
on what basis they're saying this - what clause of which law.''

   The FDA officials' comments came amid mounting pressure from scientific
organizations that the agency make a clear statement about its regulatory
authority over cloning.

   Scientific groups have become concerned that some of the bills aimed at
preventing human cloning would inadvertently or intentionally preclude other
kinds of research. A plain statement about the FDA's authority over cloning
might take some pressure off Congress, sources inside and outside the
administration said, and allow legislators time to craft more carefully worded
legislation.

   A bill proposed by President Clinton and supported by various scientific
organizations has failed to gain any sponsors.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1998


                             2135 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    January 20, 1998, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1060 words

HEADLINE: Human Clone Research Will Be Regulated; FDA Asserts It Has Statutory
Authority To Regulate Attempts at Human Cloning

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   The Food and Drug Administration has decided it has the authority to regulate
human cloning, and agency officials warned yesterday that it would be a
violation of federal law to try the procedure without its approval.

   "Through the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act we do have the authority to regulate
human cloning, and we are prepared to assert that authority," acting FDA
Commissioner Michael A. Friedman said in an interview.

   The unambiguous declaration by FDA officials confirmed what the agency and
Health and Human Services Secretary Donna E. Shalala have hinted at since a
Chicago-area scientist announced last month that he would try to clone a person:
Human cloning is a form of cellular or genetic therapy that requires prior
approval by FDA reviewers.

   That means anyone who wants to attempt human cloning legally must file a
formal application with the FDA, which would then undertake a lengthy review,
Friedman said. The FDA will initiate legal action against anyone who fails to
file that application, he said.

   President Clinton banned the use of federal funds for human cloning research
last March, after scientists in Scotland announced they had cloned an adult
sheep. But legislation to ban privately funded human cloning research stalled in
Congress last session. And public fears that someone might try the feat flared
anew when Illinois scientist G. Richard Seed announced he would try to clone a
person before Congress enacted a ban.

   After reviewing the issue for several weeks, Friedman yesterday said the FDA
had determined that the kinds of manipulations involved in human cloning
presented "serious health and safety issues" for the fetus and the mother.

   Another FDA official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said would-be
cloners would have to go through a formal procedure that includes the filing of
an "investigational new drug application" (IND), which is what drug companies
must submit when they want to test new medicines on people.

   The IND process requires researchers to prove to the satisfaction of the FDA
that their proposed experiment does not pose unreasonable risk of harm to human
subjects -- a task that currently would be difficult for human cloning, given
the overwhelming failure rate in animal cloning experiments. "They will have to
answer questions like, 'Have you established animal models? Can you improve the
odds? Have you looked at safer alternatives?' " the official said.

   Moreover, the official said, given the controversy surrounding the issue of
human cloning, the agency might require public hearings as it did last year
while it was considering how to regulate the transplantation of animal organs
into people.

   "It should be done in the open," the official said. "Going through the FDA
regulatory pathways, everyone has a say and we face our fears in public and
discuss them."

   Seed said last night he would have to think about whether to challenge the
FDA's legal interpretation, or simply move his cloning effort offshore, as he
has said he would do if Congress tried to interfere with his plans. "I'm going
to have to talk with a lawyer," he said. "I'd have to evaluate on what basis
they're saying this -- what clause of which law."

   The FDA officials' comments came amid mounting pressure from scientific
organizations that the agency make a clear statement about its regulatory
authority over cloning, and as an increasing number of congressional
representatives announced they would introduce legislation to ban human cloning.

   Scientific groups have become concerned that some of the bills aimed at
preventing human cloning would inadvertently or intentionally preclude other
kinds of research. A plain statement about the FDA's authority over cloning
might take some pressure off Congress, sources inside and outside the
administration said, and allow legislators time to craft more carefully worded
legislation.

   A bill proposed by President Clinton and supported by various scientific
organizations has failed to gain any sponsors.

   The one bill that has already been approved by the House Science Committee,
sponsored by Rep. Vernon Ehlers (R-Mich.), would ban not only human cloning but
also human embryo research -- a controversial arena of research that for years
has been mired in the debate over abortion.

   Federal funding for human embryo research has been banned in this country on
an annual basis since 1994 through appropriations language imposed by Congress.
But the Ehlers bill would codify that ban as law and make it much more difficult
to reverse -- a situation that concerns scientists who believe that studies of
human embryos could lead to breakthroughs in fertility, genetics and cancer.

   "We think the issue of cloning a human being is a critical and distinct
issue, and it's wrong to steer it into the political maelstrom of the abortion
debate," said Carl Feldbaum, president of the Washington-based Biotechnology
Industry Organization, which represents about 750 biotechnology and academic
research institutes and supports a carefully worded ban on human cloning. "The
abortion debate, frankly, will not be settled in 1998 or '99," Feldbaum said,
"while the issue of cloning human beings deserves to be resolved, and can be."

   Last week, Feldbaum sent an open letter to Shalala encouraging her to assert
HHS's authority over cloning in the hope that Congress would not rush into a
broad research ban. In yesterday's edition of BioCentury, a San Carlos,
Calif.-based biotechnology industry newsletter, Philip D. Noguchi, director of
the FDA's division of cellular and gene therapies, said for the first time that
the agency had firmly decided that human cloning involves "more than minimal
manipulation" of human cells. That standard, known in FDA parlance as MTMM, has
great meaning within the agency: It is the dividing line between human tissue
experiments that do and do not require prior approval from the FDA.

   Meanwhile, last week, Rep. Cliff Stearns (R-Fla.) joined the growing list of
congressmen who have announced they would submit legislation to ban human
cloning. That could delay action on the Ehlers bill, since Stearns heads the
Commerce Committee that was the Ehlers bill's next stop. Sen. Dianne Feinstein
(D-Calif.) said Friday she too would submit human cloning legislation, the first
Democrat to do so.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1998


                             2136 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                          January 19, 1998 Monday All

SECTION: Health and Science Pg. 2

LENGTH: 655 words

HEADLINE: Cancer vaccine, new' estrogen may be just around corner
 Progress also noted in Alzheimer's treatment, tissue engineering

BYLINE: CAROLYN POIROT

SOURCE: Fort Worth Star-Telegram

BODY:

   Americans are living longer and better than ever.

   Tissue engineering, DNA cloning, gene therapy and robots that perform
delicate surgical procedures all broke through to scientific reality in 1997.

   But will there ever be a magic bullet to slay cancer, a sure-fire way to
stave off heart attacks, a time when all the world's children are immunized
against preventable diseases or even a cure for the common cold?

   Medical experts aren't making any promises, but they are willing to look at
progress and offer a few predictions for the future.

   Aricept, the second drug approved for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease,
became widely available in 1997, and an additional 17 Alzheimer's drugs are now
being tested in human clinical trials, says Janice Knebl, chief of geriatrics at
the University of North Texas Health Science Center in Fort Worth.

   Pharmaceutical companies are developing 178 medicines for the debilitating
diseases of aging.

   "The whole pharmaceutical picture is very positive," Knebl says. "Alzheimer's
was defined in the early 1900s, and it has taken almost 100 years to have some
hope. I don't think we are looking at a cure in the near future, but if we can
manage to delay progression of the disease so that people can maintain
independence five or 10 years longer, that's very positive."

   A vaccine against recurrent melanoma, the deadly form of skin cancer, is
ready for final clinical trial in the new year. The vaccine uses a patient's
specially sensitized immune cells to track down and destroy melanoma cells
before they can multiply.

   In early trials, two of the vaccines being tested dramatically reduce a
recurrence of melanoma, which is usually fatal. Researchers say if results hold,
they could be expanded to develop vaccines for people who have never had
melanoma, as well as for other forms of cancer.

   Also expect to see gene therapy joining the battle against cancer as well as
other illnesses caused by abnormal genes, and to see further clarification of
the role of viruses in cancer, says Greg Marino, chief of oncology at the
UNTHSC.

   The first in a new family of drugs known as selective estrogen receptor
modulators (SERMs) have most of the good qualities of estrogen and none of the
bad, says Bernard Rubin, chief of rheumatology at UNT Health Science Center.
Raloxifene was approved by the FDA in December and should be available for sale
this month.

   SERMs are for women who can't or won't take estrogen and other hormone
replacement therapy, Rubin says. They increase bone density and decrease the
risk of osteoporosis and heart attacks without posing an increased risk of
breast cancer or uterine bleeding, although they do nothing for hot flashes.

   If you can take estrogen, you should, but only about one in five who could
benefit from it is on estrogen, and fewer than 10% of those who start taking it
are still on it after five years, Rubin says. The introduction of SERMs could
change that.

   Tissue engineering growing human cells in the lab will be used in the near
future in conjunction with gene therapy to improve healing in coronary arteries
opened with angioplasty, says Robert Eberhart, director of the biomedical
engineering program at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical School at
Dallas.

   Eberhart is working with "bioresorbable" plastic stents that supply the
traumatized blood vessel walls with concentrated cells and special nutrients
while also keeping the vessels open while they heal. The stents degrade into
carbon dioxide and water and are reabsorbed by the body in a couple of months,
when they are no longer needed.

   Research is just beginning on using similar stents to repair spinal cord
lesions. It is hoped that the stents will induce neurons to grow in the damaged
area of the spinal cord and re-establish signals to the brain so that people
with spinal-cord injuries can relearn to use their limbs.


LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1998


                             2137 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      January 19, 1998 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: ARTS & LIVING; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 924 words

HEADLINE: AGE OF MIRACLE MEDICINE NEARS;
PROCEDURES SUCH AS GENE THERAPY COULD TAKE DREAD OUT OF DISEASES

BYLINE: By CAROLYN POIROT; FORT WORTH STAR-TELEGRAM

BODY:

   Americans are living longer and better than ever.

   Deaths from heart attacks, strokes and AIDS are down.

   The infant mortality rate is at a low of 7.2 deaths per 1,000 live births,
and life expectancy is heading toward 80.

   Tissue engineering, DNA cloning, gene therapy and robots that perform
delicate surgical procedures all broke through to scientific reality in 1997.

   But will there ever be a magic bullet to slay cancer, a sure-fire way to
stave off heart attacks, a time when all the world's children are immunized
against preventable diseases - or even a cure for the common cold?

   Medical experts aren't making any promises, but they are willing to look at
progress and offer a few predictions for the future.

   An Alzheimer's arsenal: Aricept, the second drug approved for the treatment
of Alzheimer's disease, became widely available in 1997, and an additional 17
Alzheimer's drugs are being tested in human clinical trials, says Dr. Janice
Knebl, chief of geriatrics at the University of North Texas Health Science
Center in Fort Worth.

   Pharmaceutical companies are developing 178 medicines for the debilitating
diseases of aging.

   "The whole pharmaceutical picture is very positive," Knebl says. "Alzheimer's
was defined in the early 1900s, and it has taken almost 100 years to have some
hope. I don't think we are looking at a cure in the near future, but if we can
manage to delay progression of the disease so that people can maintain
independence five or 10 years longer, that's very positive."

   A cancer vaccine: A vaccine against recurrent melanoma, the deadly form of
skin cancer, is ready for final clinical trial this year. The vaccine uses a
patient's specially sensitized immune cells to track down and destroy melanoma
cells before they can multiply.

   In early trials, two of the vaccines being tested dramatically reduce a
recurrence of melanoma, which is usually fatal. Researchers say if results hold,
they could be expanded to develop vaccines for people who have never had
melanoma, as well as for other forms of cancer.

   Gene therapy: Also expect to see gene therapy joining the battle against
cancer as well as other illnesses caused by abnormal genes, and to see further
elucidation of the role of viruses in cancer, says Dr. Greg Marino, chief of
oncology at the Texas center.

   Replacing defective genes and promoting the growth of good ones is expected
to become a major weapon against breast, ovarian and lymph cancers.

   "Research into the biology of cancer is laying the groundwork for novel
therapies," Marino says.

   Estrogen: The first in a new family of drugs known as selective estrogen
receptor modulators have most of the good qualities of estrogen and none of the
bad, says Dr. Bernard Rubin, chief of rheumatology at the Texas center.
Raloxifene was approved by the FDA and should be available for sale this month.

   The drugs are for women who can't or won't take estrogen and other hormone
replacement therapy, Rubin says. They increase bone density and decrease the
risk of osteoporosis and heart attacks without posing an increased risk of
breast cancer or uterine bleeding, although they do nothing for hot flashes.

   If you can take estrogen, you should, but only about one in five who could
benefit from it is on estrogen, and fewer than 10 percent of those who start
taking it are on it after five years, Rubin says.

   The introduction of the new drugs should change that.

   Redefining normal cholesterol: Treating people whose cholesterol is almost
normal can significantly lower the risk of heart disease, a fact that will
likely change the definition of normal in the near future, says Dr. Michael
Clearfield, chief of internal medicine at the Texas center.

   "Normal is probably still too high," Clearfield says. Preliminary results of
his study of lovastatin in people with no history of coronary artery disease
suggest that cholesterol-lowering drugs could prevent heart attacks in about 8
million Americans whose low-density lipoprotein ( "bad cholesterol") is about
150 - or "average" by current standards.

   "We likely will be reconsidering the National Cholesterol Education Program
guidelines to get more people into treatment," Clearfield says. Lowering
cholesterol below what has been considered normal could prevent a lot of heart
attacks and strokes, the biggest killers in this country.

   Regrowing injured tissue: Tissue engineering - growing human cells in the
laboratory - will be used in the near future in conjunction with gene therapy to
improve healing in coronary arteries opened with angioplasty, says Dr. Robert
Eberhart, director of the biomedical engineering program at the University of
Texas Southwestern Medical School at Dallas.

   Eberhart is working with "bioresorbable" plastic stents that supply the
traumatized blood vessel walls with concentrated cells and special nutrients as
well as keep the vessels open while they heal. The stents degrade into carbon
dioxide and water and are reabsorbed by the body in a couple of months, when
they are no longer needed.

   Research is just beginning on using similar stents to repair spinal cord
lesions. It is hoped that the stents will induce neurons to grow in the damaged
area of the spinal cord and re-establish signals to the brain so that people
with spinal-cord injuries can learn to reuse their limbs.

   "It's such a hopeful time in history to provide real improvement for medical
care," Eberhart says. "I foresee real improvements for quality of life for
people afflicted with a wide variety of diseases."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (COLOR) BY: PHOTO DISC INC.; While medical researchers aren't
making any promises, the future looks bright for advances in Alzheimer's disease
treatment, gene therapy and tissue engineering.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1998


                             2138 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              January 18, 1998, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: SUNDAY NEWS; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 806 words

HEADLINE: Seeking the fountain of youth

SOURCE: L.M. OTERO; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BYLINE: BY AISLING IRWIN AND ROGER HIGHFIELD

BODY:


   The quest for an elixir of life was until recently the stuff of science
fiction.

   But last week came the latest in a series of developments that have made
researchers talk of extending human life beyond 100, 125 or even, some say, 150.
Researchers, including Woodring Wright and Jerry Shay of the University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, announced Tuesday that they had found an
enzyme that arrests the aging process in human cells in a test tube. The enzyme,
telomerase, rebuilds the telomeres that shroud the tips of chromosomes,
protecting the chromosomes from wearing down with each cell division, as
normally occurs.

   Defeat of aging has become a gripping quest for some researchers, but it is
only a handful, mainly in the United States, who are dedicated to discovering
how to prolong life as long as possible.

   Most researchers want to prolong the amount of high-quality life we have,
ridding us of degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and osteoporosis.

   There are two strategies for prolonging life, says Dr. Tom Kirkwood, a
gerontologist at Manchester University in England. One is to discover how
lifestyle can prevent wear and tear to the system.

   "We are fortunate to have prolonged life considerably through lifestyle, but
we are not at the limits yet. We're not going to go beyond another five years
this way."

   The other strategy is to intervene in the aging process.

   "We need a much deeper understanding of it before we could predict the
possibility of extending the human life-span."

   Kirkwood is optimistic that such research will eliminate the diseases of old
age, leading to a longer high-quality life. People would then die of "the giving
out of some vital life support system. We will never be able to get rid of
growing frailty."

   But it is possible that some radical intervention could be discovered that
could send life-spans soaring.

   Last year, a scientist claimed that the average life-span could be extended
by 20 years or more if people cut their calorie intake by 30 percent. Studies in
monkeys showed that eating less slowed the metabolism. The misery of such a
restricted diet, however, was not discussed.

   Age at death has been shown to be partly under genetic control, and the race
is on to identify the genes responsible so they can be manipulated.

   Many intriguing insights have come from studying Caenorhabditis elegans, a
little worm called a nematode. The first life-extension mutation, in a gene
called age-1, was found by Dr. Thomas Johnson at the University of Colorado.
Another gene that affects longevity is daf-2.

   A clue as to what is going on in these aged worms came from the work of Gary
Ruvkun at Massachusetts General Hospital, who believes daf-2 might regulate
glucose (sugar) metabolism.

   Humans have a similar gene responsible for how the body reacts to insulin,
the hormone secreted in response to a rise in blood sugar to cause changes in
the metabolism of cells. Thus the discovery suggests that how fast humans age
might be tied up with how people burn calories they eat.

   A known cause of aging is from damage by harmful chemicals called free
radicals.

   Fruit flies normally live about 45 days. Genetically engineered fruit flies,
which produce extra antioxidants to protect against free radicals, were found to
live about 75 days, and some as long as 95 days.

   "Since the biochemistry of free radicals is essentially identical in flies
and mammals," said their discoverer, William Orr of Southern Methodist
University in Dallas, "there is reason to believe that it may be causal in
mammals as well."

   A year or two ago, scientists found the first human gene known to affect the
aging process, one responsible for a rare disease called Werner's syndrome.

   People affected by this disease appear to age in adolescence. They become
grey, develop wrinkled skin, then lose their hair and become susceptible to
diseases associated with old age, usually dying before 50.

   American researchers found that they carried a faulty version of a gene for a
type of enzyme known as a helicase, which splits apart or unwinds the two
strands of the DNA double helix, a process that must take place in healthy
dividing cells if they are to pass on their genetic material.

   If a faulty helicase accelerates aging, it could be possible that, by mending
it, sufferers would live longer.

   Dr. Steven Austad, a zoologist at Idaho State University and an expert on
gerontology, predicts that genetic therapy might prolong lives by 2020.

   But as the science is pieced together gradually, it is worth remembering that
accidents would claim us all eventually, no matter what we do. Even if science
managed to extinguish all the causes of aging, it has been estimated that we
would live, on average, no longer than 210 years before being killed on the
road.

GRAPHIC: Jerry Shay (left) and Woodring Wright, researchers at the University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, have isolated an enzyme that stops cells from
aging.  ; LONDON DAILY TELEGRAPH

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1998


                             2139 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                           January 18, 1998 Sunday DN

SECTION: Death Notice

LENGTH: 349 words

HEADLINE: OBITUARY

BODY:

   Sileno, Joseph P.  Born to Eternal Life Jan. 16, 1998. Beloved husband of
Lynn (nee LaMarre). Preceded in death by his son, Joseph Jr. (Farrell). Loving
father of Nancy (Patrick) Gillingham, James (Heather), Susan (Steve) Pool, John
(Becky), Kathie (Marco) Vitanza, and their mother Rita Sileno. Proud grandfather
of 15 grandchildren. Preceded in death by his brother Anthony (Joyce). Also
remembered by nieces, nephews, other relatives and many friends. Founder of
Sileno Companies, Inc. a real Estate Development Company which developed
numerous properties. Graduate of Marquette University. First Lt. U.S. Air Force,
serving as a navigator in W.W. II. Avid golfer and member of North Hills Country
Club. Joseph Sileno was very active in the Vince Lombardi Memorial Classic. He
was elected to the Lombardi Board of Directors in 1984 and served as Classic
Director and President in 1990 and 1991. He was also a member of the Board of
Trustees of the Lombardi Foundation Trust. Joseph was the Founder of the
Lombardi "Award of Excellence" Dinner Ball. Mr. Sileno was a leader in the
founding of the Lombardi Gene Therapy Research Laboratory at St. Luke's Medical
Center. Joseph Sileno was extremely active and committed to the war against
cancer through the Vince Lombardi Cancer Clinic, the Foundation Trust, and the
Lombardi Gene Therapy Laboratory. His dream was to establish a Cancer Family
Counseling Center at St. Luke's Medical Center for patients and their families
undergoing cancer treatment to help improve their quality of life. Joe's family
would appreciate, in lieu of flowers, helping to make Joe's vision a reality by
sending your memorial contribution to St. Luke's Medical Center, 2900 W.
Oklahoma Ave., Milwaukee, WI 53215. Visitation Sun. from 1 PM to 5 PM at the
Funeral Home. Relatives and friends may join the family Mon. 10 AM at Cathedral
of St. John the Evangelist, 802 N. Jackson St. for the Mass of Christian Burial,
followed by graveside services at Wisconsin Memorial Park. BECKER RITTER
ELMBROOK Michael Feerick Associate 14075 W. North Ave.  782-5330


LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1998


                             2140 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         January 18, 1998 Sunday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 7

LENGTH: 508 words

HEADLINE: Sileno loved home-building business
 Developer enjoyed challenge of bettering people's lives, family says

BYLINE: JESSE GARZA

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   Visitation will be held today for Joseph P. Sileno, builder, developer and
president of Sileno Companies Inc.

   Sileno, of Elm Grove, died Friday at St. Luke's Hospital after suffering a
stroke. He was 73.

   "People would see him and say they were still living in houses he built for
them in the '50s," his wife, Lynn Sileno, said Friday. "And they'd say, It's
still a wonderful house!' "

   Born in Milwaukee on Jan. 26, 1924, to Serafino and Carmela Sileno, Joseph
Sileno grew up on the east side, where he graduated from Lincoln High School
before serving in the Air Force, his wife said.

   He received his degree in business administration from Marquette University
in the late 1940s before getting into the real estate business with his brother
Anthony, who died in the early 1990s, his son James Sileno said.

   "He loved the challenge of the business," his son said. "He knew how to
figure out a deal and how to make it work."

   Sileno and his brother first started building single-family homes and then
multifamily units in subdivisions, his son said. The firm then began developing
condominium complexes, commercial developments, shopping centers and hotels,
such as the Manchester Suites, James Sileno said.

   Sileno was especially proud of his development of the Serafino Square
apartment complex in Wauwatosa, which he named after his father, his son said.

   Sileno also spearheaded numerous developments in such places as Shorewood,
Milwaukee, Brookfield, Greendale, Sussex and Delafield, Lynn Sileno said.

   "He loved the business because it gave him the opportunity to create," his
wife said. "He could build something that could make life better for people,
always a quality home and always at an affordable cost."

   When he wasn't working, Sileno enjoyed golfing and served on the board of
directors of the Vince Lombardi Memorial Classic golf tournament, the proceeds
of which benefit the Vince Lombardi Cancer Center at St. Luke's Medical Center,
his wife said.

   He served as director and president of the tournament in 1990 and 1991, was a
member of the board of trustees of the Lombardi Foundation Trust and helped
found the Lombardi Gene Therapy Research Laboratory at St. Luke's, Lynn Sileno
said.

   Before he died, Sileno was working to establish a cancer family counseling
center at St. Luke's after his son Joseph Jr. died of cancer in June of last
year, his wife said.

   "He felt there was a need for families to have a place where they could go
and deal with the psychological and emotional aspects of how cancer affects both
patients and loved ones," she said. "This was his last mission."

   Along with his wife and son James, Sileno is survived by another son, John,
and daughters Nancy Gillingham, Susan Pool and Kathie Vitanza.

   Visitation will be today from 1 to 5 p.m. at Becker-Ritter Funeral Home,
14075 W. North Ave., Brookfield. A funeral service will be held at 10 a.m.
Monday, at the Cathedral of St. John the Evangelist, 802 N. Jackson St.,
followed by burial at Wisconsin Memorial Park.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1998


                             2141 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  January 18, 1998, Sunday, FIVE STAR EDITION

SECTION: ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT, Pg. G-9, BOOK REVIEW

LENGTH: 756 words

HEADLINE: FEARSOME PLOT SINKS KOONTZ'S 'FEAR NOTHING'

BYLINE: ALLAN WALTON, ASSISTANT MANAGING EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


''FEAR NOTHING'' By Dean Koontz. Bantam Books. $ 26.95.

   Not that I'm out to spoil the ending or anything, but ''Fear Nothing,'' the
new Dean Koontz novel, climaxes in a surreal shootout involving two surfer
dudes, a dog, a female DJ, a burly bald guy with an earring and a troop of
monkeys.

   I don't mean ''troop'' in the sense of a military unit, although that's not
far off. I mean troop as in the term applied to a band of monkeys.

   With me so far? I didn't think so. Here's a little context.

   Christopher Snow is a 28-year-old writer with a beach-boy mentality and a
vampire's curse. No bloodsucker, he's nonetheless doomed to a life of darkness
because of a rare, sometimes fatal genetic disorder called xeroderma
pigmentosum, or XP for short. He's not an albino; he's normal in every way
except that exposure to ultraviolet rays - even from fluorescent lights could be
disastrous.

   Goodbye sunshine, hello darkness my old friend.

   We're introduced to him on the day his father is introduced to the grim
reaper. A simple case of cancer, it would seem. But as the hospital turns over
the body to a mortuary, Snowman, as his DJ gal pal Sasha calls him, witnesses
some strange goings-on. His father's body is switched for one of a hapless
hitchhiker, a victim of a savage beating that ended with someone - or something
- plucking out his eyes.

   Snowman sets out to discover what's up and soon finds himself involved in a
mystifying, terrifying tale that involves all of Moonlight Bay, a quaint
California coastal town, and a coterie of connivers from beyond.

   Snowman makes his way to the mortuary but is discovered by an underhanded
undertaker named Sandy Kirk. An ensuing chase grows all the more perplexing
when, in dodging the malevolent posse, Snowman follows a tad-too-intelligent cat
into an underground drainage catacomb that houses hundreds of skulls animal and
human.

   Armed with this knowledge and little else, he finds a phone and calls police
pal Manuel Ramirez. Only trouble is, some of the bad guys show up at police
headquarters. And it's a welcoming party.

   Snowman melts back into the darkness and heads home, arming himself with a
9-mm. Glock that belonged to his father. Better than that, he grabs his faithful
mutt Orson and heads out in search of answers.

   He gets his first from Angela Ferryman, a nurse and family friend. Speaking
in cryptic sentences, Angela relates a story about the time a Rhesus monkey paid
her a surprise visit. Cute and cuddly it wasn't.

   It turns out her husband, a military man stationed at the nearby and now
closed (or so they say) Fort Wyvern, told Angela the monkey was part of a
research project. And nefarious research at that, otherwise why would her
husband have killed himself a short while later?

   Angela would have had more to say, but she left the room. By the time Snowman
finds her, she's left the world.

   In due course, Snowman makes his way to the beach retreat of childhood friend
and surf warrior Bobby Halloway, where the monkey trail takes on new credence.

   After a few more nocturnal encounters - with an ex-football player, a
demented cop, a priest to the primates (!) - we learn that Moonlight Bay is a
hotbed of DNA research and that Snowman's mother was involved in some sneaky
governmental work that involved intra-species gene therapy.

   All for pure purposes, of course.

   We could go on, but let's not. Instead, take stock of this revolutionary
evolutionary plot:

   * We have a guy cavorting around after dark because sunshine could turn him
to toast.

   * A funeral home plays abra cadaver with its clientele.

   * Innocent hitchhikers are turned into Rhesus pieces.

   * An out-of-business military base reopens for monkey business.

   * Two beach boys, a DJ and a dog named Orson are all that stand between us,
the Planet of the Apes . . . God, maybe even a Charlton Heston film festival.

   Any one of the five should be enough to make you wonder, ''Remember the good
old days when Dean Koontz could write?''

   OK, that's cold. I like Dean Koontz. And he can write. Even in this silly,
convoluted story, he develops some interesting characters and supplies hip,
involving dialogue. He even hints that he'll revisit Snowman, Bobby, Sasha and
Orson somewhere down the line.

   But if so, let's hope he finds a plot first.

   Meanwhile, as you Koontz fans hunt for reasons to read this book, consider
this simple advice from our esteemed 32nd president: ''The only thing we have to
fear is 'Fear Nothing'! ''

   Or words to that effect.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, PHOTO: Dean Koontz

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1998


                             2142 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                    January 18, 1998, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 8K

LENGTH: 883 words

HEADLINE: A look ahead for some local biotech firms

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Here's a sampling of what's ahead for some of Maryland's better known
biotechnology companies:

   * MedImmune Inc. -- This Gaithersburg-based biotechnology company is one of
the state's best positioned and could move into the black if the federal Food
and Drug Administration approves its Synagis, a powerful drug to treat a
potentially life-threatening respiratory infection in infants. MedImmune plans
to seek European regulatory approvals for the drug this year.

   The company also hopes to land FDA clearance early this year to launch human
clinical trials for vaccine candidates it's developing for human papilloma
virus, or HPV. The company is seeking regulatory approvals to market one vaccine
for the viral infection, a leading cause of cervical cancer.

   MedImmune also plans to move forward with completing and getting FDA
approvals for its new $ 50 million manufacturing plant in Frederick where it
plans to produce batches of its drugs for clinical trials and marketing.

   * North American Vaccine Inc. -- The highest priority for this
Beltsville-based developer of vaccines for infectious diseases is the U.S.
marketing launch of Certiva, its whooping cough vaccine. Wall Street has taken a
dim view of the company because it has taken so long for Certiva to land FDA
approval, which is still pending. That has given competitors a jump on the
market.

   The company also has on its plate continuing pivotal U.S. human trials on a
combined vaccine for diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough (pertussis) and polio.

   * Guilford Pharmaceuticals Inc. -- The highest priority of this promising
Baltimore company is advancing research on a group of promising compounds called
neuroimmunophilin ligands to treat neuro-degenerative diseases, such as
Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases.

   Biotechnology industry giant Amgen Inc. is paying Guilford $ 35 million for
rights to the compounds, which appear to have protective powers, and $ 13.5
million over three years for research.

   Guilford also hopes to launch human clinical trials on two promising new
products. One, Naaladase, appears to regenerate neurotransmitters damaged during
stroke and other head traumas. The other is a biodegradable chemotherapy-loaded
wafer for the treatment of ovarian cancer.

   * Human Genome Sciences Inc. -- This Rockville genomics firm, which is
expanding into a diversified bio-pharmaceutical outfit, hopes to greatly
leverage its huge genomics database this year.

   On the priority list: FDA approval to begin a clinical trial on a
protein-based drug that HGS believes could prove useful in blocking the effects
of chemotherapy on platelets and other bone marrow. The company filed in late
December for approval of what would be its first ever clinical trial on a drug
candidate. Look for HGS to seek FDA approval for another clinical trial this
year on a protein-based drug to speed wound healing.

   The company also hopes to spin off a new firm based on a gene therapy it has
identified as having potentially large commercial interest, said HGS spokeswoman
Kate De Santis.

   * Osiris Inc. -- This Baltimore company, which is at the forefront of efforts
to develop tissue regeneration therapies, sees 1998 as a "major transition year"
in which the company will mature rapidly, said chief executive officer James S.
Burns.

   High on the priority list: revisiting the stock market to see if it is more
receptive to an initial public offering. Osiris canceled its IPO in December
because of an unfavorable market.

   Another goal for Osiris will be the launch its first human clinical on a
therapy -- this one to help cancer patients' bone marrow stroma, where
disease-fighting white blood cells are born, recover quickly after chemotherapy.

   * Oncormed, Inc. -- This Gaithersburg-based genetic testing and information
service company is moving fast to shift into the burgeoning "gene
characterization" business, which helps pharmaceutical companies and others
determine which genetic discoveries may be valuable for guiding development of
drugs and other medical treatments.

   The company, which has a deal with California-based Affymetrix Inc. to
develop a computer chip that can rapidly analyze DNA for genetic mutations
linked to breast and ovarian cancers, is hoping to land deals with drug
companies needing the service, said Dr. Leslie Alexandre, vice president for
corporate affairs.

   * Martek Inc. -- The mantra in 1998 for this Columbia-based biotech, which
sells and develops products made from microalgae, will be sales, sales, sales,
said chief financial officer Steven Dubin.

   Look for Martek to focus on marketing and building sales for its food
additive products, such as its oils rich in key fatty acids, and rolling out a
new product, a line of fluorescent pigments for use in laboratory research.

   Dubin says marketing will focus on landing more buyers for its DHA and ARA
oils, which have key fatty acids needed for brain and other body functions.
These oils are sold to most of the major infant formula manufacturers for use in
products sold overseas (The additives aren't approved for infant food use in the
United States). DHA is also sold to mass marketers of adult food supplements,
which use the oil in Neuromins, a supplement touted as "brain food."

   Pub Date: 1/18/98

TYPE: THE OUTLOOK -- MARYLAND'S 1998 ECONOMY

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1998


                             2143 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                            January 16, 1998, Friday

SECTION: NEWS , Pg. 1F

LENGTH: 713 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS TARGET MUSCLE DISEASE

BYLINE: Mark D. Somerson, Dispatch Medical Reporter

BODY:


   Frustrated with past attempts to treat muscular dystrophy, researchers at
Ohio State University are turning to gene therapy to trick patients' bodies into
supporting healthy muscle.

   Using a modified cold virus, or adenovirus, developed at the University of
Michigan, Dr. Jerry Mendell, a neurologist at OSU Medical Center, plans to
inject 12 boys in hopes of delivering genes that carry a protein thought to
support muscle cells.

   For the study, which will begin this year, Mendell is selecting patients with
Duchenne's and Becker's muscular dystrophies, the most common forms of the
incurable disease.

   So far, the gene therapy has shown promise in mice.

   ''I have been providing patient care since the late 1960s and have been doing
clinical studies for years,'' Mendell said yesterday. ''I have been working very
hard toward this trial.''

   His immediate goal is to determine whether it is safe to inject the
adenovirus into boys with muscular dystrophy. This method has been used in a
number of trials for other diseases, including cystic fibrosis and cancer.

   Duchenne's patients lack nearly all the essential muscle protein, dystrophin,
which is believed to be responsible for maintaining the structure of muscle
cells.

   The gene that is responsible for producing dystrophin is either missing or
flawed. The disease, which progressively destroys muscles, generally kills by
age 20.

   It affects nearly one of every 3,500 males.

   Boys diagnosed with Becker's muscular dystrophy still produce dystrophin, but
the protein is oversized and doesn't properly function.

   Both forms of the disease affect only males.

   In 1991, a team of OSU doctors led by Mendell began a study in which boys
with Duchenne's were treated in a process called myoblast transfer. The therapy
involved injecting millions of healthy muscle cells containing dystrophin into
12 patients' biceps.

   In previous studies, cultured human muscle cells were efficiently
incorporated into mice following injections into their muscles.

   But when the three-year study ended, the outcome was mixed. In September
1995, Mendell published his results in The New England Journal of Medicine,
showing only one patient retained significant dystrophin and the transfer didn't
translate into increased muscle strength.

   Back then, he predicted research would revolve around gene therapy.

   ''In myoblast transfer, there were lots of problems,'' Mendell said. ''First,
there was rejection of cells. Another problem was that the cells you put in had
to fuse with the underlying muscle fiber so the nucleus containing the gene can
get in.''

   Many of these problems can be avoided by using an adenovirus to deliver the
gene itself, he said.

   ''This bypasses many of the steps we had to take in myoblast transfer,''
Mendell said. ''This takes the gene and puts it right into the muscle.''

   Groundwork on the virus took place at the University of Michigan, where
Jeffrey Chamberlain, an associate professor of human genetics, was able to
remove every viral gene from the adenovirus, making room for the dystrophin
gene.

   When there are no viral genes, there is no viral activity in the cells. That
means less chance for an immune response by the body.

   Mendell said this virus also comes equipped with a protection protein that
allows the dystrophin gene to be expressed, that is, turned on, only inside
muscle cells.

   If the virus were to get into the blood stream and infect an organ like a
lung or kidney, the gene would not be expressed.

   Chamberlain reported in October that he was able to induce long-term
expression of the dystrophin protein in mice with Duchenne's muscular dystrophy.

   ''There is always a lot of controversy about when you go to human trials,''
Mendell said. ''We feel this is the best time.''

   Dr. James M. Wilson, director of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the
University of Pennsylvania, is testing the adenovirus - without the gene - in
monkeys and mice to satisfy U.S. Food and Drug Administration requirements.

   Research at all three universities is funded in part by the Muscular
Dystrophy Association.

   ''Our ultimate goal - if the local trial is safe and beneficial - is that it
can be tested in the extremities,'' Mendell said. ''Then the whole body.''

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1998


                             2144 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1998 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 16, 1998 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1241 words

HEADLINE: Scientists route drug to a tumor; no chemotherapy

BYLINE: David E. Graham, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Scientists in La Jolla have developed a sort of molecular addressing system
that can route cancer drugs to kill tumors, while sparing the body the
significant side effects of chemotherapy. As it is routinely administered,
chemotherapy is a powerful but toxic weapon that can cause pain, discomfort and
sometimes fatal damage to bone marrow and immune function. The technique
developed at the Burnham Institute tags a cancer drug with a molecule that has
been designed to travel to and attach at a specific site in the body, as if
homing in on a particular address.

   This approach provides a potential solution in a long search to find ways to
target the effects of drugs. "They have a novel way to address drugs just to
where they want," said Dr. Judah Folkman, an experimental therapy expert at
Harvard University.

   "It's a big advance over what we have." At Burnham, molecular biologists
Erkki Ruoslahti, Renata Pasqualini and Wadih Arap designed one such molecular
tag and combined it with a common, but toxic drug for breast cancer.

   And in experiments reported today in the journal Science, they were able to
use the compound to destroy tumors in mice.

   The experiment was designed to seek out new blood vessels that nourish tumors
and destroy the blood vessels, thereby stopping the tumors' growth. Targeting
the tiny blood vessels that support tumors, and not the tumors directly, is
itself an increasingly popular strategy for fighting cancer. Because rapidly
mutating tumors can become resistant to drugs, attacking the vessels, which tend
not to mutate, represents a way to avoid drug resistance.

   Experts say the Burnham experiment is a powerful example of this strategy,
called angiogenesis.

   And the experiment with doxorubicin showed none of the heart and liver damage
typically associated with the breast-cancer drug, Ruoslahti reported. "The
results are pretty spectacular," said Dr. Joseph Bertino, chairman of molecular
pharmacology and therapeutics at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer
Research in New York. "We all have been looking for ways to make these toxic
drugs more selective." Ruoslahti believes clinical trials in people are
warranted because doxorubicin is often prescribed as chemotherapy.

   But even if trials proceed well, it likely could be several years before a
drug using the addressing concept would be available for routine treatment,
experts caution. In addition to targeting cancer drugs, the molecular addressing
technique could be used for targeting drugs for other diseases, for delivery of
therapeutic genes into the body and even for delivering whole cells, such as
white blood cells, one of the immune system's key weapons in fighting cancer.
"We provide a new delivery system that makes it possible to make the treatments
more effective and less toxic," said Ruoslahti, who also is president of the
Burnham Institute. To be effective against rapidly growing, mutating cancer
cells, chemotherapy has had to be toxic.

   But as the drugs circulate in the blood stream, they also destroy blood cells
and bone marrow and healthy organs. Sometimes the damage is so great doctors are
forced to weigh how much drug they can give to kill cancer without killing the
patient. Scientists have tried to focus the action of the potent drugs solely
against tumors, but with little success.

   Some, like Bertino, have tried to pair drugs with antibody cells that attach
to a particular tumor type in hope of concentrating the drug's destruction at
the tumor.

   But the antibodies have proven difficult to engineer and too inefficient at
delivering drugs. Ruoslahti's approach relies on a much smaller molecule, called
a peptide, that he combines with a cancer drug.

   Through an involved technique developed at Burnham two years ago, called
phage displays, he can generate a veritable library of peptides that attach to
virtually any tissue in the body. "The concept is there, and it's a beautiful
one," Bertino said.

   "It's very clever." Ruoslahti and UCSD gene therapy researcher Theodore
Friedmann are pursuing tests now to use the addressing molecules to build
delivery systems for genes.

   The hope, says Ruoslahti, is that the tags could help concentrate beneficial
genes where they can deliver a therapeutic punch, perhaps a gene for a
blood-clotting factor for hemophilia or insulin for diabetes.

   Such targeting also could keep the inserted genes from places they might do
harm, he added. In the cancer experiment reported in Science, Ruoslahti targeted
doxorubicin at cells lining new blood vessels, which sprout to support tumor
growth.

   In the three mice that were infected with human breast tumors and then
injected with the experimental therapy, the cancers stopped growing and the
tumors degenerated into scar tissue.

   And the targeted delivery required smaller doses of the drug to succeed, he
said. "It's elegant work . . . so far it looks very clear cut," said Folkman, a
longtime proponent of the angiogenesis strategy of attacking blood vessels
rather than tumors themselves to avoid drug resistance in the tumors. While
heart and liver tissues typically damaged by doxorubicin were spared, the
experiment was unable to study damage to stem cells, which are vulnerable to the
drug, Ruoslahti acknowledged.

   Stem cells give rise to the cells of the immune system. Mice treated with
doxorubicin that didn't have the addressing molecule had damaged hearts and
livers while their tumors continued to grow. Knowing how well the technique will
fare in people, however, must await clinical trials.

   Bertino wonders how well the tagging molecules developed from mouse models
will perform in human blood vessels.

   He also wonders whether they might be attracted to coincidental wounds that
might themselves be sprouting new blood vessels at the time of treatment.
Ruoslahti said patient trials could be organized within a year, but he has not
decided whether to pursue such testing through academic channels or to allow a
drug company to conduct them. Burnham is discussing licensing of the technology
with a number of drug companies, he said.

   The institute has a patent on the phage library technology and a patent
pending on this usage of it. To make the molecular tags, researchers expose mice
to viruses and then isolate the molecules that the viruses use to connect to
various tissues in the animals' bodies.

   These molecules are Ruoslahti's address tags. Erkki Ruoslahti, M.D. President
and Chief Executive Officer The Burnham Institute [] Age: 57 Career []
Associated with the Burnham Institute in La Jolla since 1979. President and CEO
since March 1989. He also holds the William H. Fishman Chair in Cancer Biology
at the institute.

   The Burnham Institute was formerly the La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation.
[] Adjunct professor in the pathology department at UCSD since 1980. [] Former
director of immunobiology at City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte,
Calif. [] Former professor of bacteriology and serology, University of Turku,
Finland. [] Former assistant professor and acting associate professor in the
department of serology and bacteriology at the University of Helsinki, Finland.
[] Gairdner Foundation International Award, October 1997 [] Nobel Fellow,
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 1995 [] Fellow, American Academy of
Arts and Sciences, elected in 1993. Education [] Ph.D., immunology, University
of Helsinki, 1967. [] M.D., University of Helsinki, 1965. [] B.M., University of
Helsinki, medicine, 1961.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: 1,2. Erkki Ruoslahti, M.D.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2145 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   January 15, 1998, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 3C

LENGTH: 240 words

HEADLINE: OmcorMed to help pick humans for cancer treatment trial;
Schering-Plough set to test experimental gene therapy; Medical science

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Gaithersburg-based Oncor-Med Inc. said yesterday that it will collaborate
with the Schering-Plough Research Institute in selecting candidates for a human
clinical trial of an experimental gene therapy to treat cancer.

   Financial terms of the agreement were not disclosed.

   OncorMed, which provides genetic testing services, will identify people who
have a missing or defective gene known as p53. The gene has been identified by
scientists as playing a key role in suppressing cancer.

   Schering-Plough's p53 gene therapy uses a genetically engineered cold virus
to deliver a normal p53 gene to tumor cells.

   Schering-Plough said early studies have found that introduction of the gene
into a malignant cell where the gene is absent or mutating can suppress the
cell's malignancy or result in cell death.

   Dr. Robert J. Spiegel, senior vice president of worldwide clinical research
at the research institute, said OncorMed's screening of patients would help
Schering-Plough sign up appropriate patients for the trials quickly and better
understand the significance of the trial results.

   The research institute is a research and development arm of Schering-Plough
Corp. of Madison, N.J.

   Schering-Plough's clinical trials are being conducted internationally on
patients with a variety of solid tumors, OncorMed said.

   OncorMed said it would also provide other genetic screening services for the
studies.

   Pub Date: 1/15/98

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 1998


                             2146 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1998 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                     January 14, 1998 Wednesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-01

LENGTH: 773 words

HEADLINE: Cells have new virtue: immortality

BYLINE: By Terence Monmaney, Los Angeles Times

BODY:
 Breaking a biological barrier once thought out of reach, scientists have for
the first time endowed healthy human cells growing in a dish with a quality that
alchemists, explorers, and mystics have vainly sought for ages: immortality.

   The research, due to be published Friday in the journal Science, opens a new
path to the treatment of cancer and a variety of degenerative ailments,
including heart disease and age-related vision loss. Such "immortalized" healthy
human cells might also serve as biological factories for churning out
genetically engineered drugs.

   Most tantalizing, scientists say, the finding offers a glimpse of the
molecular gears and springs that make up the human biological clock, thus
renewing the ancient hope that the outer limit of the human lifespan may not be
absolutely fixed after all.

   The new study - by scientists at Geron Corp. in Menlo Park Calif. and the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas - is "an important
discovery," said Anna McCormick, chief of the biology of aging program at the
National Institute on Aging. "It opens another door to understanding the
mechanisms of aging at the cellular level."

   Leonard Hayflick, a cell biologist at the University of California, San
Francisco, who pioneered the field nearly 40 years ago, said the study
represented a "monumental advance in understanding the genetics of aging."
Hayflick, a member of Geron's scientific advisory board, said he never thought
he would live long enough to see such progress. "I'm just amazed," he said.

   The study addresses a question that has been at the center of aging research
since Hayflick and his co-workers discovered that most healthy animal cells are
programmed to divide a particular number of times before they reach the end of
the line and stop dividing, a crucial step in aging. Certain cells in the
retina, for example, have the capacity to divide only about 60 times.

   The question has always been, what controls that clock-like mechanism?

   The new research supports the idea that an animal cell's innate "division
potential" is largely controlled by a particular stretch of DNA at the tips of
chromosomes. Called telomeres, these DNA stretches do not appear to contain
hereditary information but instead consist of a cluster of six chemical bases
repeated over and over again.

   Each time a cell divides, a chunk of telomere is snipped off. Dividing ceases
when the telomere is shortened to a particular amount.

   As simple as the "telomere-clock model" sounds, proponents have found it
impossible to prove - until now.

   The Geron and Texas researchers used a gene that blocks telomere shortening
and inserted it into laboratory cultures of two healthy human cells - retina
cells and a type of skin cell. The gene produces an enzyme called telomerase,
which maintains the length of telomeres or adds to it.

   After the cells were grown in the laboratory, those with telomerase kept on
dividing long after the unendowed versions of the same cells reached the end of
the line. Usually, the cultured retina cells stop dividing after 60 divisions,
but the genetically engineered ones are still going after nearly another 40
divisions, almost doubling their lifespan, said Woodring Wright, a molecular
biologist at Texas Southwestern and a co-author of the paper.

   The results are "strikingly unequivocal," Titia de Lange, a cell biologist at
Rockefeller University in New York City, wrote in an accompanying editorial.

   Calvin Harley, Geron's chief scientific officer, suggested a number of ways
in which the finding might be exploited.

   The first application most likely will be to use cell cultures genetically
engineered with the telomerase enzyme to produce quantities of drugs like blood
factors needed to fight heart attacks. Previously, human cell lines had been
impractical for such uses because they peter out after a limited time.

   Beyond that, he speculated that gene therapy involving telomerase might be a
possibility. Cells bearing the ravages of time and due to expire could be
surgically removed, endowed in the lab with the enzyme, then replanted into the
tissue.

   Although the finding has been promoted by the University of Texas as a
"fountain of youth," Geron's Harley said he objected to that description,
because nothing in the work implies an ability to reverse aging. Still, he said
the finding does challenge the long-held theoretical notion that maximum
lifespan could never be stretched, even a bit.

   Word of the new study, which was scheduled to be made public Thursday,
focused Wall Street's interest in Geron, whose stock rose 4 3/8 to close at 14
3/8.

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1998


                             2147 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   January 14, 1998, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 961 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS GIVE CELL APPARENT IMMORTALITY

BYLINE: TERENCE MONMANEY, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:


   Breaking a biological barrier once thought out of reach, scientists for the
first time have apparently endowed healthy human cells growing in a dish with a
quality that alchemists, explorers and mystics have vainly sought for ages:
immortality.

   In the new research, due to be published Friday in the journal Science, the
scientists genetically altered cells, enabling them to keep dividing long past
their allotted life span. The work opens a new path to the treatment of cancer
and a variety of degenerative ailments, including heart disease and age-related
vision loss. Such "immortalized" healthy human cells might also serve as
biological factories for churning out genetically engineered drugs.

   Most tantalizing, scientists say, the finding offers a glimpse of the
molecular gears and springs that make up the human biological clock, thus
renewing the ancient hope that the outer limit of the human life span may not be
absolutely fixed after all.

   The new study--by scientists at Geron Corp. in Menlo Park, Calif., and the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas--is "an important
discovery," said Anna McCormick, chief of the biology of aging program at the
National Institute on Aging. "It opens another door to understanding the
mechanisms of aging at the cellular level."

   Leonard Hayflick, a cell biologist at UC San Francisco who pioneered the
field nearly 40 years ago, said the study represented a "monumental advance in
understanding the genetics of aging." Hayflick, a member of Geron's scientific
advisory board, said he never thought he would live long enough to see such
progress. "I'm just amazed," he said.

   The study addresses a question that has been at the center of aging research
since Hayflick and his co-workers discovered that most healthy animal cells are
programmed to divide a particular number of times before they reach the end of
the line and stop dividing, a crucial step in aging. Certain cells in the
retina, for example, have the capacity to divide only about 60 times.

   The question has always been, what controls that clocklike mechanism?

   The new research supports the idea that an animal cell's innate "division
potential" is largely controlled by a particular stretch of DNA at the tips of
chromosomes. Called telomeres, these DNA stretches do not appear to contain
hereditary information but instead consist of a cluster of six chemical bases
repeated over and over again.

   Each time a cell divides, a chunk of telomere is snipped off. Dividing ceases
when the telomere is shortened to a particular amount.

   As simple as the "telomere-clock model" sounds, proponents have found it
impossible to prove--until now. The Geron and Texas researchers used a gene that
blocks telomere shortening and inserted it into laboratory cultures of two
healthy human cells--retina cells and a type of skin cell. The gene produces an
enzyme called telomerase, which maintains the length of telomeres or adds to it.

   After the cells were grown in the laboratory, those with telomerase kept on
dividing long after the unendowed versions of the same cells reached the end of
the line. Usually, the cultured retina cells stop dividing after 60 divisions,
but the genetically engineered ones are still going after nearly 40 more
divisions, almost doubling their life span, said Woodring Wright, a molecular
biologist at Texas Southwestern and a co-author of the paper.

   The results are "strikingly unequivocal," Titia de Lange, a cell biologist at
Rockefeller University in New York City, wrote in an accompanying editorial.

   Calvin Harley, Geron's chief scientific officer, suggested a number of ways
in which the finding might be exploited. The first application most likely will
be to use cell cultures genetically engineered with the telomerase enzyme to
produce quantities of drugs like blood factors needed to fight heart attacks.
Previously, human cell lines had been impractical for such uses because they
peter out after a limited time.

   Beyond that, he speculated that gene therapy involving telomerase might be a
possibility. Cells bearing the ravages of time and due to expire could be
surgically removed, endowed with the enzyme, then replanted into the tissue.

   "We're optimistic that this discovery will have far-reaching applications in
medicine, but we cannot predict how long it will take to develop any products,"
said Calvin B. Harley, Geron's chief scientific officer.

   Cancer researchers are also excited about the finding, because a tumor is a
mass of cells that have somehow lost the ability to stop dividing. The enzyme
telomerase appears to be a key there, too; in 90% of cancers tested so far, the
telomerase enzyme is already active, and presumably involved in the wild growth
and division. Indeed, cell biologists have long been able to coax cancer cells
to divide indefinitely--giving the cells a quality they refer to as immortality.

   One new strategy in cancer control is to develop drugs that specifically
block the activity of telomerase, thus restoring the innate tendency to stop
dividing.

   But because cancer cells are rife with telomerase, researchers cautioned that
simply inserting the gene for that enzyme into aging cells may backfire and make
them cancerous rather than youthful. "Resetting the telomere clock may come at a
price," de Lange said.

   Although the finding has been promoted by the University of Texas as a
"fountain of youth," Geron's Harley said he objected to that description,
because nothing in the work implies an ability to reverse aging. Still, some
researchers say the finding does challenge the notion that maximum life span
could never be stretched, even a bit.

   Geron stock rose 4 3/8 on word of the study, closing at 14 3/8.

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1998


                             2148 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   JANUARY 14, 1998, WEDNESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 856 words

HEADLINE: Non-Aging Human Cells Created in Lab
 Bay firm's stock soars on hopes of medical advances

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    Scientists have managed for the first time to turn off the natural aging
process in human cells, raising hopes for a new generation of treatments for
genetic and age-related disorders.

   The discovery, announced yesterday by Geron Corp. in Menlo Park, demonstrates
how to make normal human cells that seem to never wear out -- capping a 35- year
hunt for the keys to molecular longevity. Geron's stock rose $ 4.38, or nearly
44 percent, to $ 14.38 per share yesterday on the news.

   ''I didn't think I'd live long enough to see this,'' said Leonard Hayflick,
69, an anatomy professor at the University of California at San Francisco. As a
young researcher in Pennsylvania in 1962, Hayflick published a classic research
paper that began the quest for an immortal cell.

   Although some are hailing the discovery as a ''fountain of youth,'' it does
not pave the way for unending life. Just because some cells can be made to live
seemingly forever does not mean doctors can do the same for a whole person.

   Scientists with Geron and the University of Texas said they took a so-called
immortality gene discovered and cloned last fall and proved that it works when
inserted into healthy human cells.

   The research, which will be published Friday in the journal Science, carries
profound implications for medicine in the 21st century:

   * Long-lived human cells could be used to produce huge quantities of rare
proteins, including disease- fighting antibodies. These proteins can fight
diseases such as lymphoma and nervous-system disorders such as Parkinson's
disease.  But now they can only be grown in mice, if at all.

   * New treatments could be found for genetic disorders such as cystic fibrosis
and muscular dystrophy. The immortal cell could be used to overcome a major
problem facing scientists working on gene therapy. Scientists often have trouble
keeping cells alive in the laboratory long enough to fix their genetic defects.

   * If cellular life-spans can be controlled effectively, it could mean new
ways to avoid some of the more insidious effects of old age, such as macular
degeneration of the eye, atrophy of the skin and breakdown of the cardiovascular
system.

   Related research is designed to stop the proliferation of cancer cells that
never die.

   The journal Science planned to release the research findings late tomorrow.
However, a Washington aging research organization leaked the news yesterday,
prompting the run on Geron stock.

   Geron's scientific collaborators were just as enthusiastic during a flurry of
news releases and interviews.

   CRUCIAL DISCOVERY

   In key work last year, also co- sponsored by Geron, scientists identified and
cloned the gene for a natural protein, called telomerase, that gives cells the
ability to divide without limit.

   The new research looks at this ''immortalizing gene'' in action.
Technically, the active telomerase gene was inserted into two different types of
normal cells that otherwise were self-programmed for destruction.

   ''We couldn't be more excited about the results,'' said Dr.  Woodring Wright
at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas. ''I think this
finally nails down the fundamental cause of cell aging and provides a direct
means of altering the clock of cell aging for therapeutic effect.''

   Telomerase is an unusual chemical that gives cells the ability to turn back
their biological clocks.

   It works this way: Each time a cell divides, a special strand of DNA in the
nucleus, called a ''telomere,'' gets one notch shorter.  Eventually, the DNA
strands wear down to useless nubs.

   That means certain death for the cell. But the enzyme telomerase bestows on
the cell the ability to make fresh new DNA strands.

   That's why cancer cells, in which telomerase abounds, can keep on copying
themselves without end.

   The Geron and Texas scientists engineered comparable ''immortality'' into
normal skin, eye and cardiovascular cells, extending their life-span ''without
making them malignant,'' noted Calvin Harley, Geron's chief scientist and a
co-author of the Science paper.

   INDUSTRYWIDE RAMIFICATIONS

   The notion that human forms of protein-type drugs and antibodies could be
produced in mass quantities might seem to render mouse-derived antibodies
obsolete. This would make work being done by companies such as Protein Design
Labs Inc., a Mountain View firm that specializes in making mouse-grown proteins
work in people, also obsolete.

   But that remains to be seen.

   Cary Queen, senior vice president at Protein Design, said there are already
ways to make human cells live longer, by linking them to certain parts of cancer
cells. Thus, he said, the main benefit of Geron's research will be in turning on
or off the biological clock in patients. ''I don't think it has that much
application in the area of protein production,'' Queen said.

   Some financial analysts also expressed skepticism about any immediate
commercial payoff.

   ''This certainly confirms the potential for the technology,'' said Craig
Parker at J.P. Morgan and Co. in San Francisco. ''But it doesn't prove the
economic feasibility'' of any particular application.

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1998


                             2149 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     January 13, 1998 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 397 words

HEADLINE: CITY BIOTECH FIRM WINS INVESTMENT

BYLINE: By ZACH SCHILLER; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   It took six months longer than expected, but Copernicus Gene Systems Inc., a
Cleveland biotechnology start-up company, has won funding from a group of
venture capitalists.

   Copernicus, founded in 1994 and based on technology developed at Case Western
Reserve University, last month won $4.6 million in funds from four different
venture investors. The money will allow it to beef up its staff, pursue
development of its key technology, and work toward further establishing itself
with outside partnerships.

   Copernicus is involved in gene therapy, the insertion of genes into human
cells to treat disease. It has come up with a way to compact DNA to use it in
drugs.

   Charles H. Noland, vice president of business development, said the company
hopes to receive patent protection on that technology by mid-year.

   Until now, Copernicus has had only five full-time employees of its own,
although it has sponsored research at CWRU. In the next two or three months,
Noland said, the company will add 10 or 15 more employees, many of whom have
been doing Copernicus-sponsored research at the university.

   He predicted the company would add 20 to 30 employees by the end of the year
at Copernicus' new facilities at 11000 Cedar Ave. in Cleveland.

   They will work on replicating the company's research on a larger scale.
Copernicus sees possible applications in treating hemophilia and
hypercholesterolemia, among other diseases.

   The syndicate investing in Copernicus is led by the Biotechnology Development
Fund of Palo Alto, Calif., which is managed by BioAsia Investments. The fund's
Frank Kung is joining the company's board.

   So will Dr. William McCulloch of A.M. Pappas & Associates of Research
Triangle, N.C., which advises GeneChem Technologies Venture Fund of Montreal,
another investor.

   The others are Nina Kung Wang's Veron International of Hong Kong and Ariane
Health LDC investment fund, which is managed by Muzinich & Co. of New York.

   Noland said the company's timetable on the investment slipped because some
West Coast investors have backed out of biotech investing, others turned up
their nose at Copernicus' Cleveland location, and an initial agreement with an
Ohio investor didn't pan out.

   The financing leaves the company about half-owned by outside investors,
Noland said, with the other half split between scientists and managers, a
typical arrangement.

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1998


                             2150 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    JANUARY 13, 1998, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1591 words

HEADLINE: Chiron Seeks New Blood
 A year later, biotech firm is still in search of chief executive

BYLINE: Lois Kazakoff, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    Almost exactly a year ago, Chiron Corp. Chief Executive Officer Edward
Penhoet announced to the health industry that he would step down as soon as the
Emeryville biotech company could find a successor.

   On Thursday, Penhoet will tell the same group, the Hambrecht & Quist
Healthcare conference in San Francisco, that he's still here, he's still
planning to step down and Chiron is still looking for a CEO.

   Chiron has interviewed 20 candidates for the job, has come close twice, but
has yet to land a keeper. ''This has dragged on longer than expected,'' conceded
Penhoet, 57, who co-founded the company with Chairman William Rutter, 70, in
1981. ''We need to bring this to closure, but we're not willing to settle for
just anyone.''

   The trouble finding a new chief is the most visible sign that one of the
oldest and most respected biotech companies is stumbling. Chiron, which had
visions of becoming a giant player in health care, is struggling to get
profitable products to market, and analysts are questioning whether the company
can weather its difficulties.

   The company this month will begin cutting at least $ 150 million in costs
during the next three years. Layoffs are anticipated.

   Chiron plans to consolidate its worldwide financial, legal, human resources
and information services in Emeryville, and eliminate other redundancies across
its four business units.

   The company said upcoming products -- like a treatment for diabetic ulcers, a
drug for brain cancer and a new system for doing hospital laboratory tests --
will fuel growth in earnings in 1998. And it has some potential money- makers in
development, including a treatment for breast cancer.

   Chiron promises it will have a new CEO on board early this year.  Meanwhile,
Penhoet, who told the H&Q conferees last year he was stepping down because he
had been doing double duty as CEO and governmental liaison, has added a third
job -- chief financial officer. CFO Dennis Winger resigned in August and has yet
to be replaced.

   The scenario is hauntingly similar to Apple Computer's search for a leader,
except, unlike Apple co-founder Steve Jobs who is currently serving as the
company's interim CEO, Penhoet clearly wants out.

   ''I'm the longest-standing CEO in the biotechnology industry -- I've been
here 16 years. I'm not interested in setting any more records,'' he said.

   Chiron was a darling of Wall Street during 1994 and 1995 until a spate of
clinical failures and regulatory disappointments kicked off an exodus of key
managers in 1996. Defections increased last year amid concerns about the
company's ability to find a new leader.

   ''We've learned some of life's lessons and we're more humble here than we
were a year ago,'' Penhoet said.

   Rutter, a professor at the University of California at San Francisco, and his
former student, Penhoet, started Chiron in 1981 as a research-driven
biotechnology company. It became an industry model for using collaborations,
rather than acquisitions, to develop new products.

   Chiron's research first earned it a name -- but not a buck -- in 1987 when it
created a diagnostic test for Hepatitis C virus that essentially cleaned up the
blood banks of the world.

   Even the loudest Chiron critics praise Penhoet and Rutter as outstanding
scientists and good citizens. But they blame their fixation on research rather
than the bottom line for the company's current problems.

   ''You have to make choices and focus your research on things that have a high
probability of paying off,'' said Jeff Casdin, who managers a health care mutual
fund, Casdin Life Sciences Partners LP. ''The lack of discipline is apparent all
the way through Chiron.''

   Harboring dreams of becoming a big player in the worldwide pharmaceutical
market, Chiron sold 49.9 percent of its stock in November 1994 to the Swiss
pharmaceutical giant Ciba-Geigy to finance its research. As part of the $ 2.1
billion transaction, Chiron absorbed Ciba's vaccine and diagnostic businesses.
By late 1995, Chiron had purchased two more businesses, adding nearly 4,000
employees in a year.

   Analysts alternately described the new, integrated Chiron as ''diversified''
or ''unfocused.''

   The cash, and a loan of at least another $ 250 million from Ciba (which
merged with Sandoz last year and is now known as Novartis), came with these
conditions:

   * Novartis could not buy additional shares until November 1999, when it could
increase its stake to 55 percent.

   * It would name three of Chiron's 11 board members.

   * It had to approve all significant actions and Chiron's strategic plan.

   * Chiron had to meet performance goals.

   Novartis watched Chiron's stock bottom out on Christmas Eve at $ 16.50, about
half the price it paid two years earlier. As of yesterday, the stock was
hovering below $ 17.

   While analysts say Chiron's stock performance is sub par, Novartis will only
say that it considers the company a strategic asset.

   Experts predict Chiron will regret the deal it made to keep its research
engine going. ''Novartis is going to buy Chiron, break it up and then it will
disappear,'' said Casdin. ''That's why no one wants to be CEO.''

   By 1997, Chiron was still struggling to digest the 1995 acquisitions,
reorganize its operations around three core businesses -- vaccines, therapeutics
and diagnostics -- and keep track of its operations in 30 countries.

   Cowen & Co. analyst Joyce Lonergan sees opportunities for new revenues in
Chiron's upcoming products and projects the stock will rise to $ 25 or $ 30 by
year-end.

   But Merrill Lynch analyst Eric Hecht labels the stock ''a dog.'' Not
including research payments from Novartis, Chiron is unprofitable, he said.

   ''The best thing they've got going is the diagnostics business,'' he said.
''They are kidding themselves that they are going to be a player in vaccines.''

   Troubles in Chiron's vaccine unit are indeed pronounced. A steady exodus of
key managers began when a genital herpes vaccine failed trials, after 14 years
in the works, in November 1996. The unit president, Dino Dina, left in April and
was replaced by Magnus Lundberg, who also heads Chiron's therapeutics business.

   Chiron management brought in consultants McKinsey & Co. last summer to help
design a plan dubbed ''Project 40'' to raise the stock to $ 40 a share.

   The belt-tightening is a product of that plan. ''At the moment, the plan
doesn't involve the R&D budget,'' Penhoet said. ''But we do have to be more
efficient. The shareholders expect us to have earnings.''

   CHIRON CORP./At a glance

   .

   Company: Chiron Corp.

   Headquarters: Emeryville

   Corporate investors: Novartis (a merger of Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz) in Basel,
Switzerland, holds a 49.9 percent stake

   Employees: 6,400 worldwide

   Divisions: Diagnostics, Therapeutics, Vaccines, Technologies. A fifth,

   Vision, was sold in October.

   52-week high stock price (high/low): $ 24.75/$ 16.50

   Closing price yesterday: $ 17.47

   Market cap: $ 3.04 billion

   Earnings for past four quarters: $ 1,243.4 billion or 19 cents a share

   Chronicle Graphic

   CHIRON'S DRUG PIPELINE

   VACCINES

   Acellular pertussis (whooping cough) vaccine -- Approval to manufacture
expected in the first quarter, but late entry into the market has compromised
its expected market share. The company is looking at new strategies to market
either as a single vaccine or a combination.

   Hepatitis B -- In early human clinical trials.

   Hepatitis C -- In early human clinical trials.

   HIV -- Trials of candidate vaccines are under way in the United States and
Thailand.

   Intranasal flu -- In early human clinical trials.

   Meningococcus C -- In mid-stage human clinical trials.

   Rabavert -- Rabies vaccine approved for marketing in 1997.

   THERAPEUTICS

   DepoCyt -- An anti-cancer drug for neoplastic meningitis that Chiron is
developing with DepoTech Corp. It was rejected by an FDA panel in December.
Chiron is reassessing the drug.

   Proleukin -- FDA-approved for two uses -- metastatic kidney cancer and, as of
last Friday, metastatic melanoma. The company is researching uses for HIV,
non-Hodgkins lymphoma and other cancers.

   Theratope -- Metastatic breast cancer therapeutic vaccine that will go into
late-stage clinical trials in early 1998.  DIAGNOSTICS

   Immunoassay systems -- An immunoassay system that improves the productivity
of testing laboratories by nearly doubling the number of blood, urine and other
tests they can do to 240 tests an hour. It was launched last year.

   Branched DNA probes -- Tests viral loads for HIV, Hepatitis B and Hepatitis
C. The company has just introduced an automated system.

   Rapidpoint critical care testing system -- A newly launched instantaneous
blood testing system for emergency room use.

   TECHNOLOGIES

   Becaplermin -- a platelet-derived growth factor (pdgf) that is the active
ingredient in ortho-mcneil's diabetic foot sore healing gel, regranex.
ortho-mcneil received fda marketing approval for the gel in december. chiron is
also in late-stage human clinical trials to use pdgf for pressure sores.

   Myotrophin (IGF) -- A treatment developed with Cephalon Inc. for Lou Gehrig's
disease. It was resubmitted to the FDA for review in November after conflicting
studies questioned the drug's efficacy. A ruling is expected in early 1998. IGF1
is also in early-stage trials for other indications, including osteoarthritis
and stroke.

   Tissue Factor Pathway Inhibitor (TFPI) -- A treatment for sepsis is in
mid-stage trials.

   Gene therapies-- Early stage trials for therapies to treat graft versus host
disease, HIV and cancer.

   Chronicle Graphic

GRAPHIC: PHOTO,Chiron's chief executive, Ed Penhoet, is still CEO, still
planning to step down and still looking for a successor , BY CARLOS AVILA
GONZALEZ, THE CHRONICLE

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1998


                             2151 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     January 11, 1998, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: TELEVISION WEEK; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 395 words

HEADLINE: Science as soap opera?
Cover Story

BYLINE: By Bruce McCabe, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Advance publicity on "A Science Odyssey," a five-part, 10-hour special
hosted by Charles Osgood Sunday night (at 8 on Channel 2) through Thursday, Jan.
15, raises the possibility that there can be an overlapping of science and the
soap opera.

   The series, produced by WGBH Boston and executive produced by Tom Friedman,
is said to characterize science as "a human endeavor, filled with its share of
mortal frailties - indecision and insecurities; pride and prejudice; greed and
envy." Adds the promotional copy: "There is no shortage of hoaxes, accusations
and denials, triumphs and tragedies - and just plain mistakes."

    In the Sunday night opener, "Matters of Life or Death," Alexander Fleming
experiences a stroke of luck in discovering by chance the penicilium mold and
penicillin. It would be a discovery that went unrealized for a decade until
World War II prompted a desperate search for antibiotics. The opening program
also captures the moment when Frederick Banting and James Collip, on the brink
of purifying insulin, nearly come to blows in the laboratory. At stake is the
wealth and fame awaiting the patent on a lifesaving treatment.

    "Odyssey" dramatizes the 20th century's scientific and technological
breakthroughs all the way back from the time before antibiotics to gene therapy,
from the test flight at Kitty Hawk to the launches at Cape Canaveral, from
Freud's first explorations of the psyche to the latest research in
neurophysiology. The series traces the belief that the Milky Way was the whole
universe to the subsequent discovery of 100 billion galaxies. Eras from Darwin
to DNA and "Lucy" to "Eve" are probed.

    Black Holes, nylon, radio, psychoanalysis, organ transplants, volcanoes, the
atomic bomb, The Big Bang - those last two aren't the same thing - quarks and
computer science, it all gets the dramatic treatment.

    In terms of your own interests, plan on Monday night on getting into physics
and astronomy in "Mysteries of the Universe;" it's the study of human behavior
Tuesday night with "In Search of Ourselves." Then comes the world of technology
in "Bigger, Better, Faster" Wednesday night and a look at the earth and life
sciences in "Origins" on the Thursday night conclusion of the series.

    You can see the whole series at once when it repeats on Saturday, Jan. 17,
from 1 to 11 p.m. on Ch. 44.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1998


                             2152 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                            January 11, 1998, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS , Pg. 4D

LENGTH: 638 words

HEADLINE: OSU RESEARCHERS' DISCOVERY COULD CHANGE LEUKEMIA TREATMENT

BYLINE: Mark D. Somerson, Dispatch Medical Reporter

BODY:


   Searching for a needle in a biological haystack, a team of cancer researchers
discovered a genetic marker in some leukemia patients that could change the way
they are treated and improve their prognosis.

   These molecular detectives discovered a mutated gene in about 5 percent of
acute myeloid leukemia patients that could instruct doctors when to start
aggressive treatment.

   Although their discovery applies to few patients with this form of leukemia,
further research could lead to additional genetic tools that would serve others.

   The team was led by Dr. Michael Caligiuri, associate director of clinical
research at the Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital.

   Diagnosing leukemia is one thing. Finding genetic markers that can point
toward specific problems and possible treatment options is the next step,
researchers say.

   About half of patients with acute myeloid leukemia - a particularly virulent
form of the cancer - have distinct defects in their chromosomes that can be
found during standard genetic testing. The other half show no abnormalities.

   But for some of those who don't show the initial defective chromosomes, their
prognosis is worse than those who do. These patients have shorter remissions
following chemotherapy, and don't respond as well to standard treatment.

   In looking for the proverbial needle in these patients, researchers
hypothesized that there must be a defective gene, Caligiuri said. And they
believed they would find it near the same chromosome that in this group appears
to be normal but in the other half of acute myeloid leukemia patients is
defective, Caligiuri said.

   This defective gene could serve as a marker in those who don't have the
chromosomal abnormality - sort of a red flag for a poor prognosis.

   ''We thought there would be a genetic defect there that just couldn't be
seen,'' Caligiuri said. ''And we hit pay dirt.

   ''What is neat is that this is the first sure defect discovered in those
cases.''

   Their results, published this month in the journal Cancer Research, showed
that about 5 percent of acute myeloid leukemia patients carry this defective
gene.

   For those 5 percent, doctors will be able to start an aggressive treatment
sooner.

   Acute myeloid leukemia is a type of cancer that progresses quickly and is
often difficult to diagnose in its earliest stages.

   Characterized by cancer cells found in the blood and bone marrow, it is one
of the most common forms of adult leukemia.

   The American Cancer Society estimated that 9,200 people would be diagnosed
with this type of leukemia last year, and that it would kill 6,300.

   Dr. Clara Bloomfield, director of the Comprehensive Cancer Center at Ohio
State University and co-director of the James, also worked on the international
research team.

   Although these researchers discovered the gene, called ALL1, in 1995, just
what it meant to oncologists was unclear until the group studied a set of
patients.

   ''Lots of genes are discovered,'' Caligiuri said. ''But no one knows what
they mean.''

   The group analyzed 98 acute myeloid leukemia patients with apparently normal
chromosomes. Eleven showed the ALL1 defect. Chromosomes carry genes that convey
hereditary characteristics.

   ''We know that in our study if you have this gene defect, your remission will
last 7 1/2 months compared to 20 months if you don't,'' he said. ''That's what's
important to a doctor or patient.

   ''You want to know if you need a (bone marrow) transplant and when. For some
patients, you don't want to transplant before trying other things. They are
risky. But for these particular patients, a more aggressive approach might be
necessary.''

   The next step for researchers is gene therapy.

   ''We are looking for a way to tamper with this defect to slow or stop
leukemia,'' he said. ''That's exciting stuff.''

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1998


                             2153 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1998 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                        January 10, 1998, Metro Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 832 words

HEADLINE: 'U' trial is first to test gene therapy in patient with a rare
inherited illness;
 Researchers hope that genetically altered cells from a patient will help him
battle Hunter syndrome, a hereditary disorder. Success could lead the way to
gene therapies against such illnesses as heart disease and diabetes, they say.

BYLINE: Gordon Slovut; Staff Writer

BODY:

    University of Minnesota researchers have just completed the first trial of
gene therapy in a person suffering from Hunter syndrome, an often deadly
hereditary disorder.

    "We showed that it can be done safely, which is what we set out to find
out," said Chet Whitley, director of the trial. He said it is too early to know
whether the treatment is effective.

    On Friday, Whitley and his group infused the last dose of genetically
engineered genes into James Oliger, 47, an Iowa elementary school principal.
His blood cells are missing a gene needed to prevent damage to joints and vital
organs.

    Oliger received healthy genes inserted into his own white blood cells over
the past year.

    Whitley said it is too early to know if gene treatment can be used to cure
any of the roughly 4,000 genetically transmitted diseases.

    "This is a first step," said Whitley, an assistant professor of pediatrics
and human genetics.  Someday he hopes it could be used to correct diabetes and
to clear out the clogged coronary arteries of people with heart disease.

    Similar efforts at gene therapy have been authorized at about a half dozen
medical centers around the country, but they're all at early stages of research.
One of the limitations is that scientists have been able to identify the faulty
genes involved in only a few genetic diseases, and many may involve more than
one defective gene.

    Oliger, of Davenport, Iowa, said his symptoms seem to have eased over the
past few months, especially the severe back pain that has plagued him for years.

    He said he realized, when he volunteered to be the first patient to try the
therapy, that it probably wouldn't provide much benefit for him.

    "But this is in my family," he said. "My daughter is a carrier, and she
would pass it on to her children. She is 15. This might help her, if it works
out."

    The disorder occurs only in males, although females can carry the defective
gene.

    Oliger and six other male relatives have a mild form of Hunter, which is
caused by a defect in the gene that produces an enzyme called
iduronate-2-sulfatase. Without enough of that enzyme, waste materials accumulate
in parts of the body, causing severe damage to joints, organs and other tissue.

    In its most common form, which is usually diagnosed in boys at age 3 or 4,
the disease can cause mental retardation, impaired hearing, dwarfism and death
before 20, usually in the midteens.

    Whitley looked for patients to serve as research subjects among Hunter
patients whose disease was diagnosed when they were adults. They usually have
the milder form, which often shows up as impaired hearing and joint problems,
including carpal tunnel syndrome. The Food and Drug Administration ruled that
the experiment could not be tried on anyone under age 18.

    Oliger said all seven members of his family with the syndrome have impaired
hearing and joint problems but normal intellectual ability.

    During the experiment he came to the university one weekend a month for 12
months to receive treatments with white blood cells carrying the healthy genes.
Because white blood cells live for only a few weeks, the treatment had to be
repeated at least once a month. Oliger will return to the university
periodically for tests to show if he still has some of the healthy, genetically
engineered cells in his blood, and if the treatment affected his syndrome.
Whitley said it is possible that much larger quantities of the genes may be
needed to be effective.

    He said his group plans to experiment next with someone with Hurler
syndrome, a similar hereditary disorder caused by a defect in a different gene.

    In that case, instead of correcting white blood cells, they will correct
stem cells, the seeds for bone marrow.  Whitley hopes that treating the marrow,
where all white blood cells are created, might provide a better chance for a
cure.  The Hurler trial probably will begin this year, he said.

    "This doesn't have to be restricted to genetic diseases," Whitley added.

    At the National Institutes of Health (NIH), researchers are developing a
genetic therapy for AIDS, hoping to use the treatment to restore healthy immune
systems and fight off the AIDS virus, he said.

    And some researchers are looking at the possibility of inserting new genes
in diabetics to "turn on and turn off" production of insulin to regulate blood
sugar, just as a normal pancreas does in a nondiabetic.

    Whitley said he can envision creating genes to clear out the plaque clogging
arteries of heart patients, eliminating the need for coronary artery bypass
surgery.

    His project was financed by grants from the university's NIH-funded Clinical
Research Center, the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
and the university's Academic Health Center. Private donations paid for the
studies leading up to the trials.


LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1998


                             2154 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1998 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       January 9, 1998 Friday 1ST EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-02

LENGTH: 1249 words

HEADLINE: BRIEFING

BODY:
 WHOLESALE PRICES DECLINE FOR 1997: Prices paid by wholesalers last year
recorded the sharpest decline since the 1986 oil collapse, and analysts said a
flood of cheap imports from Asia could produce more deflation at the wholesale
level this year. "Inflation is notable by its absence     Like Elvis, it's left
the stage," said economist Bob Dederick of Northern Trust Co. in Chicago. In
contrast with the 2.3 percent price drop more than a decade ago, the 1.2 percent
decrease in 1997 was broad-based, ranging from gasoline to eggs to cars to
computers, the Labor Department said. (AP)

    DOW FALLS 99.65: Hopes for a January rally faded Thursday, with stocks
falling sharply as yet another tame inflation report proved uninspiring
alongside another rough day in Asia and another dire forecast from the
technology group. The Dow Jones industrial average fell 99.65 to 7,802.62. Most
broad-market indexes also suffered sizable losses, although the technology-heavy
Nasdaq composite market fell only modestly despite the latest in a stream of
profit warnings from Seagate Technologies, the leading manufacturer of computer
disk drives. Declining issues outnumbered advancers by a 5-to-3 ratio on the New
York Stock Exchange, where trading totaled 651.25 million shares. (AP)
RIBOZYME, CHIRON TO TEST ANTI-HIV TREATMENT: Ribozyme Pharmaceuticals Inc. of
Boulder and Chiron Corp. of Emeryville, Calif., said Thursday they're planning
to test a new HIV-fighting gene therapy on AIDS patients. The news sent
Ribozyme's shares up 14 percent, or $ 1 a share, to close at $ 8.25 in heavy
trading. The companies said they'll test the treatment on AIDS patients with
lymphoma who are undergoing bone-marrow transplants, after initial clinical
trials on five HIV-positive patients who were otherwise healthy showed it to be
safe and tolerable. The tests on lymphoma patients will be the first to
determine whether the treatment is effective in fighting AIDS. Chiron's stock
gained 50 cents to finish at $ 17.875. (Bloomberg)

    MICROSOFT EXPRESSES REGRET OVER RHETORIC: Microsoft Corp. executives
expressed regret Thursday for the company's harsh rhetoric in its legal battle
with the Justice Department and said the software maker should have been more
respectful of the court and prosecutors. "We need to do a better job of toning
down the rhetoric," Robert J. Herbold, Microsoft's chief operating officer and
executive vice president, said in an interview. Herbold's remarks reflect an
effort by top Microsoft executives to rework the company's public image after a
series of legal setbacks last month. "Over the past two months, some people have
perceived Microsoft as being disrespectful to the court and the Department of
Justice, and we are very sorry to have created that impression," Microsoft
spokesman Mark Murray said. (AP)

    DRUG MAKERS TURN FOCUS ON WOMEN: The nation's drug makers have made a
potentially lucrative discovery - women. Pharmaceutical companies are developing
372 medicines to treat menopause, breast cancer and other conditions that affect
women, according to a study to be released Friday by the Pharmaceutical Research
and Manufacturers of America, a drug industry trade group. Women account for
two-thirds of the 44 million hospital procedures performed each year, 61 percent
of the 70 million annual doctor visits, 75 percent of nursing home residents and
59 percent of prescription drug purchases, according to securities firm Smith
Barney. And they live seven years longer on average, during which they remain
drug buyers. (AP)

    KOREAN BANKING MEETING ENDS WITHOUT AGREEMENT: A meeting between South
Korean officials and international bankers ended Thursday without an agreement
to postpone payments on $ 35 billion in short-term Korean debt to help the
country through its financial quagmire. Scores of banks from the United States,
Europe and Japan are involved in the effort to roll over until the end of March
the maturing debt held by private financial institutions in South Korea. The
meeting at Citicorp is the third since Christmas eve and came just before the
International Monetary Fund's executive board approved an additional $ 2 billion
payment to South Korea, part of the IMF's record $ 57 billion bailout package.
South Korea is having difficulty paying its foreign debts because of a plunge in
its currency, the won. The country already has secured an agreement with the
bankers to roll over until the end of January debt that matured in December.
(AP)

    AFTER-CHRISTMAS SALES LURE SHOPPERS: A robust U.S. economy, high consumer
confidence and the rising stock market gave many retailers high hopes for the
holiday season. But consumers didn't spend freely on Christmas gifts, instead
putting money into savings or spending on family vacations or trips to spas. But
sales picked up after Christmas, when retailers slashed prices. That helped
offset the sluggish sales of the first weeks of the season. The Merrill Lynch
retail index, the investment firm's barometer of sales performance at department
stores and discount chains, rose 5.2 percent last month after a 3.8 percent gain
in November. It was up 3.5 percent in December 1996. (AP)

    INVESTOR GROUP OPPOSES METROGOLF MERGER: An investment group representing
nearly 10 percent of the outstanding shares of Denver-based MetroGolf Inc. has
filed papers with the Securities and Exchange Commission opposing a $ 1.50 per
share cash tender offer for a majority of MetroGolf outstanding shares by Family
Golf Centers Inc. of Melville, N.Y. The proposal calls for a merger of MetroGolf
into a subsidiary of FGC if the tender offer is successful. John "Sandy" McCall,
spokesperson for the investor group, said, "FGC's offer is grossly inadequate,
and, as a result, we have sent an alternative, non-tender offer proposal to
MetroGolf's board of directors." He said the proposal would allow MetroGolf to
remain independent, replace management, fund a major project MetroGolf has with
the New York Port Authority, and substantially reduce the company's long-term
debt. MetroGolf has not responded to the proposal. (The Denver Post)

    AMERIVEST TO BUY 11 BUILDINGS IN TEXAS: AmeriVest Properties Inc. of Arvada
said Thursday it has signed contracts to purchase 11 small office buildings in
Texas. The buildings, which total about 200,000 square feet and are located in
11 cities, are leased to various Texas government agencies. James Etter, CEO of
AmeriVest, said in a statement that the total purchase price for the 11
facilities includes about $ 6.3 million 000 cash and up to 204,300 shares of the
AmeriVest common stock. The eleven properties are expected to generate
approximately $ 280,000 of funds from operations annually. AmeriVest shares
closed Thursday at $ 4.625. (The Denver Post)  MORTGAGE RATES FALL: Mortgage
rates fell this week to a 23-month low after Federal Reserve Chairman Alan
Greenspan's comments on deflation convinced financial markets he would consider
cutting short-term rates later this year. The average rate on 30-year fixed-rate
mortgages declined from 7.03 percent last week to 6.94 percent, matching a low
hit in February 1996, Freddie Mac, the mortgage company, said Thursday.
Fifteen-year mortgages averaged 6.55 percent this week, also a 23-month low and
down from 6.61 percent. On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were
asking an average initial rate of 5.50 percent, the same as last week. The rates
do not include fees known as points. (AP)

LOAD-DATE: January 09, 1998


                             2155 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     January 9, 1998, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 450 words

HEADLINE: PBS' intriguing 'Odyssey' into the miracle of medical advances

BYLINE: Ed Martin

BODY:

   Matters of Life and Death -- the first installment of PBS'
ambitious, five-part exercise in information overload, A Science
Odyssey -- is an engrossing account of the advances in medical
research throughout the 20th century. If nothing else, it's an
effective reminder of how much we take for granted and how quick
we are to forget the hardships of the past.

   As Charles Osgood, the narrator of the entire Odyssey series,
explains in Sunday's opener, "At the start of the century, we
could cure almost nothing. Now, we expect to be cured of almost
everything."


   Matters is filled with often startling information that
will probably be new to history-challenged viewers. It is almost
inconceivable, in the era of gene therapy, DNA and cloning, that
less than 100 years ago the scientific community didn't even know
how germs were spread.

   Much of this history is harrowing. As soberly noted at the top
of the program, the death of President William McKinley in 1901
had as much to do with a simple infection as with the assassin's
bullet that struck him at the Pan American Exposition. An earthquake
killed more than 1,000 people in 1906 San Francisco, touching
off an outbreak of bubonic plague. Early efforts to find a cure
for diabetes involved starving patients, sometimes to death.

   Numerous experts are seen throughout these two hours, commenting
on different periods of medical history. William H. Foege, a professor
of international health at Emory University, makes the strongest
impression, recalling how penicillin saved his life in the 1940s,
shortly after it had become widely available. "It has changed
who is living in this world and who isn't," he notes.

   Although Matters moves slowly and deliberately through
the medical milestones of this century, it seems rather rushed
as the show approaches the present. There is little time devoted
to AIDS, for example -- only a few quick comments from Osgood
about recent advances against the virus.

   Still, this is fascinating material. It prompts reflection on
how far we've come and speculation on where we might be 100 years
from now.

   A Scientific Odyssey runs through Thursday. Each two-hour
program covers a different aspect of scientific advancement in
the 20th century. Tuesday's installment, In Search of Ourselves,
also explores advances in the care and nurturing of humanity.
The other installments look at broader topics. Mysteries of
the Universe (Monday) takes on physics and astronomy; Bigger,
Better, Faster (Wednesday) reviews developments in technology;
and Origins (Thursday) looks at the history of the Earth
and mankind.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Christopher Little, PBS

LOAD-DATE: January 09, 1998


                             2156 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    January 7, 1998, Wednesday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: HEALTH WATCH; Pg. 06F

LENGTH: 278 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH WATCH;
NEWS & NOTES

BYLINE: From news services

BODY:


   SIT AND BEHAVE: Man's best friend? You be the judge. Nearly 4.5 million dog
bites occur annually in the United States, sending 334,000 victims to hospital
emergency rooms. That's more ER visits than injuries from skateboards, baby
walkers and in-line skates combined. And dog bites kill about 20 people a year,
a report in today's Journal of the American Medical Association says. The report
analyzed data from emergency rooms nationwide for 1992-94. Children were the
most frequent targets of dog bites, most often boys ages 5 to 9, who had 57,580
emergency room visits during the three-year period. These emergency room
treatments were estimated to cost $ 102.4 million.

   STRESS AND CANCER: Anxiety and stress after diagnosis and during treatment
for breast cancer can suppress a woman's immune system, perhaps making her more
susceptible to viruses and other infectious illnesses, and possibly influencing
her cancer treatment, a study suggests. The study, in today's issue of the
Journal of the American Cancer Institute, looked at 116 women who had undergone
surgery for breast cancer but had not yet started chemotherapy or radiation
treatments. Women with the highest stress levels also had the most suppressed
immune systems.

   GENE THERAPY: Scientists have injected a dose of genes into a man's heart,
the start of a study to see if they can get hearts with clogged arteries to grow
new blood vessels. The 60-year-old patient's heart was injected Dec. 17 during a
triple-bypass operation, Drs. Ronald Crystal and Todd Rosengart of New York
Hospital-Cornell Medical Center announced. It'll take three to six months to
know whether the treatment worked.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 1998


                             2157 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1998 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 7, 1998 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 509 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Nicholas-Applegate in revamp Nicholas-Applegate, a San Diego-based mutual
fund, said it has named eight new partners, replacing two partners and expanding
the ownership of the money management firm to 23 members.

   Tom Bleakley, Mark Correnti, Andy Gallagher, Jill Jordon, Pedro Marcal, Blake
Moore, Loretta Morris and Jim Szabo were named to the board.

   Jack Marshall and John Wylie withdrew from the board to pursue their own
business venture.

   They will remain with the company for the next year.

   Nicholas-Applegate was founded in 1984 and manages a portfolio of more than
$30 billion. Pauli urges worker test project Bill Pauli, new president of the
California Farm Bureau, has urged the federal government to conduct a test
project on importing foreign workers. Pauli said a pilot project before Congress
would permit 25,000 foreign workers to enter the country legally.

   "We should give it a try," Pauli said.

   "If it doesn't work or isn't necessary, we'll find that out." Synbiotics gets
marketing go-ahead Synbiotics said it received regulatory approval to market
Assure/FH, a diagnostic test to detect an antibody against heartworm infection
in cats. The San Diego company said Assure/FH is a simple and accurate way to
test cats in the veterinarian's office for exposure to the heartworm parasite.
Mycogen links with J.G. Boswell Co. Mycogen said it formed a joint venture with
J.G. Boswell Co. to develop and market cotton seeds internationally.

   San Diego-based Mycogen will contribute cotton breeding material and rights
to its technology in exchange for a 51 percent interest in the venture, Phytogen
Seed Co. J.G. Boswell will contribute its existing Phytogen cotton seed
business, which had sales of $9 million in 1997. The new venture will continue
to market cotton seed in California, Arizona and Greece and will seek to enter
other U.S. and international markets. Vical, Dynavax in licensing deal Vical and
Dynavax Technologies announced a cross-licensing agreement that gives them
rights to use each others' immunization technologies.

   Dynavax said it would use Vical's technology in developing products for
allergies, asthma and autoimmune diseases, while Vical will receive access to
Dynavax patents for DNA immunization through the skin.

   Both companies are based in San Diego. Collateral Therapeuticals sets tests
Collateral Therapeuticals of San Diego said it planned to begin clinical trials
next month for a new gene therapy treatment for coronary artery disease.

   The therapy delivers a growth factor that is supposed to trigger new blood
vessel growth. Credit increased for Realty Income Realty Income Corp. said its
credit arrangement was boosted to $150 million from $130 million.

   The Escondido-based company owns and manages 826 commercial properties in 43
states. Distribution center opens in Rio Innovative Medical Services of San
Diego said Ampromed, a company in which it recently acquired a 45 percent stake,
had opened a new distribution facility in Rio de Janeiro.

   Innovative Medical Services makes water purification and filtration systems.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2158 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1998 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 7, 1998 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-3

LENGTH: 634 words

HEADLINE: QUEST;
Field Samples

BYLINE: Scott LaFee

BODY:

   A survey of selected articles published this month in magazines and journals
covering science, medicine and the environment. The Top 100 Science Stories of
1997 Discover Whether you agree with the editors' choices or not, Discover's
compendium of big science scoops provides an interesting refresher on all that
has occurred during the last 12 months. For a complete listing, you'll have to
pick up the year-end issue, but here are Discover's top 10 stories of the year,
in ascending order: 10. HIV's harpoon: The discovery that the AIDS virus invades
cells in much the same way as the common flu. 9. Pathfinder's mission to Mars:
Stunning pictures of the red planet from a redoubtable little rover named
Sojourner. 8. Stroke treatment: Only 1 in 5 stroke patients recover using
existing medical therapies.

   But an experimental treatment, which reverses blood flow in veins, has shown
remarkable success. 7. Roaches cause asthma: One more reason to dislike the bug.
6. Mad cow disease: Also known as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, it is fatal and
comes in two forms, an old, genetic version and a newer, transmissible one. 5.
Artificial chromosomes: Invention promises to fulfill the even older promise of
gene therapy. 4. Ancient footprints: On a wet sand dune in South Africa,
geologists find human prints that are about 117,000 years old, newly
establishing the oldest footprints made by a modern human. 3. How dry is the
moon?: Some researchers now believe ice exists on the Earth's single satellite.
2. Hale-Bopp: The biggest and brightest comet since 1811. 1. Hello, Dolly: A
sheep successfully cloned using genes from frozen mammary tissue.

   Can human cloning be far behind? The Viral Superhighway The Sciences If the
fight against microbes were merely a matter of size, humans would win outright.

   After all, a person is, on average 10(17) times the size of the average
bacterium. But size isn't all that counts.

   Indeed, it's almost impossible to count the number of species of bacteria
(300,000-plus) and viruses (5,000-plus) arrayed against the number of human
species (1). It gets worse.

   Humans produce a new generation every 20 years.

   In that same time, bacteria can reproduce 500,000 times.

   All of which strongly suggests a perpetually losing battle, says George J.
Armelagos, a professor of anthropology at Emory University in Atlanta.

   With us being the losers. Armelagos' point is this: Humanity is entering a
new era in illness, one marked by widespread environmental disruption and
international travel, the latter making it easier than ever for indigenous
microbes to jet from jungle to city to suburb. The list of recently emerged
pathogens is long and growing: campylobacter, E. coli 0157:H7, hantavirus, HIV
and Legionella pneumophila among them. Humans have fought back with improved
public health, antibiotics and other technological marvels.

   But Armelagos is not optimistic.

   Human civilization, which now covers and dominates the globe, has upset the
delicate balance between our species and those we cannot see.

   Nature has set about righting the ship, in part by creating new ailments
unaffected by modern medicine. Humanity, says Armelagos, must hope the price of
reconciliation is not too high to pay. Field Notes: Scientific American looks at
a set of universal building rules that seem to guide the design of all organic
structures, from simple carbon compounds to complex cells.

   Astronomy reviews two new space telescopes -- AXAF and SIRTF -- that will
probe deep into the X-ray and infrared universe.

   American Scientist discusses "manufactured time" -- the notion that people
are living beyond their natural lifespans due to medical intervention and
improved lifestyles.

   And Skeptical Inquirer reports on experiments to determine whether some
blindfolded people can really see through their skin.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2159 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     January 6, 1998, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. C14

LENGTH: 465 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme gets funds for research;
Schering-Plough in cancer gene-therapy venture

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Genzyme Corp.'s Molecular Oncology division yesterday said it may receive up
to $ 80 million from Schering-Plough Corp. to develop gene therapy products,
including a way to treat certain cancer patients that potentially could stop the
spread of cancerous cells and shrink tumors.

    The agreement calls for Genzyme to develop gene therapy products using
Genzyme's proprietary lipid gene delivery system with some of Schering-Plough's
proprietary genes.

   Schering-Plough, headquartered in Madison, N.J., has the option to
exclusively license the Genzyme delivery system for use with six Schering-Plough
genes.

   Genzyme Molecular Oncology, based in Framingham, will receive about $ 7
million over the next 12 months in upfront payments, research funding, and
milestone payments to help develop a gene therapy program that combines its
lipid delivery system with Schering-Plough's p53 tumor-suppressor gene.

    The p53 gene helps control normal cell growth but malfunctions in cancer
cells, resulting in massive tumor growth. By delivering a normal p53 gene into
cancerous tumors, Schering-Plough hopes to stop tumor growth and end the
uncontrolled growth of cancer cells.

    And while Schering-Plough is evaluating Genzyme's drug delivery system that
targets tumors, it is also examining other approaches.

   Nearly 13 months ago, Schering-Plough began its own gene therapy program for
head and neck cancers and for some ovarian cancers. Last year it started early
clinical testing in patients with liver cancer. In all of those cancers, the p53
gene is placed directly into or near the cancer-ridden area.

    Yesterday Gail Medaris, president of Genzyme Molecular Oncology, said
Genzyme's approach calls for injecting the lipid delivery system and the p53
tumor supressor gene together directly into the patient's blood stream.

    "The big promise is when there are multiple and inoperable tumors, our
injectable lipid delivery system would work on more than a single cancerous
area," said Maderis, noting this is the division's first gene therapy corporate
partnership agreement.

    If the p53 tumor suppressor progam is successful, Schering-Plough would use
the Genzyme drug delivery technology for five other proprietary genes and pay up
to $ 73 million in additional research and project milestone fees.

   If any of the gene therapy programs are successful and approved for sale by
the US Food and Drug Administration, Genzyme Molecular Oncology will receive
royalties based on sales, with Schering-Plough owning all marketing and
distribution rights, said Maderis.

    She said the collaborative research would be conducted in Framingham and at
Canji Inc., a San Diego gene-related therapeutic and diagnostic products company
that Schering-Plough acquired in Feburary 1996.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1998


                             2160 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1998 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       January 6, 1998 Tuesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-10

LENGTH: 404 words

HEADLINE: Gene instructs heart to grow own bypasses

BYLINE: By John J. Goldman, Los Angeles Times

BODY:
 NEW YORK - In what they said was the first application of gene therapy to heart
disease, physicians at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center announced
Monday that they had injected a gene instructing cells to make new blood vessels
into the heart of a 60-year-old man.

   The hope is that the heart will grow its own bypasses, opening a new era of
treatment.

   The gene was carried by a modified virus for the common cold.

   "This has the potential to help a lot of people," said Dr. Ronald Crystal,
principal investigator of the clinical trial, which was announced at a news
conference here.

   According to the American Heart Association, about 58 million people in the
United States have some form of heart disease, including 13.9 million with
coronary artery disease. The latest statistics from the group show that 573,000
people underwent coronary bypass operations in 1995.

   If blood vessels can be grown in the heart through gene therapy or other
methods, physicians said Monday, it could have a profound effect on patients who
need cardiac surgery.

   "This is a complete change in direction in the way we treat coronary
disease," said Dr. Wayne Isom, chairman of the department of cardio-thoracic
surgery at the medical center. "We're working to really put ourselves out of
business," he added.

   In the upcoming issue of the Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery,
researchers at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center described successful
animal experiments using gene therapy that resulted in cardiac blood vessel
growth.

   On Dec. 17, surgeons at New York Hospital performed two bypasses on a patient
with three clogged arteries. The third artery was so blocked that it could not
be operated on. Instead, a gene-based agent to stimulate the growth of blood
vessels was injected into heart muscle near the blocked artery. The hope is a
network of new blood vessels will grow, compensating for the clogged artery.

   Cornell physicians said it will be some time before they know whether new
vessels will grow.

   In addition to the clinical trial, other approaches to induce cardiac blood
vessel growth are under way.

   "Preliminary laboratory experiments involving the multiple approaches have
all looked quite promising," said Dr. Leslie Leinwand, of the American Heart
Association. "It is the first time to my knowledge that a gene therapy agent has
been administered directly to the heart muscle."

LOAD-DATE: January 06, 1998


                             2161 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1998 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                  January 6, 1998 Tuesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BODY & MIND; Pg. 3F

LENGTH: 201 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY MAY HELP PROTECT CANCER-FREE CELLS

BYLINE: Free Press news services

BODY:

   To prevent chemotherapy from killing healthy cells along with cancerous ones,
researchers have been exploring the possibility of inserting a special gene into
normal cells to protect them against the ravages of the drugs.

   In the latest such attempt, researchers at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical
Center in New York report that they have been able to insert the protective gene
into bone marrow and then transplant the marrow into cancer patients.

   Because the work is highly experimental, the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration has approved the approach in only up to 20 patients with advanced
breast, ovarian or brain cancer.

   Of the five patients who have received the treatment so far, two showed
evidence of incorporating the so-called MDR (multiple drug resistance) gene,
although one of them died from advanced brain cancer and the other from
transplant complications. Two other patients are alive with no signs of cancer
two years after the transplant -- but with no signs of the MDR gene either. The
fifth cancer patient died, but not from the treatment. The preliminary results
are reported in the current issue of the Journal of Clinical Oncology.

   From Free Press news services

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             2162 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1998 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     January 6, 1998, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 10; National Desk

LENGTH: 690 words

HEADLINE: CARDIAC PATIENT TREATED BY GENE THERAPY;
 MEDICINE: DOCTORS INJECT A MODIFIED VIRUS INTO HEART OF A 60-YEAR-OLD MAN,
AIMING TO SPUR GROWTH OF NEW BLOOD VESSELS. SUCCESS OF TECHNIQUE IS UNKNOWN.

BYLINE: JOHN J. GOLDMAN, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:


   In what they said was the first application of gene therapy to heart disease,
physicians at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center announced Monday that
they had injected a gene instructing cells to make new blood vessels into the
heart of a 60-year-old man.

   The hope is that the heart will grow its own bypasses, opening a new era of
treatment.

   The gene was carried by a modified virus for the common cold.

   "This has the potential to help a lot of people, said Dr. Ronald G. Crystal,
principal investigator of the clinical trial, which was announced at a news
conference here.

   According to the American Heart Assn., about 58 million people in the United
States have some form of heart disease, including 13.9 million with coronary
artery disease. The latest statistics from the group show that 573,000 people
underwent coronary bypass operations in 1995.

   If blood vessels can be grown in the heart through gene therapy or other
methods, physicians said Monday, it could have a profound effect on patients who
need cardiac surgery.

   "This is a complete change in direction in the way we treat coronary
disease," said Dr. O. Wayne Isom, chairman of the department of cardio-thoracic
surgery at the medical center. "We're working to really put ourselves out of
business."

   In the upcoming issue of the Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery,
researchers at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center described successful
animal experiments using gene therapy that resulted in cardiac blood vessel
growth.

   On Dec. 17, surgeons at New York Hospital performed two bypasses on a patient
with three clogged arteries. The third artery was so blocked that it could not
be operated on.

   Instead, a gene-based agent to stimulate the growth of blood vessels was
injected into heart muscle near the blocked artery. The hope is that a network
of new, smaller blood vessels will grow, compensating for the clogged artery.

   Cornell physicians said it will be some time before they know whether new
vessels will grow.

   In addition to the clinical trial at Cornell, other approaches to induce
cardiac blood vessel growth are underway.

   "Preliminary laboratory experiments involving the multiple approaches have
all looked quite promising," said Dr. Leslie Leinwand, head of the basic
research council of the American Heart Assn.

   "It is the first time to my knowledge that a gene-therapy agent has been
administered directly to the heart muscle. However, this is quite an invasive
procedure, and I think it is important to be cautious and not expect too much
from this early safety trial," she said, adding that "it is important to try
various approaches, because there are scientific merits in each of them."

   In November, researchers headed by Dr. Jeffrey Isner at St. Elizabeth's
Hospital and the Tufts University School of Medicine near Boston reported that
gene therapy reversed disease in a group of patients with hopelessly blocked
blood vessels in their legs.

   Unlike the scientists at Cornell, who used a weakened virus to carry the
gene, Isner's group injected the blood vessel growth gene directly into the
legs.

   At the UC San Diego Medical Center, animal studies have shown that the
gene-therapy approach works. But researchers there have moved on to other
techniques, using infusions of proteins that cause blood vessel growth.

   These proteins can be injected into the bloodstream without the need for
direct injection into heart muscle.

   "Gene therapy has great promise for the future. But there is a dichotomy
whether gene therapy or protein delivery will be the safest or most efficacious
for this particular purpose," said Dr. Frank Giordano, an assistant professor at
UC San Diego who has been conducting research into blood vessel growth. "Only
extensive clinical trials should provide the answer."

   At Boston's Beth Israel Medical Center, researchers are developing another
technique, involving coating the outside of blood vessels that have undergone
coronary bypass surgery with a compound that contains vascular growth factors,
an approach that has proved promising in animal studies.

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1998


                             2163 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JANUARY 6, 1998 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 637 words

HEADLINE: DRUG MAY SPUR NEW BLOOD VESSELS TO COMPENSATE FOR CLOGGED ARTERIES /
HUMAN TRIALS HAVE BEGUN. ANIMAL TESTS SHOWED / THE GENETIC TREATMENT TO BE QUITE
EFFECTIVE.

BYLINE: Donald C. Drake, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In the latest effort to find the first effective genetic treatment for
disease, human trials have started on a drug that may help repair the blockage
in coronary arteries that leads to heart attacks.

   The drug was given to the first human on Dec. 17 during heart bypass surgery,
researchers at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical College in New York City
announced yesterday.

   The 68-year-old man is doing well, doctors said, but it is too soon to say
whether the drug worked, by promoting the growth of new blood vessels that could
compensate for arteries clogged with atherosclerosis.

   Animal trials have shown the drug to be very effective in restoring blood
flow around artificially induced blockage in coronary arteries.

   Ronald G. Crystal, a leading gene therapy researcher and principal
investigator in the study, said that, if successful, he foresaw the drug being
primarily used in the small percentage of patients who do not fully benefit from
conventional therapy - coronary bypass surgery and angiolasty, in which doctors
push a probe through the blockage in the arteries.

   The drug consists of a disabled cold virus - an adenovirus - that has been
engineered to carry the gene for the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).

   This is one of several genes that is involved in the growth of blood vessels.
Injected into the heart muscle near the blockage, the adenoviruses insert VEGF
genes into the cells, which then promote the growth of blood vessels.

   Researchers created artificial atherosclerotic blockage by tightening a metal
sleeve around the coronary arteries of pigs. Then they injected adenoviruses
carrying VEGF genes next to the blocked area. Within four days, blood vessels
started growing around the metal sleeve, Crystal said, restoring blood flow to
almost normal levels. The blood vessels kept functioning even though the
animals' immune systems wiped out the adenovirus and the cells that were
producing VEGF within a week of treatment.

   Encouraged by this success, Crystal and heart surgeon Todd Rosengart last
month treated the first human, a coronary bypass patient.

   After exposing the heart for the bypass surgery, Crystal and Rosengart
injected adenovirus into 10 sites in the man's heart. Tests will be done in the
next few months to see whether the gene therapy promoted blood vessel growth.

   Crystal said they were working on a simpler way to deliver the genes to the
heart. Instead of opening the chest for injections, an injection needle could be
threaded through a catheter into one of the chambers of the heart.

   Adenovirus cannot simply be injected into the circulation because randomly
distributed genes might cause blood vessels to grow in undesirable places such
as the eyes or in undiagnosed tumors, causing them to grow more rapidly.

   University of Pennsylvania heart surgeon Charles R. Bridges agreed with
Crystal that it's unlikely that this type of gene therapy would replace
angioplasty and bypass surgery, the gold standard treatment of blocked coronary
arteries.

   He said there were still many unknowns about gene therapy treatments and
immunologic complications, whereas coronary bypass surgery was well established
and very successful. He said the newest bypass procedures using mammary arteries
to graft around the block would remain effective up to 20 years in 90 percent of
patients.

   Even so, Bridges and Hansell Stedman, a Penn professor and gene therapy
expert, are developing a different gene drug and technique from that used in New
York to treat the same kind of coronary artery disease. Studies with animals
will start soon, but human trials are still a few years off.

   Since 1990, there have been hundreds of trials of gene therapy drugs for
dozens of illnesses, but so far no drug has proved effective in treating
disease.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2002


                             2164 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                           January 5, 1998 Monday All

SECTION: Health and Science Pg. 1 Body Language

LENGTH: 990 words

HEADLINE: Examining the odds of getting the cure

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE

BODY:

   The cutting edge. When we're sick, it's where we want to be.

   We want the latest treatments, drugs and equipment that medical science can
provide, especially if we're fighting long odds. And we don't want anyone
doctors, administrators, government officials and least of all, insurance
companies to tell us that we can't have it.

   Insurers have a different point of view. They can't and shouldn't be expected
to pay for anything a patient wants if there's no proof that it will work or if
a patient's condition is hopeless and the patient is grasping at straws. Because
insurers are holding the purse strings, they lack credibility when they try to
convince a patient that a treatment or drug might do them no good, even if that
is the case.

   Both sides patients and insurers would agree that if no one ever paid for
anything until there was ironclad proof of its value, medical science would
never advance.

   Such are the dilemmas with experimental medicine, which I define as anything
there's a fight about paying for diet medications, bone marrow transplants, gene
therapy, certain kinds of surgery, unlicensed drugs.

   Disputes over covering such treatments can lead to community fund drives by
well-intentioned people trying to help somebody get a chance at a cure; drives
that sometimes become unnecessary after an insurer decides or is forced to pay.

   Disputes also often lead to lawsuits by patients trying to force an insurer
to pay for the treatment they want. Public interest law firms sometimes join
such causes if a large enough pool of people or a big enough principle is at
stake.

   A common example in recent years has been breast cancer patients seeking bone
marrow transplants, such as Claudia Trzebiatowski of West Bend, who successfully
sued her insurer.

   As a result of such lawsuits including a $90 million settlement where an
insurer delayed a decision on allowing a woman to have a transplant until it was
medically too late many insurers now pay for the treatment even though there's
still relatively little evidence about precisely which breast cancer patients it
can benefit. Breast cancer now is the leading reason such transplants are
performed today.

   One insurer who does not cover them for breast cancer is Madison-based
Wisconsin Physician Service Insurance. A Whitefish Bay woman, 36-year-old
Patrice Zinda Mahon, is conducting a public campaign to try to get WPS to cover
one for her. "It's hard enough to fight cancer," she said, without also having
"to fight your insurance."

   Gerald Kempthorne, a longtime State of Wisconsin health adviser who became
WPS' medical adviser in 1994, said such transplants are specifically excluded in
many WPS policies. He said market research showed that not all insurers in the
state were covering such transplants. He also said he would advise WPS to
consider amending the policy for women with Stage 2 or 3 breast cancer, that
which has not spread to other sites.

   Evidence should drive coverage, not emotion, said Jim Hartert, head of
managed care services for Blue Cross and Blue Shield United of Wisconsin.

   "Where the experimental exclusion tends to be applied today is where there's
an absence of evidence," not a question of degree of benefit, Hartert said. For
instance, insurers pay for organ transplants and costly drugs when there's a
history showing that most patients are better off because of them, he said.

   "We embrace many expensive technologies. Money isn't the issue always," he
said.

   Blue Cross, like most insurers, has a process to evaluate whether a drug,
procedure or medical device should be covered. About 50 board-certified
specialists and experts from the community advise the company and guide its
policy on coverage.

   Some of the key questions the panel asks when it judges a treatment are:

   Has it met with approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or other
regulators?

   Does evidence show a likelihood of benefit to the patient, not just slim
odds? How long does the benefit last?

   Is it available outside a pure research setting and in use in the general
community?

   The last issue is what led Medicaid officials to deny coverage of a small
bowel transplant for 5-year-old Tiffany Miller a few years ago. That operation
now is covered by Medicaid because more have been done since Tiffany's case and
a track record is being established, Medicaid officials say.

   Something similar may occur with bone marrow transplants for multiple
sclerosis, an as-yet-unproved treatment. Beth Crucianelli Wolfe of Kenosha
became the third person in the nation to have such a transplant in November
1996. Her physician, Bill Burns of the Medical College of Wisconsin, has
partnered with Northwestern University Medical Center in Chicago to try a small
series of transplants for MS.

   Wisconsin Medicaid has refused to cover them (Burns is about to do his third
case), but an insurer in Illinois recently covered one of Northwestern's
patients.

   Rules against using taxpayer money for experimental treatments "are designed
to keep charlatans and quacks from doing things and expecting to be paid for
them," Burns said. "This is so different," where experts in the field agree it
has a reasonable chance of success and the FDA has approved the research
protocol, he said.

   But insurers don't see it that way. Transplants for MS are "way out there" on
the scale of experimental vs. proven treatments, Hartert said.

   "The crux of the issue is how do we fund research in this country," Hartert
said. "As the federal government has backed away from research and development,
the developers and proponents of these new technologies have turned to HMOs and
other insurers to foot the bill."

   The research may have lots of merit, but it's still experimentation
nonetheless. And insurers will continue to fight efforts to have them bankroll
the testing of theories, no matter how good they sound.


LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1998


                             2165 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1998 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                            January 4, 1998, Sunday

SECTION: INSIGHT - DISCOVERY , Pg. 7B

LENGTH: 702 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE PROVED FRUITFUL AS 19TH CENTURY ENDED

BYLINE: David Lore

BODY:


   Dolly I, the first in a line of cloned, redundant sheep, heads this year's
lists as the top science news item of 1997.

   Discover magazine calls Dolly, the world's first adult cloned mammal, ''the
biggest story of the year, and perhaps the millennium.''

   There they go again.

   Why is it that each new year, normally level-headed science writers act as if
they've had too much champagne?

   No offense to Dolly and her Scottish breeders.

   But doesn't anybody remember that the top story of 1996 was those supposed
microbes from Mars?

   In an attempt at perspective, I've been rating today's scientific
breakthroughs against those that marked the end of the 19th century.

   My guide has been the encyclopedic Timetables of Science, which describes the
period of 1895-1897 as ''the true beginning of 20th-century science.''

   It was this short period that gave us, for example, the discovery of X-rays,
radiation and electrons as well as the invention of a host of now-familiar
machines, including automobiles, motion-picture projectors and radio
transmitters.

   Any one of these has had far more impact on daily lives than anything likely
to emerge from future flocks of Dolly wannabes.

   At least in the near term, cloning would appear to be just another technique
for genetically engineering livestock to improve milk or meat production or to
manufacture pharmaceuticals.

   That would change, of course, if we let cloning escape from the barnyard and
become an accepted tool for human replication.

   No doubt it was just as difficult for most people to recognize the
consequences of Sir Joseph Thomson's research on cathode rays in 1897.

   In a crucial step in the development of atomic theory and the nuclear age,
Thomson - an English physicist - worked out the mass of electrons and determined
they were subatomic particles, thousands of times smaller than hydrogen atoms.

   Neither was it obvious in 1897 that another new science had been born.

   Eduard Buchner, a German chemist, accidentally discovered that year that
living yeasts were not necessary for the fermentation of sugar into alcohol.

   ''This is the beginning of biochemistry,'' according to Timetables.
''Previously, chemists believed that vital processes could only take place
inside living cells.''

   In the same way, it could be decades more before many of 1997's most
promising breakthroughs - in areas such as nanotechnolgy, neurology and gene
therapy - have a broad impact on the populace.

   Malaria, for example, was brought under control during the 20th century after
British bacteriologist Sir Ronald Ross, in 1897, found the parasite that caused
malaria in the intestinal tract of the Anopheles mosquito, thus explaining how
the disease was transmitted.

   Late 19th-century science also discovered the agents responsible for
tuberculosis, typhoid fever, leprosy, cholera, diphtheria, pneumonia and
gonorrhea. Let's hope that current research on diseases such as AIDS and
Alzheimer's will prove just as successful.

   Last year also marked the 100th anniversary of the ice-cream sundae,
breakfast cereal, condensed soup, subways, jackhammers, automatic vending (and
voting) machines, Jell-O gelatin, the diesel engine, the steel plow and the
Stanley Steamer, the first commercially successful steam-powered automobile.

   But considering how the 20th century turned out, possibly the greatest
contribution of 1897 was made by Felix Hoffman, a German chemist trying to find
a medication to relieve his father's rheumatism.

   Hoffman's product, acetylsalicylic acid, helped mankind through the Great
Depression, two world wars, the threat of nuclear annihilation and - not least
of all - the sexual revolution.

   In the next century, this same compound will accompany astronauts into deep
space and, I hope, help us cope with an energy crisis, global warming, economic
turmoil - and even human cloning, if it comes to that.

   Franz Kafka reportedly once described Hoffman's medication as ''one of the
few things that eased the unbearable pain of being.''

   Its common name is aspirin, and it gets my vote for discovery of the
millennium.

   David Lore is science reporter for The Dispatch. He is online at:

   dlorei@dispatch.com

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1998


                             2166 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1998 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       January 4, 1998 Sunday 1ST EDITION

SECTION: EMP; Pg. 06

LENGTH: 532 words

HEADLINE: He's a general in the battle of the bulge

BYLINE: By Diane Eicher, WESTERNERS: DR. ROBERT ECKEL

BODY:

   LIKE many Americans, endocrinologist Dr. Robert Eckel has lost the same 10 or
15 pounds a half-dozen times over. It has a way of creeping back when he and the
scales aren't looking. And then, a few months or a year later, when he tires of
carrying the extra weight, he consciously cuts back calories and sends the
avoirdupois packing - for awhile.

   Although Eckel is by no means overweight, that experience - the weight
professionals call it "yo-yo-ing" - has helped him to understand what his
patients are going through.

   Except that his patients at the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center
- the beefiest of the beefy, sometimes weighing 400 or 500 pounds - have far
more to lose, both literally and figuratively.

   Most are seeing him because they're at risk of dying from being fat - and
also because they're desperate to be thinner. So desperate, in fact, that
they're willing to be part of rigorous clinical studies that sometimes require
painful medical tests, serious food deprivation and overnight stays hooked up to
sleep monitors.

   Eckel has devoted his professional life to trying to find a solution for
those people. Hearing their troubled stories and knowing that, so far, medical
science doesn't have a lot to offer them leaves him "empathetic as a doctor, but
frustrated as an investigator," he says.

   "These people haven't chosen to be this way. They didn't go out and eat a lot
and just get to be 400 pounds," said Eckel.

   He says there's a lot of bias against obesity. The public still believes that
fat people get that way by eating too much. And many of them DO each too much,
and exercise too little - but Eckel also believes there is a genetic component
to the severe obesity he sees.

   That's where his research lab - where there hangs a computer-altered picture
of a corpulent Mona Lisa, her trademark serene smile nearly overshadowed by
chubby cheeks and a double chin - comes in. He and the staff currently are
creating "transgenic" animals - mice that have been injected with a human gene
that theoretically allows them to eat a high-fat diet but not gain weight.

   That could be the dream of every stout American who dreads the daily climb
aboard the scale. But gene therapy for obesity - which, at its simplest
explanation, would trick the body into burning fat differently - is still years
away from human application.

   Eckel is hopeful that someday science will have an answer for the severely
overweight. In the meantime, he continues to advise seriously overweight
patients to lose a little - by the calorie-cutting and more exercise - because
even a 5 percent reduction in weight can reduce health risks, he said. He
believes the real key to curing obesity in this country is prevention - keeping
people from getting fat in the first place. And if there's a practical, public
health message in all this, it's that increasing our daily activity can be
accomplished with a minimum of effort.

   Eckel, for example - who just turned 50 - rides the elevator to his sixth
floor office only once a day, in the morning. The rest of the time - and he's
moving between floors all day - he climbs the stairs.  Diane Eicher is a Denver
Post staff writer.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The Denver Post/Shaun Stanley Dr. Robert Eckel

LOAD-DATE: January 05, 1998


                             2167 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 1998 The Sunday Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Sunday Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             January 4, 1998 Sunday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: FORUM; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 2263 words

HEADLINE: THE 21ST CENTURY THE WORLD ON YOUR WRIST

BYLINE: MICHIO KAKU Special writer, The

BODY:

   Sunday, January 4, 1998 THE 21ST CENTURY   THE WORLD ON YOUR WRIST

   Summary:  Scientists say cheap computer chips will mean Web watches,  talking
walls, smart clothes and engineered offspring

   A lot of silliness has been written about the 21st century, mainly by lone
eccentrics and would-be prophets.

   Case in point: Last year, The New York Times Magazine, in a discussion of
the next 100 years, invited fashion designers, art critics, stockbrokers,
religious leaders and philosophers to ruminate about the future. But not one
scientist was asked to contribute. That's like recruiting people randomly off
the street to perform brain surgery.

   What could the 21st century look like to the people intimately involved in
discoveries that will revolutionize the way we live, work and play? interviews
with more than 150 of America's top scientists, including many Nobel laureates
and directors of big laboratories, I found a consensus gradually is emerging
among the scientists who are inventing the future in their labs.

   They say intelligence, in the form of computer chips seamlessly scattered
throughout our environment and lives, will mean:

   * Your watch will connect to the Internet and access the sum total of human
knowledge. Instead of seeing a watch dial, you will see a computer screen.

   * You will talk to your appliances and VCR instead of swearing at them. You
also will talk to the walls, and they might talk back to you.

   * The TV will disappear, replaced by a wall screen that doubles as an
Internet node or painting.

   * The Internet will become intelligent. Instead of typing in arcane codes
and getting 50,000 responses, you will talk to it in plain English.

   * Your jewelry and clothes will become computerized, monitoring unlimited
streams of information, such as data about your health. That could save your
life if you have a heart attack or a car accident.

   * Your glasses will contain a tiny camera capable of recognizing people's
faces or sending the image across the world.

   * Your car and highways will become intelligent, instantly monitoring your
position, traffic, toll booths and so on. If you fall asleep, your car will
notice your drooping eyes and wake you up.

   This is not science fiction. I visited these scientists' labs, saw the
prototypes and witnessed the therapies that will revolutionize the future.

   No one has a crystal ball, not even scientists. But their predictions are
more reliable than in the past because the DNA, quantum and computer
revolutions have laid a solid foundation for understanding life, matter and  the
mind.

   Moore means less cost

   Computers obey something called Moore's Law, which says computer power --
measured by speed, memory, cost and transitors per chip -- doubles every 18
months.

   If cars obeyed Moore's Law, they would cost 10 cents today. We would park
them, then discard them. Because of Moore's Law, the singing greeting cards
that we routinely throw in the garbage have more computing power than all the
Pentagon computers of 1945.

   For a half-century, Moore's Law has ruled the fate of multibillion-dollar
computer giants with an iron fist, crushing those that ignored it, such as IBM
and Wang Computers, and rewarding those that understood it, such as Intel and
Microsoft.

   Remarkably, Moore's Law predicts that by 2020, the cost of a computer chip
will plunge to about 1 penny That's the cost of bubble gum wrappers or scrap
paper that we scribble on, then discard.

   Like scrap paper, it means computer chips will be everywhere, animating our
jewelry, clothes, furniture, cars, appliances and homes. The personal computer
will disappear from our lives and gather dust as a museum piece; it will be
replaced by millions of tiny chips. Like electricity, which is hidden in the
walls but ubiquitous, computing power and intelligence will be concealed but
everywhere.

   Sorry, no robotic butlers

   But don't expect life in 2020 to be like ``The Jetsons.'' We won't have
mechanical maids or butlers.

   By Moore's Law, we won't approach the processing power of the human brain  --
almost 1,000 trillion bytes a second -- until mid-century, and even then we
won't have robots with true common sense and vision.

   A warning: Experts in artificial intelligence confessed that when robots do
become self-aware, perhaps by the end of the 21st century, we should keep one
hand close to their plug.

   Moore's Law is so powerful that it is spilling over into other sciences.
Because DNA sequencing is now automated and computerized, there is a Moore's
Law for biotechnology: The number of genes that can be sequenced doubles every
two years.

   This means that by 2005, the $3 billion Human Genome Project, which is
coordinated by the National Institutes for Health in Bethesda, Md., will
unravel the 100,000 genes of the human body. By 2020, that information should
revolutionize a visit to the doctor's office.

   Your doctor might take a piece of your skin and put it into a bread box
dubbed a gene analyzer, which will spit out a CD-ROM containing every gene in
your body, something like an owner's manual.Everything in your house has an
owner's manual except you. This CD-ROM will predict illnesses, telling you,  for
example, to watch out for diabetes in 10 years, cancer in 20 years or  heart
disease in 25 years.

   Further, each of us has about a dozen genes that are pretty screwed up.  (Try
an experiment: Ask your grandparents to list all the diseases lurking in  your
family tree, including diseases that are partially genetic, such as  mental
illness, heart disease, arthritisand diabetes. The results might shock  you.)

   About 5,000 genetic diseases have haunted humanity since the dawn of
history: for example, sickle cell anemia among African-Americans, Tay-Sachs
disease among Eastern European Jews and cystic fibrosis among Northern
Europeans.

   All this might change after 2020. Your doctor might give you a shot -- not
for measles or chicken pox, but to cure many of these dreaded diseases.

   Already, 3,000 patients are undergoing gene therapy trials. Scientists have
had partial success in curing ``bubble boy syndrome,'' in which children are
born without an immune system and must live out their lives in a sterile
plastic bubble.

   This also could change the way we treat cancer. ``How cancer develops is no
longer a mystery,'' said Dr. Robert A. Weinberg of the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.

   Cancer is revealed to be caused by a sequence of about four genetic
mistakes, the most common being the gene called p-53, which is found in more
than half of common cancers. Scientists are experimenting with scores of
promising new therapies that attack cancer at the molecular and genetic level,
such as injecting patients with a virus containing the correct version of  p-53.

   Francis Collins, director of the Human Genome Project, said: ``Most of the
cancer therapies we use now will be laughable within a few decades. People  will
look back at the way we treat cancer the same we look at arsenic to treat
syphilis. It will seem pretty medieval.''

   Grow your own organs

   This also could affect the way we see organ replacements. Mickey Mantle,
when he underwent a liver transplant in 1995, set off a fierce national debate
about who should receive organs. In the future, we will simply grow new  organs.
Skin and heart valves already can be grown. Simple organs such as  livers might
be grown in five to 10 years.

   Nobel laureate Walter Gilbert said, ``By the year 2050, I would expect us  to
be able to effectively grow all parts of the body to order.''

   Even the brain will be affected. Studies on mice have shown that certain
genes and chemicals can enhance the memory. ``Drugs to enhance human memory  are
in the cards, and actually within the cards within a 10-year time frame,''
Gilbert said.

   Even aging is yielding its secrets. Three months ago, the genes for
progeria, which speeds aging, and telomerase, which slows and even stops it,
were discovered.

   This does not mean we have a Fountain of Youth. But it does mean the  maximum
life span, which many scientists think is 120 years, no longer is  considered an
absolute. (A French woman who died last year was verified to  have been a few
years older than 120.)

   Dr. Michael Fossel, a professor of clinical medicine at Michigan State
University, said the discovery of telomerase means ``the potential is there  for
extending the human life span indefinitely.''

   Not-so-grand designs?

   But perhaps the greatest impact could be in the area of ``designer
children'' -- the ability to determine the genetic characteristics of our
offspring. Around 2020 to 2040, when scientists expect the technology to be
available, parents might be able to design their children to be free of the
curse of genetic diseases.

   But where does that stop?

   Should the technology be used for purely cosmetic reasons? Some people fear
parents will go too far, choosing the height, weight, eye and hair color,
facial characteristics and even personalities of their children. In the  future,
will baldness, shortness and shyness be considered diseases?

   For example, the introduction of ultrasound in India and China has created  a
demographic nightmare as peasant families abort female fetuses, partly  because
boys are considered more economically valuable than girls in many  agrarian
areas. As a result, 4 million infant females are ``missing'' in  India.

   Some social critics see a dystopia where the rich and the cyber-elites will
pay to enhance and design their children, while the poor are relegated to
disease-ridden cyber-ghettos.

   I recently re-read ``1984'' and ``Brave New World'' to put things into
perspective. I was amused that George Orwell and Aldous Huxley were both
prophetic and incredibly naive about the march of science.

   Ironically, we have infinitely more computer power today than Orwell  dreamed
of when his book was published in 1949, but the computer, instead of  becoming a
Big Brother, has become an enormous democratizing influence in the  form of the
Internet.

   The real danger from the computer revolution is the effect on jobs. When  the
horseless carriage first hit the roads, blacksmiths were slowly wiped out  and
replaced by automobile workers, auto mechanics, oil workers and so on.

   Some jobs are being destroyed before our eyes, including menial and even
middle-management jobs involving inventory. But new, unexpected jobs are
opening up.

   In New York, the penniless, struggling artist is enshrined as a cliche. But
many of these artists are shedding their faded jeans for business, becoming
millionaire computer-graphic moguls in Silicon Alley, designing Web pages for
corporate clients, special effects for Hollywood and talking animals for TV
commercials.

   Likewise, Huxley believed that the Brave New World he envisioned in 1932
would occur 600 years into the future. All but a few of the biological marvels
in his novel are here today.

   The important thing is to put things into perspective. When electricity
arrived, some social critics roundly denounced it, claiming houses would burn
down -- some did -- and people would get electrocuted -- some were. But
electricity now is considered a necessity for modern living.

   Not long ago, organ transplants also were denounced, but that quickly
changed. All these abstract ethical arguments mean nothing when you find out
that your Aunt Martha is dying and needs a new kidney. Then the only question
is how you can get her a new one.

   It's time to talk

   We also can learn a lesson from the late 1940s, when nuclear energy was
unleashed under the shroud of Cold War secrecy. That's why we hear horror
stories of hushed-up nuclear accidents, hideous human radiation experimentsand
17 contaminated nuclear weapons sites that might cost $500 billion to clean  up.

   We are entering a new era, the biotech revolution, that's similar to the
dawn of the Atomic Age. This time, it's unfolding under the scrutiny of the
news media.

   The key to this puzzle is more democratic debate. If a full discussion had
emerged in the late '40s, we might have avoided the horrendous excesses of
nuclear energy. Only by vigorous debate can powerful technologies be used to
benefit all humanity rather than selfish elites.

   The 21st century will be different from all other centuries in human  history
-- there's no doubt about that. We will have the power of a god, with  the
ability to animate inanimate objects via computers and to control life via
biotechnology.

   But will we have the wisdom of Solomon to exercise that power?

   The danger is that while we gradually replace human functions with  machines,
making mundane tasks obsolete, we also can create new forms of life. In Greek
mythology, the gods made half-animal, half-human creatures. Late in  the 21st
century, we might be able to create pigs with wings if we feel like  it.

   The future is coming faster than we think. Novelist William Gibson, who
coined the word cyberspace, has said, ``The future has already arrived; it's
just distributed unevenly.''

   If the future is like a freight train coming at us, the reaction of some is
to lie down and get run over. My attitude is: Why not educate ourselves about
the future of technology and jump into the driver's seat?

   Michio Kaku is the Henry Semat professor of theoretical physics at the City
College of New York and author of ``Visions: How Science Will Revolutionize  the
21st Century.'' You can reach him at his Web site,  www.dorsai.org/(TILDE)mkaku.

   ILLUSTRATION: Color illustration by MOLLY SWISHER - of The Oregonian staff

   Photo

   The following fields overflowed: BYLINETITLE = MICHIO KAKU Special writer,
The Oregonian

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2168 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1998 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                January 2, 1998, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: METRO, Pg. D4, HEALTH UPDATE COLUMN

LENGTH: 570 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH UPDATE

BYLINE: From News Services

BODY:


HEART ATTACKS

Study links death risk to women's age, health

   The reason women are far more likely than men to die after heart attacks
largely has to do with their higher ages and poorer health, a study has found.

   Many studies over the years have shown that heart attacks are much more
likely to be fatal for women. Although experts suspected that age played a role,
it was unclear how much of the difference this explained.

   European researchers tried to sort this out by analyzing data from a large
study - involving 9,600 women and 26,480 men - of clot-dissolving drugs.

   Dr. Roberto Malacrida and others from Civic Hospital in Lugano, Switzerland,
presented the results in this week's New England Journal of Medicine.

   In this study, the women had a 73 percent higher death rate than men in the
first 35 days after their heart attacks. But the women were considerably older
than the men. Forty percent of them were over 70, compared with 20 percent of
the men. When the effect of the age differences was taken into consideration,
the women's risk of death was just 20 percent higher than the men's.

PREMATURE BIRTHS

Home uterine monitoring is played down in study

   A study casts doubt on the effectiveness of uterine monitoring in the home as
a way of preventing pregnant women from giving birth prematurely.

   The goal of the monitoring is to identify uterine contractions early so they
can be stopped with medicine. Some studies have suggested this might be useful,
so doctors from Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in Santa Clara, Calif.,
conducted a study to test such monitoring along with calls from nurses.

   The doctors enrolled 2,422 women who were considered to be at high risk of
delivering prematurely. One-third were assigned to get calls once a week from a
nurse; one-third were called daily; one-third were called daily plus used home
monitoring machines.

   The women using the monitors checked themselves twice a day. The machines
stored the results, and the women transmitted them over the phone to the
hospital.

   In each of the groups, about 14 percent of the women went on to deliver at
less than 35 weeks' gestation, compared with the normal 40 weeks. There was no
sign that daily calls or monitoring did any good.

   The results of the study, directed by Dr. Donald C. Dyson, were published
this week in the New England Journal of Medicine.

BONE MARROW

Tests advance protection against toxins in therapy

   Researchers have reported success in early tests of a genetic technique to
protect bone marrow from the toxic effects of cancer chemotherapy, the Journal
of Clinical Oncology said this week.

   The researchers, at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York, removed
bone marrow from advanced cancer patients, added the Multiple Drug Resistance
gene and reinfused the cells into the patients, the journal said.

   The MDR gene, found at low levels in normal bone narrow cells, produces a
protein that reduces the lethal effects of several powerful chemotherapy drugs.
The protein flushes the drugs out of the cells before they can do their usual
damage.

   "This phase-one study was successful, showing the feasibility and safety of
introducing the MDR gene into the bone marrow cells. . . . If proven effective,
the gene therapy may allow for higher doses of subsequent chemotherapy and
better recovery from treatment," the journal said.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1998


                             2169 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1998 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    January 1, 1998, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 667 words

HEADLINE: Heart attack deaths: Puzzling out gender;
MEDICAL NOTEBOOK / DOLORES KONG

BYLINE: By Dolores Kong, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Women fare worse than men after heart attacks, several studies have found.
Researchers have sought to explain the disparity by suggesting that women are
likely to be older than men when they suffer heart attacks, and to receive less
aggressive treatment.

   In fact, a new study, one of the most comprehensive, has found that after
taking into account age and other factors, the difference in death rates within
a month of a heart attack had dropped from what appeared at first to be a 73
percent higher rate among women to a 14 percent higher rate.

   The difference narrowed on analysis, primarily when researchers took into
account the fact that women having heart attacks were older than men, and that
they thus would be expected to have a somewhat higher death rate.

   "It seems likely that there is at most only a small independent effect of sex
on early mortality and morbidity," the European researchers wrote in a report in
today's New England Journal of Medicine. Their study was based on 36,000 men and
women who were hospitalized with symptoms of a heart attack.

   However, there is another reason their study found a smaller difference in
death rate: Only patients determined to require clot-busting medication were
included, so women and men were getting similarly aggressive treatment.

Gene insertion found to aid chemo patients

    To prevent chemotherapy from killing healthy cells along with cancerous
ones, researchers have been exploring the possibility of inserting a special
gene into normal cells to protect them against the drugs.

   In the latest such attempt at gene therapy, researchers in New York reported
that they have been able to insert the protective gene into bone marrow and then
to transplant the marrow into cancer patients, demonstrating that the approach
is possible, apparently without creating new risks.

   Because the work is highly experimental, the US Food and Drug Administration
has approved the procedure in only up to 20 patients with advanced breast,
ovarian, or brain cancer.

   Of the five patients who have received the treatment so far, two showed
evidence of incorporating the so-called multiple drug resistance gene, although
one of them died from advanced brain cancer and the other from transplant
complications. Two other patients are still alive with no signs of cancer two
years after the transplant - but with no signs of the multiple drug resistance
gene either. The fifth cancer patient died, but not from the treatment.

   The preliminary results by the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center
researchers are reported in the current issue of the Journal of Clinical
Oncology.

Quick diagnoses seen in Lyme disease care

    The dire consequences of untreated Lyme disease are so widely known that one
survey has found that 83 percent of physicians treat a patient they suspect to
be infected, without waiting for test results.

   That approach leads to misdiagnosis, unnecessary medical costs, and possible
side effects. In fact, the vast majority of patients tested or treated for Lyme
disease turn out not to have it.

   In a study in today's issue of the Annals of Internal Medicine, researchers
lay out a plan to treat Lyme disease in a cost-effective way, based on their
analysis of the medical literature.

   For instance, the researchers recommend no Lyme disease testing or treatment
for patients with only vague muscular pain and no evidence of a tick bite or
symptoms of infection.

   They also call for skipping the testing and going directly to antibiotics for
patients who have red bull's-eye rash and other symptoms strongly suggestive of
Lyme disease.

   With this approach, the researchers estimate that for every 1,000 patients,
from 552 to 990 unnecessary treatments could be avoided, and $ 1.85 million to $
3.33 million in unnecessary medical expenditures could be saved.

   The authors of the study include Dr. Allen C. Steere of New England Medical
Center, who pioneered the identification and treatment of Lyme disease.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1998


                             2170 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1997 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                          December 31, 1997 Wednesday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 2617 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE AND MEDICINE GIANT STEPS IN 1997

BYLINE: RICHARD L. HILL of the Oregonia

BODY:

   Wednesday, December 31, 1997 SCIENCE AND MEDICINE   GIANT STEPS IN 1997

   Summary - This year's advances in science clear the path for  more in 1998

   Every year brings its share of significant scientific achievements and
wonders, but 1997 proved especially spectacular.

   The nonstop array of awe-provoking news, from a lamb called Dolly to a
robot called Sojourner, will be tough to top in the coming year. But advances
build on past achievements, so 1998 should not be dull. Breakthroughs are
tough to foresee, but undoubtedly they will occur.

   This year's top achievement stunned the world when it was announced in the
journal Nature in February. Dolly captured the public's imagination, and
``cloning'' became a household word when scientists for the first time used
DNA from an adult mammal to create a genetic duplicate.

   The biological breakthrough was followed in March by the arrival of Comet
Hale-Bopp, which gave scientists a better understanding about the chemical
contents of comets. The century's brightest comet provided a nightly spectacle
through May.

   A few weeks later, the Mars Pathfinder landed and became the most watched
space event. Millions of people followed the July 4 landing on Mars via TV and
through the Internet. The spacecraft's small robot, Sojourner, wandered around
the planet's stark landscape, sending back thousands of spectacular images.

   Later in the year, as El Nino warmed up the ocean off Oregon, the debate
about global climate change warmed up in Kyoto, Japan. After years of
negotiating, more than 150 nations agreed on a policy for cutting emissions of
carbon dioxide and five other heat-trapping greenhouse gases.

   Here's a peek at a few of the scientific adventures coming up in a variety
of fields during the coming year, along with a look back at several of 1997's
remarkable discoveries.

   SPACE: We're going back to the moon. The new year will blast off with
Monday's scheduled launch of the Lunar Prospector spacecraft. The 4-foot,
653-pound robot will survey the moon from a 60-mile-high orbit for a year.
Among its six scientific studies, it will seek evidence of water ice in the
permanently shadowed polar regions.

   Scientists will continue to analyze the enormous amount of data transmitted
from the Mars Pathfinder lander. After studying more than 9,500 images from
the mission, scientists reported earlier this month in the journal Science
that surface photographs provide strong evidence that liquid water was once
present on the planet.

   The Mars Surveyor spacecraft, which began orbiting Mars in September, also
has sent back photos. Using an atmospheric braking maneuver, it will achieve
its final orbital position in mid-January 1999 and begin its mapping mission
in mid-March 1999.

   Galileo, a spacecraft orbiting Jupiter, will continue exploring the solar
system's largest planet and its moon. Earlier this month, Galileo snapped
pictures of an icy Jovian moon, Europa, from a mere 124 miles away. The moon
is one of the few sites in the solar system that might have harbored life.

   Closer to home, the first steps will be taken in constructing the
International Space Station. In June, a Russian Proton rocket is scheduled to
place the first element, the functional cargo block, of the $20 billion
station into orbit. In July, the space shuttle Endeavour is scheduled to place
Node 1 into orbit. Node 1 is the main connecting point for later U.S. station
modules and components.

   Mir, the aging and crippled Russian space station, caused plenty of high
anxiety for astronauts and cosmonauts this year. A fire, a collision and
frequent computer breakdowns and power losses drew debate as to whether lives
were being risked unnecessarily.

   Expect the Hubble Space Telescope to provide more spectacular images from
deep space in the coming year. Astronauts made repairs and upgrades to the
telescope in February to help astronomers examine the universe in greater
detail.

   Two weeks ago, scientists released detailed views of the final stages of
sunlike stars. The views revealed intricate glowing patterns spun into space
by aging stars: pinwheels, lawn sprinkler-style jets and elegant goblet
shapes. They offer a preview of the final stage of our own sun's life.

   AIDS: Scientists are continuing to make headway in the frustrating 16-year
battle against the AIDS epidemic.

   In October, a research team at the University of Maryland led by HIV
co-discoverer Robert Gallo identified a natural molecule that prevents the
AIDS virus from infecting cells. The discovery could lead to powerful new
types of AIDS drugs in 1998 or perhaps a vaccine. The molecule, known as MDC,
is part of a family of proteins called chemokines.

   Gallo's team earlier identified three chemokines, but MDC is more effective
because it protects all the cell types attacked by HIV.

   Three teams of scientists recently found that the powerful drug
combinations many HIV-infected people take do not eliminate the virus from the
body. The scientists also found that the virus does not develop resistance to
the drugs in people who follow the strict schedule of medicine.

   Despite the research advances, AIDS is far from being solved. Medical
experts working for the United Nations recently said new infections are
occurring almost twice as fast as estimated a year ago. Instead of 8,200 new
infections a day, the experts estimate there are 16,000. They estimate that
30.6 million people are living with HIV.

   BIOLOGY: Look for cloning, the feat that stunned the world, to continue to
make headlines in 1998. Scientists used genetic material from the mammary
glands of a 6-year-old ewe to create a genetic duplicate, Dolly.

   The Scottish scientists who cloned Dolly announced in the Dec. 19 issue of
Science they had produced Molly and Polly, two lambs cloned with a human gene
so their milk will contain a blood-clotting protein that can be used in
treating human hemophiliacs.

   Ethical issues were raised as to whether attempts should be made to clone
humans, and a presidential ethics commission recommended a limited ban on such
efforts. But a few scientists and infertility specialists envision
circumstances when cloning might be acceptable, such as an infertile woman who
wants a child.

   Advances in reproductive technology resulted in another of the year's
biggest events: the November birth of the McCaughey septuplets in Iowa.

   The advance in cloning overshadowed a milestone in the study of human
heredity: the creation of the first working artificial human chromosome. The
achievement by scientists at Case Western Reserve University and Athersys Inc.
offers scientists a research tool for investigating fundamental questions
about the chemistry responsible for human heredity.

   Examining a synthetic chromosome gives researchers insight into the
processes of natural human chromosomes. It also might offer a way to cure
inherited diseases by altering a cell's genetic structure.

   In another area of genetics, medical researchers are continuing to work on
gene therapy, which involves repairing or replacing defective genes that cause
disease.

   Early results from gene therapy attempts have been disappointing, but
scientists in Boston reported last month that they had succeeded in using the
technique in patients with dangerously clogged arteries in their legs.

   Twenty of those patients have received injections of laboratory-made
versions of the human gene that makes vascular endothelial growth factor, a
protein that prompts blood vessel development during growth in the womb. Of
these patients, 16 have grown new blood vessels that carry blood around the
blockages.

   The Boston scientists think the therapy eventually could be used to make
bad hearts grow their own bypasses.

   PHYSICS: Work will continue in 1998 on the Large Hadron Collider, a
particle accelerator being built near Geneva, Switzerland. When completed in
2005, the 16-mile-circumference accelerator will be the world's most   powerful.

   U.S. and European officials signed an agreement earlier this month that
ensures that the United States will participate in building the accelerator.
About 25 percent of members of the U.S. experimental high-physics community
are expected to do resarch at the collider.

   In the collider, radio-frequency energy will accelerate two beams of
protons to nearly the speed of light. The collision energy of 14 trillion
electron volts will be seven times greater than at what is now the world's
highest energy accelerator, the Tevatron at Fermilab near Chicago.

   In recent months, physicists reported two other intriguing findings.

   Two teams of astronomers announced in November that they might have found
the first evidence that massive, rotating black holes in our galaxy drag space
and time around with them as they gather matter into their spiral, much as a
tornado picks up objects in its path. The phenomenon, known as frame-dragging,
was predicted in 1918 as a natural consequence of Einstein's general theory of
relativity.

   Earlier this month, a team of physicists in Austria reported in the journal
Nature they had taken a first step toward creating a perfect copy of matter
instantaneously over long distances. The feat, the first demonstration of
``quantum teleportation,'' involved replicating the exact properties of one
light particle, or photon, in another 3 feet away.

   The physicists produced a pair of photons that, according to quantum
theory, were ``entangled,'' meaning that anything that happens to one
instantaneously affects the other, no matter how far apart they are. By
altering one member of the pair by having it interact with a third photon,
they sent one feature of the third photon, its polarization, instantly to a
different place by transforming the other member of the pair.

   It is as if they took a red ball in one room and made it disappear there
and instantly reappear in another room. In fact, though, what was
``teleported'' from one place to another was not the ball itself, but the
quality of ``redness,'' which was reproduced on a different ball.

   The methods they used, wrote physicist Anton Zeilinger and his colleagues,
``will be of great importance for exploring the field of quantum communication
as well as for future experiments on the foundations of quantum mechanics.''

   ENVIRONMENT: After 160 nations agreed this month in Kyoto, Japan, to reduce
emissions of carbon dioxide and five other heat-trapping greenhouse gases, the
difficult task begins of persuading governments to support a treaty. President
Clinton faces an uphill struggle in Congress to implement the agreement.

   While politicians argue, scientists need to decide how greenhouse-gas
emissions are to be measured and verified, including the absorption and
release of carbon from changes in land use and forest management. Scientists
also must come up with a mechanism for nations to trade emissions. They need
to come up with details before the next climate conference late next year in
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

   Climate scientists also will continue to track El Nino and its effects.
Researchers in the past decade have made tremendous strides in forecasting and
following the ocean-warming events.

   Depletion of the ozone layer in the atmosphere also will be closely
monitored. The zone of total ozone destruction over Antarctica reached an
altitude of nearly 13 miles in October, up from 8 1/2  to 11 1/2  miles.

   Thinning of the protective layer appears to be playing a role in the
growing number of deaths and deformities in amphibian species. Andrew
Blaustein, a zoology professor at Oregon State University, recently found that
levels of ultraviolet radiation now found in natural sunlight in Cascade ponds
and lakes kill salamander eggs. Embryos that managed to hatch produced
deformed salamanders.

   In addition to ultraviolet radiation, scientists cite parasites and
pesticides as contributing to the decline and deformities in amphibians.

   In 1997, scientists also came up with a price tag on the annual worth of
the planet's natural goods and services: $33 trillion. That rough estimate is
conservative, say ecologists.

   The world's oceans will receive special attention in 1998 after the United
Nations General Assembly declared it the International Year of the Ocean.

   ANTHROPOLOGY: Scientists gained more insight into our ancient ancestors in
1997.

   A team of U.S. and German researchers extracted a short segment of
mitochondrial DNA, which is inherited from the mother, from a Neanderthal
fossil. The scientists found that Neanderthals apparently weren't related to
us. The evidence supports the theory that modern Homo sapiens emerged in
Africa about 100,000 years ago and spread throughout the world, replacing
Neanderthals.

   Other research showed that human ancestors had mastered the making of stone
tools as early as 2.5 million years ago. Scientists have re-dated stone tools
from the Gona region of Ethiopia and found them to be the oldest known
artifacts from anywhere in the world. The finding pushes back the date of the
oldest tools by about 200,000 years.

   The oldest known footprints left by a modern human were found recently near
Cape Town, South Africa. The two prints are thought to be 117,000 years old.

   Scientists will press their investigation as to who were the first
Americans after a significant discovery this year. A team of nine
archaeologists announced that the Americas were inhabited by humans at least
as early as 12,500 years ago -- far earlier and a half a world farther south
than previously thought.

   Artifacts unearthed at a site near Monte Verde, Chile, predate by at least
1,300 years the evidence of human habitation from Clovis, N.M. The Clovis site
is conventionally accepted as the oldest to have been discovered in the
Western Hemisphere. The Monte Verde site also has revealed preliminary
evidence that Homo sapiens might have been in residence there as long as
33,000 years ago.

   EARTH SCIENCE: Volcanologists are continuing to monitor the eruption of
Soufriere Hills volcano on Montserrat in the eastern Caribbean. Twenty people
died in June when an avalanche down its slopes engulfed several tiny villages.
More than two-thirds of the 39-square-mile British colony is considered unsafe
for habitation, and most of the island's residents have left since the volcano
began erupting in July 1995.

   U.S. scientists are keeping watch on the Mammoth Lakes ski area in
east-central California, where more than 8,000 earthquakes have been recorded
since summer. Emissions of carbon dioxide gas along the flanks of Mammoth
Mountain have killed large areas of trees. Scientists are trying to figure out
the volcanic hazard of the Long Valley caldera, a 20-mile by 10-mile crater
formed by an eruption 760,000 years ago. The last large eruption occurred
there 100,000 years ago.

   Earthquakes again took their toll around the world in 1997. A magnitude 7.1
earthquake struck Iran in May, killing at least 2,400 people and leveling
60,000 homeless. In central Italy, 10 people died, and 5,000 were left
homeless by a series of earthquakes in October and November. In eastern
Venezuela, at least 67 people died, and nearly 500 were injured by an
earthquake in July.

   -- Richard L. Hill covers science for The Oregonian's
Health/Medicine/Science team. He can be reached at 221-8238, by fax at
294-4150 or by e-mail at richardhill@news.oregonian.com

   ILLUSTRATION: Graphic - Collage by Michelle Wise -  of The Oregonian staff

   Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

   Photo by NASA

   The following fields overflowed: BYLINETITLE = RICHARD L. HILL  of the
Oregonian Staff

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2171 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1997 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          December 31, 1997 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1739 words

HEADLINE: MAN-MADE MAN;
Humanity, now a product of its own technology, looks ahead

SERIES: QUEST; HOW MAN BEGAN;  12 STEPS TO BECOMING HUMAN. PART 12 OF 12.

BYLINE: Scott LaFee

BODY:

   Born naked to the world, a human infant would seem the perfect picture of
technological innocence, a babe without goods. And for much of human history,
this was true.

   Newborns entered the world equipped only with those traits and abilities
provided by nature and genetics.

   They survived and thrived, like the species on whole, according to the same
universal laws that governed every living organism. Of course, the chronicle of
human development is unlike that of any other creature.

   And modern humans, particularly those born in this century, have been awfully
busy rewriting those laws of nature and evolution.

   In many ways, a child today is the product and beneficiary of devices,
inventions and systems created by humans, not nature, technologies such as
prenatal vitamins, amniocentesis and fetal surgery that influence human life
before it has even left the womb. For better or worse, we are a species no
longer content to place its fate solely in the hands of natural selection.

   From the development of the first stone tools, humans have increasingly
embraced and employed technology as the means to reshape their surrounding
world. Indeed, it's questionable whether we could live without it. "People are,
to use a phrase I've heard, functional cyborgs," said Gregory Stock, a
biophysicist at UCLA.

   "Technology has so expanded our realm of activities and become a part of who
we are that we would feel diminished as humans if it was taken away. "It's not
just machines I'm talking about.

   Clothing is a technology.

   Most of us wouldn't think of going naked, even if the weather was warm.

   And which would most people think more important: fat deposits or bank
deposits?

   For a strictly biological creature, the answer is obvious.

   For humans, it's not.

   We've moved a long way from basic biology." Techno-lution The evolution of
Homo sapiens sapiens, at least as it's currently described by most scientists,
has been a millions-of-years-old, ongoing process marked by distinctive
developmental milestones, each of which profoundly altered the human condition.
Warm-bloodedness, for example, gave humanity's earliest mammalian ancestors a
competitive edge in certain situations.

   Bipedalism -- the ability to walk upright -- expanded opportunities and
freedoms.

   A decidedly larger brain produced even more powerful advantages. By and
large, these milestones occurred within the broad context of Charles Darwin's
theory of evolution.

   They were -- and are -- the results of natural selection, a process in which
unfit organisms are eliminated as a result of selective pressures in the
organism's environment. Put another way, traits like warm blood, walking upright
and a big brain helped certain suitably equipped human ancestors prevail while
differently equipped competitors fell by the evolutionary wayside. But what of
technology's role, particularly the modern brand seen in the late 19th and 20th
centuries?

   Will human invention now and in the future prove to be even more
consequential than past biological innovation? That appears unlikely, but
there's no dismissing the incredible ramifications of what we hath wrought --
and will again in the near and distant future. Humans are chronic inventors.

   Our predecessors crafted the first stone tools two million years ago.

   And we've never stopped tinkering. But no period of the species' history
seems more innovatively dense or more profoundly influential than the past 100
or so years, a maelstrom of technological discovery that includes not just
myriad new machines and devices, but new ways of thinking and behaving. "Take
public health systems, which is a form of technology," said Richard Rhodes,
author of "The Making of the Atomic Bomb."

   "I read a paper published last year by two demographers who tried to quantify
the number of American lives saved due to improvements in water supply,
vaccination and other public health measures.

   They estimated that half of the U.S. population is alive because of such
mortality reductions, that 65 million Americans would have died this century
before reaching the age of reproduction without widespread public health
improvements. "That's extraordinary.

   Worldwide, more than 120 million people have died in wars and wars' attendant
privations this century.

   But here, if you extrapolate the demographers' research worldwide, is a
figure that just dwarfs the number of dead.

   It shows quite compellingly how just one aspect of technology has altered the
whole course of history." Genes to an end Traditionally, said Solomon Golomb,
director of technology at the University of Southern California's Annenberg
Center for Communication, well-adapted species tend to become evolutionary
dead-ends. "They're optimized to a particular environment, which they occupy
until that environment dramatically changes.

   That's what happened to the dinosaurs.

   They thrived until a major climatic shift killed them off. Humans have also
optimized their environment.

   What's different with us is that humans have developed the unique ability to
manipulate their environment and, in fact, their own genome.

   It makes us much less vulnerable as a species to dramatic, external change."
Gene manipulation is perhaps the technology with the most obvious long-term
impact on human development.

   Within the next few years, scientists expect to completely map the human
genome -- the sum of all of the genes forming each human being, a number
somewhere around 100,000. With this template, doctors envision being able to
devise strategies for effectively eliminating -- or at least minimizing -- the
ravages of inherited diseases like cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy.

   Even now, people in developed countries like the United States can routinely
tinker with their genetic future, using prenatal tests like amniocentesis to
screen for hereditary diseases and syndromes.

   At the same time, medical researchers are using experimental gene therapies
-- the insertion, removal and alteration of specific genes -- to counter the
effects of such diseases in people already born. "The ability to fix genetic
defects is something nobody even anticipated seriously 20 years ago," said
Golomb at USC. Now some researchers say that's just the start. "I think
somewhere down the line, the technology will allow researchers to look at the
genome and say, `Hey, if we switch these alleles we can extend longevity,'" said
John Campbell, another biophysicist at UCLA.

   "When that becomes possible, it's inevitable humans will try it." A million
mousetraps Of course, the technology that allows humans to alter their own
genetic structure did not occur in a vacuum.

   Indeed, it could not have happened -- or continue to happen -- without the
development of other technologies equally significant, if somewhat less obvious
in their consequence. Radio, television, computers and the Internet have
hastened and broadened human knowledge, spurring new invention and innovation at
speeds nature cannot match. W. Brian Arthur, a scientist at the Santa Fe
Institute in New Mexico, observed as much in a recent essay published in
Scientific American. His grandfather, Arthur wrote, was born in Ireland in 1874,
a time when "illiterate people still footed their way on dirt roads, where
one-room schools had peat fires in the corner, where stories were told at night
in shadows and candlelight." Yet he lived long enough to see the debuts of
satellites, automobiles, computers, telephones, radio, television, jet
airplanes, X-rays and the Apollo space program. Arthur's grandfather died in
1968, just 29 years ago, no more than a generation or two.

   Would he recognize the world today?

   In just the last three decades, humans have learned to create babies in test
tubes and connect millions of people simultaneously through the World Wide Web.
A computer has beaten a human master at chess, a feat once deemed impossible.
And researchers at Stanford University say they may have found the means to bind
living cells to silicon chips -- a possible first step to creating a real
melding of man and machine. In his 1993 book, "Metaman," UCLA biophysicist Stock
looks at these myriad, advancing technologies and predicts that one day they
will transform humanity into a sort of global superorganism, a life form capable
of controlling not just its destiny, but those of every other surviving
organism. "Natural evolution proceeds by trial and error.

   Small design changes are random, caused by selective advantages and different
reproductive rates. For humans, though, the process is no longer biological.

   We've achieved a sort of global homogeneity.

   There are no isolated pockets of humanity anymore, so selection occurs in a
nonphysical realm, a contest between new and different ideas, projections, plans
and designs.

   These are things that do not require the same amount of energy as, say,
evolving different limbs. That means they can change very, very fast." In
Stock's future vision, technology has allowed humans to thrive, not just on
Earth but elsewhere in the universe, thanks to advances in space exploration and
living.

   Many now deadly diseases have been marginalized; life spans substantially
increased.

   Machines are more like humans, humans more like machines. "It's really hard
to tell what the exact impacts will be, but I'm optimistic," Stock said.

   "The human enterprise is extremely robust.

   I think we would be hard put to come up with ways of derailing it.

   People in the distant future will look at this moment not as a time when we
let technology get out of control, when we wrecked the planet, but as a pivotal,
bright moment in our development." Perhaps, said Rhodes, who is editing an
upcoming anthology of writings about 20th-century technologies.

   But he is skeptical.

   "I'm quite sure that humans are just another species with lots of hard-wired
limitations." Technology at its best, he said, alleviates human suffering and
prejudice. It also firmly establishes mankind's place in nature.

   Science and technology, for example, long ago knocked humanity off its
cherished, but mistaken, pedestal at the center of the universe.

   Rhodes thinks science and technology will continue to do so, whatever marvels
emerge. "Even if we resolve all of these issues, we'll come up against the
question: What then?

   The fact is, there can be no ending up in Eden because humans will always be
constrained by the physical world, by the limits of where we are in our bodies.
"Whatever else is true of us, we're still a species of primate."

GRAPHIC: 1 ILLUSTRATION; PHOTOBY: Illustratio by Daymond Gascon

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2172 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                          December 31, 1997 Wednesday
                                SPECIAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 4269 words

HEADLINE: Tragedy and triumph

BODY:

   July   July 1 - Hong Kong reverts to Chinese rule after 156 years under
British colonial government. New rules protecting younger jet-ski operators take
effect. The mob trial of Vincent "Chin" Gigante, which began the previous week,
heats up.

    July 2 - Dr. Jack Kevorkian announces the death of in Michigan of Lynn Dawn
Lennox, a Lakewood woman who battled multiple sclerosis.

    July 6 - Mars Sojourner is first mobile vehicle on another planet.

    July 8 - An attorney denies any wrongdoing on the part of Gregory Hurst, the
George Street Playhouse producer who resigned after accusations of improper
sexual advances.

    July 9 - Leaders of 16 NATO nations, after inviting Czech Republic, Hungary
and Poland to join, meet with 25 other countries in unprecedented security
summit. Mike Tyson's boxing license is revoked and he is fined $3 million for
biting Evander Holyfield.

    July 10 - NATO forces capture one Serb war crimes suspect and kill another,
in warning to Bosnia's most wanted. DNA from Neanderthal skeleton backs theory
that all humanity descended from an "African Eve" 100,000 to 200,000 years ago.

    July 11 - Doctors announce first embryonic cell tissue transplant in U.S. to
slow spinal cord damage in paralyzed man.

    July 12 - Kidnapped Basque politician Miguel Angel Blanco found murdered
shortly after deadline set by captors.

    July 14 - Jackie Mattison, a former aide to Newark Mayor Sharpe James
convicted in a kickback scheme, is sentenced to 41 months in prison. Attorney
General Peter Verniero defends the state spending $344,000, including legal
fees, to settle a sexual-harassment suit against Chuck Haytaian, chairman of the
New Jersey Republican State Committee.

    July 15 - Fashion designer Gianni Versace is shot to death in Miami; police
suspect serial killer Andrew Phillip Cunanan, found dead days later. One of
Cunanan's victims was William Reese, a cemetery caretaker from Upper Deerfield
Township.

    July 16 - Green Beret commander Henry Shelton is named chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff. The Dow Jones average surges past 8,000. John Walter, the heir
apparent to AT&T chief executive Robert Allen last fall, resigns after being
told he will not get Allen's job in January.

    July 17 - After 117 years, Woolworth Corp. closes its last 400 five-and-dime
stores, laying off 9,200 employees. The one-year anniversary of the loss of
Flight 800 is marked.

    July 21 - USS Constitution, which defended U.S. in War of 1812, sets sail
for first time in 116 years. In other "navel" maneuvers, Miss America pageant
officials announce two-piece bathing suits will be permitted in this year's
competition.

    July 23 - Investigators announced that Donald Trump spent thousands helping
others file lawsuits to try to stop rival Steve Wynn from building a casino in
Atlantic City.

    July 25 - K.R. Narayanan becomes India's president, first member of an
"untouchable" Dalits caste to do so. Former comrades denounce Khmer Rouge leader
Pol Pot, responsible for deaths of up to 2 million Cambodians. Autumn Jackson,
who claimed to be Bill Cosby's illegitimate daughter, is found guilty of trying
to extort $40 million from the comedian. A State Police report shows crime
dropped to its lowest level since 1987.

    July 26 - General Motors and the United Auto Workers reach a tentative
agreement on a contract to end strike that had idled four parts plants in
Michigan and Canada.

    July 29 - Minamata Bay, Japan, once a worldwide symbol of industrial
pollution, is declared free of mercury 40 years after contaminated food fish
were blamed for deaths and birth defects. Fire sweeps through Wharton State
Forest in South Jersey.

    July 30 - Mideast peace talks set back when two men bomb Jerusalem's most
crowded outdoor market, killing themselves and 15 others. Fred Baker, a
corrections officer at Bayside State Prison in South Jersey, is stabbed to
death, the first such officer to be killed in a New Jersey prison in 25 years.

    July 31 - In a Brooklyn raid, police seize five bombs believed bound for
terrorist attacks on New York City subways. A Federal Express cargo plane
crashes at Newark International Airport, but all five on board escape unharmed.

   August

    Aug. 3 - Teamsters strike United Parcel Service after talks break down with
nation's largest package delivery service.

    Aug. 4 - Zoologists say they have discovered about 30 giant pandas in Gansu,
China. Teamsters go on strike at UPS, idling 7,000 in New Jersey and thousands
across the U.S.

    Aug. 5 - Montserrat's deadly volcano erupts for a second day, forcing
hundreds to flee the Caribbean island.

    Aug. 6 - Rescuers pull charred bodies from wreckage of Korean Air jet in
Guam; of 254 on board, 29 survive. Ending years of rivalry, Apple Computer and
Microsoft agree to share technology. British Prime Minister Tony Blair shakes
hands with Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams in first meeting in 76 years between
a British leader and the IRA's allies.

    Aug. 7 - Country singer Garth Brooks sings in Central Park.

    Aug. 9 - Amtrak train with nearly 350 people aboard derails on bridge near
Kingman, Ariz.; more than 150 injured.

    Aug. 11 - International donors offer world's second-largest economic rescue
plan to Thailand, a $16 billion loan to shore up Thai currency and financial
system.

    Aug. 12 - Steel workers approve contract ending 10-month strike against
Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp., in the longest walkout in modern history
against major steel company. Local officials across New Jersey reel after
learning that the state plans to generate millions by allowing companies to
build 122 cellular telephone towers and poles along state highways.

    Aug. 13 - The New Jersey Board of Medical Examiners agrees to write rules
regulating diet pills.

    Aug. 14 - FCC approves Bell Atlantic's $25.6 billion acquisition of Nynex.

    Aug. 18 - Nation's largest Lutheran church votes for closer ties with three
other major Protestant denominations to exchange clergy and communion. Beth Ann
Hogan becomes first female student in Virginia Military Institute's 158-year
history. Teamsters and UPS reach tentative agreement to end a 15-day strike that
disrupted service nationwide. Mahwah Mayor David Dwork commits suicide in his
office.

    Aug. 20 - A federal appeals court upholds Megan's Law.

    Aug. 21 - Hudson Foods Co. plant in Nebraska closes and agrees to destroy
some 25 million pounds of hamburger after largest meat recall in U.S. history.
Chairman and CEO Geoffrey Bible of Philip Morris Co. says cigarettes "might
have" killed 100,000 Americans, company's first such acknowledgement of possible
link between smoking and death.

    Aug. 25 - Egon Krenz, East German communist leader who opened Berlin Wall
eight years ago, convicted in deaths of citizens trying to flee to the West
during Cold War. Dow Corning Corp. offers $2.4 billion to settle claims from
more than 200,000 women with ills related to silicone breast implants. Chang
Sung Gil, North Korea's ambassador to Egypt, defects to United States, the first
top diplomat to abandon the communist state.

    Aug. 26 - Former South African President F.W. de Klerk, who shared Nobel
Peace Prize for helping to end apartheid, resigns as leader of party that
created the practice. Two dozen Newark city sanitation workers are arrested on
charges they solicited bribes to pick up trash.

    Aug. 27 - Federal regulators issue warnings about reported heart-valve
damage among users of fen-phen, a popular combination of diet pills.

    Aug. 28 - After nearly a year of legal challenges, California's affirmative
action ban becomes law. Officials describe Newark's Zoo Crew, once touted for
its business and philanthropic efforts, as a front for drug sales after a series
of pre-dawn raids.

    Aug. 29 - Hooded men kill more than 300 people in an Algerian farm village
in the worst carnage since Islamic insurgency. Federal regulators propose
banning a key ingredient in Ex-Lax.

    Aug. 30 - Britain's Princess Diana dies in a crash in Paris after her car is
pursued by photographers. Philip Noel Johnson, an armored car driver believed to
have taken $22 million in the biggest heist in U.S. history, is arrested at
Texas border.

   September

    Sept. 1 - Federal minimum wage increases to $5.15 an hour in second phase of
increase approved by Congress. Physicists at Brookhaven National Laboratory
announce evidence of new subatomic particle, an "exotic meson," that may help
explain how universe is constructed. Armed robbers posing as postal workers
steal more than $37 million from Zurich post office.

    Sept. 2 - Workers begin removing up to 300 bodies, mostly Muslim war
victims, from one of largest mass graves ever found in Bosnia or Croatia. Murray
Sabrin, Libertarian candidate for governor, files for public matching funds. New
Jersey's first charter schools open their doors.

    Sept. 3 - Senate votes to ban most federal financing for abortions provided
by managed-care industry. U.S. sanctions against Japan's three largest shipping
companies go into effect after Japan fails to eliminate harbor restrictions for
U.S. shippers. Teenagers set fire to an Old Bridge home after trashing it during
a days-long party during the Labor Day weekend.

    Sept. 4 - An Essex County grand jury clears Newark Police Officer Robert
Leaks in the shooting death of a woman during a narcotics arrest in June.

    Sept. 5 - Nobel Peace Prize winner Mother Teresa dies of heart attack at 87.

    Sept. 7 - Mobutu Sese Seko, former Zairian dictator, dies at 66.

    Sept. 8 - Strike against Bay Area's commuter rail system causes monumental
traffic jams in and around San Francisco. Crowded ferry capsizes, killing as
many as 400 Haitians. America Online acquires 2.6 million CompuServe users,
becoming Internet provider for 60 percent of Americans logging on from home.

    Sept. 10 - Officials disclose investigation into West New York police
department for allegedly sponsoring illegal gambling operations and prostitution
in partnership with a Cuban organized crime group.

    Sept. 11 - According to Army's largest-ever study of the problem, "sexual
harassment exists throughout the Army, crossing gender, rank and racial lines."
Scots create their own Parliament after 290 years of union with England. Tammy
Blakey, hired as a pilot for Continental Airlines in 1984, testifies of
pornography in the cockpit. Officials reveal that their investigation into
illegal activity in West New York extends to Police Chief Alexander Oriente.

    Sept. 13 - Katherine Shindle of Moorestown, representing Illinois, is
crowned Miss America in Atlantic City. A cargo jet from McGuire Air Force Base
crashes in the Atlantic Ocean after colliding with a military plane off the
coast of southern Africa.

    Sept. 14 - Overcoming fears of violence, Bosnians flood polling stations to
vote in local elections.

    Sept. 15 - A Harvard researcher reports that New Jersey's school standards
are the weakest in the nation. The popular Redux and Pondimin diet pills are
pulled off the market.

    Sept. 16 - Two New Jersey Air National Guard fighter jets collide off the
coast of Atlantic City, but all three crewmen survive.

    Sept. 17 - Northern Ireland's main Protestant party joins peace talks,
bringing major players together for first time. Negotiators from more than 100
countries agree on measures to protect ozone layer but fall short of what
environmental groups advocated. President Clinton rejects ban on land mines
endorsed by 89 countries. After five military crashes in less than a week, the
first-ever halt of training flights is ordered. "Prom Mom" Melissa Drexler is
indicted for murder. Bergen County millionaire Nelson Gross, former state
chairman of the Republican Party, disappears.

    Sept. 18 - Coopers & Lybrand merges with Price Waterhouse creating world's
biggest accounting firm. Media mogul Ted Turner pledges $1 billion for United
Nations causes.

    Sept. 19 - William Wright, who crusaded for stiffer drunk-driving laws
following his wife's death in a car crash, is killed while jogging near the site
of her fatal 1995 accident.

    Sept. 22 - Sportscaster Marv Albert's trial opens.

    Sept. 23 - Armed men raid Algerian village, looting homes, killing at least
200 people and wounding 100 in one of the worst massacres since Algeria's
Islamic insurgency began.

    Sept. 24 - Garth Brooks is named best entertainer by Country Music
Association. The body of Nelson Gross is found on the bank of the Hudson River
in Manhattan, and a fired employee and his two teenage friends are arrested.

    Sept. 25 - Hammas leader Khalid Mashaal survives attempted poisoning in
Jordan; two Israeli agents captured. President Clinton opens the door of Central
High School in Little Rock, Ark., and welcomes nine blacks who faced mobs 40
years ago in school desegration. Sportscaster Marv Albert pleads guilty to
assault and battery after earlier denying he bit a lover's back. Within hours,
NBC fires him.

    Sept. 26 - Garuda Airlines Airbus crashes in Indonesia, killing 234 people.

    Sept. 28 - Swiss voters endorse their country's liberal drug policies, which
include state distribution of heroin to hardened addicts.

    Sept. 29 - Israel and the Palestinian Authority agree to resume
negotiations, ending a six-month stalemate. Embattled West New York Police Chief
Alexander Oriente steps down. The body of 11-year-old Eddie Werner of Jackson
Township is found in the woods near his home.

    Sept. 30 - Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu frees Hamas spiritual
leader Sheik Ahmed Yassin, in a goodwill gesture to the Palestinians.

    October

    Oct. 1 - WorldCom Inc. moves to block the merger of MCI and British Telecom,
offering its own $29.4 billion bid in the biggest proposed merger in U.S.
history.

    Oct. 3 - Attorney General Janet Reno says there was no evidence President
Clinton broke the law with White House coffees and overnight stays for big
contributors as she extends a probe of Vice President Al Gore's telephone fund
raising.

    Oct. 4 - Hundreds of thousands of men attending a Promise Keepers rally pack
the Mall in Washington, D.C., in one of the largest religious gatherings in U.S.
history.

    Oct. 6 - American Dr. Stanley B. Prusiner wins Nobel Prize in medicine for
discovering new type of germ. Robert Brennan, the New Jersey penny-stock
promoter who cheated thousands of investors, loses his final challenge to a
record $75 million civil securities fraud judgment.

    Oct. 7 - The state Supreme Court voids a half-million parking tickets.

    Oct. 8 - Pathfinder yields evidence that Mars may have supported life. South
and North Korea agree to open their skies to each other's commercial flights for
the first time in 50 years. President Clinton visits Newark and praises
Democratic gubernatorial hopeful Jim McGreevey. Published reports show a 40
percent drop in New Jersey Lyme disease cases this year over last.

    Oct. 9 - Hurricane Pauline strikes Acapulco, Mexico, killing at least 118
people.

    Oct. 10 - Cuban President Fidel Castro endorses his brother, Raul, as
successor at close of Fifth Communist Party Congress. Rutgers University
athletic director Fred Gruninger announces his retirement.

    Oct. 12 - Three earthquakes in central Italy damage famed St. Francis
Basilica, in Assissi and 15th-century bell tower above Foligno city hall.

    Oct. 14 - NJ Transit announces emergency rider plans in anticipation of a
strike.

    Oct. 13 - President Kim Young-sam's son is sentenced to three years in
prison for bribery and tax evasion in South Korea's first criminal case
involving a close relative of an incumbent leader.

    Oct. 15 - Richard Noble drives a British jet-powered car twice the speed of
sound, shattering the world land speed record. Six scientists, three of them
American, win Nobel Prizes for cellular and atomic research.

    Oct. 16 - In what may be the first such U.S. case, a Georgia woman gives
birth after being implanted with previously frozen eggs. Tammy Blakey is awarded
$875,000 in one of the first findings of sexual harassment of female pilots. The
Rolling Stones play Giants Stadium.

    Oct. 17 - The remains of Ernesto "Che" Guevara, who roamed the world as
revolutionary, were laid to rest in his adopted Cuba.

    Oct. 18 - Gov. Christie Whitman, Democrat  Jim McGreevey and Libertarian
Murray Sabrin square off for the first debate of the gubernatorial election. The
New Jersey Performing Arts Center in Newark opens to fanfare, culminating a
decade-long effort to bring an arts center to the city.

    Oct. 20 - NJ Transit announces it will offer concierge service at the
Maplewood station next spring, with other stations to follow.

    Oct. 22 - For the first time, U.S. inspectors discover E. coli bacteria in
imported Canadian beef, halting shipments of 34,000 pounds. Sources report that
C. Michael Armstrong will become the new AT&T chief executive. A Bergen County
judge awards custody of a 2-year-old boy to a gay couple.

    Oct. 23 - America's Makah Indians win the right to resume their traditional
whale hunts for the first time in 70 years. Three men are found bound and shot
to death in Bogota, leading to arrests the next day. Mayor Sharpe James suggests
a plan to move the Nets to Newark.

    Oct. 24 - Former NBC sportscaster Marv Albert apologizes to the woman he bit
during a sexual romp and avoids jail time. A former mental patient guns down
Trooper Scott Gonzalez in Warren County.

    Oct. 25 - Hundreds of thousands of women join the Million Woman March in
Philadelphia.

    Oct. 26 - The Iraqi Parliament recommends freezing relations with U.N. arms
inspectors after the Security Council threatens further sanctions against Iraq.

    Oct. 27 - The stock market experiences a record 554-point drop, the worst
since the 1987 crash.

    Oct. 28 - The stock market roars back, posting its biggest single day point
gain ever and smashing the volume record with more than 1.1 billion shares
traded.

    Oct. 29 - Chinese President Jiang Zemin meets in his first summit with
Clinton in Washington, clashing over human rights but agreeing to end the
diplomatic chill.

    Oct. 30 - Louise Woodward, a 19-year-old British au pair, is convicted of
murder in the shaking death of an infant in her care.

   November

    Nov.  1 - The last Woolworth's store in New Jersey closes.

    Nov.  2 - Amtrak and the union representing rail maintenance workers reach
an agreement that includes a 3 percent annual pay hike, averting a strike.

    Nov.  3 - The Supreme Court lets stand California's groundbreaking
Proposition 209, a ban on race and gender preference in hiring and school
admission. A 10-year-old Piscataway girl is found slain near her home.

    Nov.  5 - Jim McGreevey concedes 34 minutes into Wednesday morning, giving a
re-elected Gov. Whitman the narrowest of victories.

    Nov.  6 - Corrections Commissioner William Fauver resigns.

    Nov.  7 - Eleanor Boyer, 72, says she will donate her $11.8 million Pick-6
Lotto winnings to her church and charity. Sheila Bellush is gunned down in her
Sarasota, Fla., home and her husband later returns to family in Sussex County to
care for their quadruplets.

    Nov.  9 - Researchers in Boston say they have, for the first time ever, used
gene therapy to reverse a human illness.

    Nov.  10 - WorldCom Inc. and MCI Communications Corp. agree to $37 billion
merger, biggest in U.S. history. A judge reduces the au pair's conviction to
manslaughter and sets her free.

    Nov.  11 - Gunmen in downtown Karachi, Pakistan, kill four American oil
company workers and their Pakistani driver.

    Nov.  12 - Ramzi Yousef is found guilty of masterminding the 1993 bombing of
the World Trade Center. In a unanimous vote, the U.N. Security Council condemns
Iraq, imposes a travel ban and warns of "further measures" unless Iraq
cooperates with American arms inspectors.

    Nov.  14 - Steve Forbes tests the presidential waters in Iowa, leading to
speculation about 2000.

    Nov.  16 - Wei Jingsheng, China's most prominent pro-democracy campaigner,
is freed on medical parole after nearly 18 years in prison and flown to the
United States for treatment. Most Arab nations boycott the Middle East economic
summit in Qatar in protest of Israel's hard-line policies.

    Nov.  17 - Islamic militants dressed as police spray gunfire on foreign
tourists outside one of Egypt's most renowned temples, killing 65 people. The
FBI officially pulls out of the probe into TWA Flight 800, saying the explosion
was not caused by a criminal act. A court-appointed monitor disqualifies
Teamsters President Ron Carey from running again for the union's top spot.

    Nov.  19 - An Iowa seamstress gives birth to septuplets, only the second set
known to be born alive.

    Nov.  20 - The Piscataway schools affirmative action case is settled when
civil rights group agree to pay a financial settlement. Long Branch Police Sgt.
Patrick King is slain and the suspect leads police on a chase to the George
Washington Bridge, where he is slain.

    Nov.  27 - A Manhattan woman is critically injured when a balloon knocks
over a light pole during the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade in New York.

   December

    Dec. 1 - A 14-year-old self- professed atheist shoots at a morning prayer
group at a high school in West Paducah, Ky. Three students are killed and five
hurt. On World AIDS Day, scientists report that the number of AIDS deaths in New
Jersey is falling. Dec. 2 - President Clinton signs a $2.3-billion package,
giving financially crippled Amtrak new leeway to manage itself competitively.
South Korea and the International Monetary Fund agree on a multibillion-dollar
bailout for South Korea's beleaguered economy.

    Dec. 3 - The Clinton administration, seeking to stabilize a spreading
financial crisis in Asia, commits $5 billion as part of a $55 billion
international bailout of South Korea, the largest such rescue effort in history.
In continuing fallout from disgraced Somerset County Prosecutor Nicholas
Bissell, a judge dismisses the charges against accused drug kingpin Isaac
Wright. An explosion shortly before midnight starts a fire that damages St.
Casimir's Roman Catholic Church, a center of Newark's Polish community.

    Dec. 4 - The U.N. Security Council agrees to a six-month extension of Iraq's
oil-for-food program. The state Assembly overrides Gov. Whitman's veto of a ban
on partial birth abortions, setting the stage for a Senate showdown.

    Dec. 5 - The European Union bans all tobacco advertising, except at stores
that sell cigarettes, after October 2001.

    Dec. 6 - New Jersey area codes 201 and 908 split off 973 and 732.

    Dec. 8 - In $25 billion deal, Swiss Bank and the Union Bank of Switzerland
plan to combine, forming Europe's largest and world's second largest bank. The
U.S. Supreme Court refuses to extend a stay of Megan's Law, clearing the way for
community notification on sex offenders.

    Dec. 10 - Amtrak chief Thomas Downs abruptly resigns.

    Dec. 11 - Suspected Hutu rebels attack Tutsi refugee camp in northwestern
Rwanda, killing as many as 200 people. Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams is first
political ally of the IRA in 76 years to meet a British prime minister.
Microsoft Corp. is ordered to stop bundling its Internet browser with more
desirable Windows software. Henry Cisneros, Clinton's first housing secretary,
is indicted for conspiracy, obstructing justice and making false statements
about payments to his former mistress. More than 150 countries agree at a global
warming conference in Kyoto to control the Earth's greenhouse gases.

    Dec. 12 - Former New Jersey tennis star Josh Gimelstob, convicted in the
hit-and-run death of a campus police officer at Tulane University, is sentenced
to six months in jail and two years of house arest.

    Dec. 13 - International terrorist Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, aka Carlos the
Jackal, faces prosecution in France for murder. A fire at a Burger King in
London's Heathrow airport snarls air traffic throughout Europe.

    Dec. 14 - ASEAN nations meet in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, to commemorate the
group's 30-year anniversary and focus on currency crisis and stock market
turmoil.

    Dec. 15 - Clinton appoints Bill Lann Lee as acting assistant attorney
general for civil rights over Republican objections. A moratorium on the
construction of cellular phone towers ends. The state Senate overrides Gov.
Whitman's veto of the ban on partial-birth abortions.

    Dec. 16 - State corrections officials announce a counter-offensive against
gangs in prisons. Nobody Beats the Wiz files for Chapter 11 bankruptcy
protection, saying it will close 17 of 49 stores.

    Dec. 17 - New Jersey becomes the first state in the nation to grant equal
standing to lesbian and gay couples seeking to adopt children.

    Dec. 18 - AT&T chief executive C. Michael Armstrong announces broad plan to
cut costs, a plan that could top $4 billion a year.

    Dec. 19 - Three men involved in a botched Somerset County jewelry store
robbery that ended in the death of a co-owner are given long prison terms.

    Dec. 22 - Forty-five villagers are killed by gun-toting marauders in the
Chiapas region of Mexico, the site of an anti-government rebellion last year.

    Dec. 23 - Woody Allen marries Soon-Yi Previn, the adopted daughter of his
ex-lover Mia Farrow, in a secret ceremony in Italy.

    Dec. 25 - Jerry Seinfeld announces he'll pull the plug on his quirky,
mega-grossing sitcom "Seinfeld" after this season, making it a very miserable
Christmas for NBC.

    Dec. 27 - The Giants lose NFL playoff game against Minnesota Vikings in last
minute, 23-22, a dismal end to a resurgent season.

    Dec. 30 - The Federal Aviation Administration cancels plans to reroute 25
percent of Newark International Airport's departing air traffic over central New
Jersey, one day after meeting with lawmakers and concerned citizens. Federal
officials also say a planned study of air space around the nation could change
air routes for all three New York City-area airports.

GRAPHIC: 1. Grief is etched into the faces of children and their teachers at
Northeast International Magnet School in Montclair as they watch three special
balloons rise in a Jan. 24 memorial. The balloons carried the names of Adrienne,
Kristen and Brittney Bennett, three classmates who were all found dead beside
the body of their mother, Delfrances Bennett. She apparently took her own life
after ending theirs.

 2. House Speaker Newt Gingrich was censured and fined on Jan. 21 for ethical
misconduct, but by year's end had recovered enough to put himself on the list of
possible GOP presidential candidates for 2000. He's seen leaving a Washington
prayer service with his wife, Marianne.

 3. President Clinton and Hillary dance at one of the balls Jan. 20 celebrating
his inauguration.

 4. Vernon Baker, sole survivor of a group of seven black World War II veterans,
gets a Medal of Honor Jan. 13.

 5. Kim Goldman hugs her father, Fred, after the Feb. 4 wrongful death civil
suit verdict against O.J. Simpson.

 6. This is Dolly. She was introduced in Edinburgh as the world's first clone of
an adult mammal on May 8.  By year's end, we were to meet Molly and Polly, two
cloned sisters.

 7. Ellen's coming out: In much-hyped television segment on March 30, Ellen
DeGeneres' character reveals to Laura Dern that she's gay. At the same time,
DeGeneres told the public that she's gay. 8. Jackie Mattison, Newark Mayor
Sharpe James' chief of staff, was convicted on March 21 of taking kickbacks. He
was sentenced to 46 months in federal prison

 9. Somerville actor Desi Arnaz Giles is interviewed March 6 on News12 New
Jersey about controversy over his portrayal of Jesus in the Park Theatre
Performing Arts Center's "The Passion Play." By the end of its run in Union
City, the production attracted record ticket sales

 10. During most of March, we were entertained by nightly visits by the
Hale-Bopp Comet. This shot was made on March 2, as it passed over Lambert Castle
tower in Paterson, but it came closest to earth on March 22.

 11. Heaven's Gate, an almost unheard-of techno-religious cult, burst into
notoriety when the bodies of 39 of its members were discovered in their San
Diego headquarters on March 26. The mass suicide apparently was connected with
their belief of cult leader Marshall Applewhite's promise that they would be
picked up by an alien spaceship.

 12. Pizza slices litter the ground along Scott Road in Franklin, where two
pizza deliverymen were found shot to death on April 19. In what became knows as
the "pizza murders," Thomas Koskovich, 19, and Jayson Vreeland, 18, still await
trial for the apparent thrill slayings of Giorgio Gallara and Jeremy Giordano.

 13. Amy Kunath of Teaneck finishes off emblem on the field at Shea Stadium for
the April 15 celebration for Jackie Robinson on the 50th anniversary of his
breaking the major league baseball color barrier. 14. On May 20, broadcaster
Marv Albert was indicted for sexual assault in Arlington County, Va. He
maintained his innocence until pleading guilty on Sept. 25, settling for a
no-jail sentence.

 15. There had been much said about golf phenomenon Tiger Woods before his
arrival at The Masters tournament in April, but he rose to mega-star status
after his record 12-shot victory there and subsequent endorsements.

 16. Stephen Jones, the defense attorney for convicted Oklahoma City bomber
Timothy McVeigh, is greeted outside the Denver courthouse on June 13 by
headlines about the capital sentencing.

 17. Jesse Timmendequas is led out of Mercer County Courthouse in Trenton on
June 20 after hearing his death sentence for the kidnap and murder of 7-year-old
Megan Kanka.

 18. State Senator and Woodbridge Mayor Jim McGreevey makes his victory speech
June 4 after winning the Democratic gubernatorial primary, kicking off his
surprisingly close race against Christie Whitman.

19. A Federal Express jet takes off past one of the company's cargo planes that
bounced and flipped over at Newark International Airport on July 31. It was
called a miracle by some officials because the crew walked away unscathed

 20. The Mars rover with an attitude, Sojourner, bumps into a rock named Yogi
during the exciting period in July when the Pathfinder mission beamed back
sparkling photos of the surface of the Red Planet

 21. rony and grief: Just weeks before her own death, Princess Diana comforts
Elton John on July 22 at a memorial in Milan for fashion giant Gianni Versace,
who was shot to death a week earlier in Miami. In September, the rock star would
perform at her memorial service.

 22. Lacey Township teenager Melissa Drexler became known as the "Prom Mom"
after she was arraigned in the death of her baby, born in a restroom during her
senior prom June 6 in an Aberdeen Township banquet hall.

 23. The world mourned the Sept. 5 death of Mother Teresa, which generated
special prayers by nuns with the Missionaries of Charity, her order, at St.
Mary's in Plainfield.

 24. The symbolic image from the Sept. 6 memorial service for Princess Diana at
Westminster Abbey: from left, Prince Charles, Prince Harry, Earl Charles
Spencer, Prince William and Prince Phillip.

 25. Libertarian gubernatorial candidate Murray Sabrin made New Jersey history
by being the first third-party representative to qualify for funding and debate
status. He could afford to smile during his concession speech in Edison on Nov.
4.

 26. The body of New Jersey developer Nelson Gross is removed from a site near
the Hudson River in upper Manhattan section of New York on Sept. 24. A fired
employee and two teenage friends were arrested in the Sept. 17 kidnap-murder.

 27. The Soufriere Hills volcano sends up ash and steam on Oct. 15, causing even
more evacuations from the Caribbean island. Since the volcano roared to life
in1995, only 4,038 of the original 11,000 residents remain.

 28. The 32-year autocratic reign of Zaire's Mobutu Sese Seko ended on May 16
when rebel forces captured Goma to complete their takeover of the African
country.

 29. Miss Illinois, Katherine Shindle, competes in the swimsuit portion of the
Miss America Pageant in Atlantic City on Oct. 11. She was a winner, and so was
idea to allow both two-piece and one-piece swimsuits.

 30. The wing of this New Jersey Air National Guard F-16 bears witness to the
mid-air collision over the Atlantic Ocean with a second F-16 from the 177th
Fighter Wing Sept. 16.

 31. A neighbor sits across the street from the house of her friend, 11-year-old
Eddie Werner, below, who disappeared on Sept. 27 when he was selling candy
door-to-door. His body was found two days later and 15-year-old Sam Manzie was
charged with sexually assaulting and strangling the Jackson Township boy.

 32. One of the featured performances for the Oct. 18 opening of the New Jersey
Performing Arts Center, the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, graces the new
Prudential Hall stage.

 33. The world's stock exchanges drove everybody to the brink during October,
with roller-coaster results caused by Asian markets. Sign language indicates
frustration in Chicago trading pit on Oct. 23.

 34. The nanny trial absorbed two countries during October, as British au pair
Louise Woodward is shown reacting to the guilty verdict by the Cambridge, Mass.,
jury. Although the verdict in the child-killing case carried a mandatory life
sentence, the judge later reduced the charge and set aside the prison time.

 35. Chinese's President Jiang Zemin made a U.S. tour in October, here waving to
the crowd in Colonial Williamsburg shortly before traveling to Washington to
meet President Clinton.

 36. Governor Christie Whitman initiates the post-midnight victory celebration
in Princeton after her slim victory over Democratic challenger Jim McGreevey
Nov. 4

 37. Rutgers quarterback Mike McMahon suffers on the bench toward the end of the
season-ending loss to Miami at the Orange Bowl Nov. 15. It put a miserable cap
on an 0-11 season for the Scarlet Knights.

 38. A Heath High School student screams at seeing the scene of a shooting at
her Paducah, Ky., school on Dec. 1. A 14-year-old freshman, Michael Carneal,
calmly drew a handgun in a crowded school lobby and shot eight fellow students
just finishing an informal prayer meeting. Three of them died and another
remains paralyzed

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2173 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   December 30, 1997, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02; FINDINGS

LENGTH: 195 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Technique Used To Protect Bone Marrow

BODY:


   Researchers have reported success in early tests of a genetic technique to
protect bone marrow from the toxic effects of cancer chemotherapy.

   The researchers, at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York, removed
bone marrow from advanced cancer patients, added the MDR (Multiple Drug
Resistance) gene and reinfused the cells into the patients, according to a
report in the January issue of the Journal of Clinical Oncology.

   The MDR gene, found at low levels in normal bone narrow cells, produces a
protein which reduces the lethal effects of several powerful chemotherapy drugs.
The protein flushes the drugs out of the cells before they can do their usual
damage.

   "This phase-one study was successful, showing the feasibility and safety of
introducing the MDR gene into the bone marrow cells . . . If proven effective,
the gene therapy may allow for higher doses of subsequent chemotherapy and
better recovery from treatment," the journal report states.

   A phase-one study is designed to test the safety and feasibility of a
procedure and needs to be followed up with further tests to evaluate its
effectiveness and long-term consequences.

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1997


                             2174 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

              December 24, 1997, Wednesday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 574 words

HEADLINE: NEW PROCEDURES, FUNDING EQUAL PROMISE;
 MEDICINE: AS RESEARCHERS MAKE ADVANCEMENTS IN TREATMENTS FOR PROSTATE CANCER,
THE POTENTIAL MARKET IS HUGE.

BYLINE: From Bloomberg News

DATELINE: REDONDO BEACH

BODY:


   Bruce Binder, a 52-year-old computer specialist, said he would rather die
than undergo the removal of his cancerous prostate gland--a surgery that would
keep him alive while destroying his sex life.

   A decade ago, the only alternative to treatments that caused impotence or
incontinence was to wait and hope. Binder and others like him, however, demanded
new treatments for a disease rarely discussed in the past and often overlooked.

   "I couldn't think about living my life without sex, and wearing a diaper,"
said Binder, who was newly married when diagnosed five years ago. "I would have
done nothing about the cancer and just taken a year off to die."

   He didn't have to do that, as novel uses of existing therapies and millions
spent on research are yielding promising new treatments.

   Companies such as Boston Life Sciences Inc. and Cell Genesys Inc. are working
on everything from a vaccine to gene therapy, while advances by others such as
Theragenics Corp. and UroMed Corp. have made existing procedures more effective
with fewer side effects.

   "There are a lot of exciting things going on right now," said Dr.  Robert C.
Flanigan, chairman of Loyola University Medical Center's Department of Urology.
Most of the research is in its infancy, however, and it will be years before the
treatments are deemed effective, he said.

   Binder eventually was treated with cryosurgery, which freezes and kills the
tumor while leaving healthy tissue unharmed. He has remained disease-free with
no after-effects for five years.

   Candela Corp., Cryomedical Sciences Inc., and ENDOcare Inc. all make
cryosurgery equipment.

   The potential market for prostate cancer is huge. Drugs for chemical
castration, which combat hormones that stimulate the cancer, alone generate more
than $ 1 billion in annual sales, said Hambrecht & Quist analyst Alex Zisson.

   These drugs, made by TAP Holdings Inc.--a joint venture between Japan's
Takeda Chemical Industries Ltd. and Abbott Laboratories--Zeneca Group Plc, and
Schering-Plough Corp., can reduce cancers and relieve pain for those with
advanced cancer but don't actually cure it. While the drugs can prolong a
patient's life by two to three years, they cause impotence.

   A decade ago, Eli Lilly & Co. introduced a simple blood test, now sold by
Beckman Instruments Inc., to detect the disease. It supplemented the painful and
sometimes ineffective digital rectal exam--and sent the diagnosis rate soaring
among younger men.

   Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in the United Stats,
with 300,000 new cases annually. It is the second-leading cause of cancer death
among men, killing 41,400 annually.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998


                             2175 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                   December 23, 1997, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 400 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS CLOSING IN ON REPLACING FAULTY GENES

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   University of Pittsburgh researchers looking for ways to replace faulty genes
inside cells have found they can deliver replacement genes by packaging them
inside a carrier made of fat and protein.

   Such a carrier might make it possible to use gene therapy to treat conditions
such as viral hepatitis, cancer and a host of diseases in which the liver fails
to make essential proteins or enzymes.

   Genes are bits of DNA that control a cell's function.  Gene therapy seeks to
correct a malfunctioning cell by adding beneficial genes. But a major stumbling
block has been getting the desired DNA into cells, then getting them to work.

   The new delivery system might overcome this difficulty.

   ''It is one giant step ahead because we were able to produce something that
carries DNA and yet mimics one of the natural transport systems in our body,''
said researcher Leaf Huang, a Pitt pharmacologist.

   Huang and his colleagues found they could transfer genes by incorporating
them into oil and coating the DNA strands in fat. Similar naturally occurring
complexes are used to pick up fat and deliver it to various parts of the body.

   In the experiment, firefly genes that make a glow-in-the-dark protein were
mixed with the carrier fats. The genes and carriers then were injected into mice
through the portal vein, a blood vessel that feeds the liver, during an
operation.

   Researchers then saw that some of the liver cells were glowing, showing that
the glow-in-the-dark protein was present in the cells and was working. Not only
was gene activity detected in the liver, but also in the kidneys and lungs.

   A human gene was also given to the mice and the protein it made was found in
the bloodstream up to 60 days after the injection.

   Other gene carriers, called vectors, have been used in clinical trials, such
as in therapy for cystic fibrosis and cancer, Huang said. The body often mounts
an immune defense to get rid of the virus, so it works poorly after the initial
attempt.

   Liposomes, another kind of non-viral, fat-based vector, work to a degree when
used locally, such as in a tumor, but they don't circulate easily throughout the
blood.

   Because the body doesn't recognize the carrier complex as foreign and doesn't
become resistant to it, repeat injections produce as much protein as they did
the first time, making it possible to use as a long-term treatment, Huang said.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1997


                             2176 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                    December 21, 1997, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: TEXAS MAGAZINE; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 5465 words

HEADLINE: Stripped of All but Love;
WHILE JASON CHIN STRUGGLES WITH THE DEVASTATION OF ALD, A RARE HEREDITARY BRAIN
DISEASE, THE REST OF THE FAMILY STRUGGLES JUST TO KEEP GOING.

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: MELISSA FLETCHER STOELJE; Melissa Fletcher Stoeltje is a Chronicle
reporter. Howard Castleberry is a Chronicle photographer.

BODY:

   People were always tell-ing the Chins what a storybook family they were - two
attractive, doting parents of two bright, handsome sons. When Jackie and Holrick
Chin, natives of Jamaica, moved to Houston from New York 11 years ago, they
purposefully went about building a life around their children. They acquired a
tidy brick home in Katy in a safe neighborhood with a good school.

   They found an extended family of friends, most of them fellow Jehovah's
Witnesses. And they bought a big van to squire their sons to school and
extracurricular activities.

   The American dream was as palpable as the glossy family portrait hanging in
their living room.

   Then about four years ago, 8-year-old Jason, the elder son, started acting
differently. He began struggling with schoolwork.

   Formerly mild-tempered and responsible, he started disobeying his parents. He
just couldn't pay attention. Jackie knew something was wrong, but she didn't
know what. Teachers suspected attention deficit disorder, but that didn't
explain Jason's facial tics. Eventually, a brain scan and a blood test confirmed
a far worse fate.

   Jason Chin, 12 now, rests in a hospital bed in his old bedroom, posters of
basketball stars and books replaced by shelves holding medical equipment and
diapers. He cannot see or move or speak. He can barely hear, although his mother
believes he still recognizes her voice and responds by slowly blinking his eyes.
Even in his illness, Jason remains a beautiful child. He has brown,
almond-shaped eyes and the long, thin body of an athlete. If you didn't know he
was blind, you'd think him merely caught in reverie. His hands are clenched in
fists; his slender feet point downward, as if in perpetual dance.

   A sign above his bed reads: "Wash your hands before touching me!"

   Jason has adrenoleukodystrophy, a hereditary disease passed from mother to
son that causes a disastrous buildup of fatty acids in the blood. The acids
destroy the protective insulation of nerve endings in the brain, leaving them
raw and unable to conduct electrical impulses. The brain, in essence,
short-circuits. It is an exceedingly rare disease - affecting only one or two
people out of 100,000 in the United States - and an exceedingly cruel one: Jason
lost the ability to sit up in the span of one week.

   The public learned of adrenoleukodystrophy (or ALD) through the 1992 movie
Lorenzo's Oil, which chronicled one family's relentless search for a cure for
the disease, which afflicts their son, Lorenzo. The substance that Michaela and
Augusto Odone discovered - a simple blend of cooking oils - normalizes the fatty
acids in the blood but is not a definitive cure. To that end, researchers work
toward gene therapies and other high-tech hopes.

   In the meantime, the Chins are doing everything they can to prevent Tyler,
their second son, from sharing his brother's destiny. An engaging boy with a
full head of black curls, Tyler takes Lorenzo's Oil every day. He eats an
austere, low-fat diet and undergoes brain scans every six months. So far, at age
10 - almost past the zone of highest risk - he remains asymptomatic.

   The van that was supposed to ferry rough-and-tumble boys to theme parks and
bowling alleys is now used to cart Jason's wheelchair. At a time when Jackie and
Holrick should be discussing their pre-teen's choice of rock CDs, they debate
whether the fluid coming out of his gastric tube is stomach acid or medicine.
The Chins have watched their American dream derail into a nightmare. Yet in many
ways they remain the strong, devoted family they've always been - buoyed in
their struggles by an army of friends, family, fellow worshippers and
co-workers.

   This is their story.

   Pictures of Jason in a family photo album show a gangly boy seemingly forever
in motion - catching a ball, running, leaping, mugging for the camera with
Tyler. Of her two boys, Jason was the athletic one, says Jackie, a legal
secretary with a downtown law firm who speaks in the lilting, crisp accent of
her homeland. She is an open, amiable person, talking energetically and
articulately over a shrimp lunch about her son's affliction. The only time she
loses her composure is when she pulls out a picture of Jason as he was at age 2,
a cherubic smile on his face, a halo of light brown curls ringing his head. She
stops talking and brings the white cloth napkin to her eyes. "This is how I will
have him," she says after a moment.

   Jason was always tender-hearted, she says, the first one to give up his swing
or help push the wheelchairs of disabled kids at school. Tyler, 16 months
younger and a studious whiz kid, worshiped his older brother but could easily
get the upper hand. Jackie was forever coaching Jason to stand up for himself.

   Even though Jason was an "absent-minded professor" type, he always brought
home A's and B's, Jackie says. So it was disconcerting when, in the third grade,
he started having trouble with his spelling list. Simple addition became
complex. Jackie was raised in a family that emphasized academics, and she
drilled him at night on phonics. Was Jason just being his absent-minded self or
was something wrong?

   Troubling behavioral changes also surfaced. Previously polite, he began
barging into conversations. Especially scary were the times he would "space
out," says his mother. Once, as the family was waiting for a table at an Olive
Garden restaurant, Jason picked up a public telephone. Jackie, always a stickler
about germs in public places, told him to put it down.

   "He just stared at me, holding it," says Jackie. "That would happen a lot.
He'd just go blank." Something is wrong with my child, she told friends. They
assured her she was simply riding him too hard, expecting too much. He just
needed some redirection, they said. Some encouragement. She listened and worried
and lost sleep at night. "I spent an entire year thinking something was wrong,"
says Jackie. "Nobody believed me. That was the hardest part."

   Jason started doing weird, repetitive things - walking along the fence in the
back yard over and over again, tapping his foot constantly on the edge of the
carpet by the kitchen. Jackie feared he was developing Tourette's syndrome. A
doctor (not her regular pediatrician) diagnosed Jason with attention deficit
disorder and prescribed the drug Ritalin, but it only made matters worse, says
Jackie. His grades continued slipping. A school counselor wrote in his file that
Jason had "psychological problems" -a presumption that still angers Jackie,
although in retrospect she can understand it.

   "The people who knew Jason before would make all the exceptions," she says,
"but if you had just met him at this stage, you wouldn't know he really wasn't
like this."

   Jason entered summer school and failed miserably. Jackie enrolled him in
Sylvan Learning Center, where the staff assured her they'd get to the bottom of
his problem. After two weeks "they were clueless, looking at me with blank
stares." On the advice of her pediatrician, Dr. Shellyanne Giddings, Jackie
began calling neurologists. They would invariably ask her: Has your son had any
seizures?

   "When I said no, it was like I was just this hysterical mother," says Jackie.

   Finally she found a neurologist in Katy who did an MRI - magnetic resonance
imaging - of Jason's brain. That weekend the family took a trip to Lake Conroe.
Unable to wait, Jackie called the doctor from the van for the X-ray results. The
nurse told her the doctor wanted them to come into his office the next morning.
Jackie started crying, knowing this was a bad sign.

   "When we walked in the next day he just said to us, 'It's the absolute
worst.' "

   The MRI revealed that nerve fibers in Jason's brain had been stripped of
their protective, sheathlike covering - a substance called myelin. There are
more than 11 different forms of myelin-destroying leukodystrophy; myelin
destruction is also the mechanism behind multiple sclerosis. The neurologist,
Dr. Jose Diaz, told the Chins their son undoubtedly had leukodystrophy; it would
take a blood test to determine which type.

   In ALD, fatty acids produced by the body, as well as taken in through diet,
progressively eat away the myelin, prompting an inflammatory response in the
brain, although doctors still aren't sure how the disease works. But this much
they do know: A faulty gene prevents the body from making an enzyme that breaks
down the dangerous acids. Female carriers carry the defective gene on only one
of their two X chromosomes; since they have a second, unaffected X chromosome,
they can carry the bad gene with no ill effects. But they have a 50-50 chance of
passing the gene to their sons, who, with only one X chromosome, cannot
compensate for the defect.

   Not all boys who get the bad gene will become drastically ill. Some may be
destined for only a milder, nonfatal adult form of the disease - characterized
by stiff legs, aching joints and such - as they reach middle age. The severe
childhood form usually manifests itself before age 10.

   But the mechanism behind ALD is a mystery, says Dr. Hugo Moser of the Kennedy
Krieger Institute in Baltimore, a noted ALD expert who in 1981 developed the
blood test that diagnoses the disease. Moser, who was portrayed in the movie
Lorenzo's Oil, is in the midst of an international study to determine how
effective the oil is in preventing ALD. One thing is clear: The oil is useless
as a preventative once the disease becomes entrenched.

   "The question is whether treating a boy before he gets sick will make any
difference," he says. (Some parents, like the Odones, continue to give the oil
to their sick sons, believing it prolongs their lives.)

   Researchers such as Moser are prevented by ethical reasons from doing a
"randomized study" of ALD - that is, they can't withhold the oil from a group of
boys to see if they fare worse than those who get it. Since the oil lowers the
dangerous acids, it must be given to all boys with the ALD gene. But even those
with the defective gene have a more than 60 percent chance of escaping the
severe childhood form of the disease, according to Moser's study. How much of
this is attributable to the oil and how much to some benevolent genetic quirk is
unknown.

   "We know the diet is not a total preventative because we have a few patients
who have started it and still gotten the severe illness," he says.

   His study includes 123 boys in the United States and Europe, all brothers of
those with full-blown ALD, who began the oil regime before showing any symptoms.
So far (the study continues three more years) 85 percent have remained well. But
these statistics are inconclusive, he says, because many boys have not yet
passed the high-risk zone of age 10. Of 10 boys who have passed that milestone,
three have developed the severe form. Still, it's impossible to draw hard
conclusions from such small numbers, says Moser.

   His study is also looking at what effect a new treatment - bone marrow
transplants - has on halting the disease's progression. Bone marrow contains
DNA; the hope is that by injecting marrow from a nonaffected donor (optimally, a
relative) into an ALD boy, his body will obtain the enzyme-making gene. It is an
extremely risky procedure: A boy's own bone marrow must first be destroyed;
afterward, he may suffer immune system rejection. Of 96 boys worldwide who have
undergone the procedure, 20 percent have died.

   But others have been helped: Sixty percent became "stable" after the
transplant, says Moser, and 20 percent actually improved. One boy who showed
signs of slipping into the severe illness is now a clarinet-playing A-student,
eight years after his transplant.

   But because it's so risky, physicians can't perform transplants carte blanche
on all boys with the defective gene (the majority of whom, after all, are fated
for only the mild, adult form of ALD). So transplants are recommended only for
those who begin to show early symptoms of the serious illness - telltale MRI's,
visual and auditory processing difficulties. Timing is critical: Wait too long,
and bone marrow transplants, as with Lorenzo's Oil, become useless. As it had in
Jason Chin's case.

   The Chins sat in the neurologists' office for more than an hour, stunned and
sobbing.

   Before going home, they went to the library, where they found only scant
information on ALD. Still, from the description, Jackie knew it was the form her
son had. Jason's diagnosis was confirmed by Dr. Geofrey Miller on July 15, 1996.
Jason was 101/2 .

   "Our entire world came crashing down," says Jackie.

   Holrick, a good-natured air conditioning/heating subcontractor who loves to
fish, at first couldn't grasp the notion that the boy with whom he had spent
many happy hours casting flies was slipping into a sightless, soundless world,
with no way out.

   "I said, 'OK, he has ALD. Let's fix it,' " he recalls with a bitter smile.

   After the diagnosis, aunts flew in from Florida and Jamaica. Jackie's mother
flew in from New York. Her sister Marlene Tucker, an attorney with the
Environmental Protection Agency, flew in from Atlanta. The ALD genetic lottery
is a capricious one: Of Jackie's five maternal uncles - all sons of her
grandmother, a carrier - none inherited the disease. Marlene, Jackie's only
sibling, was tested and found to be a carrier. She has no children, but is
currently in line to adopt a child.

   This was about the worst tragedy that could befall Jackie and Holrick, says
Paulette Kitson, who with husband Howard is a longtime friend.

   "They live for their children," says Kitson. "Jackie especially is
automatically drawn to children; she enters the room and goes straight to the
babies. To see Jason slowly dying before their eyes is like a torture."

   Jason deteriorated rapidly that summer. On a family camping trip to Inks Lake
near Burnet, he inexplicably set his booted foot in the fire. By August, the
tempest in his brain was making him talk repetitively and eat incessantly.

   "He would eat 10 bananas in a day, then throw up," says Marlene, who visits
three or four times a year and talks to Jackie on the telephone every day. "He
would curse and act like a crazed child and say things he normally would have
been scolded for."

   He became overly affectionate, blurting out inappropriate questions and
spontaneously embracing strangers in the mall. The boy who previously had been
too proud to hold his mother's hand in public began to embarrass her. Once, they
were in line at Wal-Mart, when Jason moved to hug a disheveled, unsavory-looking
man standing ahead of them. Jackie pulled him back, pleading with him to stop.
Finally, she told Tyler to take him to the restroom.

   "A woman walked up to me and said, 'You know, children are only on this Earth
for a short time; you should let them have fun.' " Jackie wheeled on the woman.
"I said, 'My child is dying. Do you know what it's like to watch your child die?
Do you know what it's like to have to send him to the restroom with his younger
brother?' "

   As time went on, other children began to ostracize Jason - the child, says
Jackie, who had always made it a point to accept those who were "different." His
radiant smile had dimmed; otherwise, he looked perfectly normal from the outside
- a fact that made the whispered comments and outright stares from strangers all
the harder to take. Jackie became reluctant to go to public places with him.

   "I still have a lot of guilt from this stage," she says quietly.

   By the fifth grade, Jason had been placed in a special education class.
Fellow congregants from the Kingdom Hall watched Jason after school on a
rotating basis until his parents got home from work. Jason began to stumble and
fall. After that, what had been a subtle chipping away grew dramatic. In April
1996, Jason had his first seizure (the result of electrical misfirings in the
brain) and was rushed to the hospital. That December, he lost bowel and bladder
control. By June 1997, he could no longer walk. In July, he stopped speaking.

   "When I had last seen him, Jason was diving into the lake," says Marlene.
"When I saw him again five months later, he was in diapers. I almost passed
out."

   Jason had to be taken to the emergency room countless times for seizures. He
was admitted to the hospital last summer for dehydration and a yeast infection
in his mouth. He went into the hospital again in September to have a feeding
tube put into his stomach, usually a simple operation. But things tend to get
complicated for ALD kids, says Dr. Giddings; physicians never know what to
expect because the disease is so rare. What was supposed to be a three- or
four-day procedure turned into more than a two-month hospital stay. A blockage
in his small intestine prevented the tube from working properly. Then Jason got
pneumonia and had to be put on a ventilator for four days.

   Jackie, who is a litigation legal secretary - deadline-oriented work that
requires considerable concentration -essentially began living at the hospital,
leaving Holrick to care for Tyler. She would pack her clothes and makeup bag,
spend the night with Jason, then get up before dawn to be the first one in the
hospital shower reserved for visiting family members. Soon she'd used up all her
paid time-off, so several co-workers voluntarily donated vacation days to her.
When Jason was recently sent home from the hospital, fellow legal secretaries
and paralegals again pooled their vacation and sick days and gave them to
Jackie, freeing her up to be with Jason on his first week back home. Co-workers
also brought food to the hospital. They took up donations to pay for her
hospital parking; they bought Jason package after package of the adult diapers
Depends.

   "Jackie is such a sweet, strong person. I don't think even she knows how
strong she is," says fellow legal secretary Cheri Deason, whose 7-year-old
daughter has attention deficit disorder - Jason's original diagnosis. Deason
says the Chins' plight has put her own problems "in perspective."

   "Most of us have children and can only imagine what she and her family must
be going through," says co-worker Debbie Kinzel. "Jackie's never asked for pity.
She's never asked for sympathy. Everybody just wants to be there for her."

   A small battalion of friends also helped out from the beginning. Two women
from the Kingdom Hall spent Wednesday and Saturday nights, respectively, in the
hospital, giving Jackie a chance to spend the night at home and replenish her
hospital bags. Another congregant designated every Wednesday "Tyler's Day,"
lavishing time and attention on him. Friend Denise Carr, who had watched Jason
after school for two months straight, also adopted Tyler as her special project.

   "We'd take to him to the movies, shopping, out to eat, anything that wouldn't
make it so hard on him," says Carr, the mother of two teen-agers. "But he's a
real strong boy, and his parents did their best to balance things."

   Tyler was lying with Jackie on the couch one night during this time when he
confided to her that he feared she no longer cared about him, that Jason's
illness made him angry. "I told him, 'It's OK to feel angry,' " says Jackie. "
'Mommy's very angry and probably will be for the rest of her life. But I can't
apologize to you for all the time I'm spending with Jason. Because if this had
happened to you, I'd be there, too.' "

   Tyler twirls around on the kitchen floor in his stockinged feet, while his
beloved aunt Marlene, visiting for the holidays, cooks a low-fat Jamaican jerk
chicken dish. Tyler is polite, witty, smart and affectionate. He talks like a
mature teen-ager. He shows how he mixes three tablespoons of Lorenzo's Oil
-which comes from a science lab in Baltimore, in a conventional-looking
vegetable oil bottle - with yogurt, helping to disguise its thick, oily taste.

   "When I was younger, I used to scream and cry when they made me eat it," he
says matter-of-factly. "It used to make me feel like I was going to throw up.
But now it's OK." Jackie says Tyler is good about staying on his astringent
diet, composed of fruits, vegetables, no-skin meat, low-fat products. He is an
inveterate label-reader, she says. Still, it's hard to be always denying your
child.

   "Try telling your kid no McDonald's," says Holrick. "Try saying no pizza."

   The school wanted to put Tyler in its gifted program, says Jackie, but that
was the time when Jason was getting sick, and she feared it would be too much
pressure on him. Tyler wants to be a doctor when he grows up, he says, to help
people like Jason. He still sees traces of his older brother in the silent boy
lying in the hospital bed, he says. Recently, Jason pushed out an arm and shoved
Tyler to the ground, just like in the old days. Tyler's favorite thing is to
give Jason rides in his wheelchair. Does he miss his big brother, the way he
used to be? Suddenly the self-confident 10-year-old bursts into tears, burying
his face in his mother's side.

   "It's OK," Holrick says with a sad smile after Tyler has left the room. "He
sucks it in too much."

   Moser and some French researchers are working on a gene therapy that one day
might make it unnecessary for boys to swallow the distasteful oil. Moser's group
recently created a "mouse model" - a female mouse engineered to give birth only
to ALD-affected male mice - that will allow scientists to study the disease
in-depth for the first time. More important, it may enable them to find a way to
insert copies of the enzyme-making gene directly into a patient's bone marrow -
thereby avoiding the complications of transplants. In effect, the ALD gene would
be outwitted.

   How long before such a cure is perhaps found? Five years, predicts Moser.

   "That's the one-thousand-dollar question," says Augusto Odone, who along with
his wife discovered that components of olive oil and rapeseed oil, when
combined, reversed the fatty acid buildup in their son Lorenzo's blood. Since
the movie, the Odones have founded the Myelin Project, an international group
that seeks to speed up research in myelin regeneration by raising funds and
coaxing scientists (notorious loners, he says) to share secrets and work
together.

   "We are an accelerator," says Odone, whose group gave $ 120,000 to fund the
mouse project, on the stipulation that the American and French scientists
collaborated.

   The ALD mouse project is an exception: Usually his group funds only those
projects aimed at rebuilding myelin that already has been destroyed - as it has
in Lorenzo's brain. Their son, now 19 and in a vegetative state, continues to be
given Lorenzo's Oil in the hope he will live until the day scientists find a way
to re-grow protective tissue in the brain. Preliminary research in ALD-like dogs
shows promise that myelin cells can be successfully transplanted. Odone predicts
the first human trials will occur within the next two years.

   Such a breakthrough would help not only sufferers of the various
leukodystrophies but also the thousands who struggle with multiple sclerosis.

   "For children like Lorenzo and Jason Chin," he says, "if we could bring back
the myelin sheath, hopefully it would begin conducting again. And they could
return to normal."

   Jackie tries hard not to think about the future or nebulous hopes, she says.
"I just focus on taking one day at a time," she says. "That's hard enough."

   For this reason, she doesn't belong to an international ALD support group.
She refuses to watch Lorenzo's Oil, even though Holrick, Tyler and her friends
have seen it. It's her way of preserving an emotional even-keel, a manageable
psychic load.

   For all her strength, though, there are times when Jackie Chin crashes.

   She tends to crash on weekends and every six months, when it's time for
Tyler's brain scan. She sits by the phone and waits for the doctors to call and
say her second son's brain is OK. (The most recent one in November revealed no
abnormalities.) She has learned not to schedule the scan on Fridays, because
that means enduring a weekend of waiting for the results. Now she schedules them
on Mondays, then takes the day off from work, if she can. Her whole world
compresses down to the sound of a telephone ringing.

   Paulette has learned that when Jackie is in one of her dark moods - when she
finally gives in to the grief and anger -she can be made to feel better by a
trip outside, even to the grocery store. They remain strong friends, although
the illness has "tested" their relationship, says Paulette. She was one of the
friends who dismissed Jackie's early worries about Jason, telling her she was
being "paranoid." This, she says, has left a lingering pain.

   "And it's very painful for us to see what they're going through and not be
able to do anything about it." says Paulette. "There were times in the hospital
when I couldn't even look at Jason. I like to fix things."

   Jackie is a steadfastly sweet and smiling person, but there are times when
the resentment breaks through. She is angered by friends who have slowly
retreated from her family, unable to cope with the fact that Jason is no longer
the boy he once was. At one time or another, she has yelled at and upset every
close friend, even her mother -everyone except Marlene, who seems to have an
inexhaustible store of patience and compassion for her older sister.

   "She'll hang up on me, and I'll just call her back," says Marlene with a
wistful smile. "One night we stayed up until 3 or 4 a.m. just crying together,
not even talking. Because what can you say?"

   Jackie is angry, too, at doctors who don't communicate with one another, who
are unwilling to admit they're at a loss in dealing with a mysterious disease.
She is puzzled especially by Jason's neurologist, whom she believes was
intimidated by her own self-acquired knowledge of ALD. She resents that he
seemingly took little interest in Jason while he was in Texas Children's
Hospital for two months.

   "And his office is right across the street," she says, her eyes flashing.

   Dr. Geofrey Miller declined to be interviewed for this article.

   Jason's disease, she says, has forced her to become a more assertive person.
The woman who formerly wouldn't have dreamed of causing a scene was now
demanding that certain nurses care for her son in her absence. She finds herself
routinely excoriating pharmacy workers who drop the ball in her pursuit of
hard-to-find medicines for Jason. Her son's disease, she says, has opened her
eyes to the obstacles faced by the terminally ill and their families. And it's
convinced her the American medical system is biased against "middle-class,
working people." She's watched in frustration, she says, as those on welfare
with sick children received free services, free medicines, free everything while
she was summarily turned down by every agency offering help.

   "My son gets no Social Security, no disability," says Jackie. "I've worked in
the country 17 years, my children are citizens.  . . .  Every child should have
their medical needs met, whether they're rich, middle-class or poor, but this
just isn't fair. What happens when we can no longer pay? When friends can no
longer help us?"

   Her insurance pays the majority of Jason's health costs, but that still
leaves mountains of medical debt. The Chins have gone through their savings
trying to keep up; currently they owe Texas Children's Hospital and other
facilities in excess of $ 30,000. In five days alone, Jason's hospital bill
neared $ 25,000 -and that was for a week without surgical procedures.

   Yet when Jason recently went home from the hospital, the insurance company
ruled that he required only one hour a day of nursing care. (The Chins had
requested full in-home care.) Jason is currently being cared for by his father.
The insurance company stops paying for the nurse in January.

   "I don't understand it," says Jackie. "He needs $ 25,000 in care a week at
the hospital, by doctors and nurses, but he doesn't need a nurse in his home?"

   "If anyone needs in-home nursing care, it's Jason," says pediatrician Dr.
Giddings, who has written letters to the insurance company asking for as much.
"It shouldn't even be up for discussion."

   The insurance company also recently ruled that it would not pay for Jason's
supplies, including diapers. And while it reimburses the Chins for 70 percent of
prescription medicine costs, they must make the initial outlay. Jackie estimates
her children's expenses for medicine run more than $ 500 a month, including $
100 for Tyler's experimental oil.

   Holrick, a subcontractor, has had to quit work to care for Jason, except for
the few jobs he can do at night when Jackie is home. They wouldn't have survived
this long, she says, without family and friends, who have donated everything
from a humidifier for Jason's room to bedding, diapers and money. Members of
their Kingdom Hall installed a telephone and intercom system in Jason's room, so
the family can take part in regular Bible service.

   Around Jason's hospital bed cluster the machines required for his care: A
device to suction out his saliva, because he can no longer swallow; a breathing
treatment machine to break up the secretions in his lungs, which then have to be
suctioned out; the IV bag holding the low-fat formula that flows into his
nasal-gastric tube; the machine that gauges the oxygen level in his blood.
(Jason sometimes stops breathing, setting off alarms, and must be gently shaken
or moved.) He must take Tegretol for seizures, Valium for rigidity, steroids for
adrenal insufficiency, Zantac for stomach acid and an antibiotic to prevent
pneumonia.

   Holrick has been tending to his son for only a week since he was sent home
from the hospital, but already the exhaustion is showing in his eyes, in his wan
smile. He is a trim, energetic man who seems constantly in motion, gingerly
peeling the gastric-tube tape from Jason's face or carefully moving his 90-pound
frame from bed to couch. Friends like Carr received hospital training so they
could care for Jason, giving Holrick occasional spells. But he's the chief
nurse, and it's hard work, he admits.

   "It's tearing us apart," he says of the stress of Jason's illness on his and
Jackie's 14-year marriage. In the beginning, he says, he blamed her for his
son's ALD - "just like in the movie Lorenzo's Oil." But they've worked past
that, he says. These days Holrick sleeps in Jason's room and Jackie - who must
keep working because she's the one with the insurance - sleeps in their bedroom
alone.

   But even though it's hard, they want Jason at home, not at the hospital or
some facility, says Jackie. He is "at peace" here. She croons to him in a sweet,
high voice, stroking his hair. He used to smile whenever she walked into his
room at the hospital, she says. Now he acknowledges her presence by slowly
opening and shutting his eyes. Jackie insists she sees vestiges of the child her
son was before he got sick. Jason was always squeamish about pain as a child,
she says. In the hospital, he would moan and open his eyes wildly over simple
procedures. "I still see Jason in the finicky way he reacts to stuff," she says,
gazing down at him.

   "That person's not there," Holrick answers quietly from the other side of the
bed. "He doesn't talk, he doesn't eat, he doesn't understand."

   "And Jason could always fall asleep anywhere, even with my girlfriends
chitchatting," Jackie continues. "He's the same way now."

   Her husband gently shakes his head. "We used to go camping together. He was
my fishing buddy. He could handle a skill saw," says Holrick, his voice filled
with an inexpressible sadness. "I lost my buddy, my little helper. My pal. I
miss you, Jason." He reaches down and rubs his son's foot.

   "But he knows our voices, and it comforts him," says Jackie. Holrick leaves
the room to go watch a Houston Rockets game on TV.

   Jason could live into his 20s, says Moser. What he will likely succumb to are
the same complications that claim most bedridden patients - pneumonia,
infection. The Chins have decided they will pursue no "heroic efforts" in his
medical care.

   What is left for Jackie to do, what she does meticulously, is maintain the
things Jason cared about. He was fastidious about his appearance, she says, so
she keeps his hair precisely trimmed. She dresses him in the crisp, button-down
shirts friends buy. It was with great pain that she recently bought him a pair
of low-top Nikes; he always favored the high-top kind, but she could no longer
negotiate his foot into them.

   Her goal now, her abiding mission, is to keep Jason clean and comfortable, to
make him feel loved, inasmuch as that's possible. It has become her therapy, she
says, her way of getting through it.

   "My son is not going to hurt," says Jackie resolutely. "I don't care what
rooftop I have to scream it from. He will not hurt."


GRAPHIC: Photos (all color): 1. Jason Chin and Tyler Chin in 1992; 2. Jason Chin
his legs in casts to prevent them from curling into a fetal position, is
attended to by brother Tyler in the family's Katy home; 3. Holrick Chin, an
air-conditioning subcontractor who has quit working to care for his son, gently
places Jason in the hospital bed in his bedroom ( p. 10 ); 4. Jackie Chin and
Jason Chin ( p. 11 ); 5. Jason Chin in 1994 ( p. 11 ); 6. Tyler takes Jason for
a wheelchair ride at dusk, past the neighborhood boys Jason played with only a
year ago ( p. 12 ); 7. Tyler mixes the daily dose of Lorenzo's Oil, and ALD
preventative ( p. 12 ); 8. Tyler helps with Jason's care, such as administering
breathing treatments ( p. 14 ); 9. Jason Chin ( p. 1 ); All by Howard
Castleberry

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1997


                             2177 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1997 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          December 17, 1997 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-4

LENGTH: 347 words

HEADLINE: Brief book reports by Quest writers

BYLINE: SCOTT LaFEE | LEIGH FENLY

BODY:

   Smell: The Secret Seducer Piet Vroon Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 226 pages,
$23 Of all the senses, we take smell most for granted -- a rose by any other
name. But the ability to smell works both large and small upon us.

   It is a remarkably powerful sense, able in just a brief and passing whiff to
conjure up distant memories and unexpected emotions: the perfume scent that
recalls a past lover, the odor forever linked to a life-changing event. Humans,
of course, have only modest noses.

   Dogs smell several hundred times more keenly.

   But the human olfactory organ still strongly dictates our sense of the world,
which would be -- and is for some -- a much less interesting and intelligible
place without its estimated 400,000 aromas and stinks. In this small but elegant
book, Vroon gives smell its due, recounting in learned detail the physiology,
psychology, epidemiology, etiology, history and philosophy of our most
understated sense. -- SCOTT LaFEE The New Healers William R. Clark Oxford, 256
pages, $27.50 The medical equivalent of going to the moon is expected to occur
within a decade: Scientists will have the technology to read all 100,000 or so
genes that make up the human genome.

   When that happens we'll be on the ride of our lives, as a society and as
individuals. So far the success rate of gene therapy, molecular biology's
biggest promise, is modest; Clark tells us that the number of patients who have
been unambiguously cured by it can probably be counted on one hand.

   But the logic and power behind the approach is compelling.

   "Everything we know about molecular biology tells us it can work and that it
will work," Clark writes. Clark makes sense of the first halting steps in the
field, and predicts what laboratory breakthroughs will mean for treatment of
cancer, cystic fibrosis, AIDS and other diseases.

   He discusses the challenges faced by scientists involved in the Human Genome
Project, which seeks to map all human genes, and gives a broad overview of the
ethics and choices involved. All of which serves as primer for the medicine of
the future. -- LEIGH FENLY

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2178 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                           December 15, 1997, Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 538 words

HEADLINE: 2 from Arkansas win British scholarships;
Opportunities salute the Marshall Plan

BYLINE: BY CHRIS REINOLDS, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:

   University of Arkansas student Warwick Sabin wants to blend his interest in
international relations with his goal to work in a public service job.
Fort Smith native Ann Vernon wants to study gene therapy and immunology, attend
medical school and eventually help ease human suffering.
Gifts from abroad will help both achieve their goals.
Sabin, a native of New York, and Vernon, a University of Tulsa student, won
Marshall scholarships.
First awarded in 1954, the scholarships are Britain's gesture of thanks to the
people of the United States for the Marshall Plan. The U.S. program gave aid to
European countries after World War II.
The awards, each worth about $ 32,000 annually, allow students to attend a
British university for two to three years. Sabin and Vernon plan to attend
Oxford University in fall 1998.
Helen Mann, spokesman for the British Consulate-General in Houston, said
Marshall scholarships are awarded to academically brilliant students who show
leadership.
"They have the potential to become leaders and opinion-formers in the academic,
business, or political sense," Mann said.
Students also must have an interest in broadening Anglo-American relations and a
commitment to their own communities.
Sabin, 21, said he wanted the Marshall scholarship because it honors "the right
kind of attributes in a person, such as well-roundedness, academic achievement,
leadership and contribution to the world."
"It means more to me because I will study international relations," Sabin said.
Sabin will pursue a graduate degree in international relations. The scholarship
money also will allow him to travel around England in his free time.
University of Arkansas students have won the scholarship three times before
Sabin.
Sabin plans to graduate in May with a bachelor's degree in political science. He
has a 4.0 grade point average and is the student body president. He is past
president of the university's Young Democrats and past editor of the Arkansas
Traveler student newspaper. He organized the 1997 University of Arkansas Freedom
Riders -- 200 students who rode buses to Little Rock to commemorate the 40th
anniversary of the integration of Little Rock Central High School.
Sabin also won a Truman scholarship last year that gives him $ 30,000 toward
graduate school after his studies in England. He has attended the university
through another fellowship that has paid for all four years of study. Sabin
attended high school in East Hampton, N.Y. His parents are Sharon and Mark
Sabin.
Vernon, 21, is a biology major at TU. She plans to earn a master's degree from
Oxford University in immunogenetics and gene therapy. Vernon wants to attend
Oxford to study with two top professors in her field. She plans to later enter
medical school in the United States.
Vernon has a 4.0 GPA and does volunteer work for Habitat for Humanity and
domestic violence prevention programs. She is the daughter of Dr. Rowland and
Nancy Vernon and a Fort Smith Southside High School graduate.
Vernon's grandfather died from Lou Gehrig's disease, prompting her interest in
genetics.
"Diseases are the most frustrating for me. If I had one wish it would be to
eliminate pain and suffering," she said.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1998


                             2179 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                      December 15, 1997 Monday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 331 words

HEADLINE: GROWING OUR OWN BODY PARTS?

BODY:

   Better than bionics, an incredible advance in medicine has allowed a Boston
doctor to use a genetic spark to make new blood vessels grow around clogged
arteries. This is the stuff of science fiction coming true.

   Dr. Jeffrey Isner, a professor of medicine and pathology at Tufts University
School of Medicine and chief of cardiovascular research at St. Elizabeth's
Medical Center, presented his findings at the American Heart Association's
Scientific Sessions last month.

   Dr. Isner uses a gene that stimulates blood vessel growth in human embryos.
Patients with obstructed blood vessels in their legs received injections of the
vessel-building DNA near the affected area. The gene unlocked the dormant
genetic instructions in the patients and caused new blood vessels to grow.

   Dr. Isner reported that he saw evidence of new blood vessels and improved
mobility. Patients enrolled in the study had tried all other therapies without
success.

   Eight of 10 patients showed improved blood flow in their legs and began
experiencing less pain. Doctors could see a stopping or reversal of damage to
the tissue that can cause gangrene.

   Dr. Isner expects to continue his inquiry by using the gene therapy to help
people with blocked coronary arteries. Imagine heart patients growing their own
cure rather than undergoing angioplasty and bypass surgery or taking drugs to
improve blood flow!

   More research is needed to determine whether gene therapy could become the
primary treatment method for clogged arteries. From the layman's perspective,
however, the idea of being injected with a gene -- rather than put through
surgery -- sounds miraculous.

   The ability of science to tinker with our bodies' genetic instructions to
slow or halt disease is fascinating and suggests the possibility of affecting
other forms of healing through the rekindling of embryonic genes. It is a
powerful tool that eventually could ease pain and prolong lives in ways that
make old methods appear medieval.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1997


                             2180 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         December 14, 1997 Sunday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 3

LENGTH: 521 words

HEADLINE: Virus invaded researcher in the blink of an eye

BYLINE: RICK BRAGG

SOURCE: New York Times

DATELINE: Atlanta

BODY:

   Primate researcher Elizabeth R. Griffin was careful to follow the precautions
intended to shield her from the diseased animals she handled. She always wore
gloves and a mask, and she was usually separated from the primates by a mesh
cage.

   Death found its way past her defenses.

   Six weeks ago, Griffin, 22, who planned to be a doctor, was helping to move a
caged rhesus monkey infected with the herpes B virus at the Yerkes Regional
Primate Research Center here when the animal flung a tiny drop of fluid perhaps
urine or feces at her face.

   It struck her in the eye. On Wednesday, paralyzed and weakened, she died of
complications from herpes B, which is common in primates but rare and deadly 70%
of the time in humans.

   The consequences of that animal-to-human contact, and the almost freakish way
it caused Griffin's death, seem lifted from Hollywood. Unlike the movies,
however, there is no public health risk here, researchers said, just a single
misfortune.

   Only 40 cases of primate-to-human transmission of the virus have been
reported since 1933, when the first case of human exposure was seen. Almost all
were the result of bites and scratches.

   Griffin, from Kingsport, Ga., probably never thought she was at risk.

   "This was an extraordinarily low-risk activity by any measure we have," said
Thomas Gordon, associate director for scientific programs at the Yerkes center,
which is an arm of Emory University's medical school.

   The center conducts research in AIDS, neuroscience, gene therapy and other
areas and is a frequent target of animal rights protesters.

   On the day she was infected, Griffin was dressed as usual, wearing a mask,
gloves and lab coat. The monkey's cage was covered by a fine wire mesh to
protect her and others from the animal's teeth and claws.

   Health regulations require researchers to wear goggles or safety glasses when
there is a risk of contact with an animal's fluids for example, when an animal
is removed from its cage. But that was not required in this case because Griffin
was holding the cage at arm's length, officials said.

   "During this transfer, as she tried to look into the cage to check the status
of the monkey, something came out," Gordon said. "Because it was so minor an
event, it was not even viewed by the individual as serious."

   Two weeks after she felt the tiny drop hit her eye, Griffin developed a
headache and eye infection. Griffin, who graduated this year with a degree in
biology from Agnes Scott College, was admitted to Emory University Hospital, and
at first responded well to anti-viral medication. She even went home. But about
10 days ago, her legs became weak and she went back to the hospital.

   By that time, the disease had ravaged her. Herpes B, which has few clear
treatment guidelines because there have been so few cases, causes
encephalomyelitis, an inflammation of the brain and spinal cord, which leads to
paralysis.

   Griffin, breathing with the aid of a respirator, was unable to move, Gordon
said, but was alert until just before her death from bacterial infections and
respiratory distress syndrome.

GRAPHIC: Photo
ASSOCIATED PRESS

   Elizabeth R. Griffin, 22, died after an infected monkey flung
a tiny drop of fluid that entered her eye. A recent college graduate,
she had hoped to become a doctor.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1997


                             2181 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                December 14, 1997, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 536 words

HEADLINE: A Drop of Virus From a Monkey Kills a Researcher in 6 Weeks

BYLINE: By RICK BRAGG

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Dec. 13

BODY:

   Elizabeth R. Griffin, a 22-year-old primate researcher, was careful to follow
the precautions intended to shield her from the diseased animals she handled.
She always wore gloves and a mask, and she was usually separated from the
primates by a mesh cage.

   Death found its way past her defenses, literally in the blink of an eye.

    Six weeks ago, Miss Griffin, who planned to be a doctor, was helping to move
a caged rhesus monkey infected with the herpes B virus at the Yerkes Regional
Primate Research Center here, when the animal flung a tiny drop of fluid --
perhaps urine or feces -- at her face.

   It struck her in the eye. On Wednesday, paralyzed and weakened, she died of
complications from herpes B, which is common in primates but rare and deadly, 70
percent of the time, in humans.

   The consequences of that animal-to-human contact, and the almost freakish way
it caused Miss Griffin's death, seem lifted from Hollywood. Unlike the movies,
however, there is no public health risk here, researchers said, just a single
misfortune.

   Only 40 cases of primate-to-human transmission of the virus have been
reported since 1933, when the first case of human exposure was seen. Almost all
were the result of bites and scratches.

   Miss Griffin, from Kingsport, Ga., probably never thought she was at risk.

   "This was an extraordinarily low-risk activity by any measure we have," said
Dr. Thomas Gordon, associate director for scientific programs at the Yerkes
center, which is an arm of Emory University's medical school. The center
conducts research in AIDS, neuroscience, gene therapy and other areas, and is a
frequent target of animal rights protesters.

   On the day she was infected, Miss Griffin was dressed as usual, wearing a
mask, gloves and lab coat. The monkey's cage was covered by a fine wire mesh to
protect her and others from the animal's teeth and claws.

   Health regulations require researchers to wear goggles or safety glasses when
there is a risk of contact with an animal's fluids, as when an animal is removed
from its cage. But that was not required in this case because Miss Griffin was
holding the cage at arm's length, officials said.

   "During this transfer, as she tried to look into the cage to check the status
of the monkey, something came out," Dr. Gordon said. "Because it was so minor an
event, it was not even viewed by the individual as serious."

   Two weeks after she felt the tiny drop hit her eye, he said, Miss Griffin
developed a headache and eye infection. Miss Griffin, who graduated this year
with a degree in biology from Agnes Scott College, was admitted to Emory
University Hospital, and at first responded well to antiviral medication. She
even went home. But about 10 days ago, her legs became weak and she went back to
the hospital.

   By that time, the disease had ravaged her. Herpes B, which has few clear
treatment guidelines because there have been so few cases, causes
encephalomyelitis, an inflammation of the brain and spinal cord, which leads to
paralysis.

   Miss Griffin, breathing with the aid of a respirator, was unable to move, Dr.
Gordon said, but was alert until just before her death from bacterial infections
and respiratory distress syndrome.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1997


                             2182 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                December 14, 1997, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 569 words

HEADLINE: A Gene Therapy to Fight a Leukemia Is to Be Tested on Humans

BYLINE: By DENISE GRADY

DATELINE: MINNEAPOLIS, Dec. 13

BODY:

   Doctors at the University of Minnesota plan to begin tests this summer of a
new form of gene therapy in people with leukemia.

   The experimental treatment, to be described on Monday in the journal Blood,
will be tried in patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia. This form of the
disease affects about 7,000 people a year in the United States, 20 percent to 25
percent of all leukemia patients. The disease lends itself to gene therapy
because most of the patients have a genetic abnormality called a Philadelphia
chromosome, which triggers cancerous changes in stem cells. The stem cells
create blood cells.

    In the new treatment, researchers will add genetic material to patients'
cells to deactivate the abnormal gene and prevent healthy cells from being
killed by chemotherapy.

   A patient's best chance now for a cure or long-term remission from chronic
myelogenous leukemia is to get new stem cells with a bone-marrow transplant from
a donor. But about 60 percent of patients are not candidates for transplants.

   Some patients receive bone-marrow transplants in which their own stem cells
are removed and then returned after the patient has undergone intensive
chemotherapy and radiation. The procedure, called an autologous transplant, can
extend people's lives, but not as much as a transplant from a donor can. All
patients who use their own marrow relapse, in part because their marrow harbors
malignant cells.

   Dr. Catherine Verfaillie, leader of the Minnesota team, said that the new
gene therapy would be offered only to patients who could not receive a donor
transplant. It will be nearly identical to an autologous transplant, except that
some of the patient's stem cells will be genetically altered before they are
returned.  Each treated cell will contain two genetic changes, which will be the
first time, Dr. Verfaillie said, that two genetic traits will be added to
patients' cells to fight leukemia.

   One addition will be a snippet of genetic material known as an antisense
sequence. That material is designed to stop the Philadelphia chromosome from
directing cells to make a protein that leads to cancer. "The treated cells will
act like normal cells," Dr. Verfaillie said.

   But the antisense sequence is expected to make its way into only about 2
percent of the patient's stem cells, Dr. Verfaillie said. The remaining
malignant stem cells would still cause leukemia. To combat those unaltered
cells, the scientists will attach another gene to the antisense sequence. That
gene makes the altered cells resistant to the anticancer drug methotrexate.

   After receiving the altered cells, patients will be treated with
methotrexate. The drug is expected to kill the unaltered malignant cells but
spare the genetically changed ones, which should reproduce and gradually provide
healthy replacements for the leukemic stem cells.

   Using this technique on animals has been encouraging, Dr. Verfaillie said.
She said that when malignant cells from people with leukemia were injected into
mice, nearly all the animals died within 100 days. But if the cells were first
given the new genes and then injected, three-quarters of the animals were still
alive and healthy 100 days later.

   She noted, however, that other research teams have had trouble getting cells
to take up new genes.

   Without any transplant, the doctor said, patients with this leukemia may live
three or four years.


LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1997


                             2183 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                  December 14, 1997, Sunday, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A-6

LENGTH: 522 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHER DIES FROM HERPES VIRUS ACQUIRED FROM MONKEY

BYLINE: RICK BRAGG, THE NEW YORK TIMES

DATELINE: ATLANTA

BODY:


   Elizabeth R. Griffin, 22, a primate researcher, was careful to follow the
precautions intended to shield her from the diseased animals she handled. She
always wore gloves and a mask, and she was usually separated from the primates
by a mesh cage.

   Death found its way past her defenses, literally in the blink of an eye.

   Six weeks ago, Griffin, who planned to be a doctor, was helping to move a
caged rhesus monkey infected with the herpes Simian B virus at the Yerkes
Regional Primate Research Center here, when the animal flung a tiny drop of
fluid - perhaps urine or feces - at her face.

   It struck her in the eye. On Wednesday, paralyzed and weakened, she died of
complications from herpes B, which is common in primates but rare and deadly, 70
percent of the time, in humans.

   The consequences of that animal-to-human contact, and the almost freakish way
it caused Griffin's death, seem lifted from Hollywood. Unlike the movies,
however, there is no public health risk here, researchers said, just a single
misfortune.

   Only 40 cases of primate-to-human transmission of the virus have been
reported since 1933, when the first case of human exposure was seen. Almost all
were the result of bites and scratches.

   Alphie, the monkey whose daring six-month escape from the Pittsburgh Zoo made
him a folk hero in 1987, also had the virus.

   After his recapture near Bridgeport, Ohio, zoo officials housed the Japanese
macaque in a wire-mesh cage in the zoo's children's section for almost two
years, knowing he was infected and his bite or scratch deadly to humans, records
show. A celebrity fund-raiser for the zoo, Alphie was visited by tour groups of
school children.

   In 1990 new zoo director Barbara Baker placed Alphie and other infected
macaques in quarantine, and in 1994 the colony was moved to Ashby Acres Wildlife
Park in New Smyrna, Fla.

   In the Atlanta incident, Griffin, from Kingsport, Ga., probably never thought
she was at risk.

   ''This was an extraordinarily low-risk activity by any measure we have,''
said Dr. Thomas Gordon, associate director for scientific programs at the Yerkes
center, which is an arm of Emory University's medical school.

   The center conducts research in AIDS, neuroscience, gene therapy and other
areas, and is a frequent target of animal rights protesters.

   Two weeks after she felt the tiny drop hit her eye, he said, Griffin
developed a headache and eye infection. Griffin, who graduated this year with a
degree in biology from Agnes Scott College, was admitted to Emory University
Hospital, and at first responded well to antiviral medication. She even went
home. But about 10 days ago, her legs became weak and she went back to the
hospital.

   By that time, the disease had ravaged her. Herpes B, which has few clear
treatment guidelines because there have been so few cases, causes
encephalomyelitis, an inflammation of the brain and spinal cord, which leads to
paralysis.

   Griffin, breathing with the aid of a respirator, was unable to move, Gordon
said, but was alert until just before her death from bacterial infections and
respiratory distress syndrome.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1997


                             2184 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    DECEMBER 12, 1997 Friday SFCITY EDITION

SECTION: CITY & REGION; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 684 words

HEADLINE: FAMILY'S $100 MILLION GIFT TO PENN HAS PERSONAL ROOTS

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:
"I want this gift to give everybody the kind of cure I got," said Madlyn K.
Abramson, a former breast cancer patient, as she sat on a dais at the University
of Pennsylvania yesterday.

   And with that, Abramson - a onetime public school teacher and reading
specialist who is married to health-insurance magnate Leonard Abramson -
explained the very personal reason behind the $100 million that she and her
family are donating to Penn for cancer research and patient treatment.

   The gift, announced by Penn officials at a news conference yesterday morning,
will establish the Leonard & Madlyn Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute as
part of Penn's federally designated comprehensive cancer center, one of 31
funded by the National Cancer Institute.

   The money, officials said, won't go for buildings. It will be used to recruit
the best brains in the field to attack the five leading cancers - breast, lung,
prostate, ovarian and gastrointestinal tumors.

   The research is to be linked to medical education and to personalized and
"compassionate" patient care, officials said.

   Penn president Judith S. Rodin called it "an absolutely incredible day" for
Penn and said the new institute would provide a "revolutionary framework" to
create new approaches to cancer research, diagnosis and treatment. The goal, she
said, will be nothing short of a cure.

   "Having been a cancer patient, I understand the importance of a
patient-centered approach in all research and clinical activities," Madlyn
Abramson said. "To that end, high-quality, personalized care will be the
ultimate goal for all of our efforts."

   Wearing a black suit, pink blouse and pearls, Abramson chose not to reveal
the details of her own battle with breast cancer.

   She said she had been a patient for 12 years of Dr. John H. Glick, the breast
cancer expert who heads Penn's cancer center and who will become the executive
director of the new research institute.

   Asked if Jewish tradition and values had influenced her philanthropy, she
referred to

   the Hebrew word for righteousness and charity: "Jewish people are taught the
word tzedakah . . . from the time they are children. . . . We [the Abramson
family] are very Jewish-minded and American-minded."

   In response to a question about whether she would have donated such a large
sum for cancer research had it not been for her own cancer, Abramson replied: "I
hope I would have done it anyway."

   She added, "When bad things happen to the right people, good things can come
from it."

   Abramson thanked her husband for making the gift possible. Leonard Abramson,
who watched from the sidelines yesterday, founded U.S. Healthcare Inc., a Blue
Bell-based managed-care firm that was bought by Aetna Inc. for $8.9 billion in
1996.

   Madlyn Abramson, who serves as a Penn trustee, is to chair the cancer
institute's nine-member board of directors, which will also have its own
scientific advisory board.

   At the news conference, Glick and Dr. William N. Kelley, chief executive
officer of the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center and Health System and
dean of the medical school, outlined the research mission for the new cancer
institute.

   They said the program would pursue the genetic defects that cause cancer; new
animal models for studying human cancers; new technologies for earlier detection
of cancer; molecular and biochemical tests to diagnose cancer; and novel cancer
therapies, ranging from gene therapy to harnessing the body's own immune system
to destroy cancer cells.

   Kelley said the research dollars would be used "cautiously and wisely" to
have the greatest impact on patients and their families.

   The $100 million gift exceeds the $70 million in research grants now held by
330 scientists at Penn's cancer center, an interdisciplinary program that draws
from eight schools and 41 departments in the university.

   Despite the complexity of cancer as a disease and the toll it takes
worldwide, Glick was optimistic about the prospects. "There is no question
whether we can and will cure cancer," he said. "The question is when."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Madlyn Abramson said, "Having been a cancer patient, I understand the importance
of a patient-centered approach . . ." (Associated Press, CHRIS GARDNER)

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             2185 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    December 12, 1997, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A44; AROUND THE NATION

LENGTH: 103 words

HEADLINE: Primate Researcher Dies From Rare Infection

DATELINE: ATLANTA

BODY:


   An animal research worker died Wednesday of a rare herpes B infection after
contaminated fluid landed in her eye six weeks ago as she peered into the cage
of an infected laboratory monkey, doctors said.

   The woman, whose name was not released, worked at the Yerkes Regional Primate
Research Center Emory University, which conducts research into areas including
AIDS, gene therapy and neuroscience.

   Authorities said they believe it is the first reported case of transmission
of the virus through the eye. Herpes B virus infection is common in macaque
monkeys. It is rare, but usually fatal, in humans.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1997


                             2186 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              December 8, 1997, MONDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 425 words

HEADLINE: Arthritis therapies promising

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Cartilage cells fortified with gene therapy and a new agent that blocks a
damaging enzyme are among the promising tools that could come into action in the
next decade against the most common form of arthritis.

   Osteoarthritis, traditionally considered a result of "wear and tear" on the
joints as people age, is increasingly coming to be seen as a disease caused by
specific biological processes that can be blocked or interrupted, said Dr.
Jean-Pierre Pelletier of the University of Montreal Hospital Center.

   Breakdown of cartilage lining the joints causes pain, stiffness and loss of
mobility, and while a variety of therapies can be used to treat the symptoms, no
treatments exist to halt the underlying disease process.

   Pelletier noted that tissues in joints affected by osteoarthritis produce an
excess of a chemical compound called nitric oxide, which is suspected of playing
an important role in the deterioration of cartilage.

   Pelletier sought to block the action of an enzyme that produces nitric oxide
with a new agent, called L-NIL.

   In an experiment on dogs, the blocking agent was found to significantly slow
the development of cartilage lesions compared to animals that were not treated.
It also suppressed other natural substances known to contribute to damage in
joints.

   Pelletier cautioned that the experiment only lasted 10 weeks, and that the
agent may not work the same in people as in dogs. But the findings still offer
hope that "drugs capable of slowing or stopping the body's production of nitric
oxide may find some practical application in treatment," Pelletier said.

   Researcher Paul Doherty of Toronto Hospital has been experimenting with
genetically boosted cartilage cells.

   While the transplant of such cells cultured from their own tissue has become
a standard treatment for younger patients who have suffered knee injury, Doherty
said that in order to stand a chance of mending the damage of osteoarthritis,
the cells need to be more aggressive.

   Making that happen requires inserting an extra gene into cartilage cells via
infection with harmless virus before they're returned to the knee, Doherty said.
His team has worked out the mechanics of making that gene transfer into human
cells in a lab dish, and found that those infected cells will bind with existing
cartilage.

   "With these genetic instructions, we think we can get the cartilage to start
rebuilding what disease has started to destroy," Doherty said, although he
cautioned that "we're several years away from trying any of this in patients."

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1997


                             2187 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1997 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                        December 8, 1997, Metro Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 1019 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy joins leukemia fight;
 University of Minnesota scientists are splicing genes to try to improve the
odds against relapses. Full-scale human trials begin in the summer.

BYLINE: Gordon Slovut; Staff Writer

BODY:

    University of Minnesota scientists have developed a treatment for chronic
myelogenous leukemia that's designed to reduce the harmful effects of
chemotherapy and prevent relapses.

    The new treatment for chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), one of the
deadliest cancers of the blood, couples the established therapy of bone marrow
transplantation with genetic engineering - a combination that they hope will
wipe out all traces of cancer in the patients.

    The treatment improves the current CML therapy, which has been plagued by
relapses, by splicing gene segments to provide resistance to chemotherapy and to
prevent any residual cancer cells from reproducing.

    Dr. Catherine Verfaillie, an associate professor of medicine and a lead
researcher on the project, said the therapy has been safe and effective in
laboratory mice.

    She said two human trials are beginning at the University of Minnesota to
work out the details of the procedure, and the first full-scale human trials are
scheduled to begin in the summer.

    The first major report on the research will appear in the Dec. 15 issue of
the journal Blood.

    To develop the new therapy, the scientists genetically modified cells
produced in the bone marrow so that they won't be harmed by chemotherapy - and
so that they won't reproduce if they are cancerous or turn cancerous.

    In theory, that would allow doctors to give CML patients who've had bone
marrow transplants powerful cancer-killing chemotherapy almost indefinitely,
until all traces of cancer have been eliminated.

    CML accounts for about 20 percent of the 28,000 cases of leukemia diagnosed
in the United States each year. It affects cells that turn into white blood
cells known as granulocytes. More than 90 percent of patients have an abnormal
chromosome known as the Philadelphia chromosome.

    The disease progresses slowly, and it's often detected in people who see
their doctors because of a fullness in the upper abdomen, which is caused by a
swollen spleen.  It takes three to five years before CML becomes more aggressive
and difficult to treat.

    Cancer cells that survive radiation and chemotherapy are responsible for
many of the relapses.  Other relapses are caused by cancer cells that were
missed in the "clean up" of cells harvested from the patients before radiation
and chemotherapy and reimplanted to restart their blood cell-producing systems.

    "We believe that if we could safely give them chemotherapy months or years
longer than we can now, we should have a much greater chance" for a true cure,
Verfaillie said.

    The treatment of CML is straightforward.  First the patient's bone marrow -
where blood cells, including those that become leukemic, are produced - is wiped
out with radiation and chemotherapy. That leaves the patient dreadfully ill with
little resistance to infection.

    Then healthy bone marrow is transplanted into the patient. If all goes well,
it becomes seeded and begins producing stem cells, the baby blood cells that
develop into oxygen-carrying red blood cells and the various types of white
blood cells, including those that fight cancer and infections.

    Most of the successful transplants occur in patients who have a donor whose
tissue is nearly identical to their own.

    But for about 60 percent of CML patients, either no suitable donor can be
found or the patient is older than 55 and therefore ineligible for the
transplant because of the high risk of rejection.

    The best hope for such patients is an autologous transplant, using the
patient's own stem cells that have been "cleaned" of as many leukemic cells as
possible.

    "If we do a transplant with the patient's own cells, about 99 to 100 percent
of the patients relapse because we can't clean up the stem cells completely,"
Verfaillie said.

    Also, some leukemic cells can hide in the body, surviving the radiation and
initial chemotherapy.

    That's why doctors want to give those patients cancer-killing chemotherapy
for months or years, if necessary, after their autologous transplants.  The
problem is that the chemotherapy also kills healthy white blood cells, leaving
the patients vulnerable to infections.

    To try to counter those problems, the Minnesota scientists targeted
gene-splicing in two areas.

    They created gene segments that are resistant to methotrexate, the drug that
they use to kill leukemia cells. They spliced the resistant segments into what
seemed to be healthy stem cells removed from the patient. In theory, such
noncancerous cells and their progeny will survive and thrive no matter how long
the patients receive methotrexate.

    They also created a gene segment that turns off a tumor cell's capacity to
reproduce. They spliced those segments into stem cells intended for reinsertion
into the patient.  In theory, any modified tumor cells that survive the process
will simply die off.

    To test the therapy, the scientists injected 100,000 unmodified tumor cells
into one group of rodents and 10,000 modified tumor cells into another group.

    Most of those that received the unmodified cells - but almost none of those
that received modified cells - died quickly.

    University Cancer Center scientists are designing similar therapies for
other types of cancer, including acute lymphocytic leukemia, which is often
curable in children but isn't nearly as curable in adults; non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma, which is diagnosed in 53,000 Americans a year, killing 23,000, and
ovarian cancer, which is diagnosed in 28,000 women a year, killing 15,000.

    Dr. Philip McGlave, co-director of the Cancer Center's Transplant Biology
Program, described the genetic manipulation efforts as "promising, but very new
approaches to cancer."

    "We think that starting with transplantation to wipe out most of the cancer
cells, followed by these innovative therapies to get lingering cells that may
lead to relapse, will be an effective way to bring these discoveries to
patients," he said.


LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1997


                             2188 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     December 7, 1997, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 1280 words

HEADLINE: Deal tempers fears over gap in drug development;
Merck aides long-term outlook, but investors wary of '98 revenues;
CORPORATE FOCUS / BIOGEN CORP.

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Biogen Corp. is breathing easier after Merck & Co. agreed to spend a
whopping $ 145 million to jointly develop Biogen's asthma drug.

   The pact, announced last week, is the latest in a string of deals put
together by Biogen's chief executive, James R. Tobin, to expand the Cambridge
biotechnology company's pipeline of drugs under development that could hit the
market after 2001.

   But for the near term, Biogen's biggest problem is a lack of new products
ready for sale by 1998 and 1999 - a shortcoming that has some on Wall Street
concerned about its ability to boost revenue.

   "There is an immediate short-term gap in their product line," said Anthony C.
Butler, a senior vice president and biotechnology analyst at Lehman Brothers.

   Analysts say Biogen remains well positioned, especially if it can
successfully deliver the drugs under development. But investor uncertainty is
reflected in Biogen's stock performance this year: it is down 2.3 percent,
compared with a gain of 22.8 percent for the Lipper Analytical Health and
Biotech index.

   One of the nation's oldest and largest independent biotechnology companies,
Biogen relies largely on one product, a multiple sclerosis drug called Avonex,
plus a hefty annuity ($ 118 million in royalty revenue in the first nine months
of this year) from products it developed and licensed more than a decade ago to
pharmaceutical giants such as Schering-Plough Corp. and SmithKline Beecham PLC.

   But the growth in that royalty stream, from products such as Hepatitis B
drugs, vaccines, and diagnostics, is slowing, raising the question of where
Biogen's revenue growth will come from in the next few years. Tobin is
optimistic, saying funding from the asthma drug deal and sales of its main
product, Avonex, will carry the company until revenue from the new drugs kicks
in.

   "The Merck funding solves our Achilles heel of the royalties slipping away in
2000," said Tobin, who joined Biogen four years ago and became chief executive
in February, succeeding James L. Vincent, who remains chairman.

   Nearly 56 percent of Biogen's revenue so far this year has come from Avonex,
a once-a-week injectable treatment for MS. With revenue of $ 169.5 million for
the first nine months of the year - and Wall Street estimates that the 1997
total will top $ 238 million - Avonex is the market leader among three MS drugs
approved by the US Food and Drug Administration.

   "The ramp up in Avonex over the next couple of years is going to carry the
company longer than many people think," said Caroline L. Copithorne, vice
president and senior biotechnology analyst at Prudential Securities. "The Merck
milestone payments will help, and if they hit their milestones with the other
drugs that they have in their pipeline, then Biogen will do very well. This is a
well-run company."

   The strong growth of Avonex has healed the corporate wounds caused by
hirulog, a proposed blood thinner. It did not prove to be significantly better
than heparin, the drug it was designed to replace. The disappointment led the
company to focus on Avonex.

   "We had a decent drug, but one that still required significant investment
before it reached market," Tobin told employees this past summer after hirulog
was sold in March to Medicine Co. of Cambridge.

   He also told them that VLA4, the compound that Merck acquired last week,
"represents the very best of Biogen's in-house research."

   The decision to partner with Merck is part of Tobin's strategy to focus
Biogen's direct sales of pharmaceuticals in segments that are not too large and
not too small. Biogen, he said, cannot compete against the major asthma drug
giants Glaxo Wellcome PLC, Astra AB, and Schering-Plough - but Merck can.

   "We might outwit big pharmaceutical companies but could never outspend them,"
said Tobin, who spent 22 years at medical giant Baxter International Inc. before
joining Biogen.

   However, under the agreement with Merck, Biogen will retain marketing rights
to develop the same drug to treat certain diseases with patient populations of
less than 200,000, such as multiple sclerosis, inflammatory bowel disease, and
renal failure.

   In ceding broad markets to the drug giants, Tobin's strategy is to focus on
drugs for which the number of prospective doctor-buyers is limited to a few
thousand. Biogen, he said, does not need a large sales force and can achieve
success without corporate partners in this segment of the business.

   "I'm looking for six 50-to-75-person field forces - aimed at six big-dollar,
small-target population indications," Tobin said.

   And so far Biogen has found some, though the prospects are mixed. Last
December, the company acquired certain rights to a compound called OP-1 from
Creative BioMolecules Inc. of Hopkinton to treat renal failure, a disease that
affects 217,000 Americans and is largely treated by 2,400 nephrologists in the
United States.

   The company is still evaluating OP-1. Tobin recently acknowledged that the
high-risk compound poses some technical challenges and it might be difficult to
design an effective clinical trial for acute renal failure.

    Biogen has agreed to pay $ 53 million out of a potential $ 122.5 million in
the first three years of the agreement, which included a 4.7 percent stake in
Creative BioMolecules. Tobin concedes the multimillion-dollar deal was "rich."

   More promising - and less expensive - is a collaboration with CV Therapeutics
Inc. of Palo Alto, Calif., for its drug to treat edema, which is associated with
congestive heart failure.  The drug is now in phase 2 clinical trials. It is
also one of several drugs, along with an internally developed drug to treat
psoriasis, for which Biogen might turn to Merck's Japanese partners for help in
marketing in Japan, said Tobin.

   Still, some promising drugs that Biogen licenses from others may ultimately
prove to have too small a market. Although Biogen is focusing heavily on
treatments for multiple sclerosis, which affects an estimated 250,000 Americans
(including 7,000 in Massachusetts), it has decided to find a partner for a drug
it acquired from Massachuetts General Hospital to treat cystic fibrosis. Known
as Gelsolin, the drug is also in phase 2 testing, but "may represent too small a
market and too little of an improvement over Pulmozyme," said Tobin, referring
to the leading cystic fibrosis drug now on the market.

   "Given our desire to focus on larger markets like multiple sclerosis and
lupus, Gelsolin may not make the cut," Tobin said of plans to license it to
another pharmaceutical company.

    By contrast, Genzyme Corp. of Cambridge has made a major medical and
financial commitment to cystic fibrosis, including developing a gene-therapy
program.

   Just as Genzyme depends on Cerezyme, its successful treatment of Gaucher's
Disease, a rare disorder of the spleen, to fund future expansion, so too does
Biogen depend on Avonex.

    Already, Biogen is looking to develop new generations of the drug, which has
surpassed Betaseron, the first multiple sclerosis drug, developed by Chiron
Corp. and marketed by Berlex Laboratories. That injectable drug's side effects,
its three-times a week regimen, and recent reports that repeated use reduced its
effectiveness in some users have prompted some Betaseron patients to switch to
Avonex.

   "We will surprise people with our strength," said Tobin.

 BIOGEN

    Headquarters: Cambridge Ticker symbol: BGEN (Nasdaq) Stock price: 36 7/8 52
week high (low) 52 3/4 (29) Market value: $ 2.73 billion 9- month financial
results: profit $ 57.4 million sales $ 303.6 million PLEASE SEE MICROFILM FOR
CHART DATA GLOBE STAFF CHART

GRAPHIC: CHART PHOTO, "We might outwit big pharmaceutical companies but could
never outspend them," says Biogen's chief executive James Tobin.  GLOBE STAFF
PHOTO/DAVID RYAN

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1997


                             2189 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                   December 2, 1997, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1443 words

HEADLINE: JOINT EFFORTS;
A NEW CENTER IN PITTSBURGH AND ADVANCES IN FIELDS LIKE GENE THERAPY OFFER;
ARTHRITIS VICTIMS HOPE FOR FREEDOM FROM PAIN

BYLINE: NICOLE M. RESNICK

BODY:


   For Ann Rosati, it started with a fall.

   She slipped in a store in 1982, stripping the ligaments in one of her legs.
Since then, an aching in her lower back and knees has gotten progressively
worse.

   Arthritis runs in her family, and doctors say the combination of the fall and
family history have evolved into painful osteoarthritis, forcing her to retire
early a few years ago as a teacher's aide because she couldn't kneel on the
floor to interact with the young children.

   ''I really regretted retiring,'' said Rosati of Wilkins, who turns 69 this
month.

   She has cortisone injected into her knees every two to three months, takes a
prescription medication twice a day and Tylenol two to four times a day for the
pain.

   Even so, standing or walking is painful; her legs get very weak. Walking
stairs is laboring.

   ''Nothing takes the pain away,'' she said. Taking medicine is like putting a
Band-Aid on it so at least I can move around.''

   She hopes for the day when a 'magic pill' will be found that will make her
pain disappear.

   ***

   As the No. 1 cause of chronic disability in the United States, arthritis
affects 1 in every 7 Americans.

   Like Rosati, many people suffer unrelenting pain that touches every part of
their lives.

   But with recent medical advances, however, doctors in Pittsburgh are more
optimistic than ever about delivering effective treatment for the 50 million
Americans who suffer from the disease, including more than 500,000 people in
Western Pennsylvania.

   ''There has been a tremendous evolution in the understanding of arthritic
disorders,'' said Dr. Terence Starz, a rheumatologist at UPMC St. Margaret
Hospital and chairman of the UPMC Arthritis Center clinical operations
committee.

   Doctors are better able to classify and diagnose arthritis, Starz said, so
they can better tailor treatment to each case.

   With the establishment of a federally funded arthritis research center and
groundbreaking gene therapy under way, the Pittsburgh medical community is at
the forefront of uncovering effective treatments.

   The National Institutes of Health recently awarded $ 4.3 million to UPMC
Health System to establish a Multipurpose Arthritis Center.

   Nicknamed the Pitt-MAC, the center established in September is one of 14 in
the country. Dr. Timothy M. Wright, a UPMC rheumatologist and director of
Pitt-MAC, said he considers the center a milestone for the Pittsburgh arthritis
community.

   The center will enhance and expand current arthritis services and research
programs, bringing together close to 50 specialists studying arthritis and
related musculoskeletal disorders. An intregal part of this center is a growing
network of UPMC offices and affiliates throughout the region providing arthritis
services and treatment.

   ***

   A life-limiting condition

   Besides aches and pain, arthritis usually causes stiffness, limitation in
movement, and sometimes inflammation of the joints. These symptoms flare
intermittently or remain constant.

   Joints are the parts of the body where two bones meet, such as in the knee or
fingers. Spongy tissue called cartilage covers the ends of the bones, like a
cushion, to protect them from grinding together. Lining the joints are synovial
cells which produce a fluid to lubricate the joints and allow for smoother
movement.

   While there are more than 100 types of arthritis and related disorders
affecting joints and bones, the most common is osteoarthritis. Sometimes
referred to as ''wear and tear'' or degenerative arthritis, osteoarthritis
results from the breakdown of cartilage in the joints.

   Osteoarthritis is most prevalent in men and women over the age of 50 because
erosion of cartilage is inevitable as people age.

   Rheumatoid arthritis, the other basic type, involves inflammation of the
lining tissue of the joints, affecting 2 million Americans each year.

   When patients seek treatment for symptoms that may involve difficulty in
climbing stairs, writing long-hand or even opening a jar, a doctor may first
recommend a conservative approach.

   Changing the way a person walks may protect the diseased joint, and in some
cases, leg braces, canes or walkers are needed.

   To relieve pain and swelling, doctors may prescribe nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs to be taken several times a day. Aspirin, ibuprofen and
naproxen are among the most common, or sufferers may use Tylenol
(acetaminophen).

   Exercise is another key.  While many patients mistakenly assume that exercise
exacerbates the problems, strengthening the muscles that support the joints
actually protects them.

   Weight reduction also is critical.Dr. Nicholas G. Sotereanos, an orthopedic
surgeon and incoming director of the division of joint replacement at Allegheny
General Hospital, cites weight loss as the No. 1 method of preventing and
treating osteoarthritis.

   ''Americans are destroying their joints because they're overweight,'' he
said.

   When climbing stairs, for example, a person's weight shifts, forcing each
knee to bear five times the total body weight. A 300-pound person is placing
1,500-pounds on each knee at every step.

   ***

   When surgery is needed

   When a joint degenerates to the point where conservative treatment no longer
helps, doctors may recommended surgery. In younger patients, orthopedists can
perform arthroscopic surgery to clean up and remove debris from inside a
diseased joint. Another procedure involves shifting the bone in a joint to
redistribute body weight around cartilage that is more stable.

   ''These procedures do not cure the problem of arthritis, but they do help
relieve the pain, and they buy time for our patients,'' Sotereanos said.

   In the most radical of surgeries, a joint may be replaced with a synthetic
prosthesis.

   Usually performed on older patients between the ages of 50 and 80 years, knee
and hip joint replacements are the most common, and more than 300,000 of these
operations are performed each year in the United States.

   The high volume of joint replacements can be attributed, in part, to their
success rate. ''Joint replacement has the single greatest impact of any surgical
procedure in terms of quality of life,'' Starz said.

   Mildred I. Lucas, 68, of Wilkinsburg, has had both knee joints replaced.

   Diagnosed 10 years ago with osteoarthritis, she experienced a lot of cramping
and painful movement. Getting in and out a car was difficult.

   A former accountant with United Steelworkers of America, she had her right
knee joint replaced in 1994. Surgery on her left knee followed in 1996.

   As part of her recuperation, she performs water exercises several times a
week. She also has lost 20 pounds, which has helped ease the weight and pressure
on her knees.

   Lucas still takes pain medication about twice a week, but she said she's been
able to continue an active lifestyle.

   ''Most people don't know I had surgery,'' she said.

   ***

   Another kind of arthritis

   Rheumatoid arthritis, 20 times less prevalent than osteoarthritis, is more of
a medical mystery.

   Unlike osteoarthritis, it is an autoimmune disorder - caused when immune
molecules that normally help fight disease attack the body's own healthy
cartilage for no known reason.

   Anti-inflammatory medications, such as aspirin, as well as stronger
corticosteroids, may help ease pain and swelling, .

   Pitt is testing a new drug, TNFR:Fc, which has been shown to reduce
rheumatoid's inflammatory symptoms over a three-month period.

   UPMC and 59 trial centers across the country are evaluating how this drug
affects pain.

   The best hope for patients, however, may be found in genetic research, which
is designed to halt the biologic misfiring responsible for rheumatoid arthritis.

   The world's first clinical gene therapy for arthritis took place at UPMC in
1996, when doctors injected genetically modified cells into the knuckles of an
arthritis patient.

   The strategy involves transferring an anti-inflammatory gene directly into
arthritic joints. If the gene is turned on, the protein it makes should act as a
shield, staving off attack by the immune molecules responsible for the painful
inflammation.

   Just over a year since the gene therapy trial began, more than half of the
patients approved for the trial have undergone the initial gene transfer step.

   ''Results are very promising in that the procedure has been accomplished
unproblematically,'' said Dr. Christopher Evans, professor of orthopedic surgery
and molecular genetics at UPMC.

   ''There is evidence that the gene transfer is successful and the gene is
switched on in the joint.''

   Nicole M. Resnick is a free-lance writer who lives in Greenfield.

GRAPHIC: DRAWING, DRAWING: By Stacy Innerst/Post-Gazette

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1997


                             2190 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              December 1, 1997, MONDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; BREAKFAST BRIEFING; CHICAGO; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 595 words

BODY:


   New lease for American National

   Julien J. Studley Inc. said it has negotiated a 20-year lease for 370,000
square feet at 120 S. La Salle on behalf of American National Bank. It is the
largest downtown lease transaction this year and the second largest this decade,
Studley said. American National is moving from space at 1 N. La Salle and 33 N.
La Salle. Jacque Ducharme, senior executive vice president of Studley, said the
new lease saves the bank about $ 40 million. Thomas Adams, the American National
executive who directed the move, said the bank will maintain visibility on La
Salle while occupying less space.

   Ambassador East to be rehabbed

   The Omni Ambassador East Hotel, 1301 N. State, will undergo an $ 18 million
renovation, said its owner, Omni Hotels of Irving, Texas. The work, which
includes an upgrade of all guest rooms, will begin this month and will be
finished by August, the company said. The rehab will include refurbishing of
meeting facilities and work on plumbing and the foundation. The hotel, built in
1920, will remain open during the renovation.

   CBOE to list new options

   The Chicago Board Options Exchange said it will begin listing options on
these companies today: Companhia Cervejaria Brahma, Gulf Fabrication Inc., J.P.
Foodservice Inc., Superior Services Inc. and Titan Exploration Inc. Companhia
distributes beverages in Brazil. Gulf, of Houma, La., fabricates offshore
drilling and production platforms. J.P. Foodservice, based in Columbia, Md.,
distributes food and paper products. Superior, headquartered in Milwaukee,
collects and recycles garbage. Titan, of Midland, Texas, is involved in oil and
gas exploration. In addition, the options exchange said that beginning
Wednesday, it will list options on two companies: Cell Genesys Inc., a Foster
City, Calif., developer of gene therapies, and Nam Tai Electronics Inc., a Hong
Kong-based supplier for consumer electronics firms.

   Comments sought on futures plan

   The Commodity Futures Trading Commission has requested public comment on the
Chicago Board of Trade's proposed revisions to its corn and soybean futures
contracts. The proposal includes a recommendation that Toledo, Ohio, be deleted
as an authorized delivery point for soybean shipments in favor of sites along
the Illinois River from Chicago to St. Louis. Comments may be sent to the
commission at Three Lafayette Centre, 1155 21st St., N.W., Washington, D.C.
20581.

   Mortgage rate data go online

   Chicago Title and Trust Co. said data from its weekly survey of mortgage
rates now are available at its Web site. The information, updated every
Thursday, is available at www.ctt.com. Chicago Title conducts a mortgage rate
survey for Chicago and 15 other major markets.

   Deerfield gains high-tech firm

   NetDox Inc., a new company that specializes in confidential document delivery
via the Internet, has subleased 48,000 square feet at 1751 Lake-Cook Road in
Deerfield, said Cushman & Wakefield Inc., a broker involved in the transaction.
NetDox is a joint venture of Deloitte & Touche and the Thurston Group. The space
formerly was occupied by NutraSweet Co., which has moved to the Merchandise Mart
in Chicago.

   Heartland Partners OKs payment

   Chicago-based Heartland Partners LP said it has approved a special
distribution of 75 cents per ownership unit. The distribution will be paid Jan.
7 to partners of record on Dec. 31. A subsidiary of Heartland Partners has sold
10.3 acres on Goose Island for an industrial development. The sale gives the
company a share of future profits from the site.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1997


                             2191 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      December 1, 1997 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: SMALL DOSES

BYLINE: By Fran Henry

BODY:

   Cybermarch on Washington

   Sad to say, but here's an idea whose time has come: Today - World AIDS Day -
marks the beginning of the first electronic march on Washington, the "Until It's
Over e-March" against AIDS.

   "No more porta-potties lining the Mall, no more disputes about park service
head counts, no more overbooked hotels with angry tourists, no more traffic jams
clogging the streets of D.C. and no more exorbitant policing costs for
taxpayers," says Daniel Zingale, executive director of AIDS Action, the nation's
leading AIDS advocacy organization.

   The Web site address is: http://www.aidsaction.org

   Web site visitors will find a Virtual Mall with a digital counter indicating
the number of e-marchers, a speakers podium and a booth allowing e-marchers to
carry e-signs, which are essentially e-mails to national leaders.

   Visitors also have the option of downloading a video of President Clinton's
speech on youth HIV prevention.

   The e-march will last a year.

   While AIDS cases continue to rise worldwide, particularly among children,
there is slight cause for celebration: In the past year, the AIDS death rate in
the United States has dropped 26 percent and new cases have dropped for the
first time since the epidemic began. And 124 new weapons are in development,
including: 40 antiviral medications, 23 drugs to fight AIDS-related cancers, 11
medicines to fight opportunistic diseases, five gene therapies to alter cells to
make a patient more resistant and 12 vaccines.

   Free HIV testing

   Home Access Express HIV tests will be available free (plus a $6 shipping and
handling fee) to individuals who call 1-800-HIV-TEST before 11:59 p.m. today.
It's the company's way of marking the 10th anniversary of World AIDS Day.

   The test, which allows for in-home private testing with results available
within three business days, ordinarily costs $49.95 plus shipping and handling.

   For each call for a free test, Home Access Health Corp. will donate a free
test to the National AIDS Fund for distribution to AIDS service organizations.

   Deflated bodybuilders

    We knew it all along: a psychiatric disorder would emerge for the pumped-up
set. Muscle dysmorphia causes mus- cle-bound men and women to worry that they
"look puny."

   While anorexics diet until they are super-skinny - yet still see themselves
as fat - "in typical muscle dysmorphia, a muscle-bound bodybuilder will look in
the mirror and see himself or herself as out of shape," said researcher Harrison
G. Pope of McLean Hospital in Belmont, Mass., and Brown University.

   "We think the underlying pathology ... may be the same."

   This new and sure-to-become-popular form of dysfunction was described in the
November-December issue of the journal Psychosomatics.

   Egg on nutritionists' faces

   Let's pay tribute to the egg, which has emerged triumphant after years of
defamation as a culprit in heart disease.

   Although it has been vindicated by a large body of research published in
numerous reputable journals, including the American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition and the Journal of Internal Medicine, the American public has been
understandably slow to accept the about-face.

   If you are confused by the ongoing barrage of nutritional information, here's
a tip: eat a very wide variety of foods. Eat in moderation. Unless you have a
food intolerance, you can't go wrong.

COLUMN: SMALL DOSES

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1997


                             2192 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                December 1, 1997, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A4

LENGTH: 808 words

HEADLINE: FIGHT AGAINST AIDS IS LOSING GROUND

BYLINE: Maggie Fox; Reuters News Service

BODY:


   * "The bad news is we can't yet get rid of the virus entirely," a doctor
says, despite the effectiveness of a cocktail of drugs.

   November was a sobering month for people with AIDS, and the researchers
trying to help them:

   * Scientists have admitted the cocktail of drugs that originally offered hope
of a cure cannot eradicate the virus.

   * They have been told it is still too soon to try out the vaccine considered
to be the most hopeful.

   * And they have learned the HIV epidemic is worse than anyone thought.

   Just over a year ago, people with AIDS were euphoric over news that a triple
cocktail of AIDS drugs - AZT, plus a similar drug and one of a then-new class of
drugs called protease inhibitors - could knock the virus into apparent
submission.

   Now it is clear the virus has not been vanquished, even when a fourth new
drug is added to the mix.

   Volunteers who had been taking drugs for more than two years still had traces
of the virus in their immune cells, specifically "resting" CD4 T-cells.

   "The bad news is we can't yet get rid of the virus entirely. The number of
immune system cells that remain infected with HIV declines only very slowly,"
said Dr. Robert Siciliano of Maryland's Johns Hopkins University, who worked on
one study.

   Siciliano thinks there is a chance the drugs could outwait the virus -
keeping it in check until all the cells it hides in die off. But that would take
many more years.

   And that's just in the people who take their drugs perfectly, on time, every
day. Many more find it nearly impossible to stick to a regimen that includes
dozens of pills a day, taken at different times and with side-effects ranging
from headaches to severe nausea.

   In others, the drugs do not work perfectly. Some people are not responding to
the protease inhibitors.

   And there is the issue of cost. The drugs cost thousands of dollars a year
and are beyond the reach of health care systems in many developed countries, let
alone Africa and Asia.

   New drugs are in the works. AIDS drugs work to stop the virus from
replicating itself, and each class targets a slightly different enzyme important
to this cycle.

   It is hard to kill a virus outright - in part because viruses are different
from other forms of life such as bacteria. They don't eat, they don't breathe
and they replicate by hijacking cells, rather than reproducing.

   Nonetheless, scientists are gaining a better understanding of how the HIV
virus actually operates in the body, how the body responds to it and how some
people's bodies do actually successfully fight off the infection.

   They are working on new drugs that target the virus itself. The
Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America say 40 drugs are in trials
or under review by the Food and Drug Administration.

   There are 34 drugs in the works to fight the diseases, ranging from pneumonia
to cancer, that mark AIDS, and some researchers report hopeful results with gene
therapy approaches aimed at helping the immune system battle the virus.

Vaccine offers best hope

   But while hospital beds are emptying of AIDS patients who are helped back to
health by new drugs, most experts say a vaccine offers the best hope.

   "The real solution to the international problem probably will depend on a
vaccine," said Dr. David Ho of the Aaron Diamond AIDS center in New York, one of
the developers of the drug cocktail approach.

   "We know it is possible. We just have to get there using a strategy that is
safe in humans.

   Ho said his team had shifted more than half of its AIDS research into
vaccine-related efforts.

   But there have been setbacks here, as well. More than 40 vaccines are in the
works, and none has been effective in people.

   One vaccine, using a live but genetically weakened form of the HIV virus, has
shown promise in monkeys. A group of doctors loosely organized by the
Chicago-based International Association of Physicians in AIDS Care was so
impressed that dozens of members volunteered to try it on themselves.

   But the National Institutes of Health, which must approve any such move, says
it is too dangerous and too soon to do that.

   Pressure to do something, however, is building. Prevention is not working and
the epidemic has shifted from gay men to drug users and to women. In Africa and
Asia, the two hottest spots, transmission is mostly heterosexual.

   Last week the United Nations announced the alarming news that 30 million
people were now infected with HIV, up considerably from fewer than 23 million
last year. By 2000, they predict 40 million could be infected.

   U.N. officials predict another explosion is building in Asia, and they
predict the generation of orphans that will be left behind by the epidemic will
be left poor and malnourished, uneducated and likely to contribute to unrest and
economic decline.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Color Photo - Dr. Marge Cohen (center)
talks with HIV-positive patients Denise Johnson (left), Tina Welcher and
Victoria Derovin (right) about their medications at Cook County Hospital in
Chicago last week.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1997


                             2193 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                November 30, 1997, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 14WC; Page 3; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1215 words

HEADLINE: Q&A/Dr. Francis L. Belloni;
Dean Guides Next Generation in Research

BYLINE: By DONNA GREENE

BODY:

   THE new dean of the Graduate School of Basic Medical Sciences at New York
Medical College, Dr. Francis L. Belloni, compares what is happening today in
biomedical research with what happened to art during the Renaissance. Dr.
Belloni of Cortlandt Manor said it is an exciting time to be both a scientist
and an educator guiding the next generation of scientists.

   Dr. Belloni, who has a doctorate in physiology, has been with New York
Medical College, on the Grasslands Reservation in Valhalla, since 1981 in
various capacities in the physiology department. He was appointed dean in June.

    Here are excerpts from a recent conversation with him:

   Q. What is basic medical science?

   A. We concentrate on the laboratory science part of medicine. Basic medical
research, also called biomedical research, can be measured on two values: one,
how fundamental the knowledge is, and two, how useful it is. Good biomedical
research has elements of both. What we do here is both seek fundamental
knowledge and look for very immediate practical applications in terms of health
care and treatment of diseases.

   Q.  What kind of research goes on at New York Medical College?

   A.  The kind of work that goes on within our basic science program includes a
lot of cardiovascular science, working on issues like hypertension, control of
blood flow to different organs, development of heart failure and the more
healthy normal adaptive growth of the heart.

   Q. This is real research, not something that has been developed some place
else or that you are replicating for the sake of training students, right?

   A. It's very original work, funded by the National Institutes of Health or
other agencies, such as the American Heart Association or the American Cancer
Society. Individual investigators obtain a grant. We have two program projects
from the National Institutes of Health, both in the cardiovascular area. And
these are projects that have multiple investigators doing complementary projects
that make a whole.

   The work our Ph.D. students write up in their dissertations is publishable as
original work.

   Q. We hear about cutbacks in research and development funds. Is America
suffering as a consequence?

   A.  The Federal support for research enjoyed a tremendous growth from the
1950's until the last decade or so. Since then it has flattened out. Given the
Federal budget deficit, that will probably continue in the future. The other big
problem we've had is that the growth of managed care has reduced revenues that
come into academic medical centers, and in the past some of that revenue was
used to support biomedical research at those centers. So the crunch that people
feel is that support has been reduced somewhat or flattened out, but at the same
time the promise and excitement of biomedical research is as great as it has
ever been.

   Q. And the applications are found quickly, are they not?

   A. Yes. For example, we know a lot more now about how genes work and we know
a lot more basic cellular biology. Of course, there is much still to be learned.
Take the Genome project, where scientists are mapping the genes on the
chromosomes. We also know that there are many diseases associated with very
specific defects or changes in specific genes. Once you know that -- and it's
all getting recorded now -- they become targets for therapeutic drug action,
targets for gene therapy.

   So the lack of increased funding is frustrating because there is so much to
do, and we've built up such a large cadre of scientists and the dollars that are
there just don't go as far.

   Q. With all this opportunity for doing great things comes opportunity to make
a lot of money. Reports surface occasionally of scientists who cut corners. How
do you, as a teacher, teach your students ethics?

   A. In the past, if ethics was taught, it was strictly on the basis of an
apprenticeship model. The vast majority of scientists are ethical and honest and
are very stringent in their own behavior. So we try to pass that on to our
students. Nowadays, there are pressures to cut corners, and it's true there are
gray areas where the people do have financial interest in their work. That's not
inherently bad; it's sort of the American way. If you have a financial interest
in your work, you're liable to work very hard on it and be rewarded for it. But
you have to be aware of the possible conflicts and the checks and balances to
make sure you don't step over the line.

   So we're trying to expose the students not just in an apprentice fashion, but
in a more formal classroom setting, to some of these issues. We're developing
courses now where the students will be challenged with different situations and
scenarios, and then we will discuss them and look at them and try to come to
some common understanding of where the line should be drawn between acceptable
and unacceptable behavior. Our faculty will participate in this as well, because
it's not a situation where we have a handbook with the answers and all we have
to do is give it to a student. These are questions that the whole community
needs to discuss.

   There are a lot of human relations issues as well. For example, who should be
the author on a paper? Talking out these issues in terms of how a person is
going to be rewarded with recognition ahead of time makes for a better working
place. Science is no longer -- if it ever was -- a solitary affair. It has to be
done in teams, and people have to work together.

   Q. The other big question we hear about is, Who owns the rights to these
discoveries? Is it morally acceptable to deprive sick people of high-priced
medicine? How does that issue come into play with these students?

   A. Those are exactly the kinds of issues we try to raise in our work with our
students. These problems are all multidimensional and are not as easy to
determine right and wrong as is "Did you cheat or did you not cheat?" Also, what
are the consequences to the end users of this discovery? And there are legal
issues that must be addressed. Our life in today's time is complex. We can't
avoid that and say, "I'm sitting here in my lab, and I'll work away and the rest
of it isn't important."

   You have to be aware of these things. There are ways to deal with these
issues. There are principles that we can express and all agree to. The best
safeguard against problems is to be open about the principles involved. Then
people are more likely to follow a common code.

   Q. What would be your personal code that you hope some of the students will
agree with?

   A. I guess if I had to narrow it down I would say that the watchwords would
be: seek the truth and the truth will set you free. It has been said before, but
that's the key. You need to be honest. I feel fortunate to be a scientist, which
is a very interesting thing to do. There is no drudgery in this. It's hard work,
but we see new insights every day, and it's an exciting career to choose. But
the flip side of that is that we have an obligation to take that knowledge and
share it with generations of scientists -- in other words our students -- and an
obligation to share it with the public, which has funded our work. So, we must
seek the truth and recognize these obligations. Then the bigger issues just
become minor points.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Francis L. Belloni, dean of the Graduate School of Basic
Medical Sciences at New York Medical College. (Chris Maynard for The New York
Times)

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1997


                             2194 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                November 23, 1997, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Page 65; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5070 words

HEADLINE: Success Is Like a Drug

BYLINE: By Stephen S. Hall;  Stephen S. Hall, a contributing writer to the
Magazine, is the author of "A Commotion in the Blood: Life, Death and the Immune
System."

BODY:

   At 8:30 A.M. on a Friday morning, as trainloads of sleepy commuters rolled
past heading north for San Francisco, David Goeddel's lab group convened in a
conference room of a low-slung, two-story building hard by the railroad tracks.
One by one, young biologists drifted into the room: mostly 20-something,
willfully underdressed, a rainbow coalition of the test-tube set from China and
Korea and Germany and France, each clutching notebooks and lab results that
contained dazzling but half-revealed secrets about the inner life of cells.

   First up that day in April was John Woronicz, dressed for the occasion in a
gray T-shirt, untucked, and jeans. To ears unfamiliar with the arcana of modern
biology, it wasn't long before Woronicz had drifted into a foreign language. He
spoke of molecules with funny names like RIP and TRAF, and an ominous region
called the "death domain."

    It was very basic science, and the people in this room do it as well as any
university research team in the world. But this young, blue-jeaned proletariat
works for a biotechnology company in South San Francisco called Tularik, and
competes not only with academics to publish work in journals like Science and
Nature but also with big pharmaceutical companies in the hunt for new drugs. And
if a discovery ultimately leads to a successful product, it can make every
person in the group very rich.

   It costs roughly $300 million to create a marketable new drug, and the trip
begins in rooms like this one. On this particular morning, the journey of drug
discovery traversed all of two- or three-millionths of a meter, the distance
between the surface of a typical cell and its nucleus. Therein lies an immense
biological wilderness, and Woronicz and his colleagues were trying to do nothing
less than sort out the molecular whispers that tell a cell to become "inflamed."
This happens during an infection, for example, when our bodies typically
manufacture a molecule known as tumor necrosis factor (or T.N.F.), which alights
on the surface of cells and triggers a bucket brigade of message-bearing
molecules that carry the word from the cell surface to genes nestled in the
nucleus. The message, quite simply, is, "Inflammation." When this happens enough
times in enough cells, the four horsemen of inflammation -- redness, swelling,
heat and pain -- are readily apparent.

   Research into the signalling pathways that control genes, a field known as
signal transduction, has become very hot because a complete understanding of the
molecules that participate in passing these messages -- the "cascade," in
scientific parlance -- is likely to provide important clues to the treatment of
everything from viral infections to autoimmune diseases. But as Woronicz's work
in progress made clear, a complete understanding is still a ways off. "When I
saw this, I was kind of excited," he said of one experimental result. "But when
I tried repeating it, I couldn't get it." Like so much of day-to-day science,
the nearest Eureka was probably an upright model in the janitor's closet.

   Lin Wu, up next, was working "downstream" of Woronicz, at a point in the
cascade where yet another molecule, NIK, comes into play. She described her
efforts to create "knockout mice" -- lab mice whose embryos have been engineered
in such a way that the scientists have skillfully erased, or knocked out,
whichever gene they wish. The work was going slowly.

   Seated near the back of the room, sipping tea and tugging gently on one ear,
was Tularik's C.E.O., David V. Goeddel. Casual in a blue sports shirt, green
cotton slacks and clunky tennis shoes, Goeddel slouched in his chair, not
entirely at ease, like a six-foot person in a five-foot bed. Nothing in his
demeanor suggested that Goeddel, now 46, once exemplified the fast, ruthless
"clone or die" culture of the early days at Genentech, the pioneering biotech
company; that he is a onetime "Inventor of the Year" for his role in cloning the
gene for a clot-busting drug now routinely administered to heart-attack victims
in hospitals, and that he, along with his two fellow founders, is hoping to do
what almost everyone thinks is virtually impossible these days: build a major
new drug company from scratch.

   "There'll be competition on the knockouts," Goeddel commented. Still, he
advised Wu to ignore rumors about rival labs. "Whether we get plasmids a week
after Baltimore, probably doesn't make that much difference," he said, referring
to work going on in the laboratory of the Nobel laureate David Baltimore, which
was working on the same cascade. A flicker of relief seemed to cross Wu's face,
but it faded quickly. Everyone in the room knew that Goeddel's oft-expressed
work ethic -- "Just do everything as fast as possible" -- had the quality of an
executive order.

   For more than a decade, biologists have been keenly interested in parsing the
exact chain of events as inflammation's message is passed along. Baltimore's
group, for example, first identified a key molecule in the chain, a
"transcription factor," which turns on well over a hundred genes related to
immunity and inflammation, and has been working ever since from the cell nucleus
out toward the surface. In a microcosmic echo of the race between East and West
during construction of the transcontinental railroad, Goeddel's lab group (not
to mention top-notch labs elsewhere) has been racing to piece together other
parts of the cascade, working from the cell surface in. And like the
transcontinental railroad, more than glory and honor is at stake here.

   These scientists have been indoctrinated with the mantra of innovation:
discovery creates value. Indeed, several weeks after the meeting, Mike Rothe and
the group working on inflammation identified a crucial missing link in the
cascade, called CHUK (for "conserved helix-loop-helix ubiquitous kinase").
Tularik quickly filed two patent claims, for the gene and the protein it makes,
and, within days of publishing the discovery in the journal Cell, signed a
multimillion-dollar research deal with Roche Bioscience to develop
anti-inflammatory drugs. Rothe's group immediately began to develop
drug-screening tests, which could also be patented, to identify potential drugs
that target CHUK.

   In a larger sense, Tularik has deliberately pursued a strategy of using the
greatest revolution in the life sciences during the 20th century, molecular
biology, to discover the most comforting and old-fashioned of nostrums: a pill.
Lots of pills, actually. A pill to lower cholesterol, a pill to short-circuit
allergies, a pill to block the genetic mischief of viruses and bacteria, a pill
-- if the work under discussion this morning pans out -- to block the kind of
inflammation that causes rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, autoimmune diabetes
and a host of other ailments. What all these pills will have in common, if they
ever see the light of day, is that they will confer health by switching genes on
and off with unprecedented precision. And all it takes is one blockbuster drug
to turn a "biotech boutique" into a major player.

   There is no guarantee that Tularik will succeed, but to the cognoscenti of
biotechnology it has become something of a spectator sport to watch the company
try. Unlike other companies with similar aspirations, Tularik has rather unique
bloodlines, a phenomenal amount of cash for an outfit its size and loads of
talent. It has also had a little luck, which may be the most important component
of all in the process of drug discovery.

People, People, People

   If you set out to create a major drug company these days, you need several
hundred million dollars, a dynamite scientific idea and the right people --
although not in that order. When Robert A. Swanson, the co-founder and longtime
president of Genentech, was asked at a recent financial gathering about the most
important element of a business plan, he replied without hesitation, "The first
three things are people, people and people." The remark was not irrelevant to
Tularik; Swanson was one of the first to invest when the company was formed in
December 1991 and now serves as its chairman.

   Swanson's remarks came at a meeting, called "Biotechnology Comes of Age,"
that attracted about 300 entrepreneurs, drug-industry executives, bankers and
the ubiquitous venture capitalists to the ballroom of San Francisco's
Ritz-Carlton hotel in April. The gathering not only commemorated the birth of
the industry 21 years earlier, when Swanson and the biologist Herbert Boyer
founded Genentech, but also served to underline Tularik's outsize ambitions in a
landscape much changed from the mid-1970's.

   It is no secret that the world's leading drug companies missed the boat on
the pharmaceutical implications of molecular biology in the 70's. They didn't
appreciate the swift impact genetic engineering would have on the drug industry,
they didn't have people who knew how to do the work and they rarely nurtured the
kind of entrepreneurial culture that could proceed at the breakneck pace of
young scientists like Goeddel, who as a tall, diffident 26-year-old biochemist
became one of the first scientists to work full time for Swanson.

   Beginning in 1978, Goeddel's team isolated (or "cloned") several important
human genes, including insulin, growth hormone, interferon, tumor necrosis
factor and tissue plasminogen activator (or t-PA, a popular clot-buster). All of
those genes, with the exception of T.N.F., have led to major drugs for Genentech
and its licensing partners. When the company went public in October 1980, it was
-- and remains -- one of the brightest Roman candles ever to light up the sky
over Wall Street.

   Those days are long gone. No one doubts the power of modern biology to
produce new kinds of drugs, nor that new kinds of medicine are sorely needed:
the total annual cost of uncured disease in this country exceeds $500 billion.
And no one doubts the ardor with which the major drug companies -- "big pharma,"
in industry slang -- are buying scientific expertise and a piece of the action
these days; the cost-cutting of managed care, oddly enough, has forced the
pharmaceutical industry to seek new technologies of drug development rather than
rely on knockoff drugs with ever-diminishing profit margins. The big drug
companies ("cash rich and technology poor," as one industry report put it) have
been on a billion-dollar shopping spree for genomics technology, and virtually
every big drug company -- Hoffmann-La Roche, Eli Lilly, Merck, SmithKline
Beecham, Glaxo Wellcome and Bristol-Myers Squibb, to name but a few -- has
invested heavily in the new biology.

   But an air of cheerful capitulation seems to be the prevailing aspiration for
most biotechnology companies in the 1990's. Indeed, the organizers of the San
Francisco affair gave out awards -- little double-helix Oscars, as it were -- to
biotech companies that had formed the most enterprising alliances. In the 90's,
the conventional wisdom holds that it is no longer feasible to build a major
drug company from the ground up. "Most companies don't have that ambition,
because it's too hard and the monetary requirements are too great," said Carl
Gordon, an analyst at Mehta & Islay, an investment firm.

   And the competition is fierce. Tularik has estimable rivals in the field of
signal transduction, like Cadus Pharmaceutical in Tarrytown, N.Y., and Signal
Pharmaceuticals in San Diego. It faces competition from many of the 1,300 other
biotech companies, which may be using different technologies to address the same
medical targets. And although it enjoys a healthy collaboration with Merck on
antiviral agents, Tularik could potentially compete with the Mercks and
Warner-Lamberts in cholesterol-reducing drugs. Add to that the kind of financial
bends that occur when big pharma abruptly cancels a research collaboration, and
the odds of a biotech minnow surviving long enough to become a big fish become
very long indeed. "We know it's extremely unlikely," said Barry Toyonaga of
Ontogen, one of the few biotechs with similar aspirations. "Only a handful out
of a thousand have done it. But those few successes are why we're trying."

The Idea

   For a self-described workaholic, Dave Goeddel manages to build a lot of
leisure time into his schedule, and it was during a series of fishing trips with
his friend Robert Tjian, a biologist, that the idea of starting a drug company
based on emerging research in signal transduction went from idle chatter to a
business plan.

   Tjian, who heads a laboratory at the University of California at Berkeley, is
one of nine children who grew up in central New Jersey by way of Hong Kong,
Brazil and Argentina. (One sister is the fashion designer Kenar.) He apprenticed
in molecular biology under James Watson at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on Long
Island and has become one of the leading authorities on gene regulation.

   The idea was deceptively simple. Genes can theoretically be regulated, or
manipulated, with the use of small molecules, and that meant any medicines
Goeddel and Tjian came up with would literally be easy to swallow. All the
first-generation biotech drugs, like insulin, are large proteins that must be
administered by injection; Goeddel and Tjian wanted nothing but pills. Moreover,
unlike more speculative, and hyped, applications of high-tech medicine (gene
therapy comes to mind), they knew that signal-transduction-based drugs would
work. Steroids (like prednisone), cyclosporin and the anticholesterol drugs
known as statins all work by regulating gene activity.

   The idea of starting a new company got serious on a fishing trip to the
Tularik River in western Alaska in September 1991. "We were on the banks of the
river," Tjian recalled, "when Dave turned to me and said, 'Why not call it
Tularik?' And I said, 'Call what?' He said, 'Our company.' And that's when I
knew we were going to have a company." Then they went out and got a tank
commander to run the place.

   A lot of people in the scientific community were shocked when Steve McKnight,
Tularik's third founding member, left a prestigious research position in
Baltimore financed by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute to oversee the
startup. Tall, broad-shouldered and balding, with West Texas still twanging in
his voice, McKnight looks a little like Tom Landry, and he followed in Roger
Staubach's footsteps as a high-school quarterback at the New Mexico Military
Institute. Staubach went on to Annapolis and five Super Bowls; McKnight flunked
out of the University of Texas and got drafted, serving as a tank commander in
Vietnam before resuming his studies. Ultimately, he settled down and discovered
biology -- and between 1988 and 1992, according to the Institute for Scientific
Studies, produced the most widely cited scientific papers of any molecular
biologist or geneticist in the world.

   Unlike Goeddel and Tjian, however, who mask their competitiveness with
understated demeanors, McKnight brings a more transparently pugnacious style to
his science, as in the way he describes Tularik's scientific strategy.

   "This is a simple story," he'll say, with a suffering-fools-ungladly edge to
his voice. "Listen, we've all got the same genes, and diseases almost invariably
are traced to the misexpression of genes. And if you knew and

   understood it well enough to flip it -- no gene therapy, none of that stuff,
just a pill to do that -- you could really make hay."

Making Hay

   Even Wall Street analysts can understand that kind of explanation. But what
the moneyed crowd really understands is a track record, which is one reason
Tularik has had remarkable success raising money. When Goeddel, Tjian and
McKnight went looking for startup cash, they found plenty of willing partners,
including Genentech and Swanson himself.

   Analysts credit Mark Levin, who served as Tularik's first C.E.O., with
establishing a financial strategy that gave Goeddel, Tjian and McKnight the time
to build a crack scientific staff and stake patent positions with their basic
science. While most biotech companies face enormous pressures to make an initial
public offering on the stock market quickly so early backers can recoup their
investments, Tularik has managed to raise enough money to choose its moment. Its
Japanese-born vice president for business development, Yasonuri Kaneko, has
negotiated research and development deals with three Japanese pharmaceutical
companies while retaining most marketing rights outside Asia for Tularik. As a
result, virtually all the company's basic research is financed by collaborators,
and it still has the option to market many of its own products later on.

   Then there's the importance of sheer luck. During the summer of 1996, Goeddel
and Tjian went fishing again, this time looking for Atlantic salmon on the Kola
Peninsula in Russia. A chance encounter with a Swedish investment banker also on
the trip eventually led to a $62.7 million stake in the company, mostly by
private investors in Europe -- believed to be the largest single private
investment in the history of American biotechnology. That gives Tularik an
unofficial value of about $350 million, according to Mark Edwards of Recombinant
Capital, a San Francisco consulting firm. To put that in perspective, Edwards
added: "The land north of $300 million for a biotech is relatively uncharted.
Their value is twice the average of companies that have already gone public."

   Some biotech watchers suggest that Tularik's business strategy bought it a
chance to refine a truly novel and ambitious approach to drug discovery. "A lot
of companies get pushed by financial analysts, by their boards and by their
investors to say they've got something in clinical trials," said Cynthia
Robbins-Roth, head of Bioventure Publishing in San Mateo, Calif. "It's called
'accelerated commercialization,' and it's been a disaster. It was Tularik's
savvy in their business and financial strategy that's allowed the researchers to
have the luxury they have today. The one thing that is important to Dave Goeddel
is having the freedom to do the research."

Finding the Target

   "I don't have beautiful language," said Jin-Long Chen, 35, by way of
explaining that his halting English hasn't prevented him from heading Tularik's
efforts to find a compound that might regulate the so-called obesity gene. Then
he flashed a toothy grin. "This is like an American dream. Look at me! I was a
graduate student in Tjian's lab, and two years later I'm here as a project
leader." And, he might have added, earning patents for the company, getting a
good salary (scientists typically start at $60,000 to $70,000) and accumulating
stock. Chen's team recently identified a lead compound that seems to turn on the
leptin gene, which plays a central role in fat metabolism and obesity.

   The fact that a talented researcher two years out of graduate school can be
entrusted with a major drug-development program helps explain how a small
company like Tularik can even presume to compete with big companies. "SmithKline
Beecham would not be able to hire the top 30 guys at our company, no matter how
much money they pay them," Tjian said. "It's not just the money. It's the
culture. How many companies would give essentially a student out of a Ph.D.
program the head of an obesity project?"

   The appeal of that cultural difference may best be explained by a recent
convert. Pieter Timmermans spent nearly 15 years at DuPont Merck Pharmaceutical
before joining Tularik earlier this year. "It is like comparing the well-oiled
Mercedes of the East Coast with the Ferrari of the West Coast," he said. "They
are both excellent cars, but they go at a different pace. The Mercedes has a
track record, reliability, and will get you there. Many times. But the Ferrari
can maybe get you there faster."

   Goeddel of all people appreciates what might be considered the "golden
carrot" of entrepreneurial success: identify gifted young people, dangle lots of
responsibility and stock in front of them and then get out of the way. Although
he doesn't come right out and say so, Goeddel has modeled Tularik on the early
days at Genentech, when a few young scientists (Goeddel, for example) were
entrusted to run large research initiatives, and rewarded handsomely when they
succeeded. Tularik has entrusted its six areas of drug development --
inflammation, obesity, antivirus, antibacteria, immunology and high cholesterol
-- to researchers mostly in their late 20's or early 30's.

   Unfortunately, every carrot has its stick. "I had to fire two of the first
eight or nine people that I hired," admitted McKnight, who has returned to
academic research at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in
Dallas but spends part of each month at Tularik. "And they were good guys, but
they couldn't get the work done without constant, constant pushing, and you
can't succeed like that. I mean, if you want to climb the wall, you can't do it
with baggage."

Hitting the Target

   In order to find this new generation of small-molecule drugs, Tularik has in
the course of about five years set up a drug-discovery shop that rivals the
capacity and capability of big pharma. The effort is headed by Patrick Baeuerle,
who gave up a tenured position at Freiburg University in Germany a year and a
half ago to join the company. Once the basic scientists working on inflammation
have identified a target like NIK or CHUK, for example, Baeuerle's group devises
ways of testing substances that might disrupt the inflammation signal. Although
"assays," as such tests are called, sound like an arcane concept, Tularik's
innovative approach has brought considerable rewards to the company. Its
biologists have designed clever assays that not only recreate the internal
environment of a living cell but can also detect which chemical compounds throw
a molecular spanner into the works. "I think one of the reasons Merck and Roche
have done business with us," Goeddel said, "is because of these novel drug
screens we've developed."

   With an assay in hand, Baeuerle's group throws tens of thousands of chemicals
-- plant extracts, off-the-shelf compounds from supply companies, extracts of
marine sponges -- at the target in a vast hit-or-miss operation in search of an
agent that can neutralize it. Tularik devoted a lot of cash -- up to $2 million
a year -- assembling its own library of chemicals, which now number about
450,000. Baeuerle showed me the raw stocks; like magazines in more traditional
libraries, the chemicals are stored in large metal filing cabinets. He opened
one jar that contained a greenish natural extract and wafted it by his nose.
"Smells like herbs," he said with a sheepish smile. "Hope it's not toxic."

   Tularik's commitment to amassing all these chemicals underscores the
fundamental paradox of drug discovery: the brightest minds in the business,
whether at big pharma or upstart biotechs, sooner or later are reduced to
playing the lottery. Assembling a lot of chemicals is like buying lots of
lottery tickets: it improves your odds of winning, but you're still playing a
game of chance. To be sure, in this kind of lottery, there is skill as well as
luck. The compounds are only as good as the assays the company designs to test
them, and the speed with which they can fling all 450,000 samples in the library
against a single target.

   To that end, Tularik employs four robots (with one more on the way) to run
the assays. Each machine can process 12,000 samples in 24 hours, but the reality
is that it takes 6 to 12 months to test every chemical in the library against a
single target.

   About one in a thousand tests produces a "hit" -- that is, evidence that the
target has been biologically perturbed. Hits, however, are fool's gold. Those
450,000 tests will produce 450 hits, and even then, Goeddel says, the number of
hits that become serious drug candidates is between "zero and one." To cash in
the lottery ticket, biochemists must first show that the chemical that caused
the hit is potent, specific to the target and, most of all, nontoxic. If it
passes all those hurdles and becomes a "lead compound," it goes to the medicinal
chemists, who tinker and tamper and try to turn it into a drug. "Then,"
Timmermans said, "the real game starts."

A Lead Is Not a Drug Yet

   An informal way of measuring Tularik's progress in getting a drug into
clinical trials is the timing of its key hires. In February, Timmermans gave up
his job as research chief at DuPont Merck in Delaware, where he headed a
500-person department, to run a department of 2 at Tularik. Timmermans
specializes in "optimizing leads" -- testing them in animals, figuring out how
to package them as pills and preparing them for clinical trials.

   As it turns out, Timmermans has been hard at work lately optimizing a lead.
Unknown to many in the pharmaceutical community (including some of Tularik's own
investors), the company is close to filing an investigational new drug
application with the Food and Drug Administration and hopes to begin its first
clinical test early next year. But if this first potential drug is successful,
it will only prove an old lab truism: a lot of touchdowns in science result from
a broken play. The drug is for the treatment of cancer, and Tularik did not even
have a cancer program at the time of its discovery.

   In the summer of 1996, while teasing apart the molecular pathways involved in
cholesterol metabolism, Tularik scientists identified a target, developed assays
and came up with a highly promising compound. It helped cells soak off
low-density lipoprotein, or L.D.L. (the "bad" form of cholesterol), by goosing
the gene that produces the L.D.L. receptor. "Sumitomo was very excited about
it," Steve McKnight recalled, referring to the Japanese company working with
Tularik on cholesterol reduction. "They put it in mice, rabbits, hamsters and
dogs, and it lowered cholesterol beautifully. And then Merck got wind of this,
and they were very interested in the compound. They put it in their beagle
model, and it worked beautifully there. It worked better than their
billion-dollar statins." But, as Timmermans likes to chide his colleagues, "a
lead is not a drug yet."

   There was a problem. McKnight picked up a few plates of incubating cells one
day and noticed that the cells exposed to T138067, as the compound is known
in-house, "rounded up" instead of lying flat, which scared him. "In general, you
don't want that to happen," he said. Bei Shan, another Tularik biologist,
investigated further and found that the drug's target was a protein called
tubulin, a kind of ubiquitous building block that forms the inner scaffolding of
cells. "This just killed it immediately," McKnight said. The fear was that for a
drug designed to be taken for many years, the potential deleterious effects upon
tubulin in normal cells would be intolerable. As soon as Shan made this
discovery, Tularik broke the bad news to Merck. Goodbye, cholesterol drug.

   The next day, McKnight learned from a friend in cancer research that tubulin
was the molecular target of several well-known cancer drugs, including Taxol,
vinblastine and vincristine. Cancer cells often become "resistant" to Taxol and
other forms of chemotherapy, however, by acquiring the ability to pump the drugs
out of the cell before they can kill it. Tularik's drug candidate was different;
in McKnight's vernacular, it "gets on tubulin and won't let go," so cancer cells
theoretically can't pump the Tularik compound out. Moreover, the short-term use
of such a drug in the cancer setting makes its potential side effects much more
tolerable. "Within a day," McKnight recalled, "we had killed this, and then
said, 'This could be very effective.' " Hello, cancer drug.

   The news of an impending clinical trial will make financial analysts happy --
but it also demonstrates just how fragile the entire enterprise is. Most small
companies get only one or two rolls of the dice in clinical trials to make it,
and while Tularik has assembled a larger war chest than most, Goeddel estimates
that clinical trials will eat up anywhere from $20 million to $80 million per
drug.

Fish Stories

   Those trials will be watched with great interest by the financial world, of
course, but also by Tularik's employees, who gather at the end of each week for
the 5 P.M. Friday social -- and then typically drift back to work. At one,
Goeddel put in a brief appearance, long enough to grab a handful of chips,
glance at the clock and return to his office. "This is when I start to get work
done," he explained over his shoulder. In the beginning, employees organized
sign-up sheets to provide Friday-night theme meals, but nobody has the time now.
When I naively asked if they no longer had the time to cook, one scientist set
me straight. "We don't have the time to order," she said.

   By most accounts, Tularik has gone about everything in textbook fashion --
and it still faces an uphill climb. The anticholesterol field is already crowded
with safe and effective therapies, for example, and several biotech companies
have very publicly crashed and burned trying to market anti-inflammatory drugs.
Tularik is not likely to have an answer from even its first clinical trial
before the end of next year, nor a drug in the marketplace for another three to
five years, and unlike many of the biotech boutiques out there, it is swimming
upstream against industry trends in its attempt to become a major drug company.
Which brings us to the improbably huge mounted fish that greets visitors in the
lobby of the company's new headquarters in South San Francisco.

   As Goeddel tells the story, a fishing guide on the Tularik River sent the
trophy to his friends both as a good luck charm and an inside joke. It purports
to be a 65-pound rainbow trout; the world record for a rainbow, however, is

   42 pounds, and most don't reach half that size. If Tularik fails to realize
its goals, that fish may represent the impossibly grandiose dreams of a biotech
startup swimming with the sharks of big pharma in the 1990's. If the company
succeeds, it may suggest that the best way to become a big fish in a big pond is
to act like one first. As Goeddel said of the fish in the lobby, "A few people
know it's not real, but it's such a good mounting job that most people assume
it's the real thing."

GRAPHIC: Photos: Defying conventional wisdom, Dave Goeddel is trying to build a
drug company for the next millennium from scratch. (George Lange for The New
York Times); Tjian and Goeddel, who cemented the idea of Tularik with poles in
hand, hope it doesn't become the fish that got away. (George Lange for The New
York Times); Steve McKnight added his own unique bloodlines to the Tularik mix.
(Danny Turner for The New York Times); Fridays at 5 offer a rare timeout at
Tularik. Then it's back to work for this rainbow coalition of the test-tube set.
(George Lange for The New York Times); Juan Jaen is the project team leader on
the company's first potential drug, for cancer, known as T138067. (George Lange
for The New York Times)

Chart: "Best Sellers at the Pharmacy"

   Americans spend nearly $92 billion a year on pharmaceuticals, and a single
breakthrough drug -- insulin, penicillin or, more recently, Prozac -- can have
as big an impact on public health as on a company's bottom line.

   But in the drug industry, fortunes, in every sense of the word, can change
rapidly. When Interneuron Pharmaceuticals, for example, won Government approval
to market the anti-obesity pill Redux in April 1996, some analysts predicted
annual sales of $1 billion or more for its U.S. licensee, American Home
Products. Yet barely a year later, in September, the drug was recalled amid
complaints of devastating side effects. Not only have sales ground to a halt,
but Interneuron and American Home Products, along with several other companies,
now face a bevy of consumer lawsuits.

   The following list of current best sellers was compiled by I.M.S. America, a
market research company based in Plymouth Meeting, Pa., for the one-year period
ending August 1997. Innovative young companies like Tularik aspire to crack the
list dominated by "big pharma"; significantly, however, only one drug here --
Amgen's Epogen -- was brought to market by a biotech company.

1. Prilosec (Merck) Ulcer $2.12 billion
2. Prozac (Lilly) Depression $1.83 billion
3. Zantac (Glaxo Wellcome) Ulcer $1.50 billion
4. Zocor (Merck) Hypercholesterolemia $1.30 billion
5. Epogen (Amgen) Anemia $1.22 billion
6. Zoloft (Pfizer) Depression $1.18 billion
7. Paxil (SmithKline) Depression $881 million
8. Norvasc (Pfizer) Hypertension/angina $862 million
9. Procardia XL (Pfizer) Hypertension/angina $860 million
10. Vasotec (Merck) Hypertension $858 million

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1997


                             2195 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   NOVEMBER 23, 1997, SUNDAY, SUNDAY EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 6; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

LENGTH: 1492 words

HEADLINE: LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

BODY:

    A RETURN TO MEDICINE'S DARK AGES?

   Editor --The issue of acupuncture and other alternative therapies is somewhat
more complicated than what could be covered in Sunday, November 16th's
editorial. Regardless of whether or not the merits of acupuncture, or any other
non-traditional remedy, can be explained on the basis of chemical messengers in
the brain, the fact remains that such an explanation cannot be tested -- at
least with the gold standard: prospective, randomized, double-blind, therapeutic
trials.

   If we rationalize the possible benefits of almost any kind of alternative
medicine, we must return to the empiricism of the 19th century. This was the
empiricism of medicine's dark ages. This was the wisdom of the ancients who
believed that disease was due to an imbalance of ''humors,'' translate: body
fluids. For almost 2,000 years doctors had been bleeding and purging -- and
killing -- their patients to restore this balance.

   But we seem to be returning to the dark ages, despite sound scientific
foundations underlying the eradication of small pox, organ transplantation,
joint replacement and gene therapy. For the future of acupuncture, and other
alternative therapies, depends not so much on ''mainstream recognition,'' but
upon the momentum of the current ''anti-science'' movement in America -- and,
reimbursement policies for all kinds of health care providers in the era of
managed care.

   ARMAND P. GELPI, M.D.

   Sonoma

   .

   HEALING ARTS AND FAITH

   Editor -- Like a Wagnerian crescendo, your editorial (''At Long Last,
Mainstream Recognition,'' Sunday, November 16) ends with a challenge to the
medical establishment to ''Train their scientific eyes on therapies they have
routinely distained.'' I would hope this would encompass the linking of
religious faith as an indispensable component of modern medicine.

   Ever since Jesus' healing of the lepers in the New Testament, the
relationship between faith and medicine has been inseparable and mysterious. It
is now scientifically established that healing happens in the context of our
imminent awareness of something larger than ourselves, however we may conceive
it.

   Expanded government-backed research is now operating on a working hypothesis
that there already exists a connection between faith and medicine. Clearly,
there is no wall of separation between state and church when it comes to the
healing arts and the role of religion. However, we must still wait for the
medical establishment to relax its orthodoxy and dogma.

   DENNIS KUBY

   Berkeley

   .

   SMALL WONDER

   Editor -- Everything Dr. Jocelyn Elders said in her candid interview (Sunday,
November 9) about sex and drugs resounded with obvious good sense. Small wonder
that the dominant know-nothing radical right of the Republican Party killed her
confirmation as surgeon general.

   GROVER SALES

   Belvedere

   .

   KUDOS

   EDITOR -- Bravo -- and kudos to your well-informed editorial writer who wrote
Sunday's lead (and only!) editorial ''At Long Last, Mainstream Recognition'' on
acupuncture and other forms of natural (''alternative'') medicine. (I had to
check the masthead three times to make sure I was reading it in The Chronicle.)

   I made several copies for co-workers and to mail. Several people commented on
the writer's obvious familiarity with acupuncture. Only one wrote, ''Don't hold
your breath'' next to the last paragraph (about the medical establishment
re-examining some of these alternative therapies) But I suppose the medical
establishment will have to come around someday, because they are losing patients
-- as many of us have lost our patience with them!

   JOAN J. SCOTT

   San Francisco

   .

   GUT INSTINCTS

   Editor -- Joan Ryan's November 16th essay makes a very important point:
''Horrible things just happen but miracles do, too.'' The death of a child in
the hands of a nanny, au pair, baby-sitter, or any form of hired help is tragic.

   There is no guarantee that you, the mother, has left her child in the hands
of safety. Instinct is the best indicator but not the sole.  Good references,
how the provider and child interact, and prior experience are important as well.
As a mother and child-care provider, I feel that women who must leave their
young children in the care of another must do so in good conscious, trusting
their maternal intuition rather than buying into fear propagated by the media
and sensationalistic trials.

   Mothers have legitimate needs outside their homes and families and in most
cases trusting our gut instincts do prevail. Joan Ryan wasn't just lucky, she
was following her intuition and it didn't lead her astray.

   WENDY MOSKOW

   Mill Valley

   .

   THE BIG QUESTION

   Editor -- Re: ''Work Or Starve'' (Letters November 16). Once again, the anger
of the masses has been roused and misdirected against the most vulnerable
members of society, the homeless. It's difficult to blame the purveyors of such
opinions themselves as much as the media climate which fosters them, but is
nonetheless discouraging to see people so quickly resort to the derision of
those less fortunate to shore up their own personal and economic insecurities.
Blame the poor, the immigrant, the ''outsider'' for society's ills, not those
who actually control the means of production and distribution of resources.

   I heartily concur with one aspect of Mr. Wells' letter. When it comes to the
wealthy corporations that dominate our society, ''Let us do what we have to do
to weed out the moochers, the false mendicants, the leeches, the lazy bums who
prey on our kindness.'' (Not to mention fat government subsidies.) ''No cost is
too high, and no effort too hard to sort out the true needy from the lazy
drifters who are a cancer to our society.''

   The question comes down to this: Which are more detrimental to society,
public drunkenness and littering, or massive layoffs and runaway factories?

   SCOTT SMITH

   Walnut Creek

   .

   A TRUE BELIEVER

   Editor -- Startled that someone from Arizona is annoyed by Debra Saunders
(Letters, Sunday, November 16), I resolved to write about what I've been
thinking about for ages. I always read Debra despite rarely agreeing. For one
thing I could never harbor ill will toward someone who refused to cross a picket
line. But it takes more to cause me to read her.

   First, there is evidence that she has studied what she writes about. As a
retired teacher I may wince at her terminology ''educrats'' and still note that
she has done some homework, and isn't even wrong all the time. Second, she goes
out on a limb and does battle with her ideological soul mates from time to time.
Third, and most of all, I have a feeling she says what she really believes.
It's always a gift to me when someone tells me what he or she believes.

   MAXINE REEVES

   San Jose

   .

   DEBRA BASHERS

   Editor -- We moved to the Left Coast eight years ago. The Bay Area is
renowned for its liberal tendencies. And The Chronicle is a mouthpiece for this
liberalism. But there is another voice offsetting the liberal dogma and
ideology. That is Debra Saunders. I find her columns quite informative and
insightful. Mostly though she is a breath of fresh air cutting through the
liberal stench.

   True to form, in the November 16 Sunday letters section, The Chronicle
published several letters bashing Saunders. Not surprising.  How easy it is. If
you don't like the message simply lay waste to the messenger. Liberal hypocrisy
never ceases to amaze. Those who profess to be open minded are intolerant of
those who have conservative ideas and viewpoints.

   R. MILLER

   Santa Rosa

   .

   'SKIBBY'

   Editor -- Don Lattin (Sunday, November 9) offers a Latin etymology for the
word ''skibby,'' which he has found in his grandfather's diary and infers to be
a private term for sexual intercourse. One wonders why he did not simply turn to
the Dictionary of American Slang, which identifies ''skibby'' as a noun meaning
''A Japanese or sometimes Chinese prostitute or mistress, especially one
consorting with Occidental men.''

   The sexual connotations are clear without having to resort all the way back
to Latin ''scibile,'' which when you get right down to it, means only ''That
which is knowable'' and is attested (according to Lewis & Short, A Latin
Dictionary) only in the works of third-century Roman author Tertullian and the
fifth-century satirist Martianus Capella, both of whom one might think to have
been just beyond the leisure-reading horizon of a bowling promoter like Mr.
Lattin's now-celebrated forebearer.

   Even giving him the benefit of the doubt, it would seem more natural for a
Catholic -- as I assume Grandpa Lattin was -- to have made ''scibile'' into
''shibby,'' since that would conform with Church Latin pronunciation. (cf. the
fabulous motto of the Boston Latin School cafeteria, ''he knows the faith,''
i.e. ''fidem scit.'')

   GARETH PENN

   Corte Madera


LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1997


                             2196 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           November 22, 1997 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 503 words

HEADLINE: U.S. winning drug war . . . against AIDS

BYLINE: John Hendren, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Drug makers are working on an unprecedented array of new medicines to combat
the AIDS virus, enough to triple the number of drugs and vaccines on the market
today, according to a survey released yesterday.

    Drug companies are testing 124 new treatments on patients, according to the
survey by the Pharmaceutical Research Manufacturers of America. The Food and
Drug Administration has approved 50 AIDS-related drugs, including eight this
year.

    With the first-ever drop in the number of new cases last year in the United
States, drug makers have come a long way since the first drug, Glaxo Wellcome's
AZT, was approved in 1987, said Dr. John Siegfried, the industry group's head of
medical affairs.

    "Here we are 10 years later, just a decade, and now there are 50 drugs
either for the disease or for associated conditions," he said.

   The treatments under development include:

    40 anti-viral medicines and protease inhibitors, which have proven effective
in reducing the amount of the virus in some patients.

    23 drugs to fight AIDS-related cancers, such as Kaposi's sarcoma.

    11 anti-invective medicines to fight opportunistic diseases, including a
type of pneumonia that afflicts 8 out of 10 patients.

    5 gene therapies designed to genetically alter patients' cells to make them
more resistant.

    12 vaccines, including the first DNA-based preventive vaccines.

    The national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the drop in
AIDS deaths and new diagnoses last year shows that powerful new drugs seem to be
slowing down the virus.

    In 1996, an estimated 56,730 people were diagnosed with AIDS in the United
States, down 6 percent from the 60,620 new cases in 1995, according to the CDC.
AIDS deaths also dropped 23 percent, from an estimated 50,140 in 1995 to about
38,780 in 1996. About 235,470 people were living with AIDS in 1996.

    The CDC said powerful drugs such as protease inhibitors are apparently
preventing HIV infection from progressing to full-blown AIDS, especially in
patients who start taking the medicine early.

    Many AIDS activists agree that drug company scientists have made AIDS drugs
a priority, but they give drug makers a mixed review overall.

    "I would give them an `A' for advances in the science and an `F' for
fairness in pricing," said Daniel Zingale, executive director of AIDS Action in
Washington.

    "We do owe them a great debt of gratitude for the advances they've made in
the fight against HIV and AIDS. The challenge is to make those treatments more
available to people," he said.

    Patients pay as much as $15,000 a year for the three-drug cocktails usually
used to treat AIDS and other drugs to tackle opportunistic infections and other
related problems.

   Doctors who treat AIDS patients have eagerly called for more drugs since
mutations in the virus can reduce the effectiveness of drugs.

    New drugs are being approved more quickly, in part due to an FDA program
that uses contributions from drug makers to hire more officials to review drugs.
President Clinton renewed the program yesterday.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2197 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            November 21, 1997 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 689 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy turns AIDS virus against itself

BYLINE: Maggie Fox, REUTERS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Researchers said yesterday they had found a new approach, using gene therapy,
to fight the AIDS virus.

    They said the method might be used to ferret out some of the last reserves
of the virus that lurk in immune system cells even after years of therapy with
powerful drugs.

   The new approach uses HIV's own tactics against it.

    It all boils down to the receptors, or chemical doorways, the virus uses to
infect cells, Michael Endres and colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania in
Philadelphia reported in the journal Science today.

    When it invades immune system cells, HIV very sneakily uses the receptors
that are supposed to be used by immune signaling chemicals known as chemokines.

   Once it hooks onto a cell using one of these receptors, HIV injects its own
genetic material, forcing the cell to crank out more virus as it replicates
itself.

   Endres and colleagues used this strategy in a gene-therapy approach.

    They disabled HIV so it could not reproduce on its own, and equipped it with
genes coding for the right receptors as well as a "marker" gene that let them
see if the virus entered the cell.

    The virus homed in on infected cells and pumped the marker gene into them,
they said.

    "It's basically a gene delivery system that targets infected cells
specifically (and) enables to us to deliver genes only to HIV-infected cells,"
Endres said in a telephone interview.

    HIV needs to use at least two of several different receptors to get into
cells. Endres' team equipped its virus with the gene for the CD4 receptor and
either CCR5 or CXCR4 - both chemokine receptors used by HIV.

    The cells they targeted started expressing, or producing, these receptors.
What especially pleased Endres' group was that the system worked on macrophages
- the immune system cells suspected of harboring the last vestiges of HIV
infection that remain after years of drug cocktail therapy.

    The next step would be to incorporate genes that would help kill off HIV.

    "This would be used with existing anti-viral genes," Endres said. "The hope
would be you could only selectively kill cells that are infected with the HIV
virus."

    In another study, researchers said some rare patients infected for years
with the AIDS virus without becoming ill make white blood cells of a type
missing from most patients of the immune system disorder.

    An analysis of blood from a Boston man infected with HIV for 18 years but
still healthy showed that he was protected by a large number of immune system
cells, called helper T-cells, that specifically attack the AIDS virus.

    Most patients with long-term HIV infection have a low supply of helper
T-cells targeting the AIDS virus, which leaves the immune system defenseless
against the virus, Dr. Bruce Walker of the Massachusetts General Hospital and
senior author of the study said.

    "Our work provides an explanation of why a very small group of people have
been able to avoid getting sick from this virus even though they are infected,"
Walker said.

    Experiments at Massachusetts General confirmed that high levels of
HIV-specific T-cells may be essential for the body to hold the AIDS virus in
check.

    Walker said laboratory tests of blood from HIV patients found that those
with the strongest T-cell response to the HIV antigen had the lowest amount of
virus in their bloodstream, but those with weak T-cell responses had high virus
loads.

    The discovery suggested the body might be able to control HIV if helper
T-cells that target the virus could somehow be protected.

    To test this idea, researchers used powerful anti-viral drugs to treat
patients recently infected with HIV. Walker said the drugs caused the virus load
to drop quickly, and the patients' immune systems then started producing T-cells
that specifically attacked HIV.

    Walker said the HIV-specific T-cells were not produced in the bodies of
patients who had been infected with HIV for more than six months.

    "This suggests that there is a window of time during the acute phase of
infection when anti-viral treatment can rescue the helper T-cell response to
HIV," Walker said. If treatment is delayed, he said, that natural protection may
be lost forever. The

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2198 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1997 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                          November 19, 1997 Wednesday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. E17

LENGTH: 687 words

HEADLINE: OMSI WILL USE $1 MILLION GIFT FOR EDUCATIONBriefly

BODY:

   Wednesday, November 19, 1997 OMSI WILL USE $1 MILLION GIFT FOR EDUCATION

   Briefly

   A $1 million donation by Howard and Juanita Hedinger. to the Oregon  Museum
of Science and Industry will go toward educating at-risk, minority and
low-income children in science and technology.

   OMSI will receive $100,000 annually for the next 10 years, one of the
largest donations the museum has received. OMSI is committed to matching that
amount each year, more than doubling the museum's programs for disadvantaged
youngsters.

   The donation will include support for OMSI's science program at the Blazers
Boys and Girls Club, full scholarships to the museum's summer camps and a  youth
internship at OMSI. The gift also will finance free visits to the  museum,
outreach programs and teacher education at St. Mary's Home for Boys.

   ``A science and technology education offers tremendous opportunities for
at-risk, low-income and minority youth, yet is often overlooked or
inaccessible,'' said Juanita Hedinger, who serves on OMSI's board of trustees.
``Our goal is to provide these students with the knowledge and resources to
help them develop valuable career skills and gain hands-on experience in these
expanding fields.''

   Howard Hedinger is chairman of the board and president of American
Industries, a Portland-based investment company. It focuses mainly on steel
processing and distribution and real-estate acquisition and development.

   Programs financed through the Hedinger gift will begin in early 1998. Those
wishing to support this effort may contact OMSI's development department at
503-797-4533.

   OSU Pacific salmon expert garners achievement award

   A retired Oregon State University researcher has earned an individual
outstanding achievement award from the American Institute of Fisheries
Research, the 17th such award in the organization's 50-year history.

   William Pearcy, an OSU professor emeritus of oceanic and atmospheric
sciences, was given an engraved totem fish plaque by Clark Hubbs, research
institute president. Pearcy joined OSU in 1960, the same year he received his
doctorate from Yale University.

   Pearcy is an expert on Pacific salmon and has published more than 140  papers
on ecology, oceanography and general science, including biology of  deep-sea
fish and investigation of pollution and trace metals in the  environment and the
food chain.

   Gov. John Kitzhaber recently appointed him as one of seven members of an
independent multidisciplinary science team, charged with auditing
implementation of Oregon's coastal salmon restoration initiative.

   Pearcy also has been the main adviser to more than 30 students in master's
and doctoral programs and has served on the committees of more than 50 other
students.

   About 1,000 fishery scientists are members of the institute, which works to
advance the theory and practice of fishery science.

   National AIDS Hotline urges use of Group Calls program

   In observance of World AIDS Day on Dec. 1, the National AIDS Hotline is
encouraging use of its Group Calls program so students and other groups can
learn about HIV/AIDS. By advance arrangement, any group with a speaker phone
can schedule a call to the hot line and speak with a trained counselor.

   The National AIDS Hotline is operated by the American Social Health
Association under contract with the national Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. To arrange a group call in English, contact the National AIDS
Hotline at 1-800-342-2437; in Spanish, call 1-800-344-7432.

   OHSU physician will discuss alternative, traditional care

   A physician at Oregon Health Sciences University will discuss alternative
health care and traditional medicine at a public lecture today.

   Dr. Meg Hayes, assistant professor of family medicine, will speak on ``From
Herbal Remedies to Biotechnology'' from 7 to 8 p.m. at the OHSU Richmond  Family
Health Center, 3930 S.E. Division St.

   She will discuss use of such herbs as St. John's wort, valerian and
echinacea, and such alternative medical practices as homeopathy, massage
therapy and acpuncture. She also will talk about traditional medicine and gene
therapy.

   The lecture is free.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2199 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1997 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                           November 17, 1997, Monday

SECTION: New York Now; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 547 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY WORKS ON LEG BLOCKAGES

BYLINE: By SUSAN FERRARO

BODY:


   DOCTORS WERE IN THE HOUSE, THE HALL, the hotel and on every street corner in
Orlando, Fla., as 37,000 of them mostly cardiologists attended the American
Heart Association's 70th Scientific Sessions last week. The doctors spent much
of their time examining 4,298 research papers. Among their findings:

   Gene therapy can aid patients with atherosclerosis, the condition where
arteries thicken usually because of fat deposits. In an experimental procedure
at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston, doctors injected growth DNA into
the legs of patients with blocked circulation. The genes triggered new blood
vessels in 70% of the treatments, and patients reported significantly less pain.
The approach may one day be used along with standard procedures like coronary
bypass surgery, and will probably help the estimated 100,000 to 200,000
Americans with severe leg blockage avoid possible amputation.

   A diet rich in fish is better than one that sticks to vegetables only, heart
researchers in Seattle found. Eating lots of fish lowers lipoprotein (a), a
blood fat that increases the risk of heart attack. Scientists drew some of their
data from studies of two Bantu tribes of East Africa, one living by a lake and
eating fish, the other settled in farmland and vegetarian. The lake-dwelling
Bantu diet is 23% fish protein, balanced by 70% carbohydrates and 7% fat. The
vegetarian Bantu diet is 11% protein from maize and rice, 82% carbohydrate, and
7% fat.

   High blood pressure can make orgasm more difficult for women. Male sexuality
and hypertension have long been studied, with problems linked to drugs used to
combat hypertension. But a new study of women's sexual experience found that
those with hypertension were less likely to achieve orgasm, less likely to have
adequate vaginal lubrication. Researchers at the Mary Imogene Bassett Research
Institute in upstate Cooperstown studied 211 pre-menopausal Caucasian women,
tabulating their feelings about sexual quality, desire, arousal, frequency and
satisfaction. High blood pressure is a reading of 140/90 or more; it afflicts
45% of women ages 55 to 64, 60% ages 65 to 74 and 75% of those over 75.

   FOR A FEW HOURS ON THURSDAY, TIMES Square will become the "Commit to Quit"
Cafe for the 22d annual Great American Smoke-Out featuring actress Debi Mazar,
33, who will attend what the American Cancer Society is hyping as the first-ever
"Non-Smoke Break."

   Mazur started smoking when she was 12 and has tried, and failed, to quit
several times. She's using nicotine replacement therapy which has been shown to
double the success rate for quitters, according to the American Cancer Society.

   That's good news for the 16 million American smokers who try to kick the
habit each year only 1.3 million succeed. FDA-approved, over-the-counter
nicotine replacement therapy comes as a gum, for an occasional fix, or as a
patch that provides a steady dose over 16 to 24 hours.

   Pharmacists can help customers choose the best nicotine crutch for their
needs.

   Not approved by the FDA, but just right for some, are hypnosis and
acupuncture. Prescription-only aids to quitting include nicotine replacement in
a nasal spray and Bupropion, an anti-depressant approved by the FDA in May that
eases nicotine withdrawal.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1997


                             2200 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     November 16, 1997 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 006

LENGTH: 870 words

HEADLINE: Prognosis good in heart research - Docs in fast lane on the road to
disease control

BYLINE: By Michael Lasalandra

BODY:

   Medicine has made incredible advances in the fight against heart disease and
doctors say the next few years will see even more dramatic progress against the
nation's leading killer.

   "The horizon of new treatments is practically limitless and is widening
before our eyes," Dr. Maria Rose Costanzo of Rush Medical College in Chicago
said at the American Heart Association's annual scientific conference last week
in Orlando, Fla.

   "It's an exciting time," agreed AHA President Martha Hill. "Tremendous
advances in biology are providing new knowledge about genetics and disease,
creating exciting opportunities for clinical research."

   Leading cardiologists reported a slew of groundbreaking developments,
covering the fields of gene therapy, surgery, technology and medication.

   Heart disease claims about 1 million lives a year in the United States, about
twice as many as cancer.

   "We've learned a tremendous amount about diagnosing, using medications and
about new surgical techniques," said Dr. James Young of the Cleveland Clinic.

   Perhaps the most exciting development to be reported was the first successful
application of gene therapy, the ability to grow new blood vessels from
intramuscular DNA injections.

   The discovery by Dr. Jeffrey Isner at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in
Boston one day may allow patients with clogged coronary arteries to "grow their
own" bypass arteries, eliminating the need for bypass surgery.

   But new surgical techniques already widely in use are making it easier for
heart patients to get the help they need.

   Doctors at Brigham and Women's Hospital, for example, reported that their
experience shows that minimally invasive surgical techniques are proving less
costly and more successful than traditional open-heart surgery, in which the
chestbone must be cracked.

   "The operation has become the standard at Brigham and Women's for all
patients with valve disease," said Dr. Donna Rosborough.

   Another study showed that using a laser to drill tiny holes in the heart
provides new blood flow and dramatically reduces chest pain for patients with
heart disease who are not good candidates for heart bypass surgery.

   With heart transplantation maxed out at about 2,000 a year due to a shortage
of donor organs, doctors are looking harder at the artificial heart. They say
three new devices are being developed.

   "We'll have them in patients by the end of the decade," said Dr. Bud Frazier
of the Texas Heart Institute.

   The devices will be tiny and self-contained, so patients won't be tethered to
a power pack, as in early models.

   "In 14 years, we've come a long way since Barney Clark," said Dr. Patrick
McCarthy of the Cleveland Clinic. "And the next 14 years will see some
astounding changes."

   For some patients with end-stage heart disease, the answer has been the
"miracle of the jungle," the so-called Batista procedure, named after the
Brazilian surgeon who discovered it. The operation involves cutting down hearts
enlarged by disease, and, for many, it appears to allow their organs to resume
pumping normally.

   "People don't have to die waiting for this," McCarthy said.

   Progress, however, has stalled on xenotransplantation, the use of animal
organs in humans, over fears that cross-species transplantation could subject
the world to new, deadly diseases.

   "We're in a regulatory quagmire," said Dr. Eric Rose of Columbia Presbyterian
Medical Center in New York.

   Good news also was reported on the medication front.

   From aspirin, at a few pennies per dose, to the clot-buster TPA, at more than
$ 2,000 a dose, a number of drugs can make a huge difference in saving
heart-attack victims if they get them quickly enough.

   When it comes to prevention, one study touted cholesterol-lowering drugs for
more patients than currently take them, saying the pills can prevent heart
attacks, sudden death and angina in healthy people whose cholesterol levels are
nearly normal.

   But another study warned that such drugs can affect mental acuity.

   Several studies also were presented last week that provide guidance on
lifestyle changes that can reduce the risk of heart disease.

   High fish consumption and frequent exercise were shown to be of value in two
of the studies. A diet heavy on fish turns out to be better for the heart than a
vegetarian diet, and frequent short workouts are more effective than fewer long
ones.

   The AHA and Dr. David Satcher, director of the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention and President Clinton's nominee as the next surgeon general,
promised more efforts aimed at promoting lifestyle changes to reduce the levels
of heart disease, particularly those relating to smoking, diet and exercise.

   "It's possible that the amazing technological advances in treatment of
cardiovascular disease have taken us to this point, but we now must ensure that
prevention messages reach our population," Satcher said.

   But Dr. Charles Hennekens of Brigham and Women's Hospital warned that people
are slow to change old habits.

   "Most people prefer the prescription of pills than the proscription of their
harmful lifestyles," he said.

   Staff graphic by Jeff Walsh: Source: American Heart Association and National
Center for Health Statistics


LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1997
