
                             1801 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 9, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-2

LENGTH: 676 words

HEADLINE: Quest; SCIENCE BRIEFS

BODY:
 New test for donors

   A new procedure to determine if a person is a suitable candidate to donate a
portion of his or her liver for transplant has been developed by researchers at
Northwestern Memorial Hospital and Medical School in Chicago.

   Traditionally, liver donor candidates must spend a night in a hospital,
undergoing a battery of tests and procedures that include removing a piece of
the liver for biopsy.  The new technique relies more heavily on information
derived from magnetic-resonance imaging and can be accomplished in an hour or
so.

   "Obviously, a relative or friend who wants to donate is willing to
potentially have major surgery to remove part of his or her liver and would be
willing to have invasive tests," said Dr. James Carr of Northwestern.  "But now
we can usually gather the same information with a single MR study."

   In a study Carr presented at the annual meeting of the Society of
Cardiovascular & Interventional Radiology, 47 potential donors were screened and
16 went on to donate portions of their livers for transplantation.  There were
no serious complications among the donors, though two recipients died from
complications of the surgery.

   Estrogen key to fertility

   A study using baboons suggests that low levels of estrogen during pregnancy
can result in female offspring with potential fertility problems.

   The study, conducted by researchers at the University of Maryland and Eastern
Virginia Medical School, manipulated estrogen levels in the great apes during
pregnancy.

   "Low estrogen levels during pregnancy mean the female baby will be born with
fewer eggs," said Gene Albrecht, a professor of reproductive sciences at the
University of Maryland.  "Our research suggests that doctors should pay more
attention to estrogen levels during pregnancy and consider estrogen replacement
therapy for expectant mothers with low estrogen levels."

   Diabetes risk reduced

   Patients taking a cholesterol-lowering drug from the statin family of
medications may be getting much more than they bargained for -- a reduced risk
of type 2 diabetes and stroke.

   Two studies reported in Circulation show that the drug pravastatin lowered
the risk of diabetes by 30 percent and reduced the risk of stroke by 22 percent.

   Though little is known about how the drug works, the findings are important
because there is no medication that prevents diabetes, said Dr. Allan Gaw of the
University of Glasgow in Scotland.

   The drug's ability to reduce the risk of stroke even occurred in patients
already taking drugs to lower blood pressure or prevent blood clots, said Robert
P. Byington of the Wake Forest University School of Medicine.

   Gender balance skewed

   Contrary to public perception, women do not appear to be under-represented or
understudied in scientific clinical research trials in the United States,
according to a new study.  Researchers at Johns Hopkins University found that in
cancer studies, for instance, women are represented in twice as many trials as
men, even though men die more frequently from the disease and often die at an
earlier age.

   The study, reported in Statistics in Medicine, is the first to measure gender
bias in clinical research.

   The researchers found evidence of bias against women only in heart-related
clinical trials.  Less than 1 percent of all heart trials were female-only, yet
women account for more than a third of heart disease deaths.

   As for men, they were under-represented in most cancer research, the
researchers said.

   Gene therapy for eyes

   Using gene therapy, scientists have restored the vision of three dogs born
blind.  The findings, by researchers from the University of Florida, Cornell
University and the University of Pennsylvania, was published in Nature Genetics.

   The dogs have a condition resembling Leber congenital amaurosis, or LCA, a
rare blinding disease that currently affects about 2,000 people in the United
States.  The researchers used a virus to carry healthy copies of the gene that
causes some types of LCA into the cells of the dogs' retinas.


LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2001


                             1802 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2001 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                      May 8, 2001, Tuesday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 678 words

HEADLINE: DAILY ROUNDUP;
Bill to cut prescription drug prices advances in Senate

BYLINE: Conrad deFiebre; Dane Smith; Staff Writers

BODY:

   Despite the threat of a legal challenge by pharmaceutical companies, a bill
to cut prescription drug prices for Minnesotans without drug coverage was sent
to the Senate floor Monday.

        The Finance Committee voted 15 to 10 to approve the measure, with most
DFLers in favor and most Republicans opposed. No similar bill has advanced in
the Republican-controlled House.

        Senate sponsor John Hottinger, DFL-Mankato, said his bill would provide
uninsured Minnesotans with the same drug-maker discounts and rebates of about 15
percent that are now given for the federal Medicaid program.

        Randy Morris, a lobbyist for the Pharmaceutical Research and
Manufacturers of America, testified that the bill would establish
unconstitutional restraint of trade. It is modeled on a similar Maine law now
enmeshed in litigation, but Hottinger said his bill contains differences
designed to make it more defensible in court.

        The program would cost an estimated $7.6 million over the next two years
in payments the state would make to pharmacists in advance of collection of
rebates from manufacturers. Morris said that money would be better spent on drug
subsidies for low-income senior citizens.

        _ Conrad deFiebre

   House OK's limited beer, wine sales at Capitol

        After an absence of more than 80 years, beer and wine service may be
returning to the basement of the State Capitol, albeit for special events only.

        The Minnesota House approved an amendment Monday offered by Rep. Phyllis
Kahn, DFL-Minneapolis, that would allow the city of St. Paul to issue an on-sale
license for wine and beer to the New Capitol Cafe.

        The Capitol cafeteria was originally designed as a German rathskeller.
Alcohol was served there from the Capitol's opening in 1905 until about 1920,
when a combination of anti-German hysteria and Prohibition dried the place up.

        The rathskeller was restored two years ago at a cost of about $3 million
and its operators recently have been pushing for a return of wine and beer.

       Beer and wine have been served for several years at the nearby Minnesota
History Center cafeteria with few problems reported, Kahn said, adding that
"nobody's going to go get drunk in the Capitol."

       Last week the House defeated an effort to open on-sale service to all
customers. On Monday, Kahn settled for a provision that would allow sale only at
special events, such as private parties and wedding receptions held in the New
Capitol Cafe.

       The amendment was tacked on to a Senate bill and Kahn said she thinks it
will survive a conference committee and become law.

    _ Dane Smith

   Advocates rally for muscular dystrophy funding

        Dozens of people gathered at the State Capitol on Monday to show support
for proposed federal legislation that would provide more funding for research on
muscular dystrophy.

       The bill, unanimously backed by Minnesota's U.S. senators and Congress
members, would put a special focus on Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a serious
strain of the disease that _ with rare exceptions _ affects young boys.

       Cheri Gunvalson, of Gonvick in northwestern Minnesota, urged support of
the bill, saying time was running out for her 9-year-old son, Jacob.

       "He can no longer run," she said. "In the future, he will need a
ventilator to breathe."

       Most boys with Duchenne have the disease diagnosed when they are just a
few years old. There is no cure and most die in their late teens or early 20s.

       The flawed gene that causes the disease was identified 14 years ago, but
supporters of the legislation say the pace of research has been slow.

       The legislation would authorize the National Institutes of Health and the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to establish six centers to do more
research and assessment of the disease.

       "Sooner or later, gene therapy will find a cure for this disease," said
U.S. Sen. Paul Wellstone, D-Minn., the bill's sponsor in the Senate. "We want it
to be sooner."

        _ Associated Press


LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2001


                             1803 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              May 8, 2001 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2257 words

HEADLINE: Promising Vaccine Targets Ravager of Minds

BYLINE: Susan Okie, Washington Post Staff Writer

DATELINE: TAMPA

BODY:

    The moment he hits the cool water of the laboratory's baby pool, the brown
mouse swims for dear life. He is 17 months old -- elderly for a mouse -- but he
seems to have his goal in mind. He paddles to the center of the daisy-shaped
water maze, looks around, then heads rapidly down the correct aisle and clambers
to safety on an invisible platform.

    An aging mouse's successful navigation of a maze might seem unconnected to
the plight of the estimated 4 million Americans who have Alzheimer's disease, a
common and incurable brain disorder that steals its victims' memories and
personality. But maze-swimming mice here are testing a remarkable vaccine that
one day may reduce or prevent brain damage from Alzheimer's, which is predicted
to become epidemic as the nation's elderly population grows.

    Mice at the University of South Florida have been given mutated human genes
that produce age-related brain degeneration much like Alzheimer's disease. To
the astonishment of scientists conducting the studies, vaccinating these mice
during mid-life slowed progression of their brain disorder and preserved their
ability to learn.

    The vaccine, developed by California scientists with Elan Corp. of Dublin,
Ireland, and now undergoing safety testing in people, is one of several
promising new approaches being pursued for Alzheimer's disease, a disorder whose
current treatments produce only partial and short-lived improvement. In a field
where progress has been glacially slow for many years, scientists now speak of
intense competition and rapidly emerging discoveries.

    "We tried about a dozen things that didn't work and now everything we're
trying is working," said Dave Morgan, a neuroscientist at the University of
South Florida who is testing the vaccine and other experimental treatments in
transgenic mice. "I'm very encouraged."

    The upsurge in innovative research stems in part from a clearer
understanding of precisely what goes wrong in the brains of people with the
disease. For example, researchers have identified two key enzymes that produce
beta-amyloid, a waste protein that builds up in the brains of Alzheimer's
victims and appears to be central to the destructive process. Several major drug
companies are racing to identify and develop enzyme-blocking drugs called
secretase inhibitors that they hope will reduce beta-amyloid accumulation. At
least one company, Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., has begun testing such a drug in
patients.

    In addition, researchers are evaluating an array of compounds -- ranging
from anti-inflammatory drugs, estrogen and cholesterol-lowering agents to
various vitamins and supplements -- to see whether they can prevent Alzheimer's
or delay its onset. Last month, in the first test of gene therapy for the
disease, doctors in California implanted skin cells engineered to produce nerve
growth factor into the brain of a woman with the disorder.

    However, it may turn out that to stave off Alzheimer's disease, people will
have to begin treatments such as the vaccine or enzyme-blockers in late middle
age, perhaps a decade or two before symptoms would be expected to appear. At
present, no medical test can predict who will develop the illness. Researchers
say that if effective preventive treatments become available, such a test will
be urgently needed.

    Like AIDS, Alzheimer's is an ultimately fatal disorder that begins its
stealthy assault years before problems with memory or learning make its presence
apparent.

    "The baby boomers are the people now getting Alzheimer's disease," said Trey
Sunderland, chief of geriatric psychiatry at the National Institute of Mental
Health (NIMH). "They just don't know it."

    The biggest risk factor for Alzheimer's disease is growing old. The disorder
is rare in people younger than 60, but its frequency doubles every five years
after 65. By age 80, about 9 percent of people have the condition; by age 90,
the prevalence is 29 percent. In the next half-century, as the elderly
population grows, the number of Americans with Alzheimer's disease will roughly
quadruple. The total, estimated at between 2 million and 4 million now, is
projected to be as high as 14 million by 2050.

    The earliest sign that something is amiss in the brain is usually loss of
recent memory. Later, people with the disease develop poor judgment, confusion
and personality changes. They lose the ability to care for themselves and may
fail to recognize their loved ones. Most live for an average of five to nine
years with the illness, eventually becoming bedridden and dying of pneumonia or
other infections.

    Dorothy Ordway's husband and daughters first realized that she had
Alzheimer's disease about six years ago, when the family rented a vacation house
and Ordway kept forgetting where her bedroom was. A former banker, she was also
neglecting to pay her bills.

    For several years, Ordway, 80, attended a senior day care center and
continued to live in her Parkville, Md., home, but she grew increasingly
confused.

    "She thought I was her father," recalled her husband, Thomas, 85. Last
summer, after she began leaving the stove on, her family was forced to move her
to an assisted-living facility.

    "She knows that she's not home, but she doesn't know where she is," said her
daughter, Nancy Barlow. "The day before yesterday, I'm not sure she could have
told you what my name was . . . I really sensed for the first time that she
wasn't quite sure."

    For the family, Barlow added, watching her mother's decline "is a grieving
process."

    Under a microscope, the brain of someone who has died of Alzheimer's disease
resembles a junkyard. Scattered among the surviving nerve cells of the cerebral
cortex -- the cells responsible for thoughts, learning and decisions -- are
myriad clumps or "plaques" of beta-amyloid, a waste protein toxic to nerve cells
that is a hallmark of the illness. Around the plaques cluster disease-fighting
cells that seem to be trying unsuccessfully to clean up or wall off the mess.
Everywhere are misshapen pieces of dead nerve cells, their insides choked with
tangles made of a twisted, cable-like protein called tau.

    "Nerves die and all you have left are the tangles," said pathologist Juan C.
Troncoso of Johns Hopkins School of Medicine as he examined such a brain. "What
we're not seeing here is perhaps what is most important." The tissue specimen
showed few synapses, the connections between nerve cells through which they
communicate. A healthy brain cell typically has as many as 15,000 synapses with
other cells. "These individuals have a tremendous amount of synaptic loss,"
Troncoso said.

    Faced with such wreckage, researchers have tried for years to determine what
sets off the destruction -- and in particular, whether amyloid plaques or tau
tangles are the primary trigger. Although both appear to contribute, experts
said there is now convincing evidence that buildup of beta-amyloid is at the
root of the disease.

    Key to this conclusion was the discovery of three human genes that, when
mutated, have been found to cause inherited Alzheimer's in rare families. All
three genes are involved in making beta-amyloid. One contains the code for a
larger protein that is snipped apart to produce the toxic fragment; the other
two carry instructions for an enzyme that does some of the snipping.

    "Every known mutation ultimately increases" buildup of beta-amyloid, Morgan
said.

    Once these genes were identified, scientists began introducing mutated
versions into the fertilized eggs of mice, hoping to engineer a mouse strain
that would develop something similar to Alzheimer's disease. By the mid-1990s,
scientists at Elan's laboratories in South San Francisco had such a strain and
wanted to devise experiments that might lead to diagnostic tests or treatments.

    At that point, biochemist Dale Schenk had an idea that he calls "a little
bit crazy." Why not try vaccinating the mice against beta-amyloid?

    Schenk reasoned that the protein accumulated in the brain because it was
being produced faster than it was removed. He thought that if he could stimulate
the immune system to make antibodies, proteins that would stick to beta-amyloid
and tag it as an unwanted substance, they might shift that balance, perhaps
reducing or preventing the buildup.

    The idea was revolutionary because most Alzheimer's experts believe that the
inflammation provoked by amyloid plaques contributes to destruction of brain
cells. Many predicted that stirring up the immune system with a vaccine would
only make the disease worse.

    "It was breaking a lot of paradigms," Schenk acknowledged. "I had a lot of
arguments with my colleagues. . . . This experiment ended up at the absolute
bottom of the priority list of things to do."

    Schenk first vaccinated six-week-old transgenic mice and found that the
vaccine completely protected them from developing amyloid plaques. Even when the
vaccine was given to older animals that already had plaques in their brains, it
reduced the appearance of additional plaques and seemed to make some of the
existing beta-amyloid deposits disappear. Under the microscope, it appeared that
microglial cells -- wandering brain cells that clean up debris and fight
infection -- were becoming activated by the vaccine and gobbling up the plaques.

    "That was a major surprise," Schenk recalled.

    Schenk's 1999 paper on the Elan vaccine created a sensation, not least
because the unexpected findings suggested that vaccines might be helpful in
disorders where no one had thought of using them. His results have since been
confirmed by other researchers.

    But no one knew whether the treatment could improve learning or memory in
affected animals. Without such evidence, medical researchers would be reluctant
to try it in people. "You may remove the amyloid, but patients may not do any
better," noted Hopkins' Troncoso.

    Using the Florida transgenic mice, Morgan and his team tried to address that
question. They used a water maze shaped like a daisy with six petals to test
animals' "working memory": the ability to learn and remember new information,
which is the earliest brain function affected by Alzheimer's.

    Each day, the escape platform is placed at the end of a different arm of the
maze. A mouse must swim until it locates the platform, which is invisible from
the surface. Mice in the experiment were given five trials each day, testing
their ability to learn and recall the platform's location. The next day, the
platform was moved to a new location.

    "It's like you have to remember where you parked your car," said David
Diamond, a behavioral neuroscientist who designed the water maze used in the
study.

    Morgan and his colleagues gave transgenic animals monthly injections of a
vaccine similar to the one developed by Elan, starting at seven months of age.
He first tested them in the maze when they were 11 months old, expecting that
brain inflammation caused by the vaccine would worsen their performance.
Instead, they learned the maze as fast as normal mice. "We were completely
wrong," he said. "They were just dynamite."

    By 15 months of age, transgenic mice that had not gotten the vaccine had
developed severe brain disease and could no longer navigate the maze. But the
vaccine recipients could still learn and remember the platform's location,
although they took longer to master it than normal animals. Morgan and his team
are now studying whether the vaccine still protects the brain when the treatment
is begun later in the animals' lives.

    The Florida team's promising findings and those of another group in Canada
have spurred Elan's efforts to test the vaccine in Alzheimer's patients. Last
year, a small safety study in this country found no significant side effects.
The vaccine is now undergoing a multidose safety trial involving about 80
patients in Great Britain who have mild or moderate Alzheimer's disease. The
results are expected within the next two months. If they are favorable, the
company hopes to begin testing the vaccine in a larger number of patients to see
whether it has a favorable impact on their illness.

    "I think it provides some hope," said Schenk, who is to receive a prize for
his discovery today at the American Academy of Neurology's annual meeting.

    Many researchers are nervous about the prospect of giving a vaccine to
activate the immune system in the brain, reasoning that if it triggers
inflammation or other adverse effects, doctors won't be able to turn off the
process. Some have suggested it might be safer simply to give patients periodic
injections of antibodies against beta-amyloid -- much as gamma globulin shots
were once given to prevent hepatitis -- because the treatment could be stopped
if side effects developed.

    The NIMH's Sunderland, who is trying to develop a predictive test for
Alzheimer's disease, is studying a group of healthy volunteers who are at
higher-than-average risk because they have parents or siblings with the
disorder.

    "They ask, 'Should I get the vaccine?'" Sunderland said. "My opinion is,
'No. Not now.' "

    Nevertheless, Sunderland said he is encouraged by the results so far. He
said he suspects that an Alzheimer's vaccine may work better for preventing the
disease than for treating it once the brain has become severely affected.

    "Let's say they give it to Alzheimer's patients and it fails," he said. "It
might seem a devastating blow to the vaccine concept, but maybe they gave it to
the wrong people. Right now, there is no flashlight . . . telling you where to
point your treatment, and when."

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2001


                             1804 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                       MAY 7, 2001, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D14

LENGTH: 5932 words

HEADLINE: THE CHRONICLE 500;

Profiles;

A-C

BODY:
3Com Corp.

    Computer networking systems

    5400 Bayfront Plaza

    Santa Clara, CA 95052

    (408) 326-5000

    Ticker: COMS

    www.3com.com

    CEO: Eric Benhamou

    Employees: 7,997

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 87

    _______________________________________________

    3Dfx Interactive Inc.

    Media/entertainment software

    4435 Fortran Drive

    San Jose, CA 95134

    (408) 935-4400

    Ticker: TDFX

    www.3dfx.com

    CEO: Alex Leupp

    Employees: 650

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 496

    _______________________________________________

    3Dlabs Inc. Ltd.

    Semiconductors

    480 Potrero Ave.

    Sunnyvale, CA 94086

    (408) 530-4700

    Ticker: TDDD

    www.3dlabs.com

    CEO: Osman Kent

    Employees: 140

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 459

    _______________________________________________


    3DO Co.

    Game/entertainment software

    100 Cardinal Way

    Redwood City, CA 94063

    (650) 385-3000

    Ticker: THDO

    www.3do.com

    CEO: Trip Hawkins

    Employees: 495

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 337

    _______________________________________________

    Abaxis Inc.

    Medical instruments

    3240 Whipple Road

    Union City, CA 94587

    (510) 441-6161

    Ticker: ABAX

    www.abaxis.com

    CEO: Clint Severson

    Employees: 113

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 400

    _______________________________________________

    Abgenix Inc.

    Biotechnology

    7601 Dumbarton Circle

    Fremont, CA 94555

    (510) 608-6500

    Ticker: ABGX

    www.abgenix.com

    CEO: R. Scott Greer

    Employees: 174

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 79

    _______________________________________________


    ABM Industries Inc.

    Building maintenance

    160 Pacific Ave., Suite 222

    San Francisco, CA 94111

    (415) 733-4000

    Ticker: ABM

    www.abm.com

    CEO: William Steele

    Employees: 60,000

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 148

    _______________________________________________

    Aclara Biosciences Inc.

    Scientific and technical instruments

    1288 Pear Ave.

    Mountain View, CA 94043

    (650) 210-1200

    Ticker: ACLA

    www.aclara.com

    CEO: Joseph Limber

    Employees: 124

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 268

    _______________________________________________

    Actel Corp.

    Semiconductors

    955 E. Arques Ave.

    Sunnyvale, CA 94086

    (408) 739-1010

    Ticker: ACTL

    www.actel.com

    CEO: John East

    Employees: 484

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 180

    _______________________________________________


    ActionPoint Inc.

    Software

    1299 Parkmoor Ave.

    San Jose, CA 95126

    (408) 325-3800

    Ticker: ACTP

    www.actionpoint.com

    CEO: Kimra Hawley

    Employees: 146

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 468

    _______________________________________________

    Actuate Corp.

    Software

    701 Gateway Blvd.

    South San Francisco, CA 94080

    (650) 837-2000

    Ticker: ACTU

    www.actuate.com

    CEO: Peter Cittadini

    Employees: 609

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 186

    _______________________________________________

    Adaptec Inc.

    Networking products

    691 S. Milpitas Blvd.

    Milpitas, CA 95035

    (408) 945-8600

    Ticker: ADPT

    www.adaptec.com

    CEO: Bob Stephens

    Employees: 2,512

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 138

    _______________________________________________


    Adaptive Broadband Corp.

    Data networking technology

    1143 Borregas Ave.

    Sunnyvale, CA 94089

    (408) 732-4000

    Ticker: ADAPE

    www.calmike.com/

    CEO: Daniel Scharre

    Employees: 183

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 440

    _______________________________________________

    Adept Technology Inc.

    Robotics/vision systems

    150 Rose Orchard Way

    San Jose, CA 95134

    (408) 432-0888

    Ticker: ADTK

    www.adept.com

    CEO: Brian Carlisle

    Employees: 305

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 282

    _______________________________________________

    Adobe Systems Inc.

    Computer software

    345 Park Ave.

    San Jose, CA 95110

    (408) 536-6000

    Ticker: ADBE

    www.adobe.com

    CEO: Bruce Chizen

    Employees: 3,007

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 31

    _______________________________________________


    Advanced Fibre Communications

    Telecommunications

    1465 N. McDowell Blvd.

    Petaluma, CA 94954

    (707) 794-7700

    Ticker: AFCI

    www.fibre.com

    CEO: John Schofield

    Employees: 959

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 109

    _______________________________________________

    Advanced Micro Devices

    Semiconductors

    One AMD Place

    Sunnyvale, CA 94088

    (408) 732-2400

    Ticker: AMD

    www.amd.com

    CEO: W. J. Sanders III

    Employees: 14,435

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 36

    _______________________________________________

    Advanced Polymer Systems

    Polymer-based delivery systems

    123 Saginaw Drive

    Redwood City, CA 94063

    (650) 366-2626

    Ticker: APOS

    CEO: John Meakem Jr.

    Employees: 83

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 413

    _______________________________________________


    Advent Software Inc.

    Investment management software

    301 Brannan St.

    San Francisco, CA 94107

    (415) 543-7696

    Ticker: ADVS

    www.advent.com

    CEO: Peter Caswell

    Employees: 701

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 106

    _______________________________________________

    Aehr Test Systems

    Semiconductor equipment

    400 Kato Terrace

    Fremont, CA 94539

    (510) 623-9400

    Ticker: AEHR

    CEO: Rhea Posedel

    Employees: 128

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 434

    _______________________________________________

    Affymetrix Inc.

    Biotechnology

    3380 Central Expressway

    Santa Clara, CA 95051

    (408) 731-5000

    Ticker: AFFX

    www.affymetrix.com

    CEO: Stephen Fodor

    Employees: 744

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 88

    _______________________________________________


    Agile Software Corp.

    Management software

    One Almaden Blvd.

    San Jose, CA 95113

    (408) 975-3900

    Ticker: AGIL

    www.agilesoft.com

    CEO: Bryan Stolle

    Employees: 289

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 154

    _______________________________________________

    Agilent Technologies Inc.

    Testing and measurement equipment

    395 Page Mill Road

    Palo Alto, CA 94306

    (650) 752-5000

    Ticker: A

    www.agilent-tech.com

    CEO: Edward Barnholt

    Employees: 40,000

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 16

    _______________________________________________

    Airlease Ltd.

    Aircraft leasing

    555 California St., 4th Floor

    San Francisco, CA 94104

    (415) 765-1814

    Ticker: FLY

    CEO: David Gebler

    Employees: 0

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 381

    _______________________________________________


    Alliance Semiconductor

    Imbedded memory products

    2575 Augustine Drive

    Santa Clara, CA 95054

    (408) 855-4900

    Ticker: ALSC

    www.alsc.com

    CEO: N. Damodar Reddy

    Employees: 161

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 175

    _______________________________________________

    Altera Corp.

    Programmable integrated circuits

    101 Innovation Drive

    San Jose, CA 95134

    (408) 544-7000

    Ticker: ALTR

    www.altera.com

    CEO: Rodney Smith

    Employees: 1,947

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 29

    _______________________________________________

    AltiGen Communications

    Communications equipment

    47427 Fremont Blvd.

    Fremont, CA 94538

    (510) 252-9712

    Ticker: ATGN

    www.altigen.com

    CEO: Gilbert Hu

    Employees: 108

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 480

    _______________________________________________


    Alysis Technologies Inc.

    Software provider

    1900 Powell St., Suite 110

    Emeryville, CA 94608

    (510) 450-7000

    Ticker: ALYS

    www.iacorporation.com

    CEO: Kevin Moran

    Employees: 65

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 466

    _______________________________________________

    Alza Corp.

    Drug delivery

    1900 Charleston Road

    Mountain View, CA 94039

    (650) 564-5000

    Ticker: AZA

    www.alza.com

    CEO: Ernest Mario

    Employees: 2,442

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 25

    _______________________________________________

    AMB Property Corp.

    Real estate investment trust

    Pier 1, Bay 1

    San Francisco, CA 94111

    (415) 394-9000

    Ticker: AMB

    www.amb.com

    CEO: Hamid Moghadam

    Employees: 174

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 74

    _______________________________________________


    Ampex Corp.

    Digital recording/imaging

    500 Broadway

    Redwood City, CA 94063

    (650) 367-2011

    Ticker: AXC

    www.ampex.com

    CEO: Edward Bramson

    Employees: 465

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 462

    _______________________________________________

    Appiant Technologies Inc.

    Software applications and services

    6663 Owens Drive

    Pleasanton, CA 94588

    (925) 251-3200

    Ticker: APPS

    www.nhan.com

    CEO: Douglas Zorn

    Employees: 240

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 420

    _______________________________________________

    Apple Computer Inc.

    Computer hardware

    1 Infinite Loop

    Cupertino, CA 95014

    (408) 996-1010

    Ticker: AAPL

    www.apple.com

    CEO: Steve Jobs

    Employees: 8,568

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 37

    _______________________________________________


    Applied Imaging Corp.

    Medical devices

    2380 Walsh Ave., Building B

    Santa Clara, CA 95051

    (408) 562-0250

    Ticker: AICX

    www.aicorp.com

    CEO: Carl Hull

    Employees: 85

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 442

    _______________________________________________

    Applied Materials

    Semiconductor equipment

    3050 Bowers Ave.

    Santa Clara, CA 95054

    (408) 727-5555

    Ticker: AMAT

    www.appliedmaterials.com

    CEO: James Morgan

    Employees: 19,220

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 8

    _______________________________________________

    Applied Signal Technology

    Digital signal processing equipment

    400 W. California Ave.

    Sunnyvale, CA 94086

    (408) 749-1888

    Ticker: APSG

    www.appsig.com

    CEO: Gary Yancey

    Employees: 528

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 416

    _______________________________________________


    Aradigm Corp.

    Drug delivery

    3929 Point Eden Way

    Hayward, CA 94545

    (510) 265-9000

    Ticker: ARDM

    www.aradigm.com

    CEO: Richard Thompson

    Employees: 208

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 323

    _______________________________________________

    Argonaut Group Inc.

    Property and casualty insurance

    250 Middlefield Road

    Menlo Park, CA 94025

    (650) 858-6600

    Ticker: AGII

    www.argonautgroup.com

    CEO: Mark Watson

    Employees: 372

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 207

    _______________________________________________

    Ariba Inc.

    Internet infrastructure

    1565 Charleston Road

    Mountain View, CA 94043

    (650) 930-6200

    Ticker: ARBA

    www.ariba.com

    CEO: Keith Krach

    Employees: 1,680

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 101

    _______________________________________________


    ArthroCare Corp.

    Medical devices

    595 N. Pastorina Ave.

    Sunnyvale, CA 94086

    (408) 736-0224

    Ticker: ARTC

    www.arthrocare.com

    CEO: Michael Baker

    Employees: 239

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 222

    _______________________________________________

    Artisan Components Inc.

    Semiconductors

    1195 Bordeaux Drive

    Sunnyvale, CA 94089

    (408) 734-5600

    Ticker: ARTI

    www.artisan.com

    CEO: Mark Templeton

    Employees: 108

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 312

    _______________________________________________

    Ask Jeeves Inc.

    Internet online service

    5858 Horton St., Suite 350

    Emeryville, CA 94608

    (510) 985-7400

    Ticker: ASKJ

    www.askjeeves.com

    CEO: A. George Battle

    Employees: 565

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 419

    _______________________________________________


    Aspect Communications

    Customer relation services

    1310 Ridder Park Drive

    San Jose, CA 95131

    (408) 325-2200

    Ticker: ASPT

    www.aspect.com

    CEO: Beatrice Infante

    Employees: 2,740

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 259

    _______________________________________________

    Asyst Technologies Inc.

    Semiconductor equipment

    48761 Kato Road

    Fremont, CA 94538

    (510) 661-5000

    Ticker: ASYT

    www.asyst.com

    CEO: Mihir Parikh

    Employees: 989

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 195

    _______________________________________________

    At Comm Corp.

    Integrated communications systems

    577 Airport Blvd., Suite 700

    Burlingame, CA 94010

    (650) 375-8188

    Ticker: ATCM

    www.atcomm.com

    CEO: William Welling

    Employees: 171

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 439

    _______________________________________________


    ATG Inc.

    Radioactive waste management

    47375 Fremont Blvd.

    Fremont, CA 94538

    (510) 490-3008

    Ticker: ATGC

    CEO: Doreen Chiu

    Employees: 469

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 474

    _______________________________________________

    Atmel Corp.

    Semiconductor equipment

    2325 Orchard Parkway

    San Jose, CA 95131

    (408) 441-0311

    Ticker: ATML

    www.atmel.com

    CEO: George Perlegos

    Employees: 9,091

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 49

    _______________________________________________

    Auspex Systems Inc.

    Computer hardware/software

    2800 Scott Blvd.

    Santa Clara, CA 95050

    (408) 566-2000

    Ticker: ASPX

    www.auspex.com

    CEO: Bruce Moore

    Employees: 314

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 295

    _______________________________________________


    Autodesk Inc.

    Computer software

    111 McInnis Parkway

    San Rafael, CA 94903

    (415) 507-5000

    Ticker: ADSK

    www.autodesk.com

    CEO: Carol Bartz

    Employees: 3,024

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 82

    _______________________________________________

    Avanex Corp.

    Telecommunications equipment

    40919 Encyclopedia Circle

    Fremont, CA 94538

    (510) 897-4188

    Ticker: AVNX

    www.avanex.com

    CEO: Walter Alessandrini

    Employees: 1,100

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 145

    _______________________________________________

    Avanti Corp.

    Computer software

    46871 Bayside Parkway

    Fremont, CA 94538

    (510) 413-8000

    Ticker: AVNT

    www.avanticorp.com

    CEO: Gerald Hsu

    Employees: 1,330

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 156

    _______________________________________________


    Avigen Inc.

    Gene therapy

    1301 Harbor Bay Parkway

    Alameda, CA 94502

    (510) 748-7150

    Ticker: AVGN

    www.avigen.com

    CEO: John Monahan

    Employees: 82

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 249

    _______________________________________________

    Aviron

    Genetically engineered vaccines

    297 N. Bernardo Ave.

    Mountain View, CA 94043

    (650) 919-6500

    Ticker: AVIR

    www.aviron.com

    CEO: J. Leighton Read, C. Boyd Clarke

    Employees: 462

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 107

    _______________________________________________

    AXT Inc.

    Semiconductor materials

    4281 Technology Drive

    Fremont, CA 94538

    (510) 683-5900

    Ticker: AXTI

    www.axt.com

    CEO: Morris Young

    Employees: 1,359

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 211

    _______________________________________________


    Axys Pharmaceuticals Inc.

    Pharmaceuticals

    180 Kimball Way

    South San Francisco, CA 94080

    (650) 829-1000

    Ticker: AXPH

    www.axyspharm.com

    CEO: John Walker

    Employees: 298

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 318

    _______________________________________________

    BackWeb Technologies Ltd.

    Internet infrastructure software

    2077 Gateway Place, Suite 500

    San Jose, CA 95110

    (408) 933-1700

    Ticker: BWEB

    www.backweb.com

    CEO: Eli Barkat

    Employees: 202

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 376

    _______________________________________________

    Bank of Marin

    Banking

    50 Madera Blvd.

    Corte Madera, CA 94925

    (415) 927-2265

    Ticker: BMRC

    www.bankofmarin.com

    CEO: W. Robert Griswold

    Employees: 107

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 377

    _______________________________________________


    Barra Inc.

    Risk management software

    2100 Milvia St.

    Berkeley, CA 94704

    (510) 548-5442

    Ticker: BARZ

    www.barra.com

    CEO: Kamal Duggirala

    Employees: 667

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 112

    _______________________________________________

    Bay View Capital Corp.

    Commercial banking

    1840 Gateway Drive

    San Mateo, CA 94404

    (650) 312-7200

    Ticker: BVC

    www.bvcc.com

    CEO: Robert Goldstein

    Employees: 1,018

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 275

    _______________________________________________

    Be Inc.

    Software platforms

    800 El Camino Real , Suite 400

    Menlo Park, CA 94025

    (650) 462-4100

    Ticker: BEOS

    www.be.com

    CEO: Jean-Louis Gassee

    Employees: 116

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 387

    _______________________________________________


    BEA Systems Inc.

    Computer software

    2315 N. First St.

    San Jose, CA 95131

    (408) 570-8000

    Ticker: BEAS

    www.beasys.com

    CEO: William Coleman

    Employees: 1,900

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 24

    _______________________________________________

    Bebe Stores Inc.

    Women's apparel/accessories

    380 Valley Drive

    Brisbane, CA 94005

    (415) 715-3900

    Ticker: BEBE

    www.bebe.com

    CEO: Manny Mashouf

    Employees: 1,900

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 176

    _______________________________________________

    Bedford Property Investors

    Real estate investment trust

    270 Lafayette Circle

    Lafayette, CA 94549

    (925) 283-8910

    Ticker: BED

    www.bedfordproperty.com

    CEO: Peter Bedford

    Employees: 33

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 219

    _______________________________________________


    BEI Technologies Inc.

    Industrial products

    One Post St., Suite 2500

    San Francisco, CA 94104

    (415) 956-4477

    Ticker: BEIQ

    www.bei-tech.com

    CEO: Charles Crocker

    Employees: 1,189

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 246

    _______________________________________________

    Bell Microproducts Inc.

    Semiconductor distribution

    1941 Ringwood Ave.

    San Jose, CA 95131

    (408) 451-9400

    Ticker: BELM

    www.bellmicro.com

    CEO: W. Donald Bell

    Employees: 1,150

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 301

    _______________________________________________

    Beyond.com Corp.

    Software

    3200 Patrick Henry Drive

    Santa Clara, CA 95054

    (408) 855-3000

    Ticker: BYND

    www.software.net

    CEO: Ronald Smith

    Employees: 389

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 498

    _______________________________________________


    BF Enterprises Inc.

    Real estate

    100 Bush St., Suite 1250

    San Francisco, CA 94104

    (415) 989-6580

    Ticker: BFEN

    CEO: Brian Burns

    Employees: 8

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 425

    _______________________________________________

    Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc.

    Diagnostic products/instruments, analytical instrumentation

    1000 Alfred Nobel Drive

    Hercules, CA 94547

    (510) 724-7000

    Ticker: BIO/A

    www.bio-rad.com

    CEO: David Schwartz

    Employees: 3,800

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 183

    _______________________________________________

    BioMarin Pharmaceutical

    Biotechnology-based drugs

    371 Bel Marin Keys Blvd., Suite 210

    Novato, CA 94949

    (415) 884-6700

    Ticker: BMRN

    www.biomarinpharm.com

    CEO: Fredric Price

    Employees: 174

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 218

    _______________________________________________


    Bionova Holding Corp.

    Agribiotech products

    6701 San Pablo Ave.

    Oakland, CA 94608

    (510) 547-2395

    Ticker: BVA

    www.bionovaholding.com

    CEO: Bernardo Jiminez

    Employees: 374

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 418

    _______________________________________________

    BioTime Inc.

    Pharmaceutical products

    935 Pardee St.

    Berkeley, CA 94710

    (510) 845-9535

    Ticker: BTX

    www.biotimeinc.com

    CEO: Paul Segall

    Employees: 14

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 334

    _______________________________________________

    Borel Bank & Trust Co.

    Commercial banking

    160 Bovet Road

    San Mateo, CA 94402

    (650) 378-3700

    Ticker: BLCA

    www.borel.com

    CEO: Ronald Fick

    Employees: 65

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 348

    _______________________________________________


    Borland Software Corp.

    Software and services

    100 Enterprise Way

    Scotts Valley, CA 95066

    (831) 431-1000

    Ticker: BORL

    www.borland.com

    CEO: Dale Fuller

    Employees: 934

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 184

    _______________________________________________

    BRE Properties Inc.

    Real estate investment trust

    44 Montgomery St., 36th Floor

    San Francisco, CA 94104

    (415) 445-6530

    Ticker: BRE

    www.breproperties.com

    CEO: Frank McDowell

    Employees: 700

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 104

    _______________________________________________

    Brio Technology Inc.

    Software

    4980 Great America Parkway

    Santa Clara, CA 95054

    (408) 496-7400

    Ticker: BRIO

    www.brio.com

    CEO: Craig Brennan

    Employees: 573

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 308

    _______________________________________________


    Britesmile Inc.

    Tooth-whitening products and services

    490 N. Wiget Lane

    Walnut Creek, CA 94598

    (925) 941-6260

    Ticker: BSML

    www.britesmile.com

    CEO: John Reed

    Employees: 150

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 297

    _______________________________________________

    Broadbase Software Inc.

    Software

    181 Constitution Drive

    Menlo Park, CA 94025

    (650) 614-8300

    Ticker: BBSW

    www.broadbase.com

    CEO: Chuck Bay

    Employees: 678

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 362

    _______________________________________________

    BroadVision Inc.

    Internet software commerce

    585 Broadway

    Redwood City, CA 94063

    (650) 261-5100

    Ticker: BVSN

    www.broadvision.com

    CEO: Pehong Chen

    Employees: 2,412

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 136

    _______________________________________________


    Brocade Communications

    Computer networks

    1745 Technology Drive

    San Jose, CA 95110

    (408) 487-8000

    Ticker: BRCD

    www.brocade.com

    CEO: Gregory Reyes

    Employees: 606

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 46

    _______________________________________________

    Building Materials Holding

    Building materials

    One Market Plaza, Steuart Tower, Suite 2650

    San Francisco, CA 94105

    (415) 227-1650

    Ticker: BMHC

    www.bmhc.com

    CEO: Robert Mellor

    Employees: 4,400

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 303

    _______________________________________________

    BWC Financial Corp.

    Bank holding company

    1400 Civic Drive

    Walnut Creek, CA 94596

    (925) 932-5353

    Ticker: BWCF

    www.bowc.com

    CEO: James Ryan

    Employees: 118

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 345

    _______________________________________________


    C-Cube Microsystems Inc.

    Digital video circuits

    1778 McCarthy Blvd.

    Milpitas, CA 95035

    (408) 490-8000

    Ticker: CUBE

    www.c-cube.com

    CEO: Umesh Padval

    Employees: 600

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 158

    _______________________________________________

    CacheFlow Inc.

    Internet caching appliances

    650 Almanor Ave.

    Sunnyvale, CA 94086

    (408) 220-2200

    Ticker: CFLO

    www.cacheflow.com

    CEO: Brian NeSmith

    Employees: 306

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 272

    _______________________________________________

    Cadence Design Systems

    Software and services

    2655 Seely Road , Building 5

    San Jose, CA 95134

    (408) 943-1234

    Ticker: CDN

    www.cadence.com

    CEO: Ray Bingham

    Employees: 5,000

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 52

    _______________________________________________


    California Micro Devices

    Electronic components

    215 Topaz St.

    Milpitas, CA 95035

    (408) 263-3214

    Ticker: CAMD

    www.camd.com

    CEO: Robert Dickinson

    Employees: 285

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 378

    _______________________________________________

    California Water Service Group

    Water utilities

    1720 N. First St.

    San Jose, CA 95112

    (408) 367-8200

    Ticker: CWT

    www.calwater.com

    CEO: Peter Nelson

    Employees: 797

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 194

    _______________________________________________

    Caliper Technologies Corp.

    Lab-on-chip technologies

    605 Fairchild Drive

    Mountain View, CA 94043

    (650) 623-0700

    Ticker: CALP

    www.calipertech.com

    CEO: Daniel Kisner

    Employees: 185

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 217

    _______________________________________________


    Calpine Corp.

    Power generator

    50 W. San Fernando St.

    San Jose, CA 95113

    (408) 995-5115

    Ticker: CPN

    www.calpine.com

    CEO: Peter Cartwright

    Employees: 1,883

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 15

    _______________________________________________

    Calypte Biomedical Corp.

    Diagnostic kits

    1265 Harbor Bay Parkway

    Alameda, CA 94502

    (510) 749-5100

    Ticker: CALY

    www.calypte.com

    CEO: Nancy Katz

    Employees: 65

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 478

    _______________________________________________

    Cardiac Pathways Corp.

    Medical devices

    995 Benecia Ave.

    Sunnyvale, CA 94085

    (408) 737-0505

    Ticker: CPWY

    www.cardiac.com

    CEO: William Starling

    Employees: 141

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 447

    _______________________________________________


    Catalyst Semiconductor

    Semiconductor manufacturer

    1250 Borregas Ave.

    Sunnyvale, CA 94089

    (408) 542-1000

    Ticker: CATS

    www.catsemi.com

    CEO: Radu Vanco

    Employees: 55

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 368

    _______________________________________________

    Catapult Communications

    Telecommunications test equipment

    160 S. Whisman Road

    Mountain View, CA 94041

    (650) 960-1025

    Ticker: CATT

    www.catapult.com

    CEO: Richard Karp

    Employees: 113

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 239

    _______________________________________________

    Catellus Development Corp.

    Real estate development

    201 Mission St.

    San Francisco, CA 94105

    (415) 974-4500

    Ticker: CDX

    www.catellus.com

    CEO: Nelson Rising

    Employees: 358

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 83

    _______________________________________________


    Celeritek Inc.

    Wireless communications

    3236 Scott Blvd.

    Santa Clara, CA 95054

    (408) 986-5060

    Ticker: CLTK

    www.celeritek.com

    CEO: Tamer Husseini

    Employees: 339

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 287

    _______________________________________________

    Cell Genesys Inc.

    Gene therapy

    342 Lakeside Drive

    Foster City, CA 94404

    (650) 425-4400

    Ticker: CEGE

    www.cellgenesys.com

    CEO: Stephen Sherwin

    Employees: 162

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 171

    _______________________________________________

    Cellegy Pharmaceuticals

    Biopharmaceuticals

    349 Oyster Point Blvd., Suite 200

    South San Francisco, CA 94080

    (650) 616-2200

    Ticker: CLGY

    www.cellegy.com

    CEO: K. Michael Forrest

    Employees: 30

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 356

    _______________________________________________


    Central Coast Bancorp

    Bank holding company

    301 Main St.

    Salinas, CA 93901

    (831) 422-6642

    Ticker: CCBN

    CEO: Nick Ventimiglia

    Employees: 99

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 285

    _______________________________________________

    Central Garden & Pet Co.

    Lawn, garden and pet supplies

    3697 Mount Diablo Blvd., Suite 310

    Lafayette, CA 94549

    (925) 283-4573

    Ticker: CENT

    www.centralgardenandpet.com

    CEO: William Brown

    Employees: 3,800

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 264

    _______________________________________________

    Centura Software Corp.

    Software

    975 Island Drive

    Redwood Shores, CA 94065

    (650) 596-3400

    Ticker: MBRN

    www.centurasoft.com

    CEO: Scott Broomfield

    Employees: 236

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 415

    _______________________________________________


    Century Aluminum Co.

    Aluminum producer

    2511 Garden Road , Bldg. A, Suite 200

    Monterey, CA 93940

    (831) 642-9300

    Ticker: CENX

    www.centuryaluminum.com

    CEO: Craig Davis

    Employees: 690

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 224

    _______________________________________________

    Cerus Corp.

    Biotechnology/medical products

    2411 Stanwell Drive

    Concord, CA 94520

    (925) 288-6000

    Ticker: CERS

    www.ceruscorp.com

    CEO: Stephen Isaacs

    Employees: 154

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 167

    _______________________________________________

    Chalone Wine Group Ltd.

    Wine

    621 Airpark Road

    Napa, CA 94558

    (707) 254-4200

    Ticker: CHLN

    www.chalonewinegroup.com

    CEO: Thomas Selfridge

    Employees: 156

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 326

    _______________________________________________


    Charles Schwab Corp.

    Brokerage services

    120 Kearny St.

    San Francisco, CA 94108

    (415) 627-7000

    Ticker: SCH

    www.schwab.com

    CEO: Charles Schwab, David Pottruck

    Employees: 26,300

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 11

    _______________________________________________

    Chevron Corp.

    Energy: oil and gas

    575 Market St.

    San Francisco, CA 94105

    (415) 894-7700

    Ticker: CHV

    www.chevron.com

    CEO: David O'Reilly

    Employees: 34,610

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 6

    _______________________________________________

    Chiron Corp.

    Biotechnology

    4560 Horton St.

    Emeryville, CA 94608

    (510) 655-8730

    Ticker: CHIR

    www.chiron.com

    CEO: Sean Lance

    Employees: 3,422

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 32

    _______________________________________________


    Cholestech Corp.

    Medical devices

    3347 Investment Blvd.

    Hayward, CA 94545

    (510) 732-7200

    Ticker: CTEC

    www.cholestech.com

    CEO: Warren Pinckert

    Employees: 172

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 364

    _______________________________________________

    Chordiant Software Inc.

    E-business infrastructure

    20400 Stevens Creek Blvd., Suite 400

    Cupertino, CA 95014

    (408) 517-6100

    Ticker: CHRD

    www.chordiant.com

    CEO: Sam Spadafora

    Employees: 250

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 278

    _______________________________________________

    Cidco Inc.

    Telecommunications equipment

    220 Cochrane Circle

    Morgan Hill, CA 95037

    (408) 779-1162

    Ticker: CDCO

    www.cidco.com

    CEO: Paul Locklin

    Employees: 127

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 488

    _______________________________________________


    Cisco Systems Inc.

    Networking products

    170 W. Tasman Drive

    San Jose, CA 95134

    (408) 526-4000

    Ticker: CSCO

    www.cisco.com

    CEO: John Chambers

    Employees: 34,000

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 2

    _______________________________________________

    Civic BanCorp

    Commercial banking

    2101 Webster St., 14th Floor

    Oakland, CA 94612

    (510) 836-6500

    Ticker: CIVC

    CEO: Herbert Foster

    Employees: 167

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 344

    _______________________________________________

    Clarent Corp.

    Internet protocol telephony

    700 Chesapeake Drive

    Redwood City, CA 94063

    (650) 306-7511

    Ticker: CLRN

    www.clarent.com

    CEO: Jerry Chang

    Employees: 850

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 197

    _______________________________________________


    ClickAction Inc.

    E-mail relationship management

    2197 E. Bayshore Road

    Palo Alto, CA 94303

    (650) 473-3600

    Ticker: CLAC

    www.clickaction.com

    CEO: Gregory Slayton

    Employees: 200

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 396

    _______________________________________________

    Clorox Co.

    Consumer goods

    1221 Broadway

    Oakland, CA 94612

    (510) 271-7000

    Ticker: CLX

    www.clorox.com

    CEO: G. Craig Sullivan

    Employees: 11,000

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 34

    _______________________________________________

    CNET Networks Inc.

    Internet content provider

    150 Chestnut St.

    San Francisco, CA 94111

    (415) 364-8000

    Ticker: CNET

    www.cnet.com

    CEO: Shelby Bonnie

    Employees: 1,900

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 97

    _______________________________________________


    CNF Inc.

    Supply chain management

    3240 Hillview Ave.

    Palo Alto, CA 94304

    (650) 494-2900

    Ticker: CNF

    www.cnf.com

    CEO: Gregory Quesnel

    Employees: 28,700

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 95

    _______________________________________________

    Coherent Inc.

    Laser instruments

    5100 Patrick Henry Drive

    Santa Clara, CA 95054

    (408) 764-4000

    Ticker: COHR

    www.cohr.com

    CEO: Bernard Couillaud

    Employees: 2,839

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 119

    _______________________________________________

    Cohesion Technologies

    Medical products

    2500 Faber Place

    Palo Alto, CA 94303

    (650) 320-5500

    Ticker: CSON

    www.cohesiontech.com

    CEO: David Foster

    Employees: 77

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 427

    _______________________________________________


    Com21 Inc.

    Telecommunications equipment

    750 Tasman Drive

    Milpitas, CA 95035

    (408) 953-9100

    Ticker: CMTO

    www.com21.com

    CEO: Peter Fenner

    Employees: 525

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 428

    _______________________________________________

    COMC Inc.

    Telecommunications services

    2840 Howe Road , Suite D

    Martinez, CA 94553

    (925) 335-4000

    Ticker: CINJ

    CEO: Christopher Smith

    Employees: 169

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 499

    _______________________________________________

    Commerce One Inc.

    Computer sofware and services

    4440 Rosewood Drive

    Pleasanton, CA 94588

    (925) 520-6000

    Ticker: CMRC

    www.commerceone.com

    CEO: Mark Hoffman

    Employees: 3,766

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 93

    _______________________________________________


    Communication Intelligence Corp.

    Pen-based software

    275 Shoreline Drive , Suite 500

    Redwood Shores, CA 94065

    (650) 802-7888

    Ticker: CICI

    www.cic.com

    CEO: Guido DiGregorio

    Employees: 73

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 315

    _______________________________________________

    Conceptus Inc.

    Medical devices

    1021 Howard Ave.

    San Carlos, CA 94070

    (650) 802-7240

    Ticker: CPTS

    www.conceptus.com

    CEO: Kathryn Tunstall

    Employees: 66

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 320

    _______________________________________________

    Conductus Inc.

    Wireless networking equipment

    969 W. Maude Ave.

    Sunnyvale, CA 94086

    (408) 523-9950

    Ticker: CDTS

    www.conductus.com

    CEO: Charles Shalvoy

    Employees: 57

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 366

    _______________________________________________


    Connetics Corp.

    Biopharmaceuticals

    3400 W. Bayshore Road

    Palo Alto, CA 94303

    (650) 843-2800

    Ticker: CNCT

    www.connetics.com

    CEO: Thomas Wiggans

    Employees: 136

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 294

    _______________________________________________

    Cooper Companies

    Health products and services

    6140 Stoneridge Mall Road, Suite 590

    Pleasanton, CA 94588

    (925) 460-3600

    Ticker: COO

    www.coopersurgical.com

    CEO: A. Thomas Bender

    Employees: 2,100

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 152

    _______________________________________________

    Copart Inc.

    Salvage

    5500 E. Second St.

    Benicia, CA 94510

    (707) 748-5000

    Ticker: CPRT

    www.copart.com

    CEO: Willis Johnson

    Employees: 1,803

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 114

    _______________________________________________


    Copper Mountain Networks

    Telecommunications equipment

    2470 Embarcadero Way

    Palo Alto, CA 94303

    (650) 687-3300

    Ticker: CMTN

    www.coppermountain.com

    CEO: Richard Gilbert

    Employees: 458

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 296

    _______________________________________________

    COR Therapeutics Inc.

    Pharmaceutical products

    256 E. Grand Ave.

    South San Francisco, CA 94080

    (650) 244-6800

    Ticker: CORR

    www.cortherapeutics.com

    CEO: Vaughn Kailian

    Employees: 311

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 105

    _______________________________________________

    CornerStone Propane Partners

    Energy distribution

    432 Westridge Drive

    Watsonville, CA 95076

    (831) 724-1921

    Ticker: CNO

    www.cornerstonepropane.com

    CEO: Keith Baxter

    Employees: 2,436

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 201

    _______________________________________________


    Cost Plus Inc.

    Home furnishings/gifts retailer

    200 Fourth St.

    Oakland, CA 94607

    (510) 893-7300

    Ticker: CPWM

    www.costplusworldmarket.com

    CEO: Murray Dashe

    Employees: 3,064

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 172

    _______________________________________________

    Covad Communications Group

    Digital internet services

    4250 Burton Drive

    Santa Clara, CA 95054

    (408) 987-1000

    Ticker: COVDE

    www.covad.com

    CEO: Robert Knowling Jr.

    Employees: 848

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 269

    _______________________________________________

    Credence Systems Corp.

    Automated testing equipment

    215 Fourier Ave.

    Fremont, CA 94539

    (510) 657-7400

    Ticker: CMOS

    www.credence.com

    CEO: Graham Siddall

    Employees: 1,213

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 117

    _______________________________________________


    Critical Path Inc.

    Messaging services

    532 Folsom St.

    San Francisco, CA 94105

    (415) 808-8800

    Ticker: CPTH

    www.cp.net

    CEO: David Hayden

    Employees: 1,041

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 304

    _______________________________________________

    CV Therapeutics Inc.

    Biopharmaceuticals

    3172 Porter Drive

    Palo Alto, CA 94304

    (650) 812-0585

    Ticker: CVTX

    www.cvt.com

    CEO: Louis Lange

    Employees: 134

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 162

    _______________________________________________

    CyberSource Corp.

    Internet services

    1295 Charleston Road

    Mountain View, CA 94043

    (650) 965-6000

    Ticker: CYBS

    www.cybersource.com

    CEO: William McKiernan

    Employees: 448

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 383

    _______________________________________________


    Cygnus Inc.

    Medical diagnostic devices

    400 Penobscot Drive

    Redwood City, CA 94063

    (650) 369-4300

    Ticker: CYGN

    www.cygn.com

    CEO: John Hodgman

    Employees: 112

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 266

    _______________________________________________

    Cylink Corp.

    Communications security

    3131 Jay St.

    Santa Clara, CA 95054

    (408) 855-6000

    Ticker: CYLK

    www.cylink.com

    CEO: William Crowell

    Employees: 401

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 395

    _______________________________________________

    Cypress Semiconductor

    Integrated circuits

    3901 N. First St.

    San Jose, CA 95134

    (408) 943-2600

    Ticker: CY

    www.cypress.com

    CEO: T.J. Rodgers

    Employees: 4,435

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 73

    _______________________________________________


    Del Monte Foods Co.

    Food processor, distributor

    One Market St.

    San Francisco, CA 94105

    (415) 247-3000

    Ticker: DLM

    www.delmonte.com

    CEO: Richard Wolford

    Employees: 2,600

    Chronicle 500 Rank: 178

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2001


                             1805 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                               May 7, 2001 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 724 words

HEADLINE: Bush's Critical Choice on Cloning

BYLINE: William Kristol

BODY:

    President Bush quoted only one thinker in his first speech to a joint
session of Congress in February: Yogi Berra. The president commended to his
congressional audience Yogi's famous dictum, "When you come to a fork in the
road, take it."

    The president was preaching to the choir. American politicians don't like
having to make difficult choices. Who can blame them? They have to balance
diverse interests and juggle competing demands while doing justice to differing
views among the citizens they represent. To govern is to choose, we're sometimes
told. But, often, to govern in a big, pluralistic democracy such as ours is not
to choose or not to choose too starkly; certainly not to choose irrevocably.
After all, lots of choices are false choices; lots of bold decisions turn out
badly. Avoiding forks in the road often isn't a bad idea.

    George W. Bush knows this. After all, he's neither a conservative nor a
moderate -- he's a compassionate conservative. He wants to cut taxes -- but also
to increase government spending. He wants to cut regulations -- but also to
reassure environmentalists. He wants to strengthen our commitment to Taiwan --
but also to work with Beijing. All of this is reasonable enough. And it's
characteristic of politics in a Madisonian republic.

    But a Madisonian republic has its Lincolnian moments. Occasionally, there
really is a fork in the road. Occasionally, to govern is to choose -- and not to
choose is not to govern. Two generations ago, under Lyndon Johnson's leadership,
we chose to overcome segregation and discrimination. One generation ago, under
Ronald Reagan, we chose to try to overcome communism abroad.

    Today we face a decision at least as momentous: whether we stumble
heedlessly into a brave new world of eugenic enhancement and technological
manufacture of human beings, or whether we will avert such a future. President
Bush will lead us -- or will fail to lead us -- in that choice.

    We are at an extraordinary moment of scientific progress, and scientific
peril. The genetic revolution offers great hope for the medical treatment of
disease, through gene therapy and other forms of healing. But if this revolution
is not subject to human guidance and limitation, it will produce consequences
that will be detrimental -- no, devastating -- to human liberty and human
dignity.

    These consequences have been laid out in detail, and the arguments against
them made with great distinction, by thinkers ranging from Hans Jonas and Paul
Ramsey a few decades ago to Leon Kass and Gilbert Meilaender today. But for
current, practical purposes, our political leaders do not have to have studied
all these arguments. All they have to do now is to realize that, if they do not
call a halt to certain experiments, if they do not limit the "progress" of
science in certain ways, it will be virtually impossible to do so later.

    But isn't it hopeless? Isn't scientific "progress" unstoppable?

    No. No more than communist domination of half the world was unstoppable, or
that the further use of nuclear weapons after 1945 was unstoppable. No more than
racial bigotry was unchangeable.

    And in any case, to bow to this sort of inevitability is to give up on the
core of the American experiment: "that honorable determination," as Madison put
it in Federalist No. 39, "to rest all our political experiments on the capacity
of mankind for self-government." Science and technology may pose an even greater
challenge to this determination than did slavery or communism. But to succumb is
to forgo our claim to govern ourselves by reflection and choice.

    What, now, is to be done? The cloning of human beings is on the horizon. Ban
it. Sen. Sam Brownback and Rep. Dave Weldon have introduced carefully drafted
legislation to prohibit all human cloning. The legislation deserves the support
of serious political leaders in both parties. But presidential leadership is
crucial.

    President Bush has spoken eloquently about his hope of ushering in a new
"responsibility era." What greater responsibility do we have than halting a
brave new world in which, to quote Leon Kass, "The programmed reproduction of
man will, in fact, dehumanize him."?

   The writer is editor and publisher of The Weekly Standard. This article is
adapted from his testimony before a Senate committee as chairman of the
Bioethics Project.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2001


                             1806 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                May 06, 2001, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: SUNDAY NEWS; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 279 words

HEADLINE: First babies born with dad and two moms

COLUMN: LEXIS-NEXIS Related Topics Full Article  Related Topics Overview

This document contains no targeted Topics.

BYLINE: BY ROGER HIGHFIELD

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   The first babies carrying DNA from two mothers have been born, to concern
from ethical watchdogs.

   Some 30 children worldwide have been born using the technique, reports a team
led by Dr. Jacques Cohen, from the Institute for Reproductive Medicine and
Science of St. Barnabas in New Jersey, a respected figure in reproductive
medicine.

   The babies were the result of a controversial method to boost the success
rate of IVF infertility treatment in older women by introducing mitochondria --
the "power packs" of cells -- from a younger woman into their eggs.

   But because mitochondria carry their own genetic blueprint, the resulting
babies have a mixture of DNA from the two women and the father: they have three
parents.

   Since the mixture of genes will be passed down the maternal line to future
generations, it marks the first example of what is called germline gene therapy,
technically breaking a genetic taboo.

   The germline gene therapy debate has focused on what the majority of people
understand as genetic modification, the alteration of DNA in the nucleus of
cells -- the DNA that makes us what we are, shaping appearance, intellect and so
on.

   But this new technique, called ooplasmic transplantation, aims to correct
problems within mitochondria and introduce other cellular factors without
changing the genetic blueprint in the nucleus of an egg.

   Although it has a more subtle effect on cellular metabolism, it still alters
the DNA of future generations.

   Genetic fingerprint tests on two year-old children confirm that they contain
a small quantity of additional genes not inherited from either parent but from
the egg donor.

   Daily Telegraph

LOAD-DATE: May 09, 2001


                             1807 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                               May 6, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 70

LENGTH: 2525 words

HEADLINE: 2. CASE STUDY: LEUKEMIA; LOCATION: HARBIN, CHINA;
Chairman Mao's Cure for Cancer

BYLINE:  By Elisabeth Rosenthal; Elisabeth Rosenthal is a correspondent in the
Beijing bureau of The New York Times.

BODY:

   At the height of China's tumultuous Cultural Revolution, when Mao closed
universities and banished intellectuals to the countryside for a "real"
education, Dr. Zhang Tingdong found himself dispatched from the city of Harbin
to a remote agricultural commune in the far reaches of frigid Heilongjiang
Province in the northeast of China. His mission was to seek out an uneducated
doctor said to possess a miraculous curative elixir.

        "Chairman Mao had called on Western-trained doctors to learn from
traditional doctors, to change their focus to Chinese medicine," says Zhang, who
is now -- as he was then -- a blood specialist at Harbin Medical University. "So
I went." Just getting to the clinic required a full-day train ride, followed by
a second day on a cranky rural bus and a third day overland on a horse-drawn
cart. It was only November, but the rivers had been frozen for more than a
month.

    When the team of urban doctors finally arrived at the clinic of the
Democracy Commune on that day in 1972, they were dismayed by what they saw: an
aged medicine man, "with wrinkles covering his face," Zhang recalls, dispensing
potions out of a primitive mud home dug into the earth to keep out the winter's
cold.

   "The room was so dark it was hard to see, and dirty because they were burning
crude oil inside to stay warm," says Zhang, now 68. "And it was poor -- so poor.
He had no equipment at all." What the doctor did have, though, was a powdery
home-brewed concoction he'd learned from his father, made from two types of
ground rock and the venom of a local toad. Some patients drank it; others rubbed
it on their skin. Sometimes the doctor wrapped it in newspapers and shoved it
into infected wounds. To the visitors' surprise, it soon become clear that some
of the patients -- even some with cancer -- got better, and some even seemed
cured.

   Today, Zhang cannot remember the name of old medic, who died a few years
later. China's agricultural communes have long since been disbanded, and the
Democracy Commune exists no more. But a formulation of the old man's powder --
purified by Zhang -- survives. And now, 30 years later, it holds tremendous
promise as a cancer drug. Last September a version of the concoction, dubbed 731
by Zhang (the name stands for the year and month he first used the compound),
was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration as a cancer treatment for
a particularly brutal form of leukemia. These days, a version of Zhang's
formulation flows through intravenous tubes not only in Harbin, the far northern
Chinese city best known for its ice festival and Russian Orthodox churches, but
also at Memorial Sloan-Kettering in New York, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in
Boston and half a dozen other powerful American cancer centers. It is routinely
used to treat certain leukemia patients and is also the subject of patient
trials against more than a dozen other cancers as well.

   But the route to acceptance has not been easy. With its humble origins, Drug
731 is an anomaly in an age of gene therapies and designer drugs that hail
mostly from big-name labs and pharmaceutical companies. Even more than that,
Drug 731 has a unique image problem to overcome: its active ingredient is
arsenic.

   "They just don't believe it -- they don't trust us," said Dr. Hu Xiaochen,
the head of the Integrated Department of Chinese and Western Medicine in Harbin,
tossing down the telephone in exasperation. On the line was a cancer specialist
from Beijing, calling to request some arsenic for a dying leukemia patient who
had tried everything else first. "This is our first choice for this disease --
we've been using it for more than 10 years," he said, pulling open a cabinet
containing tidy green and white boxes labeled (in Chinese) "Arsenic Trioxide"
and (in English) POISON! "We've treated more than 1,000 patients. It is cheap
and has few side effects. And it works."

   The specific disease that arsenic trioxide handles so superbly is a
relatively rare but formerly devastating form of leukemia called acute
promyelocytic leukemia, or A.P. L., in which the bone marrow churns out a
certain type of immature and aberrant white blood cell. The most severe result
is a bleeding disorder called disseminated intravascular coagulopathy. Patients
can die within minutes from massive bleeds inside the skull.

   I have a particular interest in this disease. When I was a resident at
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in the late 1980's, my colleagues and I
unanimously voted A.P. L. the disease we'd least like to get -- in a hospital
where there were plenty of candidates for such an award. As young doctors, we
would quake to get a patient with the diagnosis, bracing ourselves for what was
often a complicated and painful death.

   The outlook for A.P. L. patients improved with the use of a new chemotherapy
drug, all transretinoic acid, in the 1990's. And now the use of arsenic has
further improved the prognosis for these patients. But they are still among the
sickest people to enter hospital doors.

   Zhai Wentong is a patient on the 14th floor of the First Hospital of the
Harbin Medical University, a spartan place (with that universal hospital smell)
that has become a mecca for A.P. L. patients from all over northern China.

   When Zhai's relatives took him to Harbin from a hospital near his home in
Hebei Province, he was semiconscious, running a high fever and blind because his
eyes had filled with blood, making them appear bright red.

   He had been sick for six weeks. "Since Chinese New Year's, I had been feeling
worse and worse -- so weak and sweaty," he says, lying in his hospital pajamas,
raising his head with some effort. "I don't even remember when they brought me
here." His sister adds, "At one point he asked for a mirror, but we didn't dare
give him one, he looked so frightening." But after three weeks of arsenic he is
smiling, though his eyes still have a yellow tinge from blood that hasn't fully
reabsorbed. He says he feels "much, much better," and his blood counts are
improving, though tests show that signs of leukemia are still there.

   As with many traditional Chinese medicines, treatment with arsenic takes
longer and recovery is slower than with Western medicine. In Harbin, patients
get intravenous arsenic once a day for 30 days, and then, if they still shows
signs of leukemia one week later, they start a second course.

   Arsenic is remarkably easy on the patient compared with conventional
chemotherapy, which often brings with it side effects like nausea, anemia and
hair loss. Arsenic takes about an hour each day to administer by IV, and the
patients here say they generally feel fine, although some say they experienced a
feeling of abdominal fullness.

   The scientific route that brought arsenic trioxide to the bedside is a very
old-fashioned one. Doctors started with the observation that something worked --
and moved steadily backward for more than 25 years in an effort, still
unfinished, to understand why and how. Contrast this with the 21st-century
approach to drug development: first understand the molecular or biochemical
defect that produces a disease or debilitating condition and then create a drug
that corrects it.

   In many ways the starting point of the process of discovery for arsenic as a
cancer cure was the decidedly unscientific tenet of traditional Chinese
medicine: "Give poison to cure poison." Zhang returned to Harbin carrying
samples of the rocks and toad venom the old medic had used to make the potion --
as well as the recipe. He retreated to his lab to analyze what on earth he had.

   "They had made this medicine for decades, but they had no idea what the
ingredients were," he says. Most traditional medicines are a mix of a small
number of active compounds and a huge number of other molecules that essentially
tag along in the plants, rocks and animal parts used to make them. Teasing apart
these complex chemical soups can sometimes take years, scientists say. And that
has created a high barrier to winning approval for traditional medicines in the
U.S., since the Food and Drug Administration insists on knowing each medicine's
active components.

   In his lab, Zhang discovered that one rock was principally mercury. The toad
venom proved too biologically complex to analyze. And the powder from the second
type of rock contained high levels of arsenic trioxide.

   Unfettered by current notions of informed consent, Zhang did a few animal
studies with the potion and then started giving it by injection to his patients
with leukemia, for whom there was no other treatment at the time.

   "If I had told them what it was, they never would have agreed," he recalls
with a chuckle. "But by that time, I'd seen it used in the villages and on
animals and was confident it was safe."

   Working with the mystery potion proved more complicated than he had expected,
in part because he was giving it as an injection, a route that had not
previously been tried. While some patients did begin to recover, others
developed sudden blood-pressure surges after the shots, giving them terrible
headaches. Still others developed kidney failure.

   By a process of trial and error, in which he administered the potion's
components separately and together, Zhang discovered that the toad venom was
responsible for the blood-pressure problems and that the mercury-based rock was
damaging patients' kidneys. In fact, it was the arsenic alone that proved
capable of killing cancer cells in a test tube and of treating patients with
disease.

   Even then doctors had no idea of the proper dose -- clearly, too large a dose
would be toxic -- or how long to continue the treatment. It was the first time
the Chinese doctors had injected arsenic directly into patients' veins; the
standard dose was one-fifth the dose considered most effective now.

   For some time, the patients who died outnumbered those who left the hospital
-- in large part because researchers were using such a small dose. Dong Xiuzhi
was a 22-year-old factory worker when she became one of the first leukemia
patients to receive arsenic, in 1974. "The first few months, I was mostly
unconscious," she recalls. "I couldn't eat, really, couldn't even turn over in
bed." Dong is now 49 and an aide at the hospital.

   "I was in the hospital for nine months," she says. "There were three other
beds in the room and the others kept dying. It was very scary. I didn't know how
long I would live." Dong received arsenic therapy for five months before she
realized she was getting "poison." She continued on the treatment for the better
part of two years, until 1976.

   Zhang recalls a sense of euphoria at the time. "Within six months I knew it
was working, and I published a paper on it within a year -- it just seemed that
important," says Zhang, still youthful and enthusiastic in his retirement,
wearing an N.B.A. windbreaker over his shirt and tie.

   But it took another 20 years for the rest of the medical world to concur.
China was then still a poor, isolated country, more concerned with ideology than
with medical cures. The collaborations with more sophisticated medical
specialists -- not only in the United States but also in China itself -- that
ultimately proved the curative power of arsenic took time.

   It was not until the 1990's, for example, that doctors in Harbin hooked up
with researchers at a prominent institute in cosmopolitan Shanghai, where cancer
specialists were working with all transretinoic acid, which had already shown
great promise against A.P. L.

   Retinoic acid was able initially to knock out detectable leukemia in a large
majority of patients, vastly improving the prognosis of the disease. But despite
all previously available treatment, the leukemia came back in 30 to 40 percent
of the patients -- and once it did, the disease was even more resistant to
treatment.

   The Shanghai specialists, scientists with research financing and
international reputations, tried arsenic trioxide from Harbin with these
patients, and they were awed. They began more technical studies on the drug than
were possible in Harbin. And they spread the word abroad.

   In 1997, doctors at Memorial Sloan-Kettering began their first small study
with arsenic trioxide. "It was very, very impressive," says Dr. Steven Soignet
of the hospital's department of developmental chemotherapy. "We had these
patients who had all relapsed, and many were terribly sick in the intensive-care
unit. Their blood pressure was low. They were needing constant transfusions. And
we were there pushing arsenic through their IV's. It was very dramatic."

   The results, too, were dramatic -- so dramatic that American specialists are
now rethinking the way they treat this disease.

   Standard practice for treating A.P. L. at Memorial is to first give retinoic
acid and other chemotherapy and later arsenic if the first drugs fail. That may
be followed with a bone-marrow transplant to stamp out leukemia cells that the
drugs missed. But bone-marrow transplants are painful, high-risk procedures that
cost nearly $100,000.

   In Harbin, where technical expertise is limited and most patients are poor,
transplants were never an option -- so doctors have always used arsenic, and
arsenic alone, to treat A.P. L. They claim that 80 to 90 percent are cured.
Though health insurance makes bone-marrow transplants affordable for most people
in America, they are physically and emotionally traumatic. What if they were
unnecessary to treat the disease?

   It is ethically difficult for doctors to construct a study in which patients
forgo an accepted therapy that works and has been proved, no matter how
traumatic it is. But patients who took part in the first multihospital trial of
arsenic in the United States, in 1998, ended up taking the lead: of the 40
patients in the trial, 34 were disease-free after one round of arsenic
treatment. Half of them did not have the follow-up transplant, some because they
refused treatment and others because they did not qualify for the procedure.

   "This has opened up a whole new paradigm," says Soignet. "And we were seeing
such amazing responses that we've decided to look at it for other cancers." In
China and in cancer-treatment centers all across the United States, arsenic
trioxide is now showing promise in patient trials against a wide variety of
tumors, including liver cancer, cervical cancer, multiple myeloma and cancer of
the prostate.

   At Harbin, intravenous arsenic therapy also "seems very effective against
liver cancer," says Dr. Liu Lianxin, who has been following 70 patients on
arsenic for the past year. Liu has seen their tumors shrink and their pain
vanish -- although he adds that the treatment is so new for liver cancer that
"you can't talk about cures" or even know what the impact will be on survival.

   Still, in the inherently cautious world of cancer specialists, there is
unusual optimism about the powder that Dr. Zhang Tingdong rescued nearly 30
years ago from a mud hut on the Democracy Commune. In the United States, a form
of it now goes by the brand name Trisenox.

   "They've had some unbelievable discoveries in China," says Soignet, adding,
"If you get A.P. L. now, you'll probably be cured of the disease."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dr. Liu Lianxin ministers to a cancer patient in Harbin, China.
(Mark Leong); Anthony Sena receives arsenic trioxide for bladder cancer at
Memorial Sloan-Kettering. (Arlene Gottfried for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2001


                             1808 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                       May 5, 2001 Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro News; Pg. 1H

LENGTH: 1123 words

HEADLINE: Georgia's war on cancer;
Campuses rush to make Atlanta research center a reality by autumn

BYLINE: David Pendered

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:

   Construction of Georgia's first major cancer center as proposed by Gov. Roy
Barnes could begin in Atlanta as early as September, according to state
officials.

   The state-funded renovation of nearly two floors at Grady Memorial Hospital
will be the first tangible evidence of progress on the governor's year-old
cancer-fighting initiative.

   "We are moving with lightning speed on this project," said Bill Chatham, a
vice chancellor with the University System of Georgia Board of Regents who is
overseeing the work approved this year by state lawmakers.

   Scholars across the state already have followed Barnes' lead by starting to
talk about ways to collaborate on cancer research and to provide every Georgian
with access to cancer screening and cutting-edge treatment.

   "When I say this is breath-taking, I really mean breath-taking," said
Jonathan Simons, head of Emory University's Winship Cancer Institute and the
first researcher to successfully use human gene therapy to fight prostate
cancer.

   "When I visited the University of Georgia, we had an incredible epiphany
about the things we could do together," Simons said. "That would not have
happened if Barnes hadn't said the six research universities should work
together."

   The computer world joined the effort Thursday, when Emory announced a
partnership with IBM and NuTec Sciences Inc. to analyze cancer patients' genes
to tailor treatments to their genetic makeup. NuTec is building one of the
world's largest supercomputers in Atlanta, said Mike Cassidy, head of the
Georgia Research Alliance, which is helping plan the cancer initiative.

   Along with improving patient care, the NuTec system will enable companies
experimenting with various cancer drugs to select patients for clinical trials
who are genetically predisposed to the cancer drug being tested, Emory officials
said. That will speed up the process of determining if a drug is effective and
enable it to get on the market more quickly.

   Once the Georgia Cancer Coalition is in place, citizens across the state will
be able to participate in these types of clinical trials managed by their own
doctors and local hospitals, Simons said. "The first 500 people to be cured with
a new drug always are in clinical trials," he said.

   In Georgia, cancer is blamed for nearly one in four deaths, according to
public health statistics. Only heart disease is deadlier here. According to the
American Cancer Society, men have a one-in-two lifetime risk of developing
cancer, and for women, the lifetime risk is one in three.

   Barnes launched the Georgia Cancer Coalition in November to coordinate the
creation of a statewide network of cancer care. He envisions a consortium of
researchers and health care providers working together to develop drugs while
improving the screening for, and treatment of, the disease.

   The state will establish three centers of excellence, the first at Grady, to
care for difficult cancer cases. The centers will top a planned pyramid of care
supported by hometown doctors and health providers who will offer cancer
screening, treatment and education, Cassidy said.

   Georgia's approach generally tracks the recent recommendations of a national
forum called the National Dialogue on Cancer, which is co-chaired by former
President George Bush and his wife, Barbara. Barnes was invited to join the
group, which has about 130 members, after announcing the Georgia program. Barnes
and key coalition leaders attended a meeting of the group Friday in Washington.

   "I'm more excited about this cancer initiative than anything we've done,"
Barnes said.

   "This is a leveraging of public and private efforts," Barnes said. "The
public money from the tobacco fund has been allocated, and we started talking
last year with private foundations, philanthropic groups and some of the private
businesses and are in the process of coordinating the effort of who will pay for
what."

   Barnes has said the cancer initiative could ultimately entail spending up to
$400 million of the state's settlement with the tobacco industry. He expects the
private sector to provide an additional $600 million during the next decade.

   John C. Baity, chairman of the National Board of Directors of the American
Cancer Society, said he hopes other states will follow Georgia's example.

   "Georgia is to be commended for its trailblazing leadership in this area,"
Baity said. "We have a real opportunity here to make significant advances in the
war against cancer. The state's approach is a comprehensive one, focusing on
research and prevention --- including broadening access to screening and further
public education so we can decrease cancer incidence and mortality in the state
of Georgia."

   Barnes said a strategic plan for the coalition is to be completed this
summer. By that time, a director should be in place to manage the coalition. The
salary is set at $125,000, but could be supplemented by private contributions,
said Renay Blumenthal, Barnes' policy director who is overseeing the executive
search.

   Blumenthal said the goal is to hire a coalition director who is a top-notch
executive and fund-raiser, but not a necessarily a cancer specialist.

   The Legislature this year approved nearly $44 million Barnes requested for
the Board of Regents for initial funding for the cancer initiative.

   Of the state funds already appropriated, $28.4 million will fund the
renovation of unused space at Grady to create a cancer center. The
60,000-square-foot facility will house the tissue and blood banks that will form
the base of the state's cancer research program, Barnes said.

   The University System of Georgia will oversee the renovation. Chatham said
architectural and engineering studies are under way to determine the scope of
renovation work at Grady, and a request for proposals from general contractors
should be on the street within two months.

   Chancellor Stephen Portch said the coalition should result in a powerful
group of cancer researchers relocating to Georgia and help attract a significant
amount of federal funding. Simons, the Emory researcher, agreed to move here
from Johns Hopkins University last year after Barnes told him that he personally
was backing a statewide cancer program.

   "This is not going to be an inexpensive program, and leveraging resources is
going to be important," Portch said. "When the faculty hires start to come, if
they are the caliber we want, they are not going to be the average faculty cost.
But in preventing, treating, screening and curing cancer, you cannot spend
enough --- if you achieve these things."

ON THE WEB: Visit the Georgia Cancer Coalition on the Internet:
www.ganet.org/governor/fact_sheet.html

GRAPHIC: Photo:
Jonathan W. Simons, a prostate cancer researcher and director of the Winship
Cancer Institute at Emory University, analyzes genes from a cancerous prostate.
He is enthusiastic about Gov. Roy Barnes' plans. / CHARLOTTE B. TEAGLE / Staff

LOAD-DATE: May 05, 2001


                             1809 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     May 05, 2001, Saturday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 259 words

HEADLINE: BBC says baby genes are altered;
Successful births reported in U.S.

SOURCE: Reuters News Service

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   LONDON - The world's first genetically modified babies have been born in the
United States after women unable to conceive naturally underwent a revolutionary
new fertility treatment, the BBC reported on Friday.

   Up to 30 babies have been born with genes not inherited from either parent
following treatment described as the first time scientists have altered the
genes that humans pass on to their offspring.

   Tests have shown that a special fertility treatment carried out at the U.S.
Institute for Reproductive Medicine and Science of St. Barnabas, N. J., created
a modified set of genes in the children.

   Using the treatment, women who failed to conceive had their eggs modified
with material from donor eggs.

   Genes from the mitochondria, which surround the nucleus, were then
transplanted, resulting in some cases in a successful birth.

   The scientists have confirmed that the children's cells contain mitochondria,
and hence genes, from two women as well as their fathers, the BBC said.

   A spokesman at the institute said researchers were not immediately available
for comment.

   The babies are said to be healthy, but the technique has already been
criticized as unethical in Britain, where it would be illegal.

   It is also likely to raise fresh concerns in the "designer baby" debate
raging over the possible future production of genetically-modified children.

   "Now is not the time to bring in human germline gene therapy through the back
door," Professor Joe Cummins of the University of Western Ontario in Canada told
BBC's website.


TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2001


                             1810 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                       MAY 5, 2001 Saturday 4STAR EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 02

LENGTH: 258 words

HEADLINE: Babies born with modified genes;
BBC: 30 U.S. births from new treatment<

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   The world's first genetically modified babies have been born in the United
States after women unable to conceive naturally underwent a revolutionary
fertility treatment, the BBC reported yesterday.

   Up to 30 babies have been born with genes not inherited from either parent
following treatment in which scientists altered the genes that humans pass on to
their offspring.

   Tests have shown that a special fertility treatment carried out at the U.S.
Institute for Reproductive Medicine and Science, at St. Barnabas Medical Center,
West Orange, N.J., created a modified set of genes in the children.

   Using the treatment, women who failed to conceive had their eggs modified
with material from donor eggs. Genes from the mitochondria, which surround the
nucleus, were transplanted, resulting in some cases in a successful birth.

   The scientists have confirmed that the children's cells contained
mitochondria, and hence genes, from two women, as well as from their fathers,
the BBC said.

   A spokesman at the institute said researchers were not immediately available
for comment.

   The babies are said to be healthy, but the technique has already been
criticized as unethical in Britain, where it would be illegal.

   It is also likely to raise fresh concerns in the "designer baby" debate
raging over the possible future production of genetically-modified children.

   "Now is not the time to bring in human germline gene therapy through the back
door," Professor Joe Cummins of the University of Western Ontario in Canada told
BBC's Web site.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1811 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      MAY 5, 2001 Saturday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 129 words

HEADLINE: Clearing the Record

BODY:

   In an article last Saturday about a gene-therapy experiment on blind dogs at
the University of Pennsylvania, a researcher mistakenly said that one of the
three animals had been killed to determine whether the gene was working. The
lead researcher said this week that the needed tissue had been obtained without
sacrificing the dog.

   *

   The Economy column in yesterday's Inquirer incorrectly stated the size of the
Social Security Trust Fund. It has $1 trillion in assets, and that is expected
to grow to about $3 trillion in 2010.

   *

   The Weekend section yesterday incorrectly reported the date for the Dizyners
Gallery reception for the show of Paula Desjardins paintings. The reception is
from 7 to 9 tonight at the gallery, 65 N. Second St., Old City.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1812 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                               May 4, 2001 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                             Orange County Edition

SECTION: METRO; Part 2; Metro Desk; DANA PARSONS ; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 787 words

HEADLINE: When Wishful Thinking Is Not Enough;
;

BYLINE: DANA PARSONS

BODY:

   I don't know if the thought is occurring to Sandy Lane, but it is to me. I'm
just too embarrassed to ask.

   Here she is at 35, married and the mother of two, sitting at the dining room
table in her upscale home in Orange, talking about a disease named after a 19th
century German doctor that someday may claim her 7-year-old daughter.

   Part of her must be thinking she can't believe she's doing this. She can't be
talking about her daughter. This isn't the way life is supposed to go.

   But, there's wishful thinking, and there's reality. The reality for Sandy and
Steve Lane is that Chelsea has a rare disease of the nervous system that is
robbing her of some childhood pleasures and threatening to shorten her life.

   To many parents, a diagnosis like that devastates them. They cope, but life
becomes an ongoing trial that strips them of their energy.

   That's the way Sandy Lane was feeling for more than a year after Chelsea,
then 4 1/2, began tripping and falling. Normal childhood stuff, perhaps, but not
20 times a day. She told her parents her legs were tired, that she needed help
walking. Lane remembers thinking, "How can a 4-year-old's legs hurt?"

   After a series of tests, the Lanes got their answer: Chelsea had Friedreich's
Ataxia (FA), an inherited progressive disease that debilitates motor skills and
often leads to serious health problems. Already, Chelsea has an enlarged heart.

   While learning about FA, Lane says, she was surprised how relatively few
fund-raising efforts spearheaded by parents were in play.

   So she and her husband kicked into gear. Last May, they organized a "Walk for
Hope and a Cure" that drew 600 people and netted $116,000 for FA research. "I
had no idea what I was doing," she says.

   On May 20, they'll hold the second walk, starting with registration at 8 a.m.
at St. Norbert Church in Orange.

   Forced to Speak Up

   Because such things need publicity, Lane is forcing herself to talk about her
daughter's plight. She shows me a video of news coverage last year on which a
reporter asks Chelsea, then 6, how she feels.

   "I feel great, but I'm wobbly," she says.

   In that moment of innocence and honesty, I see what Lane meant when she said
her daughter has something special in her. "I don't know if the disease has made
her stronger, given her this inner strength or if she was born with it," she
says. "People would tell me there was something special about her, even before
she was diagnosed."

   A Muscular Dystrophy Assn. Web site says 5,000 Americans have FA, striking
roughly two out of every 100,000 people. The National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke reports that most people with the disease die in their
early 20s if they have severe heart disease. Others can live much longer,
although they will become totally incapacitated.

   The Lanes know that, but Chelsea doesn't. She knows only that she can't run
and jump like the other kids and that they help her get around at St. Norbert
School in Orange, where she's a second-grader. She knows that a classmate told
her she prays for her every night, although Chelsea told her mother she doesn't
know why.

   The good news, Lane says, is that National Institute researchers have said
that gene-therapy advances might click with FA. The money raised at the walk
last year, she says, eventually went to a Texas A&M researcher.

   In the meantime, Lane spreads the word about a disease she'd never heard of
four years ago but which now consumes her family's life. "She's starting to fall
with her walker," she says of Chelsea. "So I see we're so close to a wheelchair
that it breaks my heart."

   Eventually, I get around to asking if, despite its ever-present reality, she
can believe what's happened.

   "This isn't the yellow brick road I thought it was going to be when I got
married," she says. "I was Dorothy, we were going to walk down the yellow brick
road and have this happy family. You want your kids to be healthy, happy, have
good futures and get married. This is not what you picture when you have kids."

   She isn't bitter or plaintive. It's simply the life--the one she, her
husband, Chelsea and their 11-year-old daughter Brianna (who has no signs of FA)
are living.

   Her illness has revitalized the Lane family's belief in the kindness of
strangers. Still, Sandy Lane says, "I don't say 'Why me,' but 'Why Chelsea?' I
still don't understand. I jokingly say that when I die, I want answers. I'm not
angry, but I just want to know why kids get sick and have to suffer."

   *

   Dana Parsons' column appears Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays. Readers may
reach Parsons by calling (714) 966-7821; by writing to him at The Times' Orange
County edition, 1375 Sunflower Ave., Costa Mesa, CA 92626; or by e-mail at
dana.parsons@latimes.com.

CORRECTION-DATE: May 6, 2001

CORRECTION:

   Wrong Date--A Dana Parsons column that ran in Friday's newspaper contained
the incorrect date for an upcoming charity walk for Chelsea Lane, a young girl
with a crippling neurological disease. The walk is Saturday, May 19, and will
begin and end at St. Norbert Church in Orange. Registration starts at 7 a.m.,
with the walk beginning at 9.

   Wrong Date--A Dana Parsons column that ran in Friday's newspaper contained
the incorrect date for an upcoming charity walk for Chelsea Lane, a young girl
with a crippling neurological disease. The walk is Saturday, May 19, and will
begin and end at St. Norbert Church in Orange. Registration starts at 7 a.m.,
with the walk beginning at 9.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2001


                             1813 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                               May 4, 2001 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 361 words

HEADLINE: Guilford Pharmaceuticals, GenVec Post Losses

BYLINE: Terence Chea, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    First-quarter losses persisted at two Maryland biotechnology companies:
Guilford Pharmaceuticals Inc. narrowed its loss on steady revenue, while
declining revenue helped widen GenVec Inc.'s loss.

    Guilford, a Baltimore company that develops treatments for cancer and brain
disease, said it lost $ 14.6 million (55 cents per share) in the three months
ended March 31, compared with a loss of $ 15.1 million (65 cents) in the
year-earlier period. That beat by one penny the consensus analyst estimate of a
56-cents-per-share loss, according to the research firm First Call/Thomson
Financial.

    The company had revenue of $ 4.7 million for the quarter, matching last
year's first-quarter revenue. Sales of its Gliadel wafer, a dime-size,
biodegradeable disk that delivers chemotherapy directly on the site of brain
tumors, generated all of the quarter's revenue. Guilford reacquired rights to
the wafer from Aventis on Jan. 1 of this year.

    Guilford said it had $ 135 million in cash or cash equivalents at the end of
the quarter, compared with $ 109.5 million at the end of last year. The company
raised $ 42.6 million in a supplementary stock offering in January.

    GenVec, a Gaithersburg company that develops gene-therapy treatments, said
it lost $ 3.3 million (18 cents) in the three months ended March 31, compared
with a loss of $ 2.3 million ($ 1.45) in the same period last year. The
per-share loss declined after the company made an initial public offering of
stock in December. Analysts had estimated GenVec would lose 13 cents per share,
according to First Call/Thomson Financial.

    The company's revenue declined by 39 percent to $ 2.0 million, compared with
$ 3.3 million in the same period a year ago. The company attributed the decrease
to reduction in research support under its collaboration agreement with New York
pharmaceutical company Pfizer Inc.

    During the quarter, the company started early human tests of a gene-therapy
treatment for cancer and made research progress on its gene-therapy treatment
for blindness. The company ended the quarter with $ 42.1 million in cash and
cash equivalents.

   More stories on BIOTECH/MEDICAL online at Washtech.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2001


                             1814 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 3, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-6:2,7; B-2:1

LENGTH: 563 words

HEADLINE: Cadaver brain cells cultivated by Salk's scientists

BYLINE: Jeff Ristine; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Salk Institute researchers have discovered a way to recover cells that can grow
and divide from the brains of cadavers, a technique that opens a line of
investigation into genetic neurological diseases.

   Previously, scientists have been able only to examine the cells after they
had died, in brain tissue sections.

   The newfound ability to cultivate normally inaccessible cells raises hope for
learning how they are activated to perform various functions in the brain, said
neuroscientist Fred H. Gage, a professor in the institute's genetics laboratory.

   "We can now harvest those cells as living cells in a dish and begin to
understand what controls how they divide (and) what they become in a way that we
couldn't do before," Gage said.

   To keep the recovered cells alive, Gage and colleagues added a combination of
chemicals found in the brain to the culture dishes used to bathe the cells, a
type known as progenitor cells.  With the chemicals, functioning progenitor
cells were recovered up to 20 hours after death in individuals ranging from 11
weeks to 72 years old.

   A report on the work, done in partnership with researchers from Stanford
University and Children's Hospital of Orange County, appears today in the
journal Nature.

   Nature publicists said the work someday could make it possible to transplant
neural progenitor cells from the dead to the living, an alternative to the use
of fetal tissue.

   But Gage said such an accomplishment requires "a lot of ifs," and that
transplantation "hasn't been the major theme of what we're doing."

   He noted research has not even determined whether the pool of progenitor
cells recovered from cadavers contains the more primitive cells known as stem
cells that would be used in such transplant work.

   For now, Gage said, it's more practical to view the work as "a tool to look
at the cellular and molecular events underlying certain kinds of genetic
diseases," applying that knowledge to treatment of a neurological disorder, such
as epilepsy.

   Ultimately, he said, such work "may allow us to activate these cells . . .
that exist already in the human brain" and conceivably "induce them to become a
(type of) cell that they normally wouldn't."

   The next step in the research is to transplant recovered cells into living
animals to see if they thrive.

   Use of progenitor cells from cadavers would be important because research and
therapy involving stem cells derived from surplus embryos has aroused political
and ethical opposition.

   A progenitor cell is one step more mature than a stem cell.  Both are capable
of dividing and giving rise to other types of specialized cells, such as
neurons.  But progenitor cells don't divide as fast and are less hearty than
those drawn from early embryos.

   Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski, a neurologist at the UC San Diego School of Medicine,
said the Salk Institute's work is "very interesting and compelling," especially
since the researchers were able to repeatedly generate progenitor cells from
adult brains of different age groups.

   "They appropriately sound a cautionary note that progenitor cells derived
from adult brains may or may not have the same potential as fetal-derived stem
cells in therapies," said Tuszynski, who recently made headlines for leading a
new gene-therapy procedure for an Alzheimer's disease patient.  "That's a
question that requires further study."


LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2001


                             1815 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                      MAY 3, 2001, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 798 words

HEADLINE: Alameda firm puts insulin dose in a pill

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Tom Abate

BODY:
A biotech company in Alameda has patented a technique for putting insulin genes
into the form of a pill, which could be swallowed to control blood sugar,
potentially freeing diabetics from the need for daily injections.

    But don't throw away those needles just yet. Officials at Genteric Inc. said
it could take eight years for their "gene pill" to go through the tests required
of all new medicines.

    "This is a marvelous new invention, but much work needs to be done before it
reaches patients," said Martin Cleary, chief executive of the privately held
startup.

    The gene pill patent is based on a discovery, by three scientists at the
University of California at San Francisco, that cells in the intestine can
absorb genes and use these genes to create proteins like insulin.

    That discovery, kept quiet until the patent was issued, caught gene therapy
experts by surprise. For years, they have struggled with how to deliver working
copies of ordinary genes into cells. Malcolm Brenner, a gene therapy expert at
Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, said prevailing medical wisdom has been
that if a person swallowed a bit of DNA or a therapeutic protein, the acids and
enzymes in the stomach and intestines would break the intended medicine down as
if it were food.

    "This is certainly a very unexpected result," Brenner said. "It has been
thought the intestinal cells were resistant to taking up DNA because of the
possibility of contracting a virus or some foreign DNA."

    Professor Michael German, a diabetes expert at UCSF, and one of the
professors who founded Genteric in 1997, explained the experiments that led to
the patent.

    German said it started it 1996, when he and fellow professors Stephen
Rothman and Ira Goldfine were using a $50,000 grant from UCSF to study ways to
deliver insulin without injections. In the course of their work, they injected
DNA fragments into the intestine of a diabetic rat. The fragments were many
copies of the human insulin gene.

    The scientists expected the enzymes in the rat's intestine to break down the
DNA and render the gene useless. Instead, German said, the gene seemed to be
absorbed by the rat's intestinal cells, which started pumping out enough insulin
to bring the creature's blood sugar back to normal levels.

    That finding was so surprising that the UCSF scientists knew they were on to
something. German said the question was how to proceed -- to publish the
findings and apply for federal funds to pursue the experiments, or keep the data
under wraps while they filed a patent through the university and started a
company.

    "In the end we felt the best thing was to form our own company," German
said.

    Former UCSF patent officer Jeff Labovitz not only filed the paperwork,
German said, but hooked them up with Michael Nantz, a chemistry professor at UC
Davis. Nantz knew how to create chemical wrappers to get DNA safely through the
stomach acids and to make the DNA more easily absorbed by intestinal cells --
keys to making the gene pill practical.

    With Nantz on board, and the patent pending, German said the four professors
started searching for venture capital. They got lucky when Fred Middleton, with
Sanderling Ventures in Menlo Park, took an interest in the startup. Middleton
helped raise $9 million in venture funding and recruited an executive team
including Cleary, a former drug industry executive.

    Last week, on the eve of receiving the patent, Genteric raised another $22
million. Now the 24-person startup is working on turning a scientific curiosity
into a product. Cleary said it could take three to five years of animal testing
just to persuade the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to let the company test
the gene pill in human clinical trials.

    Meanwhile, Genteric researchers, led by chief scientist Roland Scollay, are
doing animal tests to determine whether the gene pill could provide clotting
genes for hemophiliacs.

    German said the gene pill does not appear to be a cure. The intestinal cells
that take up the DNA only live a couple of days. Thus, even if the concept works
in human beings, patients would have to take gene pills on a regular basis.

    The patent is held by the University of California, which licensed it
exclusively to Genteric. Any royalties from the invention would be split between
UCSF, which keeps 65 percent, and the scientists, who divide the rest.

    From a scientific standpoint, German said that what amazes him is the
thought that, statistically speaking, bits of DNA from food must occasionally
survive the stomach's acid bath and make it to the intestine, where they might
be absorbed and put to work.

    "The thing that surprises me is that we pick up DNA in our gut," German
said.

   E-mail Tom Abate at tabate@sfchronicle.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2001


                             1816 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              May 3, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-6:2,7; B-2:1

LENGTH: 557 words

HEADLINE: Cadaver brain cells cultivated by Salk's scientists

BYLINE: Jeff Ristine, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Salk Institute researchers have discovered a way to recover cells that can
grow and divide from the brains of cadavers, a technique that opens a line of
investigation into genetic neurological diseases. Previously, scientists have
been able only to examine the cells after they had died, in brain tissue
sections. The newfound ability to cultivate normally inaccessible cells raises
hope for learning how they are activated to perform various functions in the
brain, said neuroscientist Fred H. Gage, a professor in the institute's genetics
laboratory. "We can now harvest those cells as living cells in a dish and begin
to understand what controls how they divide (and) what they become in a way that
we couldn't do before," Gage said. To keep the recovered cells alive, Gage and
colleagues added a combination of chemicals found in the brain to the culture
dishes used to bathe the cells, a type known as progenitor cells.

   With the chemicals, functioning progenitor cells were recovered up to 20
hours after death in individuals ranging from 11 weeks to 72 years old. A report
on the work, done in partnership with researchers from Stanford University and
Children's Hospital of Orange County, appears today in the journal Nature.
Nature publicists said the work someday could make it possible to transplant
neural progenitor cells from the dead to the living, an alternative to the use
of fetal tissue. But Gage said such an accomplishment requires "a lot of ifs,"
and that transplantation "hasn't been the major theme of what we're doing." He
noted research has not even determined whether the pool of progenitor cells
recovered from cadavers contains the more primitive cells known as stem cells
that would be used in such transplant work. For now, Gage said, it's more
practical to view the work as "a tool to look at the cellular and molecular
events underlying certain kinds of genetic diseases," applying that knowledge to
treatment of a neurological disorder, such as epilepsy. Ultimately, he said,
such work "may allow us to activate these cells . . . that exist already in the
human brain" and conceivably "induce them to become a (type of) cell that they
normally wouldn't." The next step in the research is to transplant recovered
cells into living animals to see if they thrive. Use of progenitor cells from
cadavers would be important because research and therapy involving stem cells
derived from surplus embryos has aroused political and ethical opposition. A
progenitor cell is one step more mature than a stem cell.

   Both are capable of dividing and giving rise to other types of specialized
cells, such as neurons.

   But progenitor cells don't divide as fast and are less hearty than those
drawn from early embryos. Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski, a neurologist at the UC San
Diego School of Medicine, said the Salk Institute's work is "very interesting
and compelling," especially since the researchers were able to repeatedly
generate progenitor cells from adult brains of different age groups. "They
appropriately sound a cautionary note that progenitor cells derived from adult
brains may or may not have the same potential as fetal-derived stem cells in
therapies," said Tuszynski, who recently made headlines for leading a new
gene-therapy procedure for an Alzheimer's disease patient. "That's a question
that requires further study."

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1817 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              May 3, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: MIDTOWN PICAYUNE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 660 words

HEADLINE: Algiers 4-year-old can resume gene therapy;
Fund-raiser will be behind Jesuit High

BYLINE: By Susan Langenhennig; West Bank bureau

BODY:

   After two years of anxious waiting, an Algiers girl suffering from a rare
neurological disorder is back on a list of patients to receive an experimental
gene therapy treatment.

   The good news came last month, when the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
notified Douglas and Desiree Loeb Guth of Algiers Point that their 4-year-old
daughter, Lisette, and the other children with Canavan's disease who had been
involved in the gene therapy program at Thomas Jefferson University in
Philadelphia would be allowed to resume treatment.

   Canavan's disease is a genetic disorder that causes a breakdown in the
protective sheaths around the nerve fibers in the brain. The breakdown is caused
by a defect in a gene, resulting in a buildup of protein in the brain. The
disease short-circuits the nervous system, stifling normal childhood
development.

   Children with Canavan's disease cannot walk, talk or support their heads.
Lisette can't roll over or grab and hold objects, and she has limited eyesight
and hearing.

   Researchers at Thomas Jefferson had been experimenting with ways to insert
healthy genes in Canavan's patients. But the treatment had been halted after the
widely publicized death of a teen-ager undergoing another type of gene therapy
at the University of Pennsylvania.

   After the death, the FDA began requiring researchers to do more testing on
nonhuman subjects before experimenting on living patients.

   But over the past year, the families of patients, including the Guths,
lobbied the FDA to ease the restrictions. Some of the families even traveled to
Washington, D.C., with their sick children to testify before Congress.

   "We've been waiting for so long," said Desiree, as she rocked Lisette on her
lap and stroked the girl's sandy brown curls. "I knew it was going to happen,
but I just didn't know if it was going to happen for Lisette."

   Although the treatment is risky, the Guths have seen its benefits. When
Lisette was 11/2, she underwent the first phase of the treatment. Doctors
inserted a reservoir under Lisette's scalp, leaving a small bump below her
hairline. A few months later, healthy genes were injected into the reservoir.

   Not long after the treatment, Lisette's vision and hearing improved, and she
was much more alert, said Desiree, a registered nurse at St. Charles General
Hospital.

   Although the positive effects have gradually worn off, the Guths are
optimistic that the next stage of treatment will produce similar improvements.

   Douglas Guth, a teacher at Belle Chasse High School, said he would love to
see his daughter's sight improve. Lisette can turn her large brown eyes in the
direction of someone speaking to her, but her parents and doctors don't think
she has much ability to see beyond light and shadows.

   "What I hope for is for her to stay healthy and happy and that we get a
better understanding of neurological disorders," Desiree said. "While I don't
think medical research should be pushed ahead faster than it is prudent, I think
there are times when there should be considerations for compassionate use of
experimental treatments for families who have no other options."

   Through Lisette's experiences, researchers will hopefully move closer to a
cure for this debilitating disease, Desiree said.

   But the cutting-edge research, which is financed by grants and the parents in
the program, is costly. Since Lisette has been involved in the program, the
Guths have raised $65,000 for Canavan's research.

   The family plans to hold its second annual "Blue Jeans for New Genes"
fund-raiser May 20 from 5 to 8 p.m. at the Banks Street Bar, behind Jesuit High
School. The event will feature entertainment by the Plowboys, a barbecue dinner
buffet, drinks and a parade of prizes. Tickets are $25, and checks should be
made payable to Canavan's Research. All donations are tax-deductible. Checks can
be mailed to Canavan's Research, 500 Pelican Ave., New Orleans, LA 70114 or call
362-3792.

GRAPHIC: Lisette Guth, 4, of Algiers sits with her parents, Doug and Desiree,
and her brother Leo on the front porch of their home in Algiers.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2001


                             1818 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       May 2, 2001 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 002

LENGTH: 541 words

HEADLINE: 5 praised for work on leukemia drug - Experimental medication
promising

BYLINE: By Michael Lasalandra

BODY:

   A New Hampshire woman whose leukemia is in remission thanks to an
experimental drug yesterday thanked five doctors and researchers who were
instrumental in developing the promising new treatment.

   "I am so very joyful to be here today," said Flower Burdett, 54, of
Kearsarge, N.H., who was on hand at the Four Seasons Hotel to help honor the
five winners of the Warren Alpert Foundation Scientific Prize for 2000.

   "Thank you all for being so smart," said Burdett, a former innkeeper, who was
diagnosed with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) in 1999.

   The experimental drug, STI571, which has few side effects, restored normal
blood counts in 53 of 54 patients with CML in whom standard therapy had failed,
according to a paper published last month.

   Since that Phase I trial, some 6,000 patients have gone on the drug,
including Burdett. The drug is also being tested on brain tumors, prostate
cancer and small cell lung cancers.

   The medication was developed by the five winners of the Alpert Prize.

   David Baltimore, president and professor of biology at the California
Institute of Technology, and Dr. Owen N. Witte, professor at the University of
California at Los Angeles, did the basic science research.

   Dr. Alex Matter of Novartis Pharma AG and Nicholas Lydon, of Amgen Inc., did
preclinical work in drug development.

   And Dr. Brian J. Druker, professor of medicine at Oregon Health Sciences
University, pioneered the clinical investigations.

   STI571 works by turning off an enzyme called a tyrosine kinase that is
abnormally active in CML. When the enzyme is turned on, it can lead to
uncontrolled cell division.

   Treatment with STI571, "is like shutting off a light switch that is on,"
Druker said. "It binds to the protein and shuts it off. The cells end up dying."

   CML afflicts 5,000 Americans each year. Most patients die within five years
of diagnosis.

   Burdett said she went on the standard treatment, interferon, but "it wasn't
working very well and was very toxic."

   She finally got in a clinical trial at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and
is still on the drug. She said she may have to take it for the rest of her life,
but isn't complaining.

   "I'm not ready to die," said the mother of two and grandmother of two.
"There's too much yet I haven't achieved."

   The drug is one of the first to show the promise of gene therapy. CML is
caused by a genetic anomaly triggered by the rearrangement of chromosomes 9 and
22.

   "This is the first of many changes in cancer research coming in the next five
to 10 years," Witte said.

   Said Druker: "We're trying to treat cancer in a more rational, more humane
way. This is just a glimpse of the future."

   The award - which comes with a $ 150,000 prize - is given annually by the
Alpert Foundation, established in 1987 by Chelsea native Warren Alpert to honor
significant discoveries in the prevention, treatment or curing of disease. Each
year's winners are now selected by a panel established at the Harvard Medical
School.

   Photo Caption: GRATEFUL SURVIVOR: Flower Burdett embraces Dr. David Baltimore
during a luncheon in Boston yesterday. Baltimore and four others developed a
drug to which Burdett's leukemia remission is attributed. Staff photo by Ted
Fitzgerald


LOAD-DATE: May 02, 2001


                             1819 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                     MAY 2, 2001, WEDNESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 975 words

HEADLINE: CLINICAL trials and tribulations;

Medical testing profession coming under increasing pressure

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Tom Abate

BODY:
More demoralizing than losing both breasts to cancer was the trauma of watching
her hair fall out from chemotherapy, Deborah Scott told several hundred clinical
trial professionals at a conference in San Francisco yesterday.

    "In the evenings when I was in the yard with the dog, I took to standing
over the compost bin and pulling out great gobs of hair for nature to recycle,"
Scott told the Association of Clinical Research Professionals, whose members are
meeting at the San Francisco Hilton through tomorrow.

    The association represents the more than 14,500 professionals who conduct
clinical trials of experimental drugs, biotech medicines and new medical
devices. Prior to sale, all new medical treatments must undergo three stages of
human trials and then be reviewed for safety and effectiveness by the U.S. Food
& Drug Administration.

    Scott, herself a participant in two clinical trials, promised her audience
that she will encourage other patients to volunteer, and try to recruit more
physicians to perform tests.

    "Many of us owe our lives . . . to your efforts to treat and contain
disease," she said.

    Scott's pep talk comes at a time when government regulators and the media
are intensifying their scrutiny of the clinical trial process in light of
instances where lax procedures, sometimes coupled with conflicts of interests,
have placed volunteer patients at risk.

    An embattled air hung over the conference, as professional testers said a
few examples -- like the death of a gene therapy subject in 1999 -- are being
exaggerated and frightening people away from volunteering for tests.

    "There are outliers in any group who don't play by the rules but we think
they are outside the norm," Susan Coultas, a clinical research consultant from
Texas, said during a presentation on research ethics Monday.

    In an interview yesterday, association official Dennis DeRosia offered a
sketch of the clinical testing business, which revealed some of the reasons why
the profession is under pressure.

    The overarching trend is an explosion in the number of drug, biotech and
medical device companies, all of which need to test their proposed products
before they can be sold.

    "Twenty-five years ago, before biotechnology took off, there were probably
100 classic pharmaceutical companies," DeRosia said. "Now there are thousands.
And whatever they develop eventually comes to the point of testing in a human
subject."

    Partly as a result of the need to test more experimental products, there has
been a shift in where clinical trials are conducted. Two decades ago, DeRosia
said, 80 percent of new drugs were tested at academic medical centers like the
University of California at San Francisco or Stanford University Medical Center.

    As recently as five years ago, such medical centers ran 60 percent of the
trials involving human volunteers. "Today, probably less than 40 percent of the
trials are done at academic centers," DeRosia said.

    Now the majority of clinical experiments are conducted by doctors in private
practice or small medical groups. These doctors -- called investigators in the
testing business -- work under contract to drug companies or their
intermediaries. They are paid to enroll volunteers, administer medicines and
observe and record the results.

    How much the investigators get paid for the trials varies with the
procedure, DeRosia said. Testing a strep-throat drug might only involve a week
of observation, while a cancer trial could require months of follow-up visits.
What makes the work financially appealing is that doctors get paid the full cost
of whatever visits or treatments they provide to volunteers during the trial,
DeRosia said. This could actually be more money than seeing a regular patient
with insurance, because insurance companies typically negotiate discounted
payments, he said.

    DeRosia said most doctors who conduct trials do so primarily because they
want to help work on cures, not for the money. Whether the doctors are motivated
by money or medicine, however, DeRosia said the paperwork involved in trials
discourages them from participating. "The records for one patient can fill a
three-ring binder," DeRosia said, adding that most investigators do one study
and never perform another.

    As the testing industry has expanded, however, and recruited more
investigators from the ranks of private physicians, oversight has become a
problem. Trials at an academic medical center are easier to supervise than
trials at many individual sites.

    Although doctors are ultimately responsible for the conduct of tests, they
make up only a tiny fraction of the research association's membership.
Two-thirds of the organization's members are nurses or other health
professionals who work directly with volunteer patients or visit doctors'
offices to make sure the experiments are being carried out properly.

    Given the organization's nursing backbone, the conference was dominated by
women, for whom Scott's remarks on breast cancer were particularly poignant.
During a break in Scott's presentation, Connie Riddle, a test professional from
Chapel Hill, N.C., approached Scott to share her own experience as a breast
cancer survivor.

    "People have to participate in trials," Riddle said, "so we can have the
progress."

   --------------------------------------------------------------------Should
you participate in clinical research?

    People participate in clinical research for a variety of reasons:

    -- Volunteers for phase II and phase III trials can gain access to promising
drugs long before these compounds are approved for the marketplace.

    -- They typically will get excellent care from the physicians during the
course of the study.

    -- This care may also be free.

    For more information, go to www.centerwatch.com.E-mail Tom Abate at
tabate@sfchronicle.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Deborah Scott talked with researchers about her participation in
a clinical trial when she had breast cancer. / Frederic Larson/The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2001


                             1820 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                       May 1, 2001 Tuesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. 3B CITY/COUNTY DIGEST

LENGTH: 699 words

SOURCE: FROM STAFF REPORTS

BODY:

   In Baltimore City

   Ex-Catholic Charities worker pleads guilty to theft from clients

   A former Catholic Charities social worker pleaded guilty yesterday in
Baltimore Circuit Court to stealing more than $14,000 from eight clients with
mental or physical disabilities, the Maryland attorney general's office said.

   Wanda Marie Wilson, 53, of the 100 block of Tregarone Road in Timonium stole
the money between 1997 and 1999 and pleaded guilty to eight counts of felony
theft, the attorney general's office said. Wilson was a program administrator
for Catholic Charities' Congregate Housing Services, which provides meals,
personal care and case management at several residential centers.

   Sentencing was set for June 5. She could be sentenced to 15 years in prison
and fined $1,000, the attorney general's office said.

   2 researchers win awards for developmental biology

   The March of Dimes awarded its annual prize in developmental biology
yesterday to two researchers whose discoveries have led to a better
understanding of how the brain is "wired" and what goes wrong in birth defects
and adult diseases.

   The awards, presented at the Harbor Court Hotel, went to Dr. Corey S.
Goodman, professor of neuroscience at the University of California, Berkeley,
and Dr. Thomas M. Jessell, professor of biochemistry and molecular biophysics at
Columbia University in New York. They will share equally in a $100,000 award.

   Independently, the scientists discovered ways in which brain cells take on
specialized roles and make connections to other cells in the developing
organism. Dr. Jennifer Howse, March of Dimes president, said the findings could
lead to drugs and gene therapies for neurological disorders.

   Police identify three men killed separately last week

   Police identified yesterday three men who were slain in separate incidents
last week. No arrests had been made and motives remain unknown.

   Antonio Travers, 26, was stabbed by an unknown assailant about 1:30 a.m.
Saturday in the 2000 block of E. North Ave., police said. Travers of the 6900
block of McClean Blvd. died a short time later at Johns Hopkins Hospital.

   Antoine Holley, 23, of the 1700 block of Baker St. was shot twice in the back
about 10 p.m. April 24 in the 4600 block of Reisterstown Road and was pronounced
dead a short time later at Sinai Hospital, police said. About 1 a.m. that day,
William Richards, 21, of the 3000 block of Oakley Ave. in Pimlico was found
fatally shot in a car parked in the 5000 block of Chalgrove Ave., about six
blocks from his home, police said.

   In Baltimore County

   Musicians whose Fla. trip fell through will play May 15

   PERRY HALL -- Perry Hall High School students who were supposed to perform at
a music competition in Florida before their plans were scrapped because of a
ticket mishap will perform May 15 at Joseph Meyerhoff Symphony Hall instead.

   The free concert by the school's orchestra and chorus will begin at 7 p.m.
Members of the two musical groups also will travel to Six Flags America near
Washington where they will perform May 18. Information: 410-887-5108.

   5,000 new and used books for sale at library branch

   RANDALLSTOWN -- The Friends of the Randallstown Library are conducting a book
sale of more than 5,000 new and used books at the library, 8604 Liberty Road,
from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Friday and Saturday.

   The books, almost all of which were donated, include fiction, nonfiction,
adult, children's and Russian language volumes, most priced at $2 or less.
Information: 410-887-0773.

   Villa Maria students to hold Ghana Fun Fest

   TIMONIUM -- Students at Villa Maria School will hold a Ghana Fun Fest on
Thursday as part of a fund-raiser to help pen pals who live in West Africa.

   Villa Maria students will make pen and pencil pouches and fill them with
writing implements. They will experience Ghanaian life by using chew sticks
instead of toothbrushes and playing musical instruments.

   Villa Maria School, 2300 Dulaney Valley Road, is run by Catholic Charities
and serves children with behavioral and emotional problems. The Ghana Fun Fest
will be held from 11 a.m. to 12 p.m. and from 12:30 p.m. to 1:30 p.m.
Information: 410-521-4813.

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2001


                             1821 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      May 1, 2001, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D6

LENGTH: 328 words

HEADLINE: REGIONAL BUSINESS IN BRIEF;
ETC.

BYLINE: (Globe staff and wire services

BODY:

   Atlantic Data Services Inc. of Quincy will eliminate 37 jobs, or 24 percent
of its work force, after reporting a fiscal fourth-quarter loss of $997,000, or
8 cents a share. The cuts will result in a fiscal first-quarter charge of
$925,000 . . . Washington Group International Inc. defaulted on a $1 million
loan payment - part of a $1 billion loan arranged by Credit Suisse First Boston
in July - after cost overruns at a unit acquired from Raytheon Co. left it
strapped for cash, said a person familiar with the matter. The default gives
lenders the right to demand early repayment of the entire loan . . .
Cambridge-based Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. shares rose $2.98 to $18.83, or 19
percent, after an analyst upgraded the stock on European prospects for the
company's Replagal treatment for Fabry disease . . . Boston Communications Group
Inc. of Woburn said it got a contract from Price Communications Wireless Inc. to
provide back-office support for Price prepaid wireless phone service offerings
in four Deep South states with a market of 3.3 million people. Terms were not
disclosed . . . RiverDelta Networks of Tewksbury, a start-up offering systems
for cable television operators to deliver broadband Internet and telephone
calling, said that Insight Communications Inc., the country's eighth-largest
cable operator, is using RiverDelta gear to offer secured networking for
businesses and universities in the Lexington, Ky., area this spring . . . Aura
Networks Inc. of Nashua said it received a $1 million, 18-month order for its
optical-network service provisioning system from Cogent Communications of
Washington D.C., which plans to offer 100-megabit-per-second optical lines in
several US markets this year . . . At Comm Corp., a phone-system software maker,
fired 150 workers at its headquarters in Burlingame, Calif., and in New
Hampshire. The job cuts are effective immediately, the company said in a
statement.

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2001


                             1822 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                          May 1, 2001, Tuesday , METRO

SECTION: METRO / SOUTH TEXAS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1385 words

HEADLINE: At last, a bite is going right ; Surgeons and orthodontists bring
amiracle to a tortured family with a rare genetic defect.

BYLINE: Cindy Tumiel


BODY: Emma Ramirez rarely smiled during the first 13 years of her life.

    Her reluctance went beyond the typical adolescent bashfulness over gapped
front teeth or braces. The Cotulla teen suffered taunts of classmates and stares
from adults because of a rare genetic disorder that leaves its most visible
hallmark on the teeth.

    One by one, Emma's primary teeth fell out, but no permanent teeth emerged to
take their place. At an age when most children already have a full set of adult
teeth, Emma entered those typically awkward teen-age years with only a
scattering of remaining primary teeth.

    Emma has a syndrome called cleidocranial dysplasia, a rare genetic defect
that also afflicts her mother, younger brother and younger sister.

    The disorder, traced to a mutation on a key bone-building gene, causes a
variety of skeletal deformities.

    For years, the children and their mother lived knowing something was wrong,
but not knowing what could be done about it.

    Finally, after years of mostly enduring in silence, Emma and her family have
found treatment and answers through the University of Texas Health Science
Center.

    Over the past four years, surgeons and orthodontists at the university's
dental school have slowly built pretty smiles for Emma, now 17; her brother
Humberto Pedroso, 10; and sister Idalmis Pedroso, 8. They also plan to begin
corrective work soon for Delia Pedroso, their mother.

    At the same time, genetics researchers at the health science center have
been able to use the family's DNA to answer some questions about the rare and
perplexing syndrome.

    Scientists working under Mary MacDougall, an associate professor at the
dental school, recently identified a mutation on a key regulator gene that
appears to allow the body's bone-building process to go haywire.

    "I'm grateful because it will help my children and my grandchildren," said
Delia Pedroso, 37. "For me, I didn't know nothing growing up. At least now, they
know."

    Emma is still a bit on the quiet side but no longer reluctant to flash a big
grin. She has big plans of leaving little Cotulla after high school graduation
next year and going to Dallas to study art.

    "I was really shy before," she said. "I didn't feel like smiling much. Now
I'm really a lot more confident."

    It's not that the Cotulla family members have no adult teeth. In fact,
people with cleidocranial dysplasia have too many teeth, sometimes twice as many
as normal. But the teeth are poorly developed and do not emerge as primary teeth
fall out.

    Delia Pedroso, the daughter of a garbage collector and housekeeper from
rural Cotulla, grew up accepting that she had malformed clavicles and missing
teeth. But she didn't have a name for her condition until she was 17.

    The family was living in Waco and a schoolteacher, concerned about this
student with virtually no teeth, arranged for the teen-ager to see a dentist for
the first time in her life.

    "They told me, did I know I had all these extra teeth?" Delia Pedroso said.
"I said no, and they showed me the X-rays."

    The dentists finally gave a name to her condition. They also surgically
removed her extra upper teeth and fitted her with dentures.

    Years later, she was back in Cotulla, married and with three children, all
of whom inherited their mother's condition.

    In 1996, the family came to the attention of staff at the health science
center's Craniofacial Disorders Clinic. There, a team of surgeons and
orthodontic specialists began the complicated process of correcting the dental
defects.

    X-rays taken when Emma was 13 showed she had more than 40 tiny teeth, piled
on top of each other at bizarre angles, lying below her gumline.

    Dental surgeons had to operate three times to remove the excess teeth and
attach orthodontic devices that were used to pull Emma's remaining teeth
downward and into her mouth. Humberto and Idalmis are in the earlier stages of
the same treatment.

    Once a month now, the family drives from Cotulla to see Carlos Nurko, an
assistant professor of pediatric dentistry, who is handling orthodontic care for
the three children.

    They sit patiently while Nurko adjusts wires and braces that are slowly
bringing their teeth out of hiding.

    "This is a harsh treatment," Nurko said of the surgeries endured by the
children. "It is like having your wisdom teeth pulled 10 times. But they are
doing very well."

    Emma's first surgery was done during her Thanksgiving school break in 1997.
She remembers being sore and unhappy at the dinner table.

    "I couldn't eat turkey," she said. "Just mashed potatoes."

    Cleidocranial dysplasia occurs once in every 50,000 to 100,000 births. The
genetic defect isn't fatal, but it leads to deformed or soft bones, particularly
those in the torso and the skull.

    The condition can be inherited from a parent, but the mutation also can
occur in patients with no previous family history of the disease.

    Children born with the defect generally grow to be short in stature, the
soft spot on their skulls may never close, and their clavicles may be so soft
that they can touch their shoulders together.

    They are prone to breathing problems, ear infections and hearing
impairments. Women with the disorder have a high rate of Caesarean section
deliveries because their hips are poorly formed.

    But the most visible mark of the disease is in the teeth. Primary teeth are
very slow to fall out, while permanent teeth remain immature and do not emerge.
People with the genetic defect may actually have twice the normal number of
permanent teeth.

    Usually, said Brendan Lee, an assistant professor of genetics at Baylor
College of Medicine in Houston, it is the family dentist who makes the
diagnosis.

    Lee was part of a team of Baylor scientists who in 1998 identified the
culprit gene, CBFA1. The gene appears to be a master switch that regulates other
genes in the formation of bone cells.

    "It is one of the most important genes in the formation of bone cells," said
Lee, who also is director of a skeletal dysplasia clinic at Texas Children's
Hospital. "This gene turns on the program of making a bone cell."

    But this discovery is just the beginning of the mystery, Lee said.
Scientists still do not understand how the faulty gene makes the body produce
insufficient bone, while at the same time, too many teeth.

    "The consequences of the mutation on the teeth is very different than on the
skeleton," Lee said. "That is one of the biggest conundrums we're still trying
to understand. Clearly, its function is different in the bone cells of the
skeleton versus the teeth cells. But that's often the case with nature."

    Armed with information about the gene involved, MacDougall obtained blood
and tissue samples from the Cotulla family to study the gene further.

    Their DNA yielded results. Last month, MacDougall reported finding the
specific mutation - a small defect in the gene's chemical structure that appears
to start the cascade of developmental problems in cleidocranial dysplasia.

    "One little change in just one little amino acid, and this is what happens,"
MacDougall said. "It's pretty amazing."

    Correcting the defect through gene therapy will be difficult, MacDougall
said. The gene is active very early in fetal development, and gene therapy
researchers are a long way from being able to intervene at this stage, she said.



    But the Pedroso DNA could be helpful with another scientific project.
MacDougall is trying to understand how the body forms teeth and whether
scientists can stimulate the body to make its own replacement teeth. Better
knowledge of cleidocranial dysplasia could prove important.

    "What we're looking at is can we use this information to induce new teeth
when we lose them?" MacDougall said.

    Emma has one more surgery to go through, a final step to properly align her
upper and lower jaw once doctors are certain her bones have finished growing.
She's not looking forward to it, but knows she will endure.

    "I know that all they have to do is this surgery, and then it's over," she
said with a smile. "That makes me feel a lot better."

    ctumiel@express-news.net


GRAPHIC: PHOTOS BY GLORIA FERNIZ/STAFF : Emma Ramirez is no longer embarrassed
to flash a smile.  ; Emma Ramirez, 17, has her mouth examined during a visit to
the University of Texas Health Science Center's dental school. The teen-ager
suffers from a rare genetic mutation called cleidocranial dysplasia, which
causes a variety of skeletal deformities.

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2001


                             1823 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              May 1, 2001 Tuesday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 382 words

HEADLINE: Bill fosters cancer research;
Committee votes to allow more bonds

BYLINE: By Ed Anderson; Capital bureau

BODY:

   BATON ROUGE -- The House Ways and Means Committee gave unanimous approval
Monday to a bill allowing the agency that oversees health facilities in New
Orleans to issue more bonds to build research and cancer treatment centers in
the city.

   The committee sent House Bill 931 by Rep. Mitch Landrieu, D-New Orleans, to
the House floor for debate. It allows the Health Education Authority of
Louisiana, which oversees development of medical facilities within a 10-mile
radius of Charity Hospital in New Orleans, to sell up to $400 million in bonds,
double its present capacity.

   Landrieu said the authority has sold $170 million in bonds with ambitious
projects still pending.

   "This is a very small slice of a great opportunity facing Louisiana" in
developing its biomedical research and biotechnology industries, Landrieu said.
"The sleeping giant for economic development in this state is biotechnology and
biomedical research."

   Rep. Karen Carter, D-New Orleans, said that by increasing the bond capacity
of the authority, "incubator projects" in the New Orleans medical community can
get financed, but not at state expense.

   "This has the potential to free up money in the capital outlay bill," Carter
said, referring to the state's annual construction budget, which already is
strained.

   The bonds would be paid off with revenue generated by fees paid for services
at charity hospitals in New Orleans and garages the authority operates near the
Central Business District, Landrieu said.

   Mary Ella Sanders, interim chancellor of the Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center in New Orleans, said the bonds could be used to finance
construction of a forensic laboratory, gene therapy research facilities and
cancer treatment centers.

   With the expanded bond capacity, Sanders said, New Orleans could be the "site
for startup companies that grow out of research, and for opportunities for
incubator (businesses) that would play off the critical mass of research" done
in the area.

   The bonds could be used to acquire land, buy or construct buildings and
furnish them. Landrieu stressed that the bonds would be the authority's
responsibility, not the state treasury's.

   . . . . . . .

Ed Anderson can be reached at eanderson@timespicayune.com or at (225) 342-7315.

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2001


                             1824 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       April 30, 2001 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: ARTS & LIFE; Pg. 033

LENGTH: 793 words

HEADLINE: SOCIAL SCENE; MFA party FOR 'Bloom' comes up roses

BYLINE: By Dana Bisbee

BODY:

   It was a blooming good time.

   Friday night, 1,100 people walked through an artistic garden at the Museum of
Fine Arts to celebrate the 25th anniversary of "Art in Bloom." Organized by the
museum's Ladies Committee, it has raised $ 5 million over the years.

   The Silver Anniversary display opened Friday with a multifaceted event that
offered an arrangement of party styles. There was Big Band dancing, cabaret
music with pianist and singer Bobby Weatherby, an Alfred Fiandaca fashion show
and performance by the Boston Gay Men's Chorus.

   Garden clubs and professional floral designers from across New England have
created flower arrangements to complement works in the MFA's permanent
collections.

   Gauguin's "Woman and a White Horse," for example, is accompanied by an
arrangement of lush, exotic plants and white flowers by Cynthia Antonopoulos of
the Wollaston Garden Club.

   Opening night guest Sally Cottingham said it was her favorite of the 72 art
and flower pairings. She toured the art landscape with her husband, Bill
Cottingham, Peter Rathbone and his daughter, Sarah.

   Peter is the son of the late Perry Rathbone, once the MFA's director. Touring
the art and garden with his daughter was like passing on a family legacy.

   WHDH-TV (Ch.7) anchor and reporter Janet Wu took a walk through the garden
with friends Amy Fielder and Jackie McBride. Barbara Jordan, Gale and Sandy
Noble and Berneda and Louis Meek were also trekking.

   Guests also included museum director Malcolm Rogers, Ladies Committee chair
Terry Aufranc, "Art in Bloom" chair Molly Nye, and Chuck Thomas, who founded
"Art in Bloom" when he was director of membership at the MFA.

   "Art in Bloom" concludes today. Guided tours are ongoing throughout the day.
Tea is served in the Ladies Committee Gallery at 2 p.m. For tickets and other
information call (617) 369-3396 or e-mail taufranc@mfa.org.

   At the Foundation Fighting Blindness' 12th annual "Seeing is Believing Ball"
Saturday night at the Hyatt Regency Hotel, it is what guests heard that was
unbelievable.

   Friday, researchers at the University of Pennsylvania announced that they had
used gene therapy to give sight to dogs born blind. The animals had Leber
congenital amaurosis, one of several incurable forms of blindness collectively
known as retinitis pigmentosa.

   It was not the announcement of a cure. The first studies with humans could
begin in three or four years. But it was close enough to be most of a dream come
true for Alice Hayen, gala co-chair with Karen Hopper.

   "They have actually reversed blindness," Hayen said. "My dream has always
been to have a party and say, 'This is for you. You don't have to pay. We did
it.' This is as close as it gets."

   Originally called the Retinitis Pigmentosa Foundation, the Foundation
Fighting Blindness now funds research into all eye diseases, including macular
degeneration, the disease afflicting nearly blind screenwriter Sean Moynihan.

   Moynihan wrote "Shallow Hal," the new Farrelly brothers film starring Gwyneth
Paltrow and Jeff Bridges. He came from the set in Rhode Island to attend the
gala and hear the news.

   "That's incredible for someone like me, who has never driven a car, never
played tennis, never thrown a ball."

   Hayen and Hopper created a Hawaiian-theme party. A trip to the 50th state was
the major raffle prize. Auction items included a Caribbean trip and a tropical
pearl necklace.

   The guest of honor was Michael Amoruso, who is resigning his presidency of
the foundation to move to New York with his wife, Sreelekha. Incoming president
Lynn Donnelly was among the guests.

   WBZ-TV (Ch. 4) sports anchor Bob Lobel was emcee for a gala audience that
included Jo O'Connor-Doherty and Chris Doherty, Anne and Charles Hajjar, and
Lissy and Joel Davis, a trustee of the national Foundation Fighting Blindness
and chairman of the local affiliate.

   Dr. Maurice Vanderpol, founder of the Wang Center's Walter Suskind Memorial
Fund - now merged into Suskind Young at Arts - at the Wang Center, was knighted
Friday night at a dinner in his honor at the theater.

   The Netherlands' Honorary Counsel Henry Paap performed the ceremony on behalf
of Queen Beatrix to recognize Vanderpol for his dedication to preserving the
memory of Walter Suskind, a Dutch Jew who worked in Amsterdam to save hundreds
of children during World War II.

   Wang Center President Joe Spaulding got Vanderpol and his wife, Netty, to
dinner on the ruse that they were meeting a possible new donor.

   Dinner guests included former Amsterdam mayor Ed van Thijn, one of the
children Suskind saved.

   Photo Caption: ALL SMILES: Left to right, Chris Doherty, Jo O'Connor-Doherty
and Sean Moynihan, from left, at the 'Seeing is Believing Ball' at the Hyatt
Regency Hotel. in Cambridge

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2001


                             1825 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 30, 2001, Monday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 515 words

HEADLINE: Many step briskly forward in salute to March of Dimes; Thousands join
in fund-raising

BYLINE: Ronald W. Powell; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Businessman Mike Cruse remembers participating in a fund-raising walk for the
March of Dimes as a teen-ager, but not fully understanding the organization's
purpose.

   Fifteen months ago, in the harrowing hours after his son's premature birth,
it became clear.

   Little Hayden weighed just 2 pounds, 11 ounces, and his underdeveloped lungs
made breathing impossible without the assistance of a machine.

   However, a lung therapy developed by the March of Dimes allowed Hayden to
begin breathing on his own after three days.  Now, he is lively and robust.

   Cruse cuddled Hayden yesterday as his wife, Laura Cruse, told their story to
several thousand people at Balboa Park before the annual March of Dimes
walkathon.

   Mike Cruse, an owner of the La Mesa Outback Steakhouse, and Laura Cruse, an
administrator at the Mission Valley Outback Steakhouse, led a contingent from
the company.  After relating their story of alarm and relief, Laura Cruse set
the throng of about 4,000 walkers in motion at 7:45 a.m. with a blast from an
air horn.

   About the same time, an additional 2,000 March of Dimes walkers set off from
Legoland.  All were putting their feet in the street over a five-mile course to
raise money for the 63-year-old national organization that is dedicated to
fighting birth defects and other childhood illnesses.

   Nationwide, the walk raises about $90 million.  Last year, $825,000 was
raised in San Diego.

   The Salk Institute has been the recipient of $3 million in research funds
over the past two years.  Some of that money has funded research conducted by
Dr. Samuel Pfaff, who is investigating how the spinal cord develops in fetuses.

   Pfaff said gene therapy is emerging as a promising tool that may help
identify health risks in parents and aid in treatment of birth disorders in
infants.

   About 250 local companies and organizations participated in the walk.  Each
employee solicited donation pledges, with some companies contributing a matching
amount.

   An expanse of grass at Sixth Avenue and Laurel Street served as the event's
staging area, with booths erected by sponsors and participating companies.
Clusters of walkers huddled about the area wearing company T-shirts in brilliant
blues, reds, oranges, pinks and other hues.

   Tony "Bazooka" De Luca, the onetime world bantamweight boxing champion in the
1980s, led a group of employees from Home Depot, standouts in their orange
shirts.

   De Luca said the company supports the work of the March of Dimes, and that he
and other employees were eager to get some morning exercise.

   "I'm going to walk off what I had for breakfast," said De Luca, who is a few
pounds above his fighting weight.

   Marilyn Claybrooks, an employee of California Instruments Corp., said she was
participating in her fifth March of Dimes walk.  She became a grandmother about
18 months ago, and said she feels fortunate that the child is healthy.  She is
walking for others who are not so fortunate.

   "It makes me feel that I really accomplished something for myself and, at the
same time, helped somebody else out," she said.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; Sandy Huffaker; An estimated 6,000 people participated in the
March of Dimes walkathons held in the county yesterday. Here a group is seen
passing a fountain in Balboa Park. Another large contingent of marchers began at
Legoland in Carlsbad.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2001


                             1826 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 30, 2001 Monday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 506 words

HEADLINE: Many step briskly forward in salute to March of Dimes;
Thousands join in fund-raising

BYLINE: Ronald W. Powell, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Businessman Mike Cruse remembers participating in a fund-raising walk for the
March of Dimes as a teen-ager, but not fully understanding the organization's
purpose. Fifteen months ago, in the harrowing hours after his son's premature
birth, it became clear. Little Hayden weighed just 2 pounds, 11 ounces, and his
underdeveloped lungs made breathing impossible without the assistance of a
machine. However, a lung therapy developed by the March of Dimes allowed Hayden
to begin breathing on his own after three days.

   Now, he is lively and robust. Cruse cuddled Hayden yesterday as his wife,
Laura Cruse, told their story to several thousand people at Balboa Park before
the annual March of Dimes walkathon. Mike Cruse, an owner of the La Mesa Outback
Steakhouse, and Laura Cruse, an administrator at the Mission Valley Outback
Steakhouse, led a contingent from the company.

   After relating their story of alarm and relief, Laura Cruse set the throng of
about 4,000 walkers in motion at 7:45 a.m. with a blast from an air horn. About
the same time, an additional 2,000 March of Dimes walkers set off from Legoland.

   All were putting their feet in the street over a five-mile course to raise
money for the 63-year-old national organization that is dedicated to fighting
birth defects and other childhood illnesses. Nationwide, the walk raises about
$90 million.

   Last year, $825,000 was raised in San Diego. The Salk Institute has been the
recipient of $3 million in research funds over the past two years.

   Some of that money has funded research conducted by Dr. Samuel Pfaff, who is
investigating how the spinal cord develops in fetuses. Pfaff said gene therapy
is emerging as a promising tool that may help identify health risks in parents
and aid in treatment of birth disorders in infants. About 250 local companies
and organizations participated in the walk.

   Each employee solicited donation pledges, with some companies contributing a
matching amount. An expanse of grass at Sixth Avenue and Laurel Street served as
the event's staging area, with booths erected by sponsors and participating
companies. Clusters of walkers huddled about the area wearing company T-shirts
in brilliant blues, reds, oranges, pinks and other hues. Tony "Bazooka" De Luca,
the onetime world bantamweight boxing champion in the 1980s, led a group of
employees from Home Depot, standouts in their orange shirts. De Luca said the
company supports the work of the March of Dimes, and that he and other employees
were eager to get some morning exercise. "I'm going to walk off what I had for
breakfast," said De Luca, who is a few pounds above his fighting weight. Marilyn
Claybrooks, an employee of California Instruments Corp., said she was
participating in her fifth March of Dimes walk.

   She became a grandmother about 18 months ago, and said she feels fortunate
that the child is healthy.

   She is walking for others who are not so fortunate. "It makes me feel that I
really accomplished something for myself and, at the same time, helped somebody
else out," she said.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: An estimated 6,000 people participated in the March of
Dimes walkathons held in the county yesterday. Here a group is seen passing a
fountain in Balboa Park. Another large contingent of marchers began at Legoland
in Carlsbad.; PHOTOBY: Sandy Huffaker

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1827 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 April 30, 2001, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS PLUS, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1665 words

HEADLINE: ST. LOUIS FIRMS ARE BUILDING SCIENCE LABS FOR THE REGION'S "BIOBELT";
AREA CONTRACTORS AND DEVELOPERS ARE BECOMING KNOWN FOR DESIGNING AND;
CONSTRUCTING SCIENCE CENTERS, WHICH REQUIRE SPECIALIZED VENTILATION,;
SUPER-CLEAN ENVIRONMENTS AND MORE

BYLINE: Virginia Baldwin Gilbert; Of The Post-DispatchLBIZ; LOCAL SCIENCE
INDUSTRY GROWTH

BODY:


   Civic leaders are hoping to direct the developer's mantra -- "If you build
it, they will come" -- toward the development of laboratories and other
buildings for scientific pursuits.

   The aim is to offer a significant amount of wet laboratory space -- where
experiments are performed -- as well as dry labs -- where computer work is done
-- for both home-grown businesses and for companies relocating here.

   It's all part of the campaign to turn St. Louis into a region where science,
particularly biotechnology, makes money.

   The effort is gathering steam. One developer has announced tentative plans to
renovate an industrial building in midtown St. Louis. Another is building in St.
Charles County and about to open a facility in St. Louis County.

   "In many parts of the country, good science has led to good economic
development," said William Danforth, former chancellor of Washington University.
"Given the amount of science we have (in the region), we have less economic
development than we'd hoped for."

   Danforth is chairman of the Coalition for Plant and Life Sciences, a
committee formed by the Regional Chamber and Growth Association and Civic
Progress to act on recommendations of a study released last September.

   The study, by the Battelle Memorial Institute in Columbus, Ohio, suggested
ways the region could establish itself as a national center for biotechnology --
in image and in reality. It even coined a new marketing term for the area: the
BioBelt.

   Various groups have begun to establish venture capital and seed money funds.
Two incubators for science business have opened in the last three years --
Center for Emerging Technologies, 4041 Forest Park Boulevard in St. Louis, and
the Nidus Center on the campus of Monsanto Co. in Creve Coeur.

   At the same time, the region needs to be building labs for the graduates of
those incubators and the successful companies created with the venture capital,
civic leaders say.

   "Most companies don't have the capability to build a laboratory," said Robert
Calcaterra, chief executive of the Nidus Center. "It's much better for companies
to lease and have someone else amortize the cost for them. A lot of places
around the country will do that. If we don't, the companies will go elsewhere."

Building new labs

   Lab construction is a demanding niche. Scientific buildings require
specialized systems -- plumbing that can handle and filter chemical wastes,
ventilation systems that do not recirculate air, electrical systems with
reliable backups for experiments that need constant and consistent power.

   Construction methods must pay attention to the need for a super-clean
environment, starting with requiring workers who pour the first concrete
footings to eat lunch away from the work site and continuing through to the
installation of furniture and countertops that won't accumulate dust.

   A key word is control. Whether the research seeks to develop a new drug, gene
therapy or plant variety, scientists want to control as many variables as they
can -- light, temperature, humidity, the very air surrounding the experiment.
They also want to prevent contamination, whether it's a virus, a stray human
skin cell or an ordinary house fly.

   Lab space is expensive to build and expensive to maintain. But the return can
be substantial, Calcaterra said. "People who use these labs pay a rent
significantly higher than for office space," he said.

   That's what Paul McKee, of McEagle Development Corp. and Paric Construction,
is counting on. He plans to announce the completion of a $ 4 million building
with 18,000 square feet of space in the Page Boulevard-Warson Road area in the
next few weeks. Although he said it was premature to be specific, the building
is just the beginning of his plans for St. Louis County.

   McEagle is also the developer and Paric is the builder of WingHaven, a
1,200-acre development under construction in St. Charles County that includes an
office-research park. In that development, McKee said, two buildings will have
space for research. One will cost about $ 20 million with 75,000 square feet;
the other will cost $ 14 million with 40,000 square feet.

   "We are committed to high-tech space in St. Louis. It makes wonderful sense,"
McKee said. "We're putting our money where our mouth is."

A new kind of market

   Farther east, across the street from the Center for Emerging Technologies,
the Desco Group is completing due diligence for the renovation of a
230,000-square-foot warehouse building for research/office space.

   "This project is far from a sure thing," said Mark Schnuck, president of
Desco. "But the indications are that we'll be moving forward."

   Desco is upfront that such a project needs government incentives -- tax
abatements or tax credits in particular.

   Desco made its reputation developing retail centers, starting with
family-owned Schnuck Markets. The project would be the firm's first foray into
research-facility development.

   "There is a dire need to provide the infrastructure of wet lab space in order
for this biotech initiative to work in St. Louis," Schnuck said.

A national expertise

   Area contractors and architects have honed their skills on academic and
corporate research facilities and offer the oft-sought critical mass of workers
and expertise to take development to the next level.

   McCarthy Construction and architectural firm Hellmuth, Obata and Kassebaum
have both established national reputations in building and designing science
facilities.

   McCarthy is the construction manager and HOK is the architect of record for
two major projects underway: the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, an
independent research facility across Olive Boulevard from Monsanto and the Nidus
Center, and Sigma Aldrich Corp.'s life science technology center in midtown St.
Louis.

   Building research facilities "has become quite a specialty for us in the last
five years," said Bud Guest, senior vice president of McCarthy. The science
building business grew out of hospital projects, he said.

   McCarthy is involved in science construction projects worth more than $ 1
billion, including a $ 132 million building for the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention in Atlanta and a $ 380 million research lab for the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.

A need for flexibility

   Designing lab facilities for biotech often focuses on flexibility, said Tom
Goulden, project manager of the science and technology group for HOK. "It's a
changing type of investigation," Goulden said. "If the research goes in a
different direction or endeavor, the lab has to be able to accommodate that."

   So the trend is toward open labs with fewer walls, and toward installing gas,
electric and water utilities that can "plug in and unplug" as needed.

   Goulden sees more demand for benchtop area for computers as "fume hoods are
being replaced with more computer-generated science."

   Whether the labs are in universities or corporations, clients want space for
collaboration, Goulden said. "Scientists discuss what they're finding, what
they're looking at. The building needs to provide space where that interaction
can take place.

   "We provide coffee bars, break rooms, atriums, open stairways where people
communicate - where they're almost required to pass one another and where they
can stop and chat."

   Such considerations can be seen in the Danforth Center, where the three-story
atrium is open to a glass wall on the north end, which looks out on the
greenhouses and undeveloped green space.

   The momentum for science seems to be building, so to speak. Calcaterra, of
the Nidus Center, says it's none too soon.

   "There are some potential companies that would come here, that are large
enough to take a substantial amount of space - say 75,000 to 100,000 square feet
within the next three years," Calcaterra said. "We know exactly what the
opportunity is. If we don't start creating that space now, it won't be available
when they're ready for it."

==================

Building up science

Scientific facilities under construction:

   * Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, Olive Boulevard and Warson Road.
Cost: $ 52 million. Architects: Nicholas Grimshaw & Partners of London and
Hellmuth Obata & Kassabaum Inc. of St. Louis. General contrac tor: McCarthy
Construction. Estimated completion: late September.

   * Center for Emerging Technologies, 4041 Forest Park Boulevard, $ 8 million
renovation of a factory building next door to center. Contractor: Korte
Construction.

   * Pharmacia Corp., $ 33 million protein plant, Chesterfield campus.
Architect: St. Louis office of Jacobs Engineering. Contractor: Sordoni Skanska
Construction Co., Parsippany, N.J. Completion: 2002.

   * Sigma-Aldrich Corp., $ 42 million life science technology center, 2909
Laclede Avenue, Architect: HOK. Contractor: McCarthy. Completion: December 2001.

   * Washington University, $ 30 million biomedical engineering building,
Skinker and Forest Park boulevards. Architect: Shepley Bulfinch Richardson &
Abbott, Boston. Contractor: McCarthy. Completion: 2003.

   * WingHaven, O'Fallon, Mo., $ 20 million building, 5555 Phoenix Boulevard,
and $ 14 million Park Place building. No tenants yet. Developer: McEagle
Development Corp. Contractor: Paric Construction. Completion: later this year.

On the drawing board:

   * Southern Illinois University-Edwardsville, science-building addition and
renovation. Architect: HOK.

Still in funding phase.

   * Desco Group, warehouse renovation and conversion to labs, 4100 Forest Park
Boulevard. Property negotiations continue.

   * An $ 80 million redevelopment plan for the neighborhood of the Center for
Emerging Technologies, along Forest Park Boulevard between the medical schools
of St. Louis University and Washington University, to be called Technopolis.
Still seeking investors, development partners and a major tenant.

Source: Post-Dispatch research

NOTES:
Reporter Virginia Baldwin Gilbert: E-mail: vgilbert@post-dispatch.com Phone:
314-862-2153

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GRAPHIC (1) Color Photo by ANDREW CUTRARO / POST-DISPATCH -
Contractor Matt Walas examines the elevations of a frame for a greenhouse under
construction at the Danforth Plant Science Center. The architects moved the
greenhouses several yards north of the building to ensure they get sunlight even
in winter.
 (2) Color Photo by NANCY PASTOR / POST-DISPATCH FILE PHOTO - A worker from
Rockwell Mechanical Contractor loads duct work earlier this springfor the
heating and ventilation system at the Sigma Aldrich research facility, 2902
Laclede Avenue.
 (3) Color Photo by ANDREW CUTRARO / POST-DISPATCH - Construction workers
complete exterior work on the Danforth Plant Science Center. Center officials
chose thrifty, but attractive, terra cotta panels to balance the high cost of
mechanical systems. Scientific buildings often cost twice as much as office
buildings of comparable size.
 (4) Color Photo by DAVID Y. LEE / POST-DISPATCH - Don Molitor of Swanson
Masonry makes mortar Wednesday for Pharmacia's protein manufacturing plant in
Chesterfield. The plant will make proteins used in Pharmacia's drug research
worldwide.
 (5) Graphic / Chart - Building up science (See text field.)
 Source: Post-Dispatch research
 (6) Color Photo by ANDREW CUTRARO / POST-DISPATCH - Construction workers are
silhouetted as they work on the Danforth Plant Science Center, a McCarthy
Construction and Hellmuth Obata & Kassabaum project in Creve Coeur. The
three-story glass wall allows researchers to look out at the greenhouses and
undeveloped green space on the property. McCarthy and HOK have developed a
national reputation for their work building science laboratories and research
facilities. (NOTE: This photo only appeared on the cover of Business Plus.)

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2001


                             1828 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             April 30, 2001 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. T07

LENGTH: 1570 words

HEADLINE: PUBLIC COMPANIES: Biotechnology

BODY:

    35 West Watkins Mill Rd.

   Gaithersburg, Md. 20878

   301-417-0770

   www.medimmune.com

   Founded: 1988

   Revenue: $ 540.50 million

   Net income: $ 111.16 million

   Earnings per share: 50 cents

   Dividend: none

   Stockholders' equity: $ 843.58 million

   Return on equity: 17 percent

   Stock: MEDI (Nasdaq)

   Assets: $ 1.01 billion

   Market capitalization: $ 8.31 billion

   52-week high: $ 86.13 (9/25/2000)

   52-week low: $ 27.63 (3/22/2001)

   CEO: David M. Mott

   President and COO: Melvin D. Booth

   Employees: 831

   Local employees: 610

   DESCRIPTION: MedImmune is a biotechnology company that develops drugs to
treat and prevent a variety of diseases. The company's most successful product,
Synagis, is a genetically engineered antibody that fights respiratory synctial
virus, a common childhood disease that can cause serious health problems in
premature babies and infants with weakened immune systems. In addition to
Synagis, the company has five other drugs on the market and half a dozen in
development.

   DEVELOPMENTS: Even as it generated record profits and sales over the past
year, the Washington region's most profitable biotechnology company took its
shareholders on a roller-coaster ride.

    Last year, burgeoning sales of Synagis fueled another year of robust
financial growth. The company's revenue grew by more than 40 percent from $ 383
million in 1999 to $ 540 million last year, while its income rose nearly 20
percent from $ 93 million in 1999 to $ 111 million.

    Despite the impressive numbers, the company's stock, which traded as high as
$ 86 in September, has been falling with the rest of the market. On Oct. 2,
MedImmune shares plunged more than 25 percent, losing more than $ 20 as
investors questioned whether Synagis sales would continue to grow. The stock has
continued to slide ever since.

    MedImmune has several products in development, including treatments for
autoimmune disease, cancer and various infections. In March, the company
launched new human tests for a potential vaccine to prevent urinary tract
infections and an experimental drug to treat cancer. But most products in
MedImmune's pipeline are still in early stages of development, and none are not
expected to reach the market for at least two or three years.

    Meanwhile, the company has undergone a major shift in senior management.
MedImmune's founder and chief executive, Wayne T. Hockmeyer, passed the reins to
David M. Mott in October. In February, Gregory S. Patrick joined the company as
its senior vice president and chief financial officer.

    The company last year began producing Synagis at its recently completed
manufacturing plant in Frederick, which received regulatory approval in December
1999. In July, the company granted pharmaceutical company SmithKline Beecham
Corp. a license to a vaccine technology in exchange for up-front and future
milestone payments totaling more than $ 30 million, plus royalties on product
sales.

    14920 Broschart Road

   Rockville, Md. 20850

   301-738-1000

   www.bioreliance.com

   Founded: 1947

   Revenue: $ 55.89 million

   Net income: $ 1.22 million

   Earnings per share: 15 cents

   Dividend: none

   Stockholders' equity: $ 53.72 million

   Return on equity: 2.3 percent

   Stock: BREL (Nasdaq)

   Assets: $ 79.67 million

   Market capitalization: $ 107.46 million

   52-week high: $ 16.75 (2/27/2001)

   52-week low: $ 4.25 (4/24/2000)

   Chairman: Sydney R. Knafel

   President and CEO: Capers W. McDonald

   Employees: 480

   Local employees: 390

   DESCRIPTION: BioReliance provides biological testing and manufacturing
services on a contract basis to biotechnology firms, pharmaceutical companies
and research institutions that are developing drugs. The company specializes in
developing biological drugs such as vaccines and genetically-engineered
proteins. The company was founded more than 50 years ago as Microbiological
Associates to serve mainly as a contractor to government agencies such as the
National Institutes of Health in Bethesda.

   DEVELOPMENTS: BioReliance's business activities expanded steadily last year.
The company's annual revenue rose 18 percent from $ 47.2 million in 1999 to $
55.9 million last year, allowing the company to report a profit of $ 1.2
million, compared to a loss of $ 1 million a year earlier. The company
attributed the growth to increased business at its European operations, which
are based in Sterling, Scotland, and Heidelberg, Germany.

    The company's stock more than doubled last year, to more than $ 13 a share
from less than $ 6.

    BioReliance won several major government contracts last year. In August, the
company was selected by DynPort LLC to develop and manufacture smallpox vaccine
for the U.S. Department of Defense. In a separate contract in September,
BioReliance announced it would team up with Oravax Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., in
a 20-year contract worth an estimated $ 343 million to produce a 40-million-dose
stockpile of smallpox vaccine for the Centers for Disease Control to protect
civilians in the event of an outbreak. And in December, the firm won a
five-year, $ 6 million contract from the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases to help develop viral delivery systems to test experimental
gene therapy drugs.

    In the second quarter last year, the company opened a new manufacturing
plant near its Rockville headquarters, which will allow it to expand production
capacity.

    The company expects continued growth in 2001 as the biotechnology and
pharmaceutical industries hire contract research organizations to provide
testing and manufacturing services. In February, BioReliance said it planned to
hire 50 new employees during the first half of this year.

    45 W. Gude Dr.

   Rockville, Md. 20850

   240-453-3000

   www.celera.com

   Founded: 1998

   Revenue: $ 42.70 million

   Loss: $ 92.70 million

   Loss per share: $ 1.73

   Dividend: none

   Stockholders' equity: $ 1.29 billion

   Return on equity: NA

   Stock: CRA (NYSE)

   Assets: $ 1.41 billion

   Market capitalization: $ 2.23 billion

   52-week high: $ 143.75 (6/21/2000)

   52-week low: $ 24 (3/22/2001)

   President: J. Craig Venter

   Chief operating officer: Peter Chambre

   Employees: 684

   Local employees: 684

   DESCRIPTION: Celera Genomics operates the world's largest laboratory capable
of unraveling the precise order of an organism's genetic material -- its genome.
The company creates databases of genetic information and sells these to
researchers in academia and industry.

   DEVELOPMENTS: Not many American corporate chieftains -- especially ones whose
companies were only in their second year of existence -- have stood next to the
president of the United States in the White House to announce a company
milestone. But that's what Celera President J. Craig Venter did in June.

    Venter is a genetic researcher with a history of defying conventional wisdom
and pushing the frontiers of his science. He has often upset competing
scientists in the process. In 1998, with substantial backing from a Connecticut
company now known as Applera Corp., Venter announced a new venture intended to
jump-start research on human genes.

    His new company would move rapidly to finish a complete map of the human
genome, the full complement of genetic material that encodes human biology. The
map would become part of a larger series of databases, including the genomes of
organisms like mice, that would be sold to researchers in universities and at
drug and biotechnology companies.

    This plan yielded big results in 2000. Neck-and-neck with publicly funded
researchers, Celera completed an initial human genome map, and the two groups
announced their achievements together at the White House in a ceremony presided
over by President Bill Clinton. That was followed this February by published
analyses of the genome in top scientific journals.

    Celera has grown rapidly and its profile could hardly be higher, given the
media interest in genetics. The company has announced sweeping database deals
with major universities -- even with the entire academic research network of
Australia. This buzz has been translating into revenue. The company reported $
42.7 million in revenue for the year ending in June 2000, and it is expected to
report close to $ 100 million for the year ending this coming June. The company
is applying for government grants for gene-mapping projects, which should
bolster revenue.

    Those are big revenue numbers for such a young biotechnology company. But
Celera is still losing money -- and when, if ever, it will become profitable
remains a matter of speculation. It continues to invest heavily in building up
its business. The company lost $ 92.7 million in the year ending last June and
analysts are expecting a loss on the order of $ 125 million for the year ending
this June.

    Though a wholly owned subsidiary of Applera Corp., Celera is represented on
the New York Stock Exchange by its own "tracking stock," traded under the symbol
CRA. The stock has not been a good performer for shorter-term investors: From
Jan. 1 to Dec. 29, the year's final day of trading, the shares lost 52 percent
of their value. They peaked March 6 at $ 247 a share.

    As it works toward profitability, Celera has an ace-in-the-hole: a $ 1
billion cash kitty that it raised when the markets were being generous. It has
plans to add protein analysis to its genetic work, and to use all that
information to look for potential drugs. Still, Celera investors are the sort
who look for rapid growth, and whether the company can deliver it over the long
term remains to be seen.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2001


                             1829 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             April 29, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: GRETNA PICAYUNE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 662 words

HEADLINE: Algiers 4-year-old can resume gene therapy;
Family says benefits outweigh the risks

BYLINE: By Susan Langenhennig; West Bank bureau

BODY:

   After two years of anxious waiting, an Algiers girl suffering from a rare
neurological disorder is back on a list of patients to receive an experimental
gene therapy treatment.

   The good news came last month, when the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
notified Douglas and Desiree Loeb Guth of Algiers Point that their 4-year-old
daughter, Lisette, and the other children with Canavan's disease who had been
involved in the gene therapy program at Thomas Jefferson University in
Philadelphia would be allowed to resume treatment.

   Canavan's disease is a genetic disorder that causes a breakdown in the
protective sheaths around the nerve fibers in the brain. The breakdown is caused
by a defective gene, resulting in a buildup of protein in the brain. The disease
short-circuits the nervous system, stifling normal childhood development.

   Children with Canavan's disease cannot walk, talk or support their heads.
Lisette can't roll over or grab and hold objects, and she has limited eyesight
and hearing.

   Researchers at Thomas Jefferson had been experimenting with ways to insert
healthy genes in Canavan's patients. But the treatment had been halted after the
widely publicized death of a teen-ager undergoing another type of gene therapy
at the University of Pennsylvania.

   After the death, the FDA began requiring researchers to do more testing on
nonhuman subjects before experimenting on living patients.

   But over the past year, the families of patients, including the Guths,
lobbied their elected officials to ease the restrictions. Some of the families
even traveled to Washington, D.C., with their sick children to testify before
Congress.

   "We've been waiting for so long," said Desiree, as she rocked Lisette on her
lap, stroking the girl's sandy brown curls. "I knew it was going to happen, but
I just didn't know if it was going to happen for Lisette."

   Although the treatment is risky, the Guths have seen its benefits. When
Lisette was 11/2, she underwent the first phase of the procedure. Doctors
inserted a reservoir under Lisette's scalp, leaving a small bump below her
hairline. A few months later, healthy genes were injected into the reservoir.

   Not long after the treatment, Lisette's vision and hearing improved, and she
was much more alert, said Desiree, a registered nurse at St. Charles General
Hospital.

   Although the positive effects have gradually worn off, the Guths are
optimistic that the next stage of treatment will produce similar improvements.

   Douglas Guth, a teacher at Belle Chasse High School, said he would love to
see his daughter's sight improve. Lisette can turn her large brown eyes in the
direction of someone speaking to her, but her parents and doctors don't think
she has much ability to see beyond light and shadows.

   "What I hope for is for her to stay healthy and happy and that we get a
better understanding of neurological disorders," Desiree said. "While I don't
think medical research should be pushed ahead faster than it is prudent, I think
there are times when there should be considerations for compassionate use of
experimental treatments for families who have no other options."

   Through Lisette's experiences, researchers will hopefully move closer to a
cure for this debilitating disease, Desiree said.

   But the cutting-edge research, which is financed by grants and the parents in
the program, is costly. Since Lisette has been involved in the program, the
Guths have raised $65,000 for Canavan's research.

   The family plans to hold its second annual "Blue Jeans for New Genes"
fund-raiser May 20 from 5 to 8 p.m. at the Banks Street Bar, behind Jesuit High
School. The event will feature entertainment by the Plowboys, a barbecue dinner
buffet, drinks and a parade of prizes. Tickets are $25, and checks should be
made payable to Canavan's Research. All donations are tax-deductible. Checks can
be mailed to Canavan's Research, 500 Pelican Ave., New Orleans, LA 70114 or call
362-3792.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2001


                             1830 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             April 29, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: ALGIERS PICAYUNE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 662 words

HEADLINE: Algiers 4-year-old can resume gene therapy

BYLINE: By Susan Langenhennig; West Bank bureau

BODY:

   After two years of anxious waiting, an Algiers girl suffering from a rare
neurological disorder is back on a list of patients to receive an experimental
gene therapy treatment.

   The good news came last month, when the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
notified Douglas and Desiree Loeb Guth of Algiers Point that their 4-year-old
daughter, Lisette, and the other children with Canavan's disease who had been
involved in the gene therapy program at Thomas Jefferson University in
Philadelphia would be allowed to resume treatment.

   Canavan's disease is a genetic disorder that causes a breakdown in the
protective sheaths around the nerve fibers in the brain. The breakdown is caused
by a defective gene, resulting in a buildup of protein in the brain. The disease
short-circuits the nervous system, stifling normal childhood development.

   Children with Canavan's disease cannot walk, talk or support their heads.
Lisette can't roll over or grab and hold objects, and she has limited eyesight
and hearing.

   Researchers at Thomas Jefferson had been experimenting with ways to insert
healthy genes in Canavan's patients. But the treatment had been halted after the
widely publicized death of a teen-ager undergoing another type of gene therapy
at the University of Pennsylvania.

   After the death, the FDA began requiring researchers to do more testing on
nonhuman subjects before experimenting on living patients.

   But over the past year, the families of patients, including the Guths,
lobbied their elected officials to ease the restrictions. Some of the families
even traveled to Washington, D.C., with their sick children to testify before
Congress.

   "We've been waiting for so long," said Desiree, as she rocked Lisette on her
lap, stroking the girl's sandy brown curls. "I knew it was going to happen, but
I just didn't know if it was going to happen for Lisette."

   Although the treatment is risky, the Guths have seen its benefits. When
Lisette was 11/2, she underwent the first phase of the procedure. Doctors
inserted a reservoir under Lisette's scalp, leaving a small bump below her
hairline. A few months later, healthy genes were injected into the reservoir.

   Not long after the treatment, Lisette's vision and hearing improved, and she
was much more alert, said Desiree, a registered nurse at St. Charles General
Hospital.

   Although the positive effects have gradually worn off, the Guths are
optimistic that the next stage of treatment will produce similar improvements.

   Douglas Guth, a teacher at Belle Chasse High School, said he would love to
see his daughter's sight improve. Lisette can turn her large brown eyes in the
direction of someone speaking to her, but her parents and doctors don't think
she has much ability to see beyond light and shadows.

   "What I hope for is for her to stay healthy and happy and that we get a
better understanding of neurological disorders," Desiree said. "While I don't
think medical research should be pushed ahead faster than it is prudent, I think
there are times when there should be considerations for compassionate use of
experimental treatments for families who have no other options."

   Through Lisette's experiences, researchers will hopefully move closer to a
cure for this debilitating disease, Desiree said.

   But the cutting-edge research, which is financed by grants and the parents in
the program, is costly. Since Lisette has been involved in the program, the
Guths have raised $65,000 for Canavan's research.

   The family plans to hold its second annual "Blue Jeans for New Genes"
fund-raiser May 20 from 5 to 8 p.m. at the Banks Street Bar, behind Jesuit High
School. The event will feature entertainment by the Plowboys, a barbecue dinner
buffet, drinks and a parade of prizes. Tickets are $25, and checks should be
made payable to Canavan's Research. All donations are tax-deductible. Checks can
be mailed to Canavan's Research, 500 Pelican Ave., New Orleans, LA 70114 or call
362-3792.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2001


                             1831 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    April 28, 2001, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 341 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy restores dogs' eyesight, may treat blind

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   NEW YORK - Using gene therapy, scientists have restored vision in dogs with a
version of a rare disease that blinds human infants. The work may lead to
treatments for several genetic forms of blindness.

   The dogs had a version of Leber congenital amaurosis, an untreatable
condition that causes near total blindness in infancy.

   Perhaps 10,000 Americans have it, and about 1,000 of them have the particular
genetic defect corrected in the dogs, said researcher Dr. Jean Bennett.

   If the gene therapy works in Leber patients, it might pave the way for
treating a variety of hereditary vision diseases that strike the retina, known
collectively as retinitis pigmentosa, which affects 100,000 to 200,000
Americans, said Dr. Gerald Chader, chief scientific officer of the Foundation
Fighting Blindness.

   "It should open the floodgates," said Chader, whose organization helped
finance the research.

   Bennett, an associate professor of ophthalmology at the University of
Pennsylvania, and colleagues report their experiments on three Briard dogs in
the May issue of the journal Nature Genetics.

   She said she hopes initial experiments in people can begin within about two
years.

   The dogs were blind because they lacked a particular gene. Without it, their
eyes could not make a pigment necesssary to perceive light. The therapy was
designed to deliver working copies of the gene to their eyes.

   Researchers treated one eye in each animal and used the other eye for
comparison. Four months after treatment, several tests showed the animals had
regained at least some sight in the treated eye.

   Most dramatically, the dogs were allowed to wander in a room cluttered with
furniture. The dogs were much better at avoiding objects on the same side of
their bodies as the treated eye than on the other side. The dogs also seemed to
be using the treated eye to look around, Bennett said.

   Researchers also measured how much the dogs' pupils contracted in response to
light. The treated eyes showed a better response than did the untreated eyes.


TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2001


                             1832 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            April 28, 2001 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: PART A; Part 1; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 692 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY RESTORES SIGHT IN DOGS BORN BLIND;
MEDICINE: TREATMENT APPEARS TO REVERSE A HEREDITARY EYE DISEASE THAT IS ALSO
FOUND IN PEOPLE. HUMAN TRIALS COULD BEGIN IN A FEW YEARS.

BYLINE: From the Washington Post

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Dogs born blind are seeing the world for the first time after scientists
injected new genes into their eyes. The unprecedented feat has electrified the
families of the nearly 10,000 Americans born with the same disease--and hundreds
of thousands of others with closely related forms of blindness.

   The work, led by researchers at the University of Pennsylvania, marks the
first time that congenital blindness has been reversed in an animal larger than
a mouse. It suggests that a single injection into the eye may someday restore
vision in children born with the genetic disorder--called Leber congenital
amaurosis--one of several incurable forms of blindness collectively known as
retinitis pigmentosa.

   Doctors said they suspect that similar gene therapy treatments could prove
curative for many of the 150,000 Americans suffering from that broad family of
diseases, all of which involve a deterioration of the light-detecting retina in
the back of the eye. If ongoing studies in dogs go well, the researchers said,
the first human studies could begin in the next three to four years.

   "We have to be careful not to fill people with false expectations or false
hopes," said Albert Maguire, an ophthalmologist at Penn's Scheie Eye Institute
who was involved in the new study. "But that said, it's hard not to get very
excited about this because it's a very dramatic result. I mean, basically these
dogs were blind and now they are not blind anymore."

   Children with LCA have little or no vision at birth, and what little may be
there is lost over time. It occurs when there is a defect in any of several
genes that help convert light into electrical signals in the eye. Parents
carrying the defect on one copy of the gene have normal vision. The condition
affects children who inherit two defective copies--one from each parent.

   The new work was done on Briard dogs, which in the course of long-term
breeding by humans have acquired a blinding genetic mutation in the so-called
rpe65 gene--identical to the one that causes about 20% of LCA cases. Mutations
in any of a dozen or so other genes also cause LCA, and mutations in scores of
other genes cause other forms of retinitis pigmentosa.

   Jean Bennett, Maguire's wife and co-worker at the Scheie Institute's F.M.
Kirby research center, led the new study, in which thousands of viruses were
injected directly into the eyes of three blind Briards. The viruses had been
genetically engineered by scientists at the University of Florida to contain
healthy versions of the rpe65 gene, which the viruses then delivered to the
dogs' ailing retinal cells.

   The dogs' left eyes got injections into one part of the eye--an area distant
from the retina--with no effect. But the right eyes got injections directly
behind the retina, very close to the so-called retinal pigment epithelial cells
where the rpe gene does its job. Before long, all three dogs had vision in their
right eyes.

   A video shows the dogs navigating around a cluttered room, only bumping into
objects when they are on the animals' left side. Electrical measurements of the
retina, resembling an EKG for the heart, appear normal. And pupil responses
prove that the neural connections between the eye and the brain are
working--evidence of real visual perception.

   "It's very exciting," said Michael Redmond, a senior investigator at the
National Eye Institute who has done seminal work on the rpe gene. "It's just
beautiful work."

   Previous studies on rats and mice with LCA had achieved temporary restoration
of vision with a highly toxic nutritional additive, and longer lasting but only
partial restoration with gene therapy. It's difficult to measure visual acuity
in dogs. But by all measures they are still seeing very well nine months after
they were treated, with no ill effects.

   "We are bursting at the seams," said Betsy Brint of Highland Park, Ill.,
whose son Alan was born with LCA four years ago. "When Alan was diagnosed the
doctors all said there's nothing you could do and no cures and very little
research going on," said Brint, who with husband David created the Foundation
for Retinal Research. Now, she said, everything is changing.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2001


                             1833 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     April 28, 2001 Saturday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 09A

LENGTH: 379 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy gives sight to dogs;
Researchers hope method can help humans, too

BYLINE: MALCOLM RITTER Associated Press

BODY:

   New York -- Using gene therapy, scientists have restored vision in dogs that
had a version of a rare disease that blinds human infants. The work may lead to
treatments for several genetic forms of blindness.

   The dogs had a version of Leber congenital amaurosis, an untreatable
condition that causes near total blindness in infancy. Perhaps 10,000 Americans
have it, and about 1,000 of them have the particular genetic defect corrected in
the dogs, said researcher Jean Bennett.

   If the gene therapy works in Leber patients, it might pave the way for
treating a variety of hereditary vision diseases that strike the retina, known
collectively as retinitis pigmentosa, which affects 100,000 to 200,000
Americans, said Gerald Chader, chief scientific officer of the Foundation
Fighting Blindness.

   "It should open the floodgates," said Chader, whose organization helped
finance the research.

   Bennett, an associate professor of ophthalmology at the University of
Pennsylvania, and colleagues report their experiments on three Briard dogs in
the May issue of the journal Nature Genetics.

   She said she hopes initial experiments in people can begin within about two
years.

   The dogs were blind because they lacked a particular gene. Without it, their
eyes could not make a pigment necessary to perceive light. The therapy was
designed to deliver working copies of the gene to their eyes.

   Researchers used eye surgery to deliver a dose of the gene, carried by a
virus that deposited the gene within eye cells.  They treated one eye in each
animal and used the other eye for comparison.

   Four months after treatment, several tests showed the animals had regained at
least some sight in the treated eye. Most dramatically, the dogs were allowed to
wander in a room cluttered with furniture. The dogs were much better at avoiding
objects on the same side of their bodies as the treated eye than on the other
side.

   The dogs also seemed to be using the treated eye to look around, Bennett
said.

   Researchers also measured how much the dogs' pupils contracted in response to
light. The treated eyes showed a better response than untreated eyes did,
although it was not as good as normal dog eyes show.

   The treatment's effects have lasted nine months so far, Bennett said.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2001


                             1834 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            April 28, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 147 words

HEADLINE: Dogs' Sight Restored With Gene Therapy

BYLINE:  By The Associated Press

BODY:

   Using gene therapy, scientists have restored vision in dogs with a version of
a rare disease that blinds human infants. The work may lead to treatments for
several genetic forms of blindness.

        The dogs had a version of Leber congenital amaurosis, an untreatable
condition that causes near total blindness in infancy. Perhaps 10,000 Americans
have it, and about 1,000 of them have the particular genetic defect corrected in
the dogs, said a researcher, Dr. Jean Bennett, an associate professor of
ophthalmology at the University of Pennsylvania.

    If the gene therapy works in Leber patients, it may pave the way for
treating a variety of diseases that strike the retina, known collectively as
retinitis pigmentosa, which affects 100,000 to 200,000 Americans, said Dr.
Gerald Chader, chief scientific officer of the Foundation Fighting Blindness,
which helped finance the research.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2001


                             1835 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2001 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                            April 28, 2001, Saturday

SECTION: Metro; Pg. 010

LENGTH: 608 words

HEADLINE: BLIND DOGS HAVE THEIR DAY

BODY:

   Scientists in Pennsylvania have used gene therapy to help blind dogs see
again, raising hopes the treatment one day may be used in humans.

   Three dogs being treated had a version of Leber congenital amaurosis, a
disease that causes blindness in human infants.

   If gene therapy helps Leber patients, it might lead to a way to treat a
variety of hereditary diseases affecting the retina.

   The dogs were blind because they did not have a particular gene needed to
make a pigment necessary to perceive light.

   Surgery delivered a dose of the gene to the eye cells, reports the journal
"Nature Genetics." Four months later, the dogs regained some sight in the
treated eye.  Post Wire Services

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2001


                             1836 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     April 28, 2001 Saturday CITY-D EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 431 words

HEADLINE: New gene gives some sight to 3 blind dogs;
A Penn surgeon, one of the study's authors,
hopes for success in eventual human trials.<

BYLINE: Faye Flam INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Demonstrating the possibility that some permanent forms of blindness can be
reversed, scientists have restored sight to three dogs suffering from a rare
genetic eye disease.

   "We hope we have the same biology in humans," said Albert Maguire, an
ophthalmic surgeon at the University of Pennsylvania's Scheie Eye Institute, one
of the principal authors of the study. Maguire said that in the best of
circumstances it would likely take three to five years before researchers could
begin human trials.

   Scientists used a form of gene therapy, injecting one eye in each of three
dogs with a healthy form of the gene that was defective. The researchers used a
modified virus to deliver the engineered gene, essentially infecting cells with
the normal version.

   The dogs had a canine version of Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA), which has
been found in purebreds that have been subject to too much inbreeding. The Penn
team used a breed called Swedish Briards.

   LCA also is a rare disease in humans, affecting several thousand people in
the United States. But the research might have further applications.

   "This is specifically for one type of retinal degeneration, but the
implications are serious for any genetic eye disease," Santa Tumminia, a
specialist in diseases of the retina at the Foundation Fighting Blindness in
Hunt Valley, Md., said yesterday. The class of hereditary diseases for which the
procedure might be investigated is known as retinitis pigmentosa, which affects
100,000 to 200,000 Americans.

   The researchers, led by Scheie's Jean Bennett, have published their findings
in today's issue of Nature Genetics.

   The faulty gene causes LCA by preventing the body from forming a critical
protein, one that in healthy people transports a form of Vitamin A to the
retina. This causes a loss of vision at birth.

   A few experiments had attempted to inject the protein directly into the eye,
Maguire said, but these met with marginal success. A better strategy seemed to
be to administer the gene that would allow the dogs to make the protein
themselves.

   Maguire injected the gene into cells behind the retina six months ago. A week
after the surgery, he said, they were able to see perhaps half or two-thirds as
well as a normal dog.

   The dogs, blind since birth, could now see well enough to navigate around
objects. Now, more than six months since the treatment, two of the three dogs
have maintained that ability and seem happy, Maguire said. The third was killed
to see whether the gene was working.

   Faye Flam's e-mail address is fflam@phillynews.com.

CORRECTION-DATE: MAY 5, 2001

CORRECTION:
CLEARING THE RECORD, PUBLISHED MAY 5, 2001, FOLLOWS: In an article last Saturday
about a gene-therapy experiment on blind dogs at the University of Pennsylvania,
a researcher mistakenly said that one of the three + animals had been killed to
determine whether the gene was working. The lead researcher said this week that
the needed tissue had been obtained without sacrificing the dog.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2001


                             1837 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                        April 28, 2001, Saturday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; HEALTH ; Pg. 20A

LENGTH: 387 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy restoring blind dogs' sight holds hope for people


SOURCE: Associated Press

BODY: NEW YORK - Using gene therapy, scientists have restored vision in dogs
with a version of a rare disease that blinds human infants. The work may lead to
treatments for several genetic forms of blindness.

    The dogs had a version of Leber congenital amaurosis, an untreatable
condition that causes near total blindness in infancy. Perhaps 10,000 Americans
have it, and about 1,000 of them have the particular genetic defect corrected in
the dogs, said researcher Dr. Jean Bennett.

    If the gene therapy works in Leber patients, it might pave the way for
treating a variety of hereditary vision diseases that strike the retina, known
collectively as retinitis pigmentosa, which affects 100,000 to 200,000
Americans, said Dr. Gerald Chader, chief scientific officer of the Foundation
Fighting Blindness.

    "It should open the floodgates," said Chader, whose organization helped
finance the research.

    Bennett, an associate professor of ophthalmology at the University of
Pennsylvania, and colleagues report their experiments on three Briard dogs in
the May issue of the journal Nature Genetics.

    She said she hopes initial experiments in people can begin within about two
years.

    The dogs were blind because they lacked a particular gene. Without it, their
eyes could not make a pigment necessary to perceive light. The therapy was
designed to deliver working copies of the gene to their eyes.

    Researchers used eye surgery to deliver a dose of the gene, carried by a
virus that deposited the gene within eye cells. They treated one eye in each
animal and used the other eye for comparison.

    Four months after treatment, several tests showed the animals had regained
at least some sight in the treated eye.

    Most dramatically, the dogs were allowed to wander in a room cluttered with
furniture. The dogs were much better at avoiding objects on the same side of
their bodies as the treated eye than on the other side.

    The dogs also seemed to be using the treated eye to look around, Bennett
said.

    Researchers also measured how much the dogs' pupils contracted in response
to light. The treated eyes showed a better response than untreated eyes did,
although it was not as good as normal eyes.

    The treatment's effects have lasted nine months so far, Bennett said.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2001


                             1838 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

               April 28, 2001, Saturday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 517 words

HEADLINE: Therapy may cure some blindness

SOURCE: Compiled from Times Wires

BODY:


   Dogs born blind are seeing the world for the first time after scientists
injected new genes into their eyes. The unprecedented feat has electrified the
families of the nearly 10,000 Americans born with the same disease - and
hundreds of thousands of others with closely related forms of blindness.

   The work, led by researchers at the University of Pennsylvania, marks the
first time that congenital blindness has been reversed in an animal larger than
a mouse. It suggests that a single injection into the eye may someday restore
vision in children born with the genetic disorder, Leber congenital amaurosis,
one of several incurable forms of blindness collectively known as retinitis
pigmentosa.

   Reporting in the May issue of the journal Nature Genetics, doctors said they
suspect that similar gene therapy treatments could prove curative for many of
the 150,000 Americans suffering from that broad family of diseases, all of which
involve a deterioration of the light-detecting retina in the back of the eye. If
ongoing studies in dogs go well, the researchers said, the first human studies
could begin in three to four years.

   In breast cancer news . . .

   TEST SHOWS PROMISE: An experimental technique of analyzing milk duct cells
might one day be able to detect breast cancers that mammograms miss in younger
women, according to preliminary research.

   Nearly all breast cancers start in the milk ducts. The method, which involves
flushing the ducts to dislodge cells by injecting saline solution through the
nipples and drawing it back out again, is described this week in the Lancet
medical journal.

   While mammograms are good at detecting cancer in post-menopausal women,
spotting tumors in the breasts of women under 40 is more challenging because the
breast tissue is so dense.

   Scientists have therefore been trying to develop new surveillance strategies
for women at high risk of developing the disease, hoping to detect earlier-stage
tumors, when they're easier to treat.

   STUDY WAS FAKED: A key study pointing to the effectiveness of high-dose
chemotherapy and bone marrow transplants in treating metastatic breast cancer
was based on faked data, cancer experts said Thursday.

   The American Society of Clinical Oncology announced that an unscrupulous
South African researcher, Dr. Werner Bezwoda, has seduced thousands of women
with breast cancer into undergoing expensive, debilitating and often fatal bone
marrow transplants. His data were fraudulent, suggesting the controversial
procedure was more effective than it actually is, the society concluded.

   "Bezwoda duped us all," Dr. Larry Norton, president-elect of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology, said at a news conference.

   The new revelations do not mean that bone marrow transplants are worthless,
the oncology society said, only that the procedure has not been proven to be
effective. Several large clinical trials are now under way to determine
precisely how beneficial the transplants are, and the society reiterated that
women should undergo the procedure only if they are enrolled in a clinical
trial.


LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2001


                             1839 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2001 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            April 28, 2001 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 664 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy fixes blindness in dogs

BYLINE: RICK WEISS, WASHINGTON POST

BODY:

   Dogs born blind are seeing the world for the first time after scientists
injected new genes into their eyes.

    The unprecedented feat has electrified the families of the nearly 10,000
Americans born with the same disease - and hundreds of thousands of others with
closely related forms of blindness.

    The work, led by researchers at the University of Pennsylvania, marks the
first time that congenital blindness has been reversed in an animal larger than
a mouse.

    It suggests that a single injection into the eye may someday restore vision
in children born with the genetic disorder - called Leber congenital amaurosis -
one of several incurable forms of blindness collectively known as retinitis
pigmentosa.

    Doctors said they suspect that similar gene therapy treatments could prove
curative for many of the 150,000 Americans suffering from that broad family of
diseases, all of which involve a deterioration of the light- detecting retina in
the back of the eye.

    If ongoing studies in dogs go well, the researchers said, the first human
studies could begin in the next three to four years.

    "We have to be careful not to fill people with false expectations or false
hopes," said Albert Maguire, an ophthalmologist at Penn's Scheie Eye Institute
who was involved in the new study.

    "But that said, it's hard not to get very excited about this because it's a
very dramatic result. I mean, basically these dogs were blind and now they are
not blind anymore."

    Children with LCA have little or no vision at birth, and what little may be
there is lost over time. It occurs when there is a defect in any of several
genes that help convert light into electrical signals in the eye. Parents
carrying the defect on one copy of the gene have normal vision. The condition
affects children who inherit two defective copies - one from each parent.

    The new work was done on Briard dogs, which in the course of long-term
breeding by humans have acquired a blinding genetic mutation in the so-called
rpe65 gene - identical to the one that causes many LCA cases.

   Mutations in any of a dozen or so other genes also cause LCA, and mutations
in scores of others genes cause other forms of retinitis pigmentosa.

    Jean Bennett, Maguire's wife and co-worker at the Scheie Institute's F.M.
Kirby research center, led the new study, in which thousands of viruses were
injected directly into the eyes of three blind Briards.

    The viruses had been genetically engineered by scientists at the University
of Florida to contain healthy versions of the rpe65 gene, which the viruses then
delivered to the dogs' ailing retinal cells.

    The dogs' left eyes got injections into one part of the eye - an area
distant from the retina - with no effect. But the right eyes got injections
directly behind the retina, very close to the so-called retinal pigment
epithelial cells where the rpe gene does its job. Before long, all three dogs
had vision in their right eyes.

    A video shows the dogs navigating around a cluttered room, only bumping into
objects when they are on the animals' left side. Electrical measurements of the
retina, resembling an EKG for the heart, appear normal. And pupil responses
prove that the neural connections between the eye and the brain are working -
evidence of real visual perception.

    "It's very exciting," said Michael Redmond, a senior investigator at the
National Eye Institute who has done seminal work on the rpe gene. "It's just
beautiful work."

    "We are bursting at the seams," said Betsey Brint of Highland Park, Ill.,
whose son, Alan, was born with LCA four years ago.

    "When Alan was diagnosed, the doctors all said there's nothing you could do
and no cures and very little research going on," said Brint, who with husband,
David, created the Foundation for Retinal Research. Now, she said, everything is
changing.

    But the work, done in puppies 3 or 4 months old, does not prove the method
will work in children, much less in adults. And it's unclear whether multiple
injections would be needed.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                             1840 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            April 28, 2001 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 967 words

HEADLINE: Gene Treatment Restores Vision In Blind Dogs;
Study Offers Humans Hope

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    Dogs born blind are seeing the world for the first time after scientists
injected new genes into their eyes. The unprecedented feat has electrified the
families of the nearly 10,000 Americans born with the same disease -- and
hundreds of thousands of others with closely related forms of blindness.

    The work, led by researchers at the University of Pennsylvania, marks the
first time that congenital blindness has been reversed in an animal larger than
a mouse. It suggests that a single injection into the eye may someday restore
vision in children born with the genetic disorder -- called Leber congenital
amaurosis -- one of several incurable forms of blindness collectively known as
retinitis pigmentosa.

    Doctors said they suspect that similar gene therapy treatments could prove
curative for many of the 150,000 Americans suffering from that broad family of
diseases, all of which involve a deterioration of the light-detecting retina in
the back of the eye. If ongoing studies in dogs go well, the researchers said,
the first human studies could begin in the next three to four years.

    "We have to be careful not to fill people with false expectations or false
hopes," said Albert Maguire, an ophthalmologist at Penn's Scheie Eye Institute
who was involved in the study. "But that said, it's hard not to get very excited
about this, because it's a very dramatic result. I mean, basically these dogs
were blind and now they are not blind anymore."

    Children with LCA have little or no vision at birth, and what little may be
there is lost over time. It occurs when there is a defect in any of several
genes that help convert light into electrical signals in the eye. Parents
carrying the defect on one copy of the gene have normal vision. The condition
affects children who inherit two defective copies -- one from each parent.

    The new work was done on Briard dogs, which in the course of long-term
breeding by humans have acquired a blinding genetic mutation in the RPE65 gene
-- identical to the one that causes about 20 percent of LCA cases. Mutations in
any of a dozen or so other genes also cause LCA, and mutations in scores of
others cause other forms of retinitis pigmentosa.

    Jean Bennett, Maguire's wife and co-worker at the Scheie Institute's F.M.
Kirby Center for Molecular Ophthalmology, led the study, in which thousands of
viruses were injected directly into the eyes of three blind Briards. The viruses
had been genetically engineered by scientists at the University of Florida to
contain healthy versions of the RPE65 gene, which the viruses then delivered to
the dogs' ailing retinal cells.

    The dogs' left eyes received injections into one part of the eye -- an area
distant from the retina -- with no effect. But the right eyes received
injections directly behind the retina, very close to the retinal pigment
epithelial cells where the RPE65 gene does its job. Before long, all three dogs
had vision in their right eyes.

    A video shows the dogs navigating around a cluttered room, only bumping into
objects when they are on the animals' left side. Electrical measurements of the
retina, resembling an EKG for the heart, appear normal. And pupil responses
prove that the neural connections between the eye and the brain are working --
evidence of real visual perception.

    "It's very exciting," said Michael Redmond, a senior investigator at the
National Eye Institute who has done seminal work on the RPE65 gene. "It's just
beautiful work."

    Previous studies on rats and mice with LCA had achieved temporary
restoration of vision with a highly toxic nutritional additive, and longer
lasting but only partial restoration with gene therapy. It's difficult to
measure visual acuity in dogs. But by all measures they are still seeing very
well nine months after they were treated, with no ill effects.

    "We are bursting at the seams," said Betsy Brint of Highland Park, Ill.,
whose son Alan was born with LCA four years ago.

    "When Alan was diagnosed the doctors all said there's nothing you could do
and no cures and very little research going on," said Brint, who with husband
David created the Foundation for Retinal Research. Now, she said, everything is
changing.

    But the work, done in puppies 3 or 4 months old, does not prove the method
will work in children, much less in adults. And it's unclear whether multiple
injections would be needed to maintain the benefits.

    "There's a big debate whether if we wait too long the brain may not be able
to accept vision, or the photosensitive cells may have degenerated too much to
work," Brint said. "So I feel like we're really in a race against time."

    There is some evidence that LCA remains reversible for many years.

    "We think the best time to intervene is birth to 12 years old," said Santa
Tumminia, director of special science programs at the Foundation Fighting
Blindness of Hunt Valley, Md. The foundation helped fund the new work, which
included researchers at Cornell University and appears today in the May issue of
the journal Nature Genetics.

    But many questions need to be answered, experts said, before doctors can
justify human studies -- especially considering the ethical stickiness of
conducting experiments on children. Gene therapy has a 10-year history of
raising false hopes, and the field has been weathering intense criticism since
the November 1999 death of a teenager in a gene therapy experiment at Penn.

    "We want to be sure the therapeutic effect is long-term . . . without
complications or bad side effects," Bennett said. "We want to make sure there is
no evidence of toxicity in the dogs' eyes or anywhere else in the body."

    If the technique proves safe and effective, Bennett said, it may also work
for other kinds of retinitis pigmentosa using viruses stuffed with the
appropriate genes.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2001


                             1841 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                             April 27, 2001, Friday

SECTION: EDITORIAL & COMMENT, Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 470 words

HEADLINE: CELL-A-THONS

BODY:


   Heart disease and cancer are the major killers in this country, but perhaps
no illness is more feared than Alzheimer's disease, which slowly and inexorably
robs a person of his mind and physical capacity. No doubt that is why so much
research is directed at this cruel illness.

   A few weeks ago, a 60-year-old woman in the early stages of the disease had a
hole drilled in her skull in a San Diego hospital and was injected with millions
of her own skin cells, which had been genetically modified. This is believed to
be the first time gene therapy was tried on an Alzheimer's patient. Dr. William
Mobley, chairman of the Neurology Department at Stanford University, said the
logic of this experiment is sound.

   He was referring to 20 years of research tracing the changes that accompany
normal aging of the brain and the processes that lead to the types of dementia
suffered by Alzheimer's victims.

   In another foray into gene therapy, researchers at the University of
California at Los Angeles and the University of Pittsburgh say they have
isolated human stem cells from fat sucked out of patients in routine
liposuction.

   All the fat that Americans are carrying around could provide a generous
supply of cells needed for research into gene therapy.

   Up to now, there has been a scarcity of stem cells, which develop in the
first stages of life and have been harvested at fertility clinics. There is much
disagreement over the ethics of acquiring stem cells from fetal tissue. Using
stem cells from fat, though, would sidestep the ethical and emotional minefield
that has developed around the use of aborted fetuses.

   In the Alzheimer's experiment, gene therapy is designed to produce nerve-
growth factor, a natural substance that will spur growth of and nurture nerve
cells that have been killed in higher brain regions.

   When this process was performed on monkeys, cells were stopped from dying and
atrophied cells were brought back to life. Researchers want to find out whether
this will happen in humans, too, restoring memory loss to Alzheimer's sufferers.
If no harm comes to the first patient in the experiment after three months,
seven more will be given new cells.

   Both the fat-cell and Alzheimer's brain- cell experiments are in early
stages. But both areas of research hold the prospect of major gains.

   Some people question studies in which no practical applications are expected
at an early time. That is shortsighted, though. Sometimes the right path is not
evident until after a journey down many dead-end streets.

   Generous funding from both public and private sources make medical research
in this country pre-eminent in the world. Exciting scientific explorations carry
the promise that in the next generation, effective treatments for serious
illness will replace despair.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2001


                             1842 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     April 26, 2001 Thursday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg.A-21 AS OTHERS SEE IT

LENGTH: 372 words

HEADLINE: ETHICAL LAPSES IN RESEARCH

BODY:

   The nation's system for policing medical research is broken. Ethical lapses
have been uncovered at some of the nation's most prestigious research
institutions. At least one patient died as a result. Yet when an influential
federal committee recommended modest reforms last week, some researchers balked.
Current standards, which mandate extensive reviews, are sufficient, they argued.
They are dead wrong.

    Almost two years ago, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
concluded that patients are regularly placed at risk during medical experiments.
Nearly 18 months ago, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died of massive organ failure
brought on by an experimental gene therapy treatment at the University of
Pennsylvania.

    Last week, the Institute of Medicine, part of the National Academy of
Sciences, called for a new accreditation system for medical research. The
system, similar to that used to accredit universities and hospitals, would
review all groups that conduct research on human subjects. For the first time,
the review would extend not only to universities and hospitals, but also to
private facilities and doctors' offices, where an increasing proportion of
pharmaceutical research takes place.

    Monday, HHS Secretary Tommy Thompson announced an effort to collect data on
patient safety in various research programs. That information has never been
systematically collected. Instead, federal officials rely on researchers to
report injuries and deaths.

    As with several other troubling ethical problems, the death of Mr. Gelsinger
in September 1999 demonstrated the weakness of that system. Researchers led by
Dr. James Wilson, who directed the experiment, failed to immediately report
serious reactions in two other patients enrolled in the drug trial, apparently
for fear the study would be halted. Only later was it revealed that Dr. Wilson
owned $13.5 million worth of stock in a company that made the ill-fated gene
therapy drug.

    By themselves, accreditation and information gathering will not guarantee
that medical research is free from ethical lapses. They are, at best, small
steps in the right direction. But after so many years of inaction, even small
steps are reason to cheer.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2001


                             1843 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 24, 2001, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 24 Medicine

LENGTH: 565 words

HEADLINE: BREAKTHROUGH: RESTORING BLOOD FLOW;
Gene therapy experiment targets clogged arteries

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: LEIGH HOPPER, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   Each year, surgeons perform nearly a million balloon angioplasties and
install 376,000 stents to restore blood flow to clogged arteries, according to
the American Heart Association.

   The unpleasant sequel to these statistics is that in 15 to 40 percent of
these patients, the cleaned-out blood vessels supplying blood to the heart will
clog up again within six months. Among patients who undergo angioplasty in a
leg, up to 80 percent will have a recurrence of the problem.

   "These people have to come back three or four times a year to prevent
amputation of limbs," said Dr. Pierre Zoldhelyi, an assistant professor of
internal medicine at the University of Texas Medical School at Houston. "This is
especially urgent in patients with diabetes who have frequently recurring
(blockage) in the lower extremities."

   An experimental gene therapy that has helped heal damaged vessels in a
species of rabbit that has naturally occurring atherosclerosis, or hardening of
the arteries, may offer hope to humans.

   Zoldhelyi and Dr. James T. Willerson, a cardiologist and president of
UT-Houston, saw a 40 percent reduction in scarring in animals that received gene
therapy after angioplasty. Scarring is the initial indicator that the area
damaged by angioplasty will close up again.

   "We're really optimistic the therapy will provide a door to entirely new
interventions," said Zoldhelyi, who is also director of the Wafic Said Molecular
Cardiology and Gene Therapy Research Laboratory at the Texas Heart Institute of
St Luke's Episcopal Hospital.

   Doctors have limited options for preventing clots in the arteries supplying
blood to the heart and limbs.

   In the rabbit experiments, researchers performed balloon angioplasties on the
carotid arteries. Although the procedure widens narrowed vessels, it also causes
a small injury in the process.

   After angioplasty, the damaged area was exposed via catheter to a cold virus
carrying the beneficial gene. Cold viruses are commonly used as the "vector" to
carry experimental genes into the cells they infect.

   The gene contained tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI), which appears to
reduce clotting and scarring.

   For seven to 10 days, the virus pumped out the TFPI gene. After four weeks,
researchers found a 40 percent reduction in scarring.

   "If you can influence with local gene therapy the first 10 days, you achieve
protection beyond that period. How long, I don't know," Zoldhelyi said.

   Researchers hope to recruit 20 patients with "moderately severe"
atherosclerosis late this year or early next year to undergo gene therapy.

   Gene therapy has been under closer scrutiny since the death of an Arizona
youth in a gene therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania in 1999.
That incident resulted in a federal overhaul of medical research involving human
volunteers and included a temporary shutdown of experiments at numerous
institutions including the UT Medical Branch in Galveston.

   Willerson said this particular gene therapy, in development for five years,
will undergo additional safety testing before it is applied to humans.

   Zoldhelyi said he is considering injecting the gene therapy directly into the
vessel walls where it is needed.

   "We're trying to limit the clot prevention to the site in need, not giving it
randomly to the whole body hoping it goes to the one-centimeter long artery,"
Zoldhelyi said.


GRAPHIC: Mug: Dr. Pierre Zoldhelyi, assistant professor of internal medicine, is
optimistic about gene therapy to prevent blood clots.

TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2001


                             1844 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                April 24, 2001, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. C8

LENGTH: 374 words

HEADLINE: EVEN SMALL STEPS ARE PROGRESS

BODY:


MEDICAL RESEARCH

   THE nation's system for policing medical research is broken. Ethical lapses
have been uncovered at some of the nation's most prestigious research
institutions. At least one patient died as a result. Yet when an influential
federal committee recommended modest reforms last week, some researchers balked.
Current standards, which mandate extensive reviews, are sufficient, they argued.
They are dead wrong.

   Almost two years ago, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
concluded that patients are regularly placed at risk during medical experiments.
Nearly 18 months ago, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died of massive organ failure
brought on by an experimental gene therapy treatment at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   Last week, the Institute of Medicine, part of the National Academy of
Sciences, called for a new accreditation system for medical research. The
system, similar to that used to accredit universities and hospitals, would
review all groups that conduct research on human subjects. For the first time,
the review would extend not only to universities and hospitals, but also to
private facilities and doctors' offices, where an increasing proportion of
pharmaceutical research takes place.

   Monday, HHS Secretary Tommy Thompson announced an effort to collect data on
patient safety in various research programs. That information has never been
systematically collected. Instead, federal officials rely on researchers to
report injuries and deaths. As with several other troubling ethical problems,
the death of Mr. Gelsinger in September 1999 demonstrated the weakness of that
system. Researchers led by Dr. James Wilson, who directed the experiment, failed
to immediately report serious reactions in two other patients enrolled in the
drug trial, apparently for fear the study would be halted. Only later was it
revealed that Dr. Wilson owned $ 13.5 million worth of stock in a company that
made the ill-fated gene therapy drug.

   By themselves, accreditation and information gathering will not guarantee
that medical research is free from ethical lapses. They are, at best, small
steps in the right direction. But after so many years of inaction, even small
steps are reason to cheer.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2001


                             1845 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             April 23, 2001 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 585 words

HEADLINE: OUT & ABOUT

BYLINE: Roxanne Roberts

BODY:

    Kennedy Center,

   Hitting the Big 3-0To celebrate its Spring Gala last night, the Kennedy
Center took the whole "family" thing to a new level. Exhibit A: Lots of hugging,
because the center's new president, Michael Kaiser, is a hugger. Exhibit B:
Jeanne and Otto Ruesch, the first ever husband-wife duo to chair the event.

    "This has been such an easy sell," said a beaming Jeanne, who credited the
center's 30th anniversary and Kaiser's accessible style to the record $ 2.5
million the event raised. (Ah, but some credit falls to the seamless work of the
couple, who are also chairman and COO of their foreign-currency firm. "I know
exactly when to shut up and when to say something," said Otto.)

    Anyway, the KC family had plenty to feel good about. The weekend kicked off
Saturday with a reception at the State Department, hosted by Alma Powell, vice
chair of the center. Guests at last night's black-tie dinner for 1,400 included
former Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev, patron Alberto Vilar (he just gave $
50 million to the Kennedy Center), Senate Minority Leader Tom Daschle, former
U.N. ambassador Richard Holbrooke, actress Phylicia Rashad, Supreme Court
Justice Stephen Breyer and Kennedy Center Chairman Jim Johnson. The party moved
into the Concert Hall for performances featuring the NSO's Leonard Slatkin,
Christine Baranski, Debbie Allen, Art Garfunkel, Broadway actor Norm Lewis and
ballerina Nina Ananiashvili.

    But no group hug at the end. This is Washington, after all.

   Aiding the Fight Against Parkinson's The mood was optimistic, but one would
expect nothing less at a party called "Gala for Hope." More than 900 people
gathered Friday night at the Tysons Corner Ritz-Carlton as guests of the Capital
Chapter of the National Parkinson Foundation. "We're going to get enough money
to find a cure," said honoree and chapter founder Peter Morabito. Four other
people with the illness were honored as well, including journalists Jack
Anderson and Joel Havemann.

    Chairs Bette Lee Levenson and Lucia Santini Boone raised $ 500,000,
presented to Jeffrey Kordower for his gene therapy research. The event's five
honorees received Buddy Awards, a recognition named for Levenson's husband, who
died last May after a 20-year struggle with the disease. "I miss him so much,
but I am so proud," she said. "I know he's smiling down."

   Venus and Serena,

   Holding Court

    Talk about a party with soul . . . er, sole. The Tennis Ball Saturday night
was a fun, funky finish to the grand-opening day of the Southeast Tennis &
Learning Center on Mississippi Avenue. The theme was "black tie and tennis
shoes" -- every one of the 650 guests slipped on a new pair of Reeboks, donated
in honor of center founder Cora Masters Barry and tennis phenoms Serena and
Venus Williams. (The formal footwear for these Cinderellas?)

    Landing the tennis superstars was a huge coup. "We don't do anything we
don't want to do -- that's for sure," Venus said sweetly, flashing her fabulous
$ 40 million smile. The new center, she said, was a great opportunity for the
next generation to excel on and off the courts.

    After a day of tennis clinics for local children, the two sisters changed
into ball gowns for the dinner, which was held on an indoor court. Gospel singer
Yolanda Adams sang; guests included tennis greats Pam Shriver and Zina Garrison,
Mayor Tony Williams, former mayor Marion Barry and Del. Eleanor Holmes Norton.

    Prince Charming may have to rethink the whole glass-slipper thing.

   With Janelle Erlichman

   </body>

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2001


                             1846 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                April 22, 2001, Sunday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; IN BRIEF; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 670 words

HEADLINE: Computers would predict diseases

SOURCE: Compiled from Times Wires

DATELINE: CHICAGO

BODY:


   Doctors have asked the questions for years. Has anybody in your family had
breast cancer? Heart disease? Do you smoke? And what's your weight?

   The answers are supposed to help them guess what might afflict patients in
the future. But computer programs are being designed to turn a doctor's "say ah"

 into a data-crunching process that could give patients a more accurate forecast
of what diseases they can expect to develop - and how to treat them.

   Called evidence-based predictive modeling, the process combines a patient's
personal data - including age, gender, race, family history, cholesterol - with
data collected from studies of specific diseases to determine a person's
likelihood of developing those diseases.

   Although not widely in use, the programs are aimed at health-care providers,
self-insured employers and pharmaceutical companies looking for more efficient
ways to manage and prevent illness.

   These types of predictive technologies are not without critics. Some, for
example, wonder whether drugmakers will use the reports to urge doctors to
prescribe unnecessary preventive medications. Others worry that a patient's
personal information could be used by insurers and employers looking to protect
themselves from people who are health risks.

   "Generating profiles of high-risk individuals, given the almost sieve-like
nature of medical information, is almost an invitation to discrimination," says
Ronald Green, director of the Ethics Institute at Dartmouth College in Hanover,
N.H.

   Vaccine could treat virus linked to lung cancer

   CHICAGO - Scientists gathered Friday for a two-day conference to explore the
suspected causes and possible treatments for one of the deadliest of human
cancers.

   For years, doctors were certain that the lethal lung cancer was caused only
by exposure to asbestos. In 1994, however, a researcher at the National
Institutes of Health discovered genetic material from a monkey virus inside 60
percent of the cancers, called mesotheliomas, that he tested.

   Millions of people might have been exposed to the virus, called SV40, through
contaminated polio vaccine in the 1950s, and scientists believe the virus,
asbestos and genetics can work together to cause the cancer.

   Life expectancy for those who get the disease is nine to 15 months, and a
cure was unimaginable just a few years ago.

   But a vaccine is being developed for the virus, along with potential genetic
therapies for those predisposed to the disease. The vaccine might be ready in
about a year for tests on humans.

   The first case of mesothelioma, which attacks the lungs' lining, was
diagnosed in 1946, and few cases were reported until 1960. That number has
climbed to 2,000 to 3,000 cases a year.

   C-sections on the rise, journals report

   C-sections are making a comeback, reversing the course set in the early
1990s, when public health officials campaigned to increase the rate of vaginal
births after Caesareans.

   C-sections cost more than vaginal deliveries, are thought to carry a higher
risk of complications for the mother and require longer hospital stays.

   But recent publications in medical journals have pointed out small risks in
Caesareans. Those warnings come at a time when medical malpractice premiums are
on the rise.

   "It is simply not a secret that there are trial lawyers out there and having
babies is a big issue," said Marc Volavka, executive director of the
Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council, which issued the Caesarean
section report Friday. "In the absence of counter-pressure from the purchaser
community, certainly the pressure on doctors not to get sued is going to be
there."

   Dr. Bruce Flamm, research chairman at Kaiser Permanente Medical Center in
Riverside, Calif., said there have always been people who feel too many
C-sections are done, and others, not enough.

   What's new in the debate, he said, is that more women are requesting them. A
few first-time mothers are asking to schedule C-sections rather than attempt a
vaginal delivery.


LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2001


                             1847 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            April 21, 2001 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 658 words

HEADLINE: Free for All

BODY:

   Dealing With Death

   Once again your paper has excelled in terms of tasteless and insensitive
journalism. Regardless of a person's stance for or against the death penalty,
there is probably universal agreement on the gravity of this issue. It is, in
the true sense of that hackneyed phrase, a matter of life and death.

    Yet the two good ol' boys apparently sharing a joke in the photo on the
April 10 front page (Maryland Sen. Walter M. Baker and Del. Joseph F. Vallario
Jr.) are, says the caption, actually discussing the "death penalty deal." Of all
the images that must have been available, why on earth was such an inappropriate
one selected?

    -- Jenifer Craley Bland

   'Little Pioneers' in Genetics

    I was excited to hear that gene therapy was used to treat Alzheimer's
disease at the University of California at San Diego [news story, April 10]. But
one of the first paragraphs of your article contained an inaccuracy. Alzheimer's
disease is not the first degenerative brain disease to be treated with gene
therapy. In fact, Canavan disease, a leukodystrophy that affects children, was
the first.

    Researchers in 1996 treated two children in Auckland, New Zealand. In 1998,
researchers at Yale and Thomas Jefferson universities treated a total of 15
children with a corrected gene in a liposomal matrix. All children showed
improvement. As a parent of a Canavan child who was treated ("Dateline NBC"
aired our story Nov. 26, 1999), I feel that these "little pioneers" deserve
proper recognition.

    -- Ilyce Randell

   Taxing Our Capacity

   In response to your April 15 front-page article "Illegals Paying Millions in
Taxes," by Mary Beth Sheridan:

    We could sneak the total populations of India and China across the border
and pay them 15 cents per hour, and we'd still have to put their children
through school and work out some sort of housing for them, give them all medical
care and put the majority on welfare, pave over all of our remaining farmland
and open space, and we'd still have a tiny problem remaining: too many people.
The same applies to the illegal immigrants already here. I don't care whether
they pay taxes or not, they are here illegally and we are bulging at the seams
already.

    -- Marvin Gregory

   Unbearable Brit Bashing

   Stephen Hunter writes: "The choice of Texas-born [Rene] Zellweger to play
this quintessentially English heroine upset many people, most of them British --
but as we all know, ever since the English gave up their empire, they don't
count. If they want to be listened to, they should take back Hong Kong, India
and East Africa."

    Not only is this statement incomplete (for Hunter has failed to include the
United States in his list of former exploited colonies that should be "taken
back" by the British), but it also succeeds in being both pointless and
offensive, rather like British colonial rule. If there's any taking back to be
done, it should be of this churlish remark, which has no bearing on the choice
of Zellweger for this role.

    -- Yassir Islam

    The Low-Down on Flooding

    With regard to your April 18 news story concerning the Mississippi River
flooding that is affecting areas of the upper Midwest, I found one statement
slightly perplexing. You write that Hastings, Minn., expects the river to crest
in the next few days, but the "town still considers itself lucky. Most of its
residents and businesses are 15 feet above sea level."

    Now, I'm not from Minnesota, but I do know that it's higher in elevation
than we are here in the tidal lowlands. Checking a trusty topographical map, I
find Hastings to be 730 feet above sea level. If most of the citizens are truly
at 15 feet elevation, they're in more serious trouble than they thought!

    -- Dave Andrews

   Two for the Price of Two

   Bad enough your overreliance on silly puns in your headlines, but inexcusable
the appearance of the same "punny" head -- "Waiting to Inhale" -- two days in a
row [Health, April 17; Style, April 18].

    -- Nathan Dotson

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2001


                             1848 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             April 20, 2001 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: PART A; Part 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 777 words

HEADLINE: BRITAIN PROPOSES LAW AGAINST CLONING OF HUMANS;
HEALTH: GENETIC TYPE- CASTING BY INSURERS MAY ALSO FACE BAN. MOVES COULD BENEFIT
GOVERNMENT IN JUNE ELECTION.

BYLINE: MARJORIE MILLER, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   The British government moved Thursday to ease public fears about new gene
technologies by announcing plans to outlaw human reproductive cloning and steps
to prevent insurance companies from using genetic tests to limit coverage.

   At the same time, genetic tests for diseases such as breast cancer are to be
made more readily available through the National Health Service.

   Health Secretary Alan Milburn said Britain must harness the benefits of gene
technologies for health care and "jettison its downsides."

   "The genetics revolution has already begun. It is not going to go away,"
Milburn told a meeting of scientists and doctors in the northern city of
Newcastle. "Genetic advances can be a force for good, but that requires active
preparation."

   He said current licensing restrictions are insufficient to ensure that human
reproductive cloning--copying human beings--never occurs in Britain. New laws
may also be necessary to prevent the creation of a "genetic underclass" by
insurance companies seeking to exclude people with an inherited risk for certain
diseases, he added.

   "Human cloning should be banned by law, not just by license," Milburn said.

   Health Department officials said Britain stood to become the first country to
make human cloning a criminal offense. However, they gave no timetable for the
introduction of legislation, saying only that it would be in "the next available
Parliament, when it can be fitted in."

   The announcement, coming ahead of a June 7 general election, could win the
government favor with British voters, who overwhelmingly oppose cloning for the
production of babies.

   The government's Human Fertilization and Embryology Authority, the body that
regulates genetic research, consulted the public on the issue in 1997 and found
that the vast majority of experts and average Britons believed that human
reproductive cloning should not be allowed. Subsequent polls have confirmed the
public opposition, and no such research is licensed in the country.

   The government does, however, support "therapeutic cloning" of human embryos
to be used for research into the causes and treatments of diseases such as
Parkinson's and Alzheimer's. A law allowing such embryo research to go forward
has passed both houses of Parliament, but its implementation has been held up by
a court challenge from an anti-abortion group.

   In January, a team of U.S., Italian and Israeli doctors announced plans to
proceed with cloning children for infertile couples without submitting to
ethical or scientific oversight by any government. They said more than 600
couples from the United States, Britain, Japan and elsewhere have asked to take
part in the cloning effort.

   The team is headed by Dr. Severino Antinori, an Italian fertility specialist
known for helping women conceive in their late 50s and early 60s.

   Richard Nicholson, editor of the London-based Bulletin of Medical Ethics,
said he hopes that Britain's proposal to ban human reproductive cloning will
inspire other countries to follow suit.

   "We need to make sure that places like Italy and the United States now take
seriously the need to ban human cloning," Nicholson said.

   He said there has been "an awful lot of hype" about the benefits of genetic
research and gene therapy but very little in the way of results.

   Cloning is the process of creating a genetic twin by removing DNA from an egg
cell and replacing it with DNA from the individual being copied. In 1997, the
birth of Dolly the sheep marked the first time a mammal was created in this way.
Since then, scientists have cloned other animals.

   Ian Wilmut, the scientist who led the team that cloned Dolly in Scotland,
denounced the group trying to clone a human, saying that for every successful
birth of a cloned animal there have been many miscarriages and deformed
offspring.

   "There is no reason to believe that the outcomes of attempted human cloning
will be any different," he wrote last month in the U.S. journal Science.
"Attempting to clone a human would be extremely cruel for the women and children
involved, and there could be a backlash against valuable research into cloning
to create cells for therapeutic purposes."

   On another issue, Health Secretary Milburn said the public would reject
valuable genetic testing if it feared that the results would be passed on to
insurance companies or potential employers.

   "Many tests can only indicate an individual has a predisposition to develop a
condition, not a certainty that they will," he said. "Even so, forced disclosure
of the test results could deter some people from taking tests at all,
potentially putting their health at risk for fear of suffering discrimination."

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2001


                             1849 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      April 20, 2001 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg.C-4 NORTH/WEST

LENGTH: 563 words

BODY:

   NORTH

    WEST VIEW

    Water purifier working

    The water authority yesterday unveiled Sentinel, a new disinfection system
built by the Calgon Carbon Corp. at its treatment plant on Neville Island.

    The device, which consists of a 48-inch pipe with six 20-kilowatt lamps
inserted inside, uses ultraviolet light to deactivate the water-borne pests
giardia and cryptosporidium by scrambling their DNA, making it impossible for
them to reproduce.

    The custom-built stainless steel device cost $640,000 plus $60,000 for
installation.

    BUTLER CITY

    Fire pension decision

    Jim Kaufman, president of the Butler Firefighters, and Bill Walters,
president of the pension board, asked council last night to reconsider the
decision they made Monday to deny increases in retirement pensions.

    Kaufman said some older firefighters are getting as little as $370 per month
as a retirement benefit.

    Council said they will hold a public meeting with the firefighters and the
pension board to discuss the matter.

    LAWRENCE COUNTY

    Illegal drug use charged

    A school administrator has pleaded guilty to obtaining hundreds of
painkillers by getting early refills of his prescriptions.

    Assistant principal Charles Lucidore, 54, of West Pittsburg, is on
sabbatical from the Frew Mill School for troubled youths in Lawrence County.

    District Attorney Matthew Mangino said Tuesday that Lucidore pleaded guilty
to two counts of illegal possession of the pain reliever hydrocodone. He said he
is recommending that Lucidore serve two years of probation. The administrator
will be sentenced July 2.

    ERIE

    Ailing lawmaker gets tests

    State Rep. Italo Cappabianca will be tested this week to determine if he can
receive another gene therapy vaccine to combat his brain cancer, doctors said.

    Cappabianca has been a patient at Saint Vincent Health Center since March
16, when he had a seizure at his Erie home.

    Cappabianca, 64, the dean of Erie County's legislative delegation, was
diagnosed with brain cancer in 1993. He has since undergone surgery and received
radiation, chemotherapy and experimental gene therapy.

    The tests will determine if Cappabianca's immune system has been hampered by
steroids he takes to control brain swelling.

    WEST

    CENTER AREA

    Master plan approved

    The school board last night approved a Comprehensive School Facilities
Master Plan at a cost of $21,880, which will be paid from the capital reserve
fund.

    Ingraham Planning Associates Inc. of Butler will do the study. They will be
looking at all of the school buildings and the educational curriculum. They want
to learn where Center can best utilize space and buildings as well as
educational items.

    Center has room to build or add-on and still owns the Center Grange
Building. If the school would need to use Center Grange, it would have to be
renovated. The building is being rented.

    The study will also include demographics and potential growth of the area
bearing on the needs of the district. The study should take about six months to
complete.

    MOON AREA

    Middle school reopens

    Classes will resume at Moon Area Middle School today after nearly two days
of closing to provide time for paint fumes to dissipate.

    Three students were sent home early Tuesday complaining of headaches and eye
and throat irritation. A teacher with severe asthma also left.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2001


                             1850 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    APRIL 18, 2001 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 344 words

HEADLINE: REPORT: CERTIFYING RESEARCHERS COULD PROTECT VOLUNTEERS

BYLINE: Randolph E. Schmid ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Setting up an accreditation system for researchers could be one way of
increasing the protection for people who volunteer for medical research
programs, an advisory panel said yesterday.

   The Institute of Medicine, a part of the National Academy of Sciences, said
an accreditation program could certify that researchers meet certain performance
standards.

   Pressure for such added protections has been building since the 1999 death of
Arizona teen Jesse Gelsinger in a gene-therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   Searching for ways to tighten research controls, the Department of Health and
Human Services called on the Institute of Medicine to study the issue.

   Yesterday's report concentrates on the possibility of an accreditation
system, with a more comprehensive report planned for next year.

   "The responsibility for protecting research participants looms especially
large and is particularly complicated in clinical research, where risks are
often highest, professional roles frequently conflicted, and ethical lapses most
salient," said Daniel D. Federman, chairman of the committee that wrote the
report. He is senior dean for clinical teaching and professor of medicine and
medical education at Harvard Medical School in Boston.

   The institute said accreditation programs should be initially pilot-tested
and then assessed after three to five years.

   It said accreditation standards should be made applicable to all research
programs involving human participants, an estimated total of more than 10,000
programs.

   Among its recommendations, the committee urged that:

   Accrediting organizations be nongovernmental entities whose standards build
upon federal regulations.

   HHS commission studies for collecting baseline data on the current system of
protections.

   Consideration be given to having pilot programs evaluated by the General
Accounting Office and the HHS inspector general.

   The National Academy of Sciences is an independent agency chartered by
Congress to provide government agencies with advice on scientific topics.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1851 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            April 18, 2001 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 441 words

HEADLINE: WASHINGTON IN BRIEF

BODY:

    The director of the only U.S. lab that studies and tests for foot-and-mouth
disease said yesterday that the chances of an outbreak in the country are "quite
great" given the amount of travel between the United States and Britain.

    If the virus has already reached the United States, it could have been in
the country for only 24 to 48 hours because "signs of the disease would appear
quite quickly," said David Huxsoll, director of the Department of Agriculture's
Plum Island laboratory in New York.

    Foot-and-mouth disease is harmless to humans but has devastated livestock in
Britain, where herds are being destroyed to prevent its spread.

    The Supreme Court ruled that back-pay awards like those won by baseball
players after a 1980s labor dispute are subject to federal taxes based on the
year the money is paid out.

    The unanimous ruling was a victory for the Internal Revenue Service, which
argued that taxing the whole amount at one rate is simpler than trying to figure
out which old tax rates applied to what part of a lump-sum settlement.

    The case arose from the 1994 cash settlement won by the major league
players' union for collusion among 26 baseball teams to stop the steep
escalation of salaries for free agents.

    In a separate ruling, the court made it easier for states to withhold
payments from contractors who do not comply with prevailing-wage laws.

   States do not have to give contractors a hearing to challenge a withholding
of payment, the court ruled unanimously in a California case. As long as
contractors can challenge a state's action in court, their rights are adequately
protected, the justices said.

    The Immigration and Naturalization Service could not account for hundreds of
weapons and has not been keeping track of thousands of computers that may
contain sensitive information, an audit found.

    The weapons, including six guns that were eventually linked to crimes, were
among 61,000 items worth nearly $ 70 million that auditors said were missing,
the Department of Justice inspector general said. The investigation dates back
to 1998.

    INS spokesman Greg Gagne said that the report offered a "snapshot of a lot
of our past inadequacies" and that the agency now requires more record-keeping
and employee-training.

    Accrediting researchers could increase protection for people who volunteer
for medical research programs, officials at the Institute of Medicine, a part of
the National Academy of Sciences, said.

    Pressure for such added protections has been building since the 1999 death
of Arizona teenager Jesse Gelsinger in a botched gene therapy experiment.

    -- Compiled from reports by the Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2001


                             1852 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             April 17, 2001 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 985 words

HEADLINE: A New Stage in Biotechnology;
Plays Encourage Students to Study Field, Consider Ethical Dilemmas

BYLINE: Terence Chea, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   High school juniors Melissa and Lee are in love, but their romance is
complicated by their genetic differences.

    Melissa's parents "fixed" her genes before birth to give her a disease-free
life with all the genetic advantages. She routinely alters her genes to achieve
enhancements such as a better singing voice. On the other hand, Lee, who has a
learning disability, comes from a family of "naturals" who oppose genetic
tampering.

    He wants her to stop frivolously changing her genes. Her father wants
Melissa to dump her genetically flawed "loser" of a boyfriend.

    A tragic "hyper-biking" accident challenges their beliefs and changes their
lives forever, when Melissa must decide whether to undergo a risky genetic
therapy that could save her life but may leave her blind.

    This isn't the script of a Hollywood sci-fi blockbuster, but a synopsis of a
new play called "Honey & Sting" being performed at Washington area high schools.
Set in the year 2030, the "Romeo and Juliet"-esque love story examines a
not-so-distant future when advances in genetic engineering have made tinkering
with one's genes as commonplace as getting a haircut.

    The play, written by Barry Kornhauser and performed by the Bethesda Academy
of Performing Arts (BAPA), introduces students to biotechnology and the complex
social and ethical issues it raises: What are the appropriate uses of genetic
engineering? What is the "self" in an age when one can easily change one's
genetic makeup? Do we want to live in a society of genetic haves and have-nots?
And what are the potential dangers of tampering with human genes?

    "Honey & Sting" is the second in a series of plays that local biotechnology
executives hope will get students interested in careers in biotech or at least
make them aware of the complex questions raised by the rapidly advancing
science. Local performances are sponsored by MdBio Inc., a nonprofit
organization that promotes Maryland's biotech industry. Over the past year, the
play has been performed about 10 times at local high schools, and more
performances are scheduled later this year.

    "These ethical issues are going to loom so large. You want the public
growing up thinking about these things," said C. Robert Eaton, MdBio's
president. "It puts it into a dramatic context that the students can relate to
and use as a springboard for a discussion of their own views."

    The play's backers say it doesn't present one particular viewpoint, but
rather attempts to explore different sides of the arguments and allow students
to draw their own conclusions.

    "The biotech industry has a keen interest in educating people about what
they do," said Janet Stanford, the academy's artistic director. "They see this
liberal arts approach to presenting the science as a very effective and fun way
of getting people to think about biotechnology."

    The idea of using theater to introduce young people to biotechnology was
hatched almost a decade ago when local biotech executives worried that fewer
American students were pursuing careers in the sciences and their industry would
soon suffer the consequences.

    "There was definitely an awareness by those of us in the industry that the
young people in our schools weren't particularly interested in areas [of study]
that would be useful in our industry," said J.J. Finkelstein, who is now the
managing principal of Bethesda-based RegeneRx Biopharmaceuticals Inc. In the
1980s "kids wanted to be investment bankers. They were looking for ways to make
lots of money and they disregarded the sciences," he said.

    Finkelstein, who was then chairman of the CEO committee of the Association
of Biotechnology Companies and also a member of BAPA's board of trustees, was
pondering this question when the Bethesda theater came to him asking for ideas
for new programs.

    "Why don't we do a play about biotechnology?" Finkelstein asked. At first
the idea sounded far-fetched even to Finkelstein, but he said, "as we started
thinking about it, we realized theater can present these issues in an
interesting way."

    A few years later, BAPA's first biotech drama, "The Cutting Edge," opened at
Maryland high schools. The play, written by Jason Kravits, explores the benefits
and dangers of genetic testing through the story about a girl named Casey, who
is about to be tested for a genetic disease that has caused her sister to go
blind.

    The play toured for three years at Washington area high schools and BAPA put
on performances at several industry conferences, including an international
medical conference in Germany in 1997. With a grant from the National Institutes
of Health in Bethesda, the play was turned into a video that's been distributed
for free to local high schools.

    With funding from Swiss pharmaceutical company Novartis AG, BAPA has started
putting together a third biotech play that delves into social and ethical issues
surrounding pharmacogenomics, the use of individual genetic codes to design
personalized medicine.

    On a recent afternoon this month, about 150 students at Thomas S. Wooton
High School in Rockville stayed after school to watch "Honey & Sting," the
second play in the trilogy. Although the students were offered extra credit to
attend, many students found the story compelling and had already begun
contemplating careers in the life sciences.

    "It's a very interesting and intriguing field that I would like to get
into," said Priya Palaparthi, a 16-year-old sophomore. At the same time, she
worried about the use of genetic engineering for nonessential purposes such as
improving one's looks. "It totally destroys the beauty and nature of life," she
said.

    Megan Freed, a 16-year-old sophomore who attended the performance, was also
skeptical about the recreational uses of biotechnology: "You want to lose these
diseases, but you don't want to lose what makes your family unique."

   More stories on BIOTECH/MEDICAL online at Washtech.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2001


                             1853 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             April 16, 2001 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part S; View Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2118 words

HEADLINE: PUTTING CHILDREN TO THE TEST;
CLINICAL DRUG TRIALS ON BABIES AND YOUTHS CAN POSE A DILEMMA FOR PARENTS. BUT
SUCH PROGRAMS SHED LIGHT ON HOW CHILDREN REACT TO MEDICATION.

BYLINE: SHARI ROAN, TIMES HEALTH WRITER

BODY:

   Four weeks after the birth of their son, Ronnie and Michelle Higgins were
stunned when they were asked to put him in a clinical trial for an antifungal
drug.

   Born 15 weeks premature, he had been expected to endure a long
hospitalization crammed with drug treatments, tests and possibly surgery. And
when he developed a fungal infection, they knew additional medication would be
required. But an unproven drug?

   "I found the idea of a clinical trial very scary," Michelle Higgins says.

   Letting a child participate in the testing of a drug does carry some
risks--and it's a decision that more parents are making.

   A federal law passed in 1997 gave drug companies an incentive to test
products in children by offering a six-month patent extension on drugs so
tested. And in December, the Food and Drug Administration began requiring that
new drugs deemed important to children--or even commonly used in
children--include labeling on safe pediatric use.

   As a result, the number of medications being tested in children has jumped
from 114 in 1990 to 217 last year, according to the Pharmaceutical Research and
Manufacturers of America. Most doctors agree there's a need for such
research--and have long pushed for it.

   After all, about 400 drugs commonly used in children--and 70% of all
medications--bear no labeling information on safety and efficacy for them, says
Dianne Murphy, associate pediatrics director at the FDA. Doctors typically
prescribe the drugs simply hoping they'll work as they do in adults. With the
new clinical trials, 120 medications could carry labeling for children within
five to 10 years.

   Still, "if a trial is for a new drug , you can't really give people a good
idea of all the types of possible side effects," says Jeff Goad, an assistant
professor at the USC School of Pharmacy.

   The possibility of serious harm became apparent during research on the drug
Propulsid, for gastroesophageal reflux, in 1999. The FDA reported that 24
children being treated died of cardiac arrhythmia--some while involved in
clinical trials. The drug's manufacturer, Johnson & Johnson Co., withdrew it
from the market last year, although there is dispute over how much of a role the
drug played in the infants' deaths.

   But the case points to the agonizing choice facing doctors and parents: Test
drugs in children or allow untested medications to be given to them. Even before
the dangers of Propulsid were clear, doctors were enthusiastically prescribing
the drug for babies despite the fact that the label carried no information on
safety and effectiveness in children.

   "There is this difficult dilemma as to which situation presents the most
risk"--giving untested medications to children or doing clinical trials in
children, says Christopher Milne, assistant director of the Tufts University
Center for the Study of Drug Development. "But I think the evidence is coming
down on the side of testing these medications in children."

   Prescribing "adult" drugs to children has its own dangers, experts note. In
the 1960s, numerous newborns died from the antibiotic chloramphenicol. And many
other drugs have proved to be harmful in children in ways that were not
discovered during testing in adults. For example, sulfa drugs were found to
cause jaundice in newborns; the painkiller fentanyl led to withdrawal symptoms
in kids; and the antibiotic tetracycline was found to stain the teeth of young
children.

   Among the major proponents of pediatric drug testing in children have been
AIDS advocates, including the late Elizabeth Glaser, who said children were
dying of the disease because of the lack of pediatric drug data.

   Moreover, several recent studies have indicated that dosage in children does
not work as doctors had hoped--that many children are receiving too much or too
little of various medications.

   Some trials have actually had immediate benefits for their participants. For
instance, the standard medication for the Higgins baby's fungal infection can be
toxic to the kidneys, particularly risky for such a young patient. The parents
participated in the trial, and the baby is now doing well.

   That antifungal drug study resulted in a change in treatment philosophy by
demonstrating that the new medication was as effective but less toxic, according
to a November paper in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases.

   "We're relieved now," his mother says, "because he could have been in another
hospital where the experimental drug wasn't available and he would have received
the toxic drug."

   A Perception of Emphasis on Profit

   Several U.S. children's hospitals, Children's Hospital of Orange County among
them, are planning research centers to handle the growing demand for clinical
trials.

   While establishing separate pediatric research facilities is a lucrative
business move on the part of many hospitals--CHOC, for example, has 59 trials
going--officials at pediatric hospitals justify their centers by saying that
they are better suited than general hospitals and other research centers to do
studies in children.

   "Pediatrics is a specialty, and you should have pediatricians doing these
studies," says USC's Goad.

   Still, many people believe that children are being used to make hospitals and
drug companies money, acknowledges the Higgins baby's doctor, Antonio Arrieta of
Children's Hospital of Orange County.

   "The perception is that people are profiting off this and are luring children
into research," says Arrieta, an infectious diseases specialist. "But if there
are two medications, wouldn't you like to know which one is better?"

   The knowledge gleaned from pediatric studies even goes beyond which drug is
better, experts say. Research in children is also defining the differences in
how infants, toddlers, preadolescent children and adolescents react to
medication, says Dr. Greg Koski, director of the federal Office for Human
Research Protections.

   "Children are not little adults or even a homogenous population," he says.
"It makes a big difference whether it's a teenager, preteen, toddler or infant."

   Among the findings of recent drug trials:

   * Under common dosing guidelines, children under age 5 receiving the
anti-seizure medication gabapentin may be getting too little of the drug.
Further, a small number of children ages 3 to 12 experience hostility taking it.

   * Girls ages 8 to 11 being treated for obsessive-compulsive disorder
typically receive too much Luvox.

   * Children with congenital heart disease or pulmonary hypertension need lower
doses of the sedative midazolam than was previously believed.

   Drug companies also are learning how to formulate medications so they're
easier for children to take. One antibiotic that was tested in children with ear
infections and reformulated into a liquid even ended up aiding adults.
Researchers found that the drug helped elderly people with urinary infections
who also have difficulty swallowing.

   In the case of the sedative midazolam, clinical trials in children led to the
development of an oral medication. Previously, the drug had to be delivered
through an injection.

   And, last December, the first pill for type 2 diabetes, Glucophage, became
available for children. For some young patients, it will be the only
FDA-approved alternative to insulin shots. While doctors sometimes prescribe
other diabetes medications for children, picking the correct dose is often
guesswork.

   "Sometimes it is difficult to change a drug's formulation," says Dr. Bert
Spilker, senior vice president of scientific and regulatory affairs for the
Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America. "There can be many
problems, and it can take months, if not years, to develop these dosage forms."

   The studies also are teaching investigators more about how to conduct
research in children.

   "They are advancing the science of pediatric clinical trials," says Milne.
"They're coming up with new sampling techniques that are less invasive and new
ways to measure results that are more applicable to children."

   For example, researchers worked diligently to produce a new rating scale to
measure anxiety in children, Milne says.

   "That had previously been a problem with getting drugs approved to treat
pediatric anxiety," he says. "You couldn't measure efficacy because the ratings
scales were designed for adults."

   But while there are benefits to conducting drug studies in children in terms
of the knowledge gained, individual parents and doctors still struggle with the
question: When is a clinical trial advantageous to a particular child?

   Different Degrees of Risk and Benefit

   That is the sticky question that investigators, parents and the people who
monitor clinical trials must constantly ponder, says Denise Angst, director of
pediatric research at Lutheran General Children's Hospital in Chicago. "Most
people believe these studies are important to do, but there is concern over how
to do it," she says.

   There is general agreement that early-stage testing to determine if a drug is
safe is not justified in children. Conversely, it's often easier for parents of
a seriously ill child who has exhausted all other therapeutic options to try an
experimental drug. Studies offering less seriously ill children potential
benefit, along with some risk, are sometimes controversial.

   Other types of studies that need close scrutiny include studies in which an
experimental drug is compared to a placebo (a harmless, dummy drug), although
Koski says that type of research is rare in children. Parents can also face a
difficult dilemma if they are asked to enroll a healthy child in a study that
might present even a tiny degree of risk.

   Moreover, more than a few headlines have been generated in recent years
stemming from improperly conducted clinical trials in adults. In 1999, for
example, the death of a man in a gene-therapy study led to the revelation that
more than 600 adverse events had occurred in other gene-therapy studies but had
not been reported to federal authorities as stipulated by law. "The same abuses
that have happened with adult trials could happen with children," Angst notes.

   All clinical trials are overseen by a panel called an institutional review
board. These committees consist of doctors, lawyers, chaplains, ethicists,
nurses and parents and are charged with reviewing a study to protect the
patients' interests.

   "As more trials are done in children, those conducting the trials as well as
the IRBs looking at trials need to have experience with the unique issues
related to children," Angst says. For example, while parents must sign a
document giving consent for a child to participate in a trial, children age 7 or
older also should be asked to give verbal assent.

   There is also concern among ethicists that some families may be persuaded to
enter clinical trials due to incentives attached to trials. In clinical trials
for people of all ages, it's common for patients to be offered a small amount of
money or gift certificates to compensate for their time and effort.

   "The IRB will look to see if there is undue inducement," Goad says. "If there
is an impoverished patient, would the financial inducement cause them to take
part in the study when they otherwise wouldn't do it?"

   Many of the ethical and safety issues related to research in children will be
addressed in a report due out this month from the Office for Human Research
Protections, says Koski. The document will even suggest how researchers should
handle situations in which parents of a critically ill child consent to research
but the child opposes the experimental treatment.

   Parents should take their time before entering a child in a research program,
experts say. The informed consent document should be written in clear,
understandable language.

   "We often give families a highlighter and say, 'There are lots of things in
the informed consent you won't understand. Why don't you highlight it, and we'll
answer your questions,' " says Angst.

   The decision to enter a trial can be more complicated if a child is seriously
ill, says Goad. "In that case, you may need a second opinion. Have another
physician read the informed consent to make sure the study has benefit for your
child," he says.

   When a child is ill, research typically involves a choice between the
standard therapy and the drug under investigation, experts say.

   A solicitation to enter a clinical trial should never be high-pressure, says
Angst. "When the child and parent are vulnerable by virtue of the situation, we
need to be careful in making sure that we present this as research," she says.
"It is voluntary. If they decide not to participate, there are alternatives. If
they decide not to do it, it shouldn't compromise their care. They shouldn't
feel obligated."

GRAPHIC:  Ronald Rae Higgins III, 7 months, has his heart rate checked by
medical assistant Glenda Gonzales at Children's Hospital of Orange County. Born
three months premature, the baby was enrolled in a clinical trial for an
antifungal drug. He is now doing well.  PHOTOGRAPHER: GERALDINE WILKINS / Los
Angeles Times GRAPHIC: Clinical Trials by the Numbers

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2001


                             1854 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             April 16, 2001 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part S; View Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 992 words

HEADLINE: STAVING OFF ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE;
TREATMENT: DOCTORS ARE AWAITING THE RESULTS OF THEIR FIRST ATTEMPT AT GENE
THERAPY FOR A PATIENT IN EARLY STAGES OF THE ILLNESS.

BYLINE: JANE E. ALLEN, TIMES HEALTH WRITER

BODY:

   For the first time, doctors have attempted gene therapy in an Alzheimer's
patient, a former Oregon schoolteacher in the early stages of the disease.

   But it may take months before they know if the procedure, performed in early
April, had any effect.

   "This will not cure the disease, but the hope is it can significantly improve
quality of life for a certain time period," possibly years, said Dr. Mark
Tuszynski, a neurologist leading the research at UC San Diego.

   The researchers are hoping that cells taken from the patient's body, altered
and implanted in her brain, will help stave off mental deterioration.

   This new direction in Alzheimer's therapy could hold hope for some of the 4
million Americans with the progressive neurological illness, for which there is
no cure and only limited medications.

   Tuszynski and his colleagues are betting that the cells implanted in the
brain will become, in essence, little chemical factories churning out nerve
growth factor that might keep some brain cells from dying. Just how much growth
factor they'll produce and for how long remain to be seen.

   "I think that if it works, the patient doesn't reject it and there are no
complications . . . it's a very important step in developing new treatments for
Alzheimer's," said Dr. Zaven Khachaturian, scientific and medical advisor to the
Alzheimer's Assn.

   Tuszynski said similar gene therapy is expected to be tried in the next few
years against Parkinson's disease and possibly other degenerative brain
disorders, such as Lou Gehrig's disease and Huntington's disease.

   Gene therapy, first attempted in 1990, remains a promising area of disease
treatment, even though the hundreds of clinical trials so far haven't lived up
to the initial hype of producing cures. Doctors still hope to use it to treat a
broad range of illnesses, from inherited ailments to diabetes, cancer and heart
disease.

   In the Oregon woman's case, surgeons drilled a nickel-sized hole in her skull
and made five injections into a region about the size of a thumbnail. With the
patient sedated but conscious, they injected just two drops of fluid containing
2 1/2 million engineered cells.

   The patient has been recovering well with no complications. She is due to
return for tests this week and will be monitored for the next three months. If
all goes well, seven others will undergo the same surgery.

   The 11 1/2-hour operation used technology that previously had been successful
in protecting the brain cells of mice and monkeys. In those studies, researchers
detected the effects within weeks to months.

   "However, to know overall whether nerve growth factor is beneficial for the
treatment of Alzheimer's disease will take several years," Tuszynski said.

   The new procedure was designed to make cells harvested from the woman's own
skin deliver more nerve growth factor where it's needed. The growth factor has
been shown to prevent the death of those brain cells that use acetylcholine. In
Alzheimer's disease, these cells are damaged, contributing to a decline in
memory and intellect.

   Up to now, pharmaceutical researchers have been looking for ways to keep
larger amounts of acetylcholine bathing brain cells. That's the concept behind
the current group of Alzheimer's drugs such as Cognex, Aricept, Exelon and the
newly approved Reminyl, all of which keep acetylcholine from breaking down and
thus keep damaged cells working longer.

   But the researchers who devised the gene therapy knew from experience that
nerve growth factor can prevent the death of cholinergic cells. They also knew
from Swedish studies that pumping nerve growth factor directly into the brain
caused unpleasant side effects, including pain, weight loss and unwanted cell
growth around the brain and spinal cord.

   What they sought was a way to get nerve growth factor right where it could go
to work, without exposing other brain cells to it.

   They began taking cells culled through tissue biopsies and genetically
engineering them in a test tube so they'd make the gene that instructs cells to
produce nerve growth factor. Then, they implanted those engineered cells in
animals' brains in the hopes they'd act as pumps for the growth factor--and
continue to pump the chemical for extended periods. It worked.

   In aging monkeys, shrunken brain cells became rejuvenated, and important
connections to other parts of the brain were restored too. And in 200 monkey
trials, there were no unwanted tumors or other dangerous effects.

   In 1999, the FDA gave the go-ahead to human trials.

   Although Alzheimer's disease is most destructive during its middle stages,
researchers designed the Phase I trial, meant to establish the safety of using
the method, for early-stage patients who were otherwise healthy. In the early
stage, Alzheimer's patients have some short-term memory loss but have nearly
normal ability to reason and understand--abilities researchers deemed important
to obtaining informed consent.

   "We thought it was essential on an ethical level that patients understand to
what they were consenting," Tuszynski said.

   Khachaturian called stepping in early in the course of the disease "really
good strategy."

   "Part of the problem with a lot of treatments with Alzheimer's disease is we
start fairly late in the disease process. One has to remember the disease starts
maybe 10 to 20, as many as 40 years before we detect it," he said.

   So far, a second patient has been identified, but researchers are looking for
six more candidates, preferably from Southern California.

   Khachaturian said he saw the surgical implantation of genetically engineered
cells as something that was impractical on a large scale but that might lead to
novel therapies.

   "I cannot see in the future doing thousands and thousands of surgeries as a
treatment. One should look at this as a proof of . . . the concept that
replacing this molecule, nerve growth factor, can have a therapeutic value. Once
that's done, there may be other strategies."

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2001


                             1855 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                       April 16, 2001 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 694 words

HEADLINE: As life spans stretch, new thoughts arise on age-old issues of aging

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   So a genie pops out of a bottle and says you are going to live to be 100.

   You also are granted three wishes, but all of them have to involve changes to
your physical being.

   What would you wish for?

   I have to admit to being torn.

   I'd love to get the best of Michael Jordan, Tiger Woods and Lance Armstrong.

   On the other hand, I think I'd settle for an assurance that I wouldn't need
Viagra, Depends or Miracle Ear.

   But if I had to pick three characteristics to accompany me into super-old
age, I guess I would choose a structurally perfect spinal column, a brain that
retained all its neurons and other wiring components, and a metabolism that
burned off everything I ate.

   As we race into the 21st century, a healthy diet and plenty of exercise are
two of our biggest allies against aging. But there are limits as to how far
those will take you.

   Now, with the sequencing of the human genome and the prospect of new genetic
therapies to combat life-threatening diseases, there has been increasing
speculation about more and more humans living to 100 or more.

   The chatter also has accelerated because of the very real prospect that in
the not-too-distant future there will be a ready source of replacement organs
for humans that will come from specially bred transgenic animals, most likely
pigs.

   But even with new hearts, kidneys and livers, as well as a host of other
quick fixes, humans weren't built to last for a century, at least not without
feeling their age.

   "We are built to operate efficiently for about three or four decades," said
S. Jay Olshansky, a professor of biostatistics at the University of Illinois at
Chicago, and co- author of this year's "The Quest for Immortality: Science at
the Frontiers of Aging" (W.W. Norton & Co., $25.95).

   Olshansky also is the co-author of the recent Scientific American article "If
Humans Were Built to Last," which, among other things, came up with a new design
for humans, one that emphasized a healthy, long life.

   Humans would look and feel quite a bit different if they were bred for
longevity.

   To combat back and spinal problems, we might have a curved neck with enlarged
vertebrae that would counterbalance a more forward-tilting torso. We would also
have thicker disks in our spine.

   In fact, throughout our body we'd have thicker bones to avoid breaks. We'd
also have extra fat and muscle, especially around our joints, to help minimize
bone loss and to provide extra cushioning.

   There also would be anatomical changes to prevent prostate problems in men
and bladder problems in women.

   The list goes on and on.

   The reason we encounter so many ailments with age is because we did not
evolve to become centenarians.

   Humans, like all other species, evolved with an eye toward reproduction.
Mother Nature simply didn't give much consideration to what happened after we
passed along our genes.

   We live longer than what is needed for purely evolutionary purposes, in part,
because our bodies are somewhat over-engineered and also because we now live in
a much less hostile environment than our ancient ancestors.

   Think of just a few of the pitfalls of prehistoric life: predators,
microrganisms waiting to infect every cut, unclean drinking water, poor diets,
uncontrollable extremes of hot and cold, and polluted air from burning wood
inside caves.

   Medical advances also have dramatically increased the average human life
span.

   In the years to come, more people will make it to 100.

   But while some scientists believe that the maximum life span for humans may
someday be extended beyond the 100- to 120-year range, Olshansky said he has
doubts. No one has been able to figure out how to alter the aging process
itself, he said.

   "All we are doing (now) is manufacturing survival time," he said.

   But despite our limitations and flaws, "There is so much power we as
individuals have to maintain our health," he said. "Through good health habits
and modern medical interventions, we have the opportunity to, as the Greek lyric
poet Pindar said, exhaust the limits of the possible."

   ------------

   John Fauber can be reached at (414) 223-5479 or by e-mail at
jfauber@onwis.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2001


                             1856 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                         April 16, 2001, Monday , METRO

SECTION: S.A. LIFE; Pg. 1F

LENGTH: 1486 words

HEADLINE: Clinical trials vital to medical research ; And the benefits
toparticipants can be life-saving.

BYLINE: Richard A. Marini


BODY: It's not often that participating in a clinical trial literally saves your
life. But that may have happened to Dennis Thomson. While taking part in a trial
of the then-experimental cholesterol-lowering drug lovastatin several years ago,
he underwent a routine blood test.

    The results were anything but routine.

    "They found out I had prostate cancer," says Thomson, 65, a church
fund-raiser. "But the doctor told me they'd found the cancer five years earlier
than they should have."

    Because it was caught so soon, Thomson enrolled in a second trial comparing
surgical intervention vs. what is sometimes called watchful waiting. (Prostate
cancer tumors usually grow so slowly that, especially with older patients, it
often makes more sense not to operate.)

    Thomson was randomized into the surgical arm of the trial and went under the
knife five years ago. Today, his prostate specific antigen numbers, a measure of
prostate cancer risk, are undetectable. Still, he credits his participation in
the initial drug test for saving his life.

    "I'm probably alive today because I was in that trial," he says simply.

    Clinical trials are the primary way that modern medicine answer such basic
questions as which treatment works best and why. Drug trials, for example, test
new medications to see both that they're safe and that they do what they're
intended to. A new surgical procedure might be compared with standard practice.
And a prevention trial might look at whether certain actions people take -
eating more fiber, smoking cigarettes, even praying before bedtime - affects
risk of disease.

    These trials are so much a part of the bedrock of medical knowledge, they've
been partially credited with increasing average life span by three to seven
years during the past half century - and adding five years of improved quality
of life to those with chronic medical conditions.

    Clinical trials on humans begin only after laboratory and animal studies
show promising results. There are four phases of human trials:

    Phase I tests the treatment on a small (generally fewer than 100) group of
otherwise healthy people to look for early signs of safety and effectiveness.

    Phase II tests the treatment's safety on several hundred patients with the
condition. One group usually receives the treatment while the other gets a
placebo, which is a sham treatment such as a sugar pill that has no medical
effects.

    Phase III tests the treatment on many more people, looking for definitive
results on its effectiveness. Often, the new treatment is compared against a
commonly used treatment.

    Phase IV takes place after the treatment has been approved by the Food and
Drug Administration. This looks at the treatment's safety and effectiveness once
it's available to the public.

    Finding enough people willing to participate in a clinical trial can be a
daunting task.

    "It's the most important issue facing American medicine," says Dr. Ian M.
Thompson, chief of urology at the University of Texas Health Science Center and
principal investigator of the recently launched San Antonio Biomarkers of Risk
for Prostate Cancer. And he should know; his study seeks no fewer than 10,000
area men to enroll in a multiyear study exploring the link between diet and
prostate cancer.

    "We hope to recruit 2,000 men a year for five years," says Thompson. "We've
already gotten about 1,400, but that's because of all the publicity surrounding
the launch. The issue is whether we can maintain that momentum."

    Even researchers studying less serious conditions can have trouble finding
enough subjects. Dr. Richard A. Pollak is a local podiatrist testing a spray to
treat athlete's foot. Because it's sponsored by the pharmaceutical company that
makes the spray, the study is offering to pay participants $20 per visit for six
visits.

    It's not enough to have them knocking down the doors.

    "There was money in the budget for newspaper ads," explains Pollak. "But of
the 10 people who responded, only one qualified."

    He says he expects to find most of the subjects he needs through his
practice, although even with the financial incentive, it'll be difficult.

    "Anyone with a full-time job probably isn't going to be interested in
participating because the money's not enough to make up for their time and
effort," he says. "So we get a lot of retired people, housewives and high school
kids saving to buy a CD player."

    Experts say there are several other obstacles, in addition to the time
involved, that prevent people from participating in clinical trials. One is
ignorance. A 1999 Harris Survey, for example, found that 87 percent of patients
interviewed were unaware of clinical trials or didn't know that participating
might be an option for them.

    Another is the apprehension about what some see as being used as a guinea
pig.

    "People are worried that the treatment might somehow be harmful," says
Elizabeth Brumage. "Or else they're worried that, if they're randomized to the
placebo arm of a trial, they won't get the medicine they need."

    A cancer patient herself, Brumage heads the Clinical Trials Task Force of
San Antonio, an organization dedicated to advancing the understanding of the
importance of clinical trials among the public.

    Oversight for individual studies fall to institutional review boards, which
are made up of physicians, researchers, administrators, medical ethicists,
community leaders, private citizens and others. When working correctly, a review
board ensures that volunteers participating in a trial fully understand the
research and have been informed of any potential risks they may face. Even if a
person signs an informed consent agreement, he or she is free to drop out of a
study at any time, for any reason.

    Despite these safety guidelines, research studies occasionally run into
difficulty. Last year, all government-funded research at the University of
Oklahoma School of Medicine in Tulsa was suspended and three faculty members
resigned after an independent review found that an experimental cancer vaccine
that has not been properly tested was nonetheless injected into patients.

    The University of Illinois in Chicago, which has the largest medical school
in the country, lost research funding for 11 months after an investigation that
found researchers were not doing enough to protect patient rights. In several
instances, for example, Spanish-speaking volunteers were given informed consent
forms in English.

    And two years ago, in a highly publicized case, an 18-year-old high school
graduate died after participating in what was later determined to be a
mismanaged gene therapy study at the University of Pennsylvania.

    These and other incidents prompted the federal government last year to
create the new Office for Human Research Protections. The office will be in
charge of 17 federal agencies that carry out human studies and, as an indication
of its importance, will be located at the department level of the Department of
Health and Human Services.

    The other mistaken belief that keeps many people from volunteering for
clinical studies is the fear that they'll be given a placebo rather than
whatever is being tested. That's not a big deal if what's being studied is a new
medicated dandruff shampoo. But what if you're a cancer patient, and you're
asked to test a new cancer drug?

    "Even patients in the placebo group of a trial receive all the high-quality
medical care afforded those receiving the treatment," says Robert G. Brzyski,
assistant professor in the department of obstetrics and gynecology at UTHSC. In
fact, trial participant Dennis Thomson, whose early-stage prostate cancer was
detected when he underwent an annual PSA screening, later discovered he was
getting a placebo and not the cholesterol-lowering drug being studied.

    Not everyone who applies to a clinical trial is accepted. There usually are
strict criteria to be met. To participate in a study of an athlete's foot
treatment, for example, one must have an active case of the condition. The risk
for prostate cancer trial is open only to men over 50, although African-American
men over 40 and other men over 40 with a family history of prostate cancer are
eligible.

    One good way to find out about clinical trials is to ask your doctor. If he
or she doesn't know of any or you're looking for more information, several other
sources include:

    The National Cancer Institute, http://cancertrials.nci.nih.gov.

    The AIDS Clinical Trial Information Service, (800) 847-2572, www.actis.org.



    ClinicalTrials.gov, a service of the National Institutes of Health,
www.clinicaltrials.gov.

    CenterWatch, Inc., a private company providing information on and listings
of clinical trials, www.centerwatch.com.

    rmarini@express-news.net


GRAPHIC: JOHN DAVENPORT/STAFF : Dennis Thomson's prostate cancer was discovered
while he was participating in a clinical trial studying a cholesterol-lowering
drug.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2001


                             1857 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                     APRIL 16, 2001, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 961 words

HEADLINE: Down to Business;

Students get rare chance to be part of biotech startup

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Elizabeth Bell

BODY:
Classroom volunteer Lynn Barr wanted to teach high school students about the
business of biotechnology, but in the course of the lesson she became a CEO and
her students became foot soldiers for a real-life biotech startup.

    Michael Vestel, the founder of EndoBionics, was initially nervous about
bringing corporate secrets into a high school classroom, but the company wound
up benefiting as much as the students by sharing the challenge of starting a new
enterprise.

    The biotechnology students at Miramonte High in Orinda have surprised
everyone at the new medical device company with their energy and competence.
They've scouted out the competition, studied medical journals for pertinent
information, built a crucial database of research trials that might help test
the device, and are creating a Web site to promote the company.

    Like most startups, EndoBionics is short of time and money, so Barr's
discovering the talents of high school students was a bit like striking gold.

    "It's just an amazing resource that Lynn has kind of hit on that I've never
heard anyone talk about," said Vestel, who is a material science graduate
student at the University of California at Berkeley.

    Miramonte's biotechnology teacher, Jena Lee, found EndoBionics equally
irreplaceable.

    "A huge part of biotech is the business side," said Lee. "The kids are
getting an amazing opportunity to see a business start, and it's something I'm
not going to be able to replicate next year."

    Barr was about to create a mock business plan with her students when Vestel
asked her to be CEO of his new company and create a real business plan.

    It was partly happenstance that brought EndoBionics, Barr and Lee's students
together.

    Barr, a Lafayette resident, got her training in medical technology through
the Army and has worked at developing medical technologies for 20 years. She had
taken time off after the birth of her daughter and decided to volunteer in a
local school to "stay sane."

    Miramonte High paired her with Lee, who had a lab-based science background
but was looking to round out the business side of her biotechnology class.

    Lee gave Barr free rein on Tuesdays, and Barr delved into the complexities
of getting venture capital funding, approval from the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, and evaluating investments in biotech companies.

    When Barr asked Vestel if she could involve her students, he initially
worried the students might leak information about the device before EndoBionics
had secured the intellectual property rights. At least one of the students has a
father who works in the biotech industry.

    But Vestel decided he could provide enough information to involve the
students without revealing all the details of the device.

    Soon, Barr had 15 of 24 students in the class lobbying for six internships
with the company. She finally allowed all 15 to take part.

    Barr said the students became indispensable.

    "Without them, it would have taken another two months (to determine the
company's strategy) and it wouldn't have been as good. I never would have looked
at 45 (potentially competing) companies. I would have looked at five," said
Barr. "Their information research skills rival corporate librarians. They know
how to get information (and) sort that information."

    Recently, senior Kevin Long, 18, presented his findings on potential
competitors to the class.

    "The next one is Lavipharm," he said, moving down his list. "I don't believe
this is a threat either. Its focus is on particle and formulation design
technologies. . . . Techniclone: OK, this is a threat. This is somebody we need
to spend more time looking at."

    "All right," said Barr. "I've got work to do on that one. I hadn't seen it.
I'll give you guys a report on it next Tuesday."

    EndoBionics is based on a new technology developed by mechanical engineering
graduate student Kirk Seward, also at UC Berkeley. He believes the device, a
microscopic needle with a special attachment to a catheter, could allow doctors
to deliver drugs to the inside of blood vessel walls. It could potentially be
used in treating vascular disease and cancer and in gene therapy.

    The product's entry into the marketplace could still be several years away.
EndoBionics will soon begin clinical trials that it hopes will lead to FDA
approval.

    Barr's students talk of EndoBionics in terms of "we" and "our," and many
plan to follow the company's progress even after they move on to college. They
aren't expecting a cut of future profits or even extra credit. They're doing it
simply because they're interested.

    "It's really cool that we knew about this before almost anyone," said junior
Ahu Shahrabani, 17, who was so energized she started coming home each night
eager to tell her parents of new developments.

    Shahrabani loves science but couldn't envision spending her life in a lab.
Now she realizes she could have a career in the sciences by studying biology in
college, then going to business school and becoming a biotechnology
entrepreneur.

    Sophomore Jenny Cohen, 16, said working with EndoBionics taught her to have
"realistic expectations, which is good to learn before you get your heart and
soul into the project." Cohen wants to be a scientist but never realized how
interconnected business and science are.

    Senior Sungchan Song, 18, has grown up in the age of the highly publicized
startup and feels privileged to have a view from the inside. He has faith that
EndoBionics won't go belly-up like so many Internet startups.

    "They really have a product that will work. I really believe in that
company," said Song. "I want to see how it develops, and if I can be involved
more, I definitely would be."E-mail Elizabeth Bell at ebell@sfchronicle.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (3), (1) Lynn Barr (center) talked with Miramonte High students,
including Kevin Long (right) about their work with her startup. / Photos by
Michael Macor/The Chronicle, (2) The Orinda students perused a sheet of business
cards for their volunteer teacher, Lynn Barr, CEO of EndoBionics., (3) Lynn Barr
(left), CEO of a new biotech firm, met with students at Orinda's Miramonte High.
/ Michael Macor/The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2001


                             1858 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 15, 2001, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 887 words

HEADLINE: Privacy issues could stall research;
Feds to draft rules on protection

SOURCE: Los Angeles Times

BYLINE: MARLENE CIMONS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - When Rick Curtin tore into the large, thick envelope bearing his
daughter's name on a fall day in 1998, he had no inkling he also was opening a
Pandora's box that would shake the biomedical research community and prompt a
federal inquiry into protecting the privacy of patients in scientific
experiments.

   Inside, Curtin found a 25-page questionnaire from a Virginia Commonwealth
University researcher who was building a database on the health of twins born in
the state and was asking for Curtin's daughter Allison - who has a twin brother
- to participate. But she was at college and had asked her father to check her
mail.

   When Curtin began to read, he was stunned. The questions were not only about
his daughter but also about other family members, including him. And they were
intensely personal.

   Had her father ever suffered from depression? Did he have abnormal genitalia?
Curtin, a financial manager with the Defense Department, felt they needed his
permission before his daughter could answer those questions.

   Federal regulators agreed and temporarily shut down the research. Now they
are struggling to craft a national policy on just who beyond patients deserves
privacy protection. On Monday, a Health and Human Services Department panel
plans to begin the task of drafting guidelines.

   The notion of "informed consent" - fully explaining to patients in research
experiments the potential risks of their participation - has been federal law
since 1981. But the law does not specifically address family members or others
whose privacy could be invaded, albeit unintentionally, by broadening new
avenues in research, particularly in the study of genes. Entire populations and
family lines are now under the microscope.

   "This is a new generation of privacy issues - uncharted territory," said Mary
Faith Marshall, director of the bioethics program at the University of Kansas
Medical Center, who chairs the panel. "We are pushing a new envelope and need to
come up with new answers."

   Abbey Meyers, a member of the panel, which will debate and draft
recommendations for the government in the coming months, said, "Family members
need to know if information about themselves is to be used." But, she said, if
you demand that family members give consent, "research - especially genetic
research - could come to a grinding halt."

   Francis S. Collins, director of the National Human Genome Research Institute,
recently received an e-mail from a researcher complaining that his proposal to
study the genetics of alcoholism had been rejected by a local review panel
because he hadn't obtained consent from "secondary" subjects.

   "He believes his primary subjects would be extremely reluctant to involve
family members in any way (requesting their consent) - that it would kill his
project," Collins said. "So this is not a hypothetical concern. A lot hinges on
what this advisory committee decides to do. Much of our hope in understanding
inherited conditions lies in our being able to study families."

   But, there clearly are cases in which "private information could cause
serious harm to a person's reputation and livelihood, if disclosed," said Greg
Koski, director of the HHS' office for human research protections, which
ultimately will decide the policy.

   "If a wife enrolls in a research study and is asked, 'Does your husband have
any health problems?,' does she have the right to disclose that he has HIV
without the permission of her husband?" Koski asked.

   Lana Skirboll, director of the National Institutes of Health's office of
science policy, which oversees the conduct of federally funded research, called
the current dilemma "the world's most impossible issue," adding: "It seems
simple at first. But then when you poke your finger into it, you realize that
it's far more complex than you ever thought."

   Before an experiment can begin, it must be approved - and continued to be
monitored - by a local Institutional Review Board, an independent panel of
physicians, statisticians, community representatives and others who ensure that
the research is ethical and that participants' rights are protected.

   Controversy over patient rights grew after the September 1999 death of Jesse
Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., who had been participating in a gene therapy
trial at the University of Pennsylvania. That case did not directly involve the
use of secondary research subjects. But the panel formed in the furor over
Gelsinger's death has been asked to deal with a wide range of patient protection
issues, including whether researchers can delve into the medical histories of
their patients' relatives.

   The panel is not expected to recommend a rigid standard, but rather to
encourage local review boards to consider certain criteria each time they
evaluate a research proposal.

   This kind of blueprint should give the local boards latitude in making
decisions. For example, they might decide that in a small town, where most
people know each other, inadvertent disclosure of personal medical information
about a patient's relatives might be too risky, while it would pose much less of
a concern in a large city.

   "We'll have to go back and do some very careful thinking in light of the new
possibilities for information that we have now," said Marshall, the panel's
chairwoman.


TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2001


                             1859 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 15, 2001, Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. H-2

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: Outlook at Qualcomm is optimistic

BYLINE: DON BAUDER

BODY:
 Handset vendors in the mobile phone business face a slower market, says Michael
E. Ching of Merrill Lynch, but "Qualcomm is less affected by the transition."

   That's because Qualcomm "has no manufacturing operations, having sold its
handsets and wireless infrastructure business over the past three years," the
analyst says.

   Qualcomm primarily sells its intellectual property through chipsets (45
percent of sales) and technology licensing and royalty agreements (26 percent).

   The company is the leading supplier of CDMA, or code division multiple
access, semiconductors, although it will spin off the business later this year,
Ching says.

   Qualcomm estimates that 90 million CDMA phones will be sold this year, though
Ching thinks 82 million will be more like it.

   Qualcomm will be insulated from problems in Europe's non-CDMA market, but
overall, "CDMA handset expectations for 2001 are optimistic," he says.

   Ching looks for the company to earn $1.25 a share in 2001, up from $1.05, and
he thinks the valuation of Qualcomm is $60 per share.  He is neutral on the
stock for the intermediate term, but thinks it is a long-term buy.

   Generx

   Analyst Peter F. Drake of Prudential Securities is impressed by Generx, the
pioneering gene therapy product from Collateral Therapeutics.

   Generx is a non-surgical gene therapy product that promotes the growth of
blood vessels and restores perfusion to oxygen-deprived regions of the heart,
the analyst says.

   "This technology holds the potential to revolutionize the treatment of
cardiovascular disease," Drake says.

   He expects the biotech to lose $1.14 a share in 2001. The stock is a strong
buy, but it carries high risk, he says.

   Ligand

   Ligand Pharmaceuticals and the Food and Drug Administration have agreed on
steps required to expand the label of Tagretin capsules to treat patients with
advanced non-small cell lung cancer, says John T. McCamant, editor of the
Medical Technology Stock Letter.

   He would buy the stock under $20.


LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2001


                             1860 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 15, 2001, Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 1152 words

HEADLINE: Increasing funding for research is Salk chief's main goal

BYLINE: Jeff Ristine; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Exhilarated by the dawn of a new era in biomedical research, Richard Murphy is
determined to clear the path for scientists who will discover the next big
breakthroughs.

   "Right now is without a doubt the most exciting time in the history of basic
science that's targeted toward medicine," said Murphy, the new president and CEO
of the Salk Institute.

   As 21st century technology starts to click, he said, the strange new
post-genomic world of biological science "is going to reveal stuff that you
couldn't have imagined five years ago."

   Murphy's delight in being immersed in the Salk's competition for
breakthroughs and bucks at such a turning point is unmistakable.  "For us it's a
very, very exciting time and for me to be involved in all of that is terrific,"
he said.

   He grew up in Boston, son of a paper-products salesman whose own education
stopped after ninth grade.  The first steps leading Murphy to the Salk began at
a private high school in 1967, where he taught biology and chemistry and fell in
love with science.

   "I just became really curious about how biology works," said Murphy, 56, who
became head of the Salk Oct. 1.  "There were just so many fundamental issues
that we didn't understand."

   While he's still settling in at the Salk, Murphy quickly became known as a
warm, charming leader.

   "The first thing that's really striking about Rich Murphy . . . is, he's an
extremely personable guy who you can like immediately," said professor Joseph R.
Ecker, a plant biologist at Salk and member of Murphy's advisory committee.
"That's important, especially if you're going to be communicating a lot to the
public, that you have that kind of a charismatic, genuine personality."

   Tony Hunter, chairman of the Salk faculty, said Murphy is "clearly a very
hands-on administrator and wants to be involved in everything, which is good."

   Murphy says "the key to the success of this place has been the fact that you
bring in the best people, and then you give them absolute freedom to follow
their curiosity."

   Murphy first saw the Salk Institute, whose original '60s buildings and plaza
on Torrey Pines Mesa are considered to be among San Diego's architectural
jewels, in a visit about seven years ago when he was seeking advice on fund
raising.

   "I remember coming into this building and saying, this is incredible," said
Murphy, who was head of one of Canada's leading teaching and research
institutions at the time.  Now he feels as if he works "in a piece of art."

   Murphy spent his first months at Salk making the rounds, visiting its 56 labs
and support facilities, such as the mail room.  He has met all the faculty
members individually to learn about the science they're doing.

   Founded in 1960 by Dr. Jonas Salk, the polio vaccine pioneer, the private,
world-renowned institute focuses on molecular biology, genetics and
neurosciences.

   Its researchers seek the causes and possible cures or therapies for a wide
range of diseases, including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and diabetes, and it
stands at the forefront of plant biology.

   Murphy said there is agreement among the institute's researchers that the
Salk needs to assert a major role in protein chemistry, gene therapy and
stem-cell research, among other fields.

   Few of these programs would be new to the institute, but they will require
Murphy to achieve another major goal.

   "The bottom line's going to be, where are we going to get the money to do
this?  That's really where my responsibility is," said Murphy.

   Assisted through college by a caddy scholarship, Murphy started his teaching
career at the Boston high school before delving more deeply into medicine.

   He got a doctoral degree in zoology from Rutgers and became a postdoctoral
researcher at Boston's Massachusetts General Hospital.  Two years later, he was
teaching at Harvard Medical School.

   Murphy's career took a turn north in 1986, when he joined the department of
anatomy and cell biology at the University of Alberta in Edmonton.  The final
move before Salk came in 1992, when he became director of the Montreal
Neurological Institute, a teaching and research institute affiliated with McGill
University.

   At the Salk, Murphy replaced Thomas Pollard, who stepped down last year amid
reports of policy struggles with some senior faculty members.

   The true test of Murphy's tenure may be whether he can improve the Salk's
financial footing.  Its endowment stands at about $120 million and its annual
budget is around $61 million, mostly from the National Institutes of Health and
federal grants to individual researchers.  On the private side, the March of
Dimes Birth Defects Foundation has been supporting the institute since its
creation.

   Additional funds will ensure that Salk can regularly attract seminar speakers
and host national or international scientific meetings that "enrich the
intellectual life of the organization," Murphy said.

   But the chief motivation for aggressive fund raising is more equipment in the
labs and expanding Salk facilities.

   After a recent retreat, many of the Salk's scientific objectives are becoming
clearer.

   "I guess what we want to do is be able to exploit all of the new
technological breakthroughs that are available to us," Murphy said, "so that . .
. the scientists we have are not limited by technology."

   To remain scientifically competitive with other research institutions, Murphy
said, the Salk needs to launch a major effort in protein chemistry: the science
of learning the three-dimensional structures, functions and interactions of the
chemicals that control biological processes in living organisms.

   The Human Genome Project has underscored the importance of pinpointing the
proteins that genes code for, Murphy said, and the Salk is gearing up for a
potential $20 million investment in new equipment and faculty members.

   Computational biology, an emerging field that unites biological investigation
of genes and proteins with the ability of advanced computers to sort through
databases, is another growth area for the Salk.

   Gene therapy is "an area of huge potential and importance," Murphy said, and
the Salk wants to remain at the forefront of plant biology.

   And research on stem cells, the generalized cells that are the precursors to
all other types of specialized cells in the human body, "is going to be
extremely important."

   Many scientists believe stem cells will play a role in treating Parkinson's
disease, Alzheimer's, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injuries and other
diseases and disabilities.

   Use of the cells is controversial because much of the work requires use of
surplus human embryos.  Anti-abortion activists and other critics decry such
work as unethical.

   Murphy says there are funding sources in San Diego that have not yet been
tapped by the Salk. But to reach these sources, he said, the institute needs to
become more "user friendly" to the community.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; Jim Baird / Union-Tribune; Richard Murphy, who became president
and CEO of the Salk Institute in October, got his start in science teaching
biology and chemistry at a private high school in Boston. (B-2)

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2001


                             1861 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 15, 2001, Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 3 words

HEADLINE: Week in review April 7-13

BODY:
 Caption Only.


GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; 1,2. John Gastaldo / Union-Tribune 3. Nancee E. Lewis /
Union-Tribune; 1. Dr. Hoi Sang U (left) examined a model brain with Dr. Mark
Tuszynski during an announcement about gene therapy for Alzheimer's disease. 2.
SWAT officers on the roof of the First Southern Baptist Church watched for a
gunman in the Congregational Tower apartments in Chula Vista. 3. SWAT members
land on the roof of the Congregational Tower in Chula Vista after a gunman
fatally shot three people inside on Wednesday.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2001


                             1862 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 15, 2001, Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. H-2

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: Outlook at Qualcomm is optimistic

BYLINE: DON BAUDER

BODY:
 Handset vendors in the mobile phone business face a slower market, says Michael
E. Ching of Merrill Lynch, but "Qualcomm is less affected by the transition."

   That's because Qualcomm "has no manufacturing operations, having sold its
handsets and wireless infrastructure business over the past three years," the
analyst says.

   Qualcomm primarily sells its intellectual property through chipsets (45
percent of sales) and technology licensing and royalty agreements (26 percent).

   The company is the leading supplier of CDMA, or code division multiple
access, semiconductors, although it will spin off the business later this year,
Ching says.

   Qualcomm estimates that 90 million CDMA phones will be sold this year, though
Ching thinks 82 million will be more like it.

   Qualcomm will be insulated from problems in Europe's non-CDMA market, but
overall, "CDMA handset expectations for 2001 are optimistic," he says.

   Ching looks for the company to earn $1.25 a share in 2001, up from $1.05, and
he thinks the valuation of Qualcomm is $60 per share.  He is neutral on the
stock for the intermediate term, but thinks it is a long-term buy.

   Generx

   Analyst Peter F. Drake of Prudential Securities is impressed by Generx, the
pioneering gene therapy product from Collateral Therapeutics.

   Generx is a non-surgical gene therapy product that promotes the growth of
blood vessels and restores perfusion to oxygen-deprived regions of the heart,
the analyst says.

   "This technology holds the potential to revolutionize the treatment of
cardiovascular disease," Drake says.

   He expects the biotech to lose $1.14 a share in 2001. The stock is a strong
buy, but it carries high risk, he says.

   Ligand

   Ligand Pharmaceuticals and the Food and Drug Administration have agreed on
steps required to expand the label of Tagretin capsules to treat patients with
advanced non-small cell lung cancer, says John T. McCamant, editor of the
Medical Technology Stock Letter.

   He would buy the stock under $20.


LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2001


                             1863 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 15, 2001, Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 1152 words

HEADLINE: Increasing funding for research is Salk chief's main goal

BYLINE: Jeff Ristine; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Exhilarated by the dawn of a new era in biomedical research, Richard Murphy is
determined to clear the path for scientists who will discover the next big
breakthroughs.

   "Right now is without a doubt the most exciting time in the history of basic
science that's targeted toward medicine," said Murphy, the new president and CEO
of the Salk Institute.

   As 21st century technology starts to click, he said, the strange new
post-genomic world of biological science "is going to reveal stuff that you
couldn't have imagined five years ago."

   Murphy's delight in being immersed in the Salk's competition for
breakthroughs and bucks at such a turning point is unmistakable.  "For us it's a
very, very exciting time and for me to be involved in all of that is terrific,"
he said.

   He grew up in Boston, son of a paper-products salesman whose own education
stopped after ninth grade.  The first steps leading Murphy to the Salk began at
a private high school in 1967, where he taught biology and chemistry and fell in
love with science.

   "I just became really curious about how biology works," said Murphy, 56, who
became head of the Salk Oct. 1.  "There were just so many fundamental issues
that we didn't understand."

   While he's still settling in at the Salk, Murphy quickly became known as a
warm, charming leader.

   "The first thing that's really striking about Rich Murphy . . . is, he's an
extremely personable guy who you can like immediately," said professor Joseph R.
Ecker, a plant biologist at Salk and member of Murphy's advisory committee.
"That's important, especially if you're going to be communicating a lot to the
public, that you have that kind of a charismatic, genuine personality."

   Tony Hunter, chairman of the Salk faculty, said Murphy is "clearly a very
hands-on administrator and wants to be involved in everything, which is good."

   Murphy says "the key to the success of this place has been the fact that you
bring in the best people, and then you give them absolute freedom to follow
their curiosity."

   Murphy first saw the Salk Institute, whose original '60s buildings and plaza
on Torrey Pines Mesa are considered to be among San Diego's architectural
jewels, in a visit about seven years ago when he was seeking advice on fund
raising.

   "I remember coming into this building and saying, this is incredible," said
Murphy, who was head of one of Canada's leading teaching and research
institutions at the time.  Now he feels as if he works "in a piece of art."

   Murphy spent his first months at Salk making the rounds, visiting its 56 labs
and support facilities, such as the mail room.  He has met all the faculty
members individually to learn about the science they're doing.

   Founded in 1960 by Dr. Jonas Salk, the polio vaccine pioneer, the private,
world-renowned institute focuses on molecular biology, genetics and
neurosciences.

   Its researchers seek the causes and possible cures or therapies for a wide
range of diseases, including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and diabetes, and it
stands at the forefront of plant biology.

   Murphy said there is agreement among the institute's researchers that the
Salk needs to assert a major role in protein chemistry, gene therapy and
stem-cell research, among other fields.

   Few of these programs would be new to the institute, but they will require
Murphy to achieve another major goal.

   "The bottom line's going to be, where are we going to get the money to do
this?  That's really where my responsibility is," said Murphy.

   Assisted through college by a caddy scholarship, Murphy started his teaching
career at the Boston high school before delving more deeply into medicine.

   He got a doctoral degree in zoology from Rutgers and became a postdoctoral
researcher at Boston's Massachusetts General Hospital.  Two years later, he was
teaching at Harvard Medical School.

   Murphy's career took a turn north in 1986, when he joined the department of
anatomy and cell biology at the University of Alberta in Edmonton.  The final
move before Salk came in 1992, when he became director of the Montreal
Neurological Institute, a teaching and research institute affiliated with McGill
University.

   At the Salk, Murphy replaced Thomas Pollard, who stepped down last year amid
reports of policy struggles with some senior faculty members.

   The true test of Murphy's tenure may be whether he can improve the Salk's
financial footing.  Its endowment stands at about $120 million and its annual
budget is around $61 million, mostly from the National Institutes of Health and
federal grants to individual researchers.  On the private side, the March of
Dimes Birth Defects Foundation has been supporting the institute since its
creation.

   Additional funds will ensure that Salk can regularly attract seminar speakers
and host national or international scientific meetings that "enrich the
intellectual life of the organization," Murphy said.

   But the chief motivation for aggressive fund raising is more equipment in the
labs and expanding Salk facilities.

   After a recent retreat, many of the Salk's scientific objectives are becoming
clearer.

   "I guess what we want to do is be able to exploit all of the new
technological breakthroughs that are available to us," Murphy said, "so that . .
. the scientists we have are not limited by technology."

   To remain scientifically competitive with other research institutions, Murphy
said, the Salk needs to launch a major effort in protein chemistry: the science
of learning the three-dimensional structures, functions and interactions of the
chemicals that control biological processes in living organisms.

   The Human Genome Project has underscored the importance of pinpointing the
proteins that genes code for, Murphy said, and the Salk is gearing up for a
potential $20 million investment in new equipment and faculty members.

   Computational biology, an emerging field that unites biological investigation
of genes and proteins with the ability of advanced computers to sort through
databases, is another growth area for the Salk.

   Gene therapy is "an area of huge potential and importance," Murphy said, and
the Salk wants to remain at the forefront of plant biology.

   And research on stem cells, the generalized cells that are the precursors to
all other types of specialized cells in the human body, "is going to be
extremely important."

   Many scientists believe stem cells will play a role in treating Parkinson's
disease, Alzheimer's, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injuries and other
diseases and disabilities.

   Use of the cells is controversial because much of the work requires use of
surplus human embryos.  Anti-abortion activists and other critics decry such
work as unethical.

   Murphy says there are funding sources in San Diego that have not yet been
tapped by the Salk. But to reach these sources, he said, the institute needs to
become more "user friendly" to the community.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; Jim Baird / Union-Tribune; Richard Murphy, who became president
and CEO of the Salk Institute in October, got his start in science teaching
biology and chemistry at a private high school in Boston. (B-2)

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2001


                             1864 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 15, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. H-2

LENGTH: 327 words

HEADLINE: Outlook at Qualcomm is optimistic

BYLINE: DON BAUDER

BODY:

   Handset vendors in the mobile phone business face a slower market, says
Michael E. Ching of Merrill Lynch, but "Qualcomm is less affected by the
transition." That's because Qualcomm "has no manufacturing operations, having
sold its handsets and wireless infrastructure business over the past three
years," the analyst says. Qualcomm primarily sells its intellectual property
through chipsets (45 percent of sales) and technology licensing and royalty
agreements (26 percent). The company is the leading supplier of CDMA, or code
division multiple access, semiconductors, although it will spin off the business
later this year, Ching says. Qualcomm estimates that 90 million CDMA phones will
be sold this year, though Ching thinks 82 million will be more like it. Qualcomm
will be insulated from problems in Europe's non-CDMA market, but overall, "CDMA
handset expectations for 2001 are optimistic," he says. Ching looks for the
company to earn $1.25 a share in 2001, up from $1.05, and he thinks the
valuation of Qualcomm is $60 per share.

   He is neutral on the stock for the intermediate term, but thinks it is a
long-term buy. Generx Analyst Peter F. Drake of Prudential Securities is
impressed by Generx, the pioneering gene therapy product from Collateral
Therapeutics. Generx is a non-surgical gene therapy product that promotes the
growth of blood vessels and restores perfusion to oxygen-deprived regions of the
heart, the analyst says. "This technology holds the potential to revolutionize
the treatment of cardiovascular disease," Drake says. He expects the biotech to
lose $1.14 a share in 2001. The stock is a strong buy, but it carries high risk,
he says. Ligand Ligand Pharmaceuticals and the Food and Drug Administration have
agreed on steps required to expand the label of Tagretin capsules to treat
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer, says John T. McCamant, editor
of the Medical Technology Stock Letter. He would buy the stock under $20.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1865 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 15, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 1139 words

HEADLINE: Increasing funding for research is Salk chief's main goal

BYLINE: Jeff Ristine, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Exhilarated by the dawn of a new era in biomedical research, Richard Murphy
is determined to clear the path for scientists who will discover the next big
breakthroughs. "Right now is without a doubt the most exciting time in the
history of basic science that's targeted toward medicine," said Murphy, the new
president and CEO of the Salk Institute. As 21st century technology starts to
click, he said, the strange new post-genomic world of biological science "is
going to reveal stuff that you couldn't have imagined five years ago." Murphy's
delight in being immersed in the Salk's competition for breakthroughs and bucks
at such a turning point is unmistakable.

   "For us it's a very, very exciting time and for me to be involved in all of
that is terrific," he said. He grew up in Boston, son of a paper-products
salesman whose own education stopped after ninth grade.

   The first steps leading Murphy to the Salk began at a private high school in
1967, where he taught biology and chemistry and fell in love with science. "I
just became really curious about how biology works," said Murphy, 56, who became
head of the Salk Oct. 1.

   "There were just so many fundamental issues that we didn't understand." While
he's still settling in at the Salk, Murphy quickly became known as a warm,
charming leader. "The first thing that's really striking about Rich Murphy . . .
is, he's an extremely personable guy who you can like immediately," said
professor Joseph R. Ecker, a plant biologist at Salk and member of Murphy's
advisory committee.

   "That's important, especially if you're going to be communicating a lot to
the public, that you have that kind of a charismatic, genuine personality." Tony
Hunter, chairman of the Salk faculty, said Murphy is "clearly a very hands-on
administrator and wants to be involved in everything, which is good." Murphy
says "the key to the success of this place has been the fact that you bring in
the best people, and then you give them absolute freedom to follow their
curiosity." Murphy first saw the Salk Institute, whose original '60s buildings
and plaza on Torrey Pines Mesa are considered to be among San Diego's
architectural jewels, in a visit about seven years ago when he was seeking
advice on fund raising. "I remember coming into this building and saying, this
is incredible," said Murphy, who was head of one of Canada's leading teaching
and research institutions at the time.

   Now he feels as if he works "in a piece of art." Murphy spent his first
months at Salk making the rounds, visiting its 56 labs and support facilities,
such as the mail room.

   He has met all the faculty members individually to learn about the science
they're doing. Founded in 1960 by Dr. Jonas Salk, the polio vaccine pioneer, the
private, world-renowned institute focuses on molecular biology, genetics and
neurosciences. Its researchers seek the causes and possible cures or therapies
for a wide range of diseases, including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and diabetes,
and it stands at the forefront of plant biology. Murphy said there is agreement
among the institute's researchers that the Salk needs to assert a major role in
protein chemistry, gene therapy and stem-cell research, among other fields. Few
of these programs would be new to the institute, but they will require Murphy to
achieve another major goal. "The bottom line's going to be, where are we going
to get the money to do this?

   That's really where my responsibility is," said Murphy. Assisted through
college by a caddy scholarship, Murphy started his teaching career at the Boston
high school before delving more deeply into medicine. He got a doctoral degree
in zoology from Rutgers and became a postdoctoral researcher at Boston's
Massachusetts General Hospital.

   Two years later, he was teaching at Harvard Medical School. Murphy's career
took a turn north in 1986, when he joined the department of anatomy and cell
biology at the University of Alberta in Edmonton.

   The final move before Salk came in 1992, when he became director of the
Montreal Neurological Institute, a teaching and research institute affiliated
with McGill University. At the Salk, Murphy replaced Thomas Pollard, who stepped
down last year amid reports of policy struggles with some senior faculty
members. The true test of Murphy's tenure may be whether he can improve the
Salk's financial footing.

   Its endowment stands at about $120 million and its annual budget is around
$61 million, mostly from the National Institutes of Health and federal grants to
individual researchers.

   On the private side, the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation has been
supporting the institute since its creation. Additional funds will ensure that
Salk can regularly attract seminar speakers and host national or international
scientific meetings that "enrich the intellectual life of the organization,"
Murphy said. But the chief motivation for aggressive fund raising is more
equipment in the labs and expanding Salk facilities. After a recent retreat,
many of the Salk's scientific objectives are becoming clearer. "I guess what we
want to do is be able to exploit all of the new technological breakthroughs that
are available to us," Murphy said, "so that . . . the scientists we have are not
limited by technology." To remain scientifically competitive with other research
institutions, Murphy said, the Salk needs to launch a major effort in protein
chemistry: the science of learning the three-dimensional structures, functions
and interactions of the chemicals that control biological processes in living
organisms. The Human Genome Project has underscored the importance of
pinpointing the proteins that genes code for, Murphy said, and the Salk is
gearing up for a potential $20 million investment in new equipment and faculty
members. Computational biology, an emerging field that unites biological
investigation of genes and proteins with the ability of advanced computers to
sort through databases, is another growth area for the Salk. Gene therapy is "an
area of huge potential and importance," Murphy said, and the Salk wants to
remain at the forefront of plant biology. And research on stem cells, the
generalized cells that are the precursors to all other types of specialized
cells in the human body, "is going to be extremely important." Many scientists
believe stem cells will play a role in treating Parkinson's disease,
Alzheimer's, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injuries and other diseases and
disabilities. Use of the cells is controversial because much of the work
requires use of surplus human embryos.

   Anti-abortion activists and other critics decry such work as unethical.
Murphy says there are funding sources in San Diego that have not yet been tapped
by the Salk. But to reach these sources, he said, the institute needs to become
more "user friendly" to the community.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Richard Murphy, who became president and CEO of the
Salk Institute in October, got his start in science teaching biology and
chemistry at a private high school in Boston. (B-2); PHOTOBY: Jim Baird /
Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1866 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 15, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. H-2

LENGTH: 327 words

HEADLINE: Outlook at Qualcomm is optimistic

BYLINE: DON BAUDER

BODY:

   Handset vendors in the mobile phone business face a slower market, says
Michael E. Ching of Merrill Lynch, but "Qualcomm is less affected by the
transition." That's because Qualcomm "has no manufacturing operations, having
sold its handsets and wireless infrastructure business over the past three
years," the analyst says. Qualcomm primarily sells its intellectual property
through chipsets (45 percent of sales) and technology licensing and royalty
agreements (26 percent). The company is the leading supplier of CDMA, or code
division multiple access, semiconductors, although it will spin off the business
later this year, Ching says. Qualcomm estimates that 90 million CDMA phones will
be sold this year, though Ching thinks 82 million will be more like it. Qualcomm
will be insulated from problems in Europe's non-CDMA market, but overall, "CDMA
handset expectations for 2001 are optimistic," he says. Ching looks for the
company to earn $1.25 a share in 2001, up from $1.05, and he thinks the
valuation of Qualcomm is $60 per share.

   He is neutral on the stock for the intermediate term, but thinks it is a
long-term buy. Generx Analyst Peter F. Drake of Prudential Securities is
impressed by Generx, the pioneering gene therapy product from Collateral
Therapeutics. Generx is a non-surgical gene therapy product that promotes the
growth of blood vessels and restores perfusion to oxygen-deprived regions of the
heart, the analyst says. "This technology holds the potential to revolutionize
the treatment of cardiovascular disease," Drake says. He expects the biotech to
lose $1.14 a share in 2001. The stock is a strong buy, but it carries high risk,
he says. Ligand Ligand Pharmaceuticals and the Food and Drug Administration have
agreed on steps required to expand the label of Tagretin capsules to treat
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer, says John T. McCamant, editor
of the Medical Technology Stock Letter. He would buy the stock under $20.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1867 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 15, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 1139 words

HEADLINE: Increasing funding for research is Salk chief's main goal

BYLINE: Jeff Ristine, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Exhilarated by the dawn of a new era in biomedical research, Richard Murphy
is determined to clear the path for scientists who will discover the next big
breakthroughs. "Right now is without a doubt the most exciting time in the
history of basic science that's targeted toward medicine," said Murphy, the new
president and CEO of the Salk Institute. As 21st century technology starts to
click, he said, the strange new post-genomic world of biological science "is
going to reveal stuff that you couldn't have imagined five years ago." Murphy's
delight in being immersed in the Salk's competition for breakthroughs and bucks
at such a turning point is unmistakable.

   "For us it's a very, very exciting time and for me to be involved in all of
that is terrific," he said. He grew up in Boston, son of a paper-products
salesman whose own education stopped after ninth grade.

   The first steps leading Murphy to the Salk began at a private high school in
1967, where he taught biology and chemistry and fell in love with science. "I
just became really curious about how biology works," said Murphy, 56, who became
head of the Salk Oct. 1.

   "There were just so many fundamental issues that we didn't understand." While
he's still settling in at the Salk, Murphy quickly became known as a warm,
charming leader. "The first thing that's really striking about Rich Murphy . . .
is, he's an extremely personable guy who you can like immediately," said
professor Joseph R. Ecker, a plant biologist at Salk and member of Murphy's
advisory committee.

   "That's important, especially if you're going to be communicating a lot to
the public, that you have that kind of a charismatic, genuine personality." Tony
Hunter, chairman of the Salk faculty, said Murphy is "clearly a very hands-on
administrator and wants to be involved in everything, which is good." Murphy
says "the key to the success of this place has been the fact that you bring in
the best people, and then you give them absolute freedom to follow their
curiosity." Murphy first saw the Salk Institute, whose original '60s buildings
and plaza on Torrey Pines Mesa are considered to be among San Diego's
architectural jewels, in a visit about seven years ago when he was seeking
advice on fund raising. "I remember coming into this building and saying, this
is incredible," said Murphy, who was head of one of Canada's leading teaching
and research institutions at the time.

   Now he feels as if he works "in a piece of art." Murphy spent his first
months at Salk making the rounds, visiting its 56 labs and support facilities,
such as the mail room.

   He has met all the faculty members individually to learn about the science
they're doing. Founded in 1960 by Dr. Jonas Salk, the polio vaccine pioneer, the
private, world-renowned institute focuses on molecular biology, genetics and
neurosciences. Its researchers seek the causes and possible cures or therapies
for a wide range of diseases, including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and diabetes,
and it stands at the forefront of plant biology. Murphy said there is agreement
among the institute's researchers that the Salk needs to assert a major role in
protein chemistry, gene therapy and stem-cell research, among other fields. Few
of these programs would be new to the institute, but they will require Murphy to
achieve another major goal. "The bottom line's going to be, where are we going
to get the money to do this?

   That's really where my responsibility is," said Murphy. Assisted through
college by a caddy scholarship, Murphy started his teaching career at the Boston
high school before delving more deeply into medicine. He got a doctoral degree
in zoology from Rutgers and became a postdoctoral researcher at Boston's
Massachusetts General Hospital.

   Two years later, he was teaching at Harvard Medical School. Murphy's career
took a turn north in 1986, when he joined the department of anatomy and cell
biology at the University of Alberta in Edmonton.

   The final move before Salk came in 1992, when he became director of the
Montreal Neurological Institute, a teaching and research institute affiliated
with McGill University. At the Salk, Murphy replaced Thomas Pollard, who stepped
down last year amid reports of policy struggles with some senior faculty
members. The true test of Murphy's tenure may be whether he can improve the
Salk's financial footing.

   Its endowment stands at about $120 million and its annual budget is around
$61 million, mostly from the National Institutes of Health and federal grants to
individual researchers.

   On the private side, the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation has been
supporting the institute since its creation. Additional funds will ensure that
Salk can regularly attract seminar speakers and host national or international
scientific meetings that "enrich the intellectual life of the organization,"
Murphy said. But the chief motivation for aggressive fund raising is more
equipment in the labs and expanding Salk facilities. After a recent retreat,
many of the Salk's scientific objectives are becoming clearer. "I guess what we
want to do is be able to exploit all of the new technological breakthroughs that
are available to us," Murphy said, "so that . . . the scientists we have are not
limited by technology." To remain scientifically competitive with other research
institutions, Murphy said, the Salk needs to launch a major effort in protein
chemistry: the science of learning the three-dimensional structures, functions
and interactions of the chemicals that control biological processes in living
organisms. The Human Genome Project has underscored the importance of
pinpointing the proteins that genes code for, Murphy said, and the Salk is
gearing up for a potential $20 million investment in new equipment and faculty
members. Computational biology, an emerging field that unites biological
investigation of genes and proteins with the ability of advanced computers to
sort through databases, is another growth area for the Salk. Gene therapy is "an
area of huge potential and importance," Murphy said, and the Salk wants to
remain at the forefront of plant biology. And research on stem cells, the
generalized cells that are the precursors to all other types of specialized
cells in the human body, "is going to be extremely important." Many scientists
believe stem cells will play a role in treating Parkinson's disease,
Alzheimer's, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injuries and other diseases and
disabilities. Use of the cells is controversial because much of the work
requires use of surplus human embryos.

   Anti-abortion activists and other critics decry such work as unethical.
Murphy says there are funding sources in San Diego that have not yet been tapped
by the Salk. But to reach these sources, he said, the institute needs to become
more "user friendly" to the community.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Richard Murphy, who became president and CEO of the
Salk Institute in October, got his start in science teaching biology and
chemistry at a private high school in Boston. (B-2); PHOTOBY: Jim Baird /
Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1868 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      April 13, 2001 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg.B-5

LENGTH: 470 words

HEADLINE: CHIEF PLANS ASSAULT ON HEAD, NECK CANCER

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The medical equivalent of the Army, Navy and Air Force should all be involved
in a multipronged attack on deadly head and neck tumors, a recent recruit to the
University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute says.

    Surgery, chemotherapy and radiation therapy have been the mainstays, or the
ground troops, of treatment for head and neck tumors, said Dr. Dong Moon Shin,
who is now co-director of the center's Head and Neck Cancer Program. Advances in
molecular biology and gene therapy, like a navy and air force, could attack from
other directions so that cancer cells can't escape destruction.

    Molecular biology advances, for instance, make it possible to interfere with
tumor growth and are the basis of a new treatment devised by Shin, who left M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center in Houston to join Pitt in February.

    Head and neck tumors refer to cancers that occur above the collarbone,
excluding those of the brain or eyes. The cells of these cancers carry a
molecule on their surfaces called epidermal growth factor receptor. When the
growth factor attaches to the molecule, a series of chemical events occur that
make the cancer cell grow and multiply.

    Shin has been testing an antibody that clogs up the receptor so that the
signal to multiply is not relayed through the cell. In a multicenter trial that
could begin here next month, patients will be randomly assigned to get either a
chemotherapy agent alone or the drug with the experimental antibody.

    "We have seen remarkable results" in earlier studies of the drug and
antibody combination, Shin said. The antibody is being tested with radiation
therapy in another trial.

    Dr. Jennifer Rubin Grandis, who co-directs the head and neck cancer program
with Shin, has a study under way that uses another technique, known as
antisense, to disrupt the growth pathways of tumor cells. An engineered sequence
of genetic material is put into the cancer cell, throwing a wrench into its
protein-making functions and leading the cell to shut down and die.

    Other researchers in the program are working on ways to kill cancer cells
through vaccines and strategies to cut off their blood supply.

    These experimental techniques could eventually be used together to get rid
of cancer cells, Shin said.

    He is particularly interested in preventing the recurrence of cancer. He
will be starting a trial in a few months to see if agents, such as vitamin E and
a derivative of vitamin A, can stop cancer from coming back in patients who have
undergone initially successful treatment.

    This year, an estimated 45,000 Americans will be diagnosed with head and
neck tumors. About 13,000 will die from the disease. According to the American
Cancer Society, 64 percent are still alive five years after diagnosis. Smoking
and excessive alcohol consumption are risk factors.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2001


                             1869 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      April 12, 2001 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 032

LENGTH: 209 words

HEADLINE: Transkaryotic stock dives after patent case loss in UK

BYLINE: By Jennifer Heldt Powell

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. shares dropped yesterday after the Cambridge
company lost another round in an ongoing patent battle with Amgen Inc., maker of
the popular anemia drug Epogen.

   A London court ruled that Amgen's European patent for the drug is valid and
that Transkaryotic and Aventis SA infringed on it.

   Justice David Edmund Neuberger, of the English High Court of Justice, ruled
Transkaryotic and Aventis had infringed on only one of four claims on the
patent. But the decision effectively blocks the companies from selling their
anemia drug, Dynepo, in the U.K.

   Transkaryotic officials say the battle isn't over, however.

   "We believe we made significant progress in this initial case and are
confident we have strong grounds to appeal the remaining issue," said Dr.
Richard Selden, Transkaryotic chief executive, in a statement. He said he
expects a resolution in mid-2002.

   Transkaryotic shares dropped 18 percent, ending the day at $ 15.10, down $
3.30. Amgen shares rose 36 percent, to $ 51.87.

   In January, Transkaryotic lost a similar battle in the U.S. when District
Court Judge William Young ruled that Transkaryotic had infringed on three Amgen
patents. Transkaryotic has appealed and expects a decision within a year.


LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2001


                             1870 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    April 12, 2001, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E7

LENGTH: 134 words

HEADLINE: REGIONAL BUSINESS IN BRIEF;
COURT RULES AGAINST TRANSKARYOTIC

BYLINE: BY NAOMI AOKI, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   In yet another blow to Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., a British court ruled
that the Cambridge company infringed on European patents held by California
biotechnology giant Amgen Inc. for its top-selling anemia drug, Epogen. The
decision by the High Court of Justice in London comes just months after Amgen
won a US court ruling that TKT's version of erythropoietin, Dynepo, infringed on
Amgen's US patents for Epogen. The decision blocks TKT and its partner Aventis
SA from selling Dynepo in the United Kingdom. Worldwide sales of Epogen, along
with a Johnson & Johnson version of the drug marketed under the name Procrit,
total more than $4 billion. TKT said it would appeal the ruling. Cambridge-based
TKT's shares fell $3.30 to $15.10. Amgen's shares rose 36 cents to $51.87.


LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2001


                             1871 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2001 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                             All Rights Reserved
                      The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)

                 April 12, 2001 Thursday Met and metro Editions

SECTION: FORUM; Pg. 09A

LENGTH: 365 words

HEADLINE: EDITORIAL; Stem cell breakthrough

BODY:

   MUCH has been written about the hopes for stem cell research. Stem cells are
sometimes called "master cells.'' They are capable of evolving into virtually
every kind of body tissue, and could be the key to curing Parkinson's, diabetes
and many other serious diseases.

   Scientists believe that one day, stem cell technology will be used to
generate an endless supply of spare parts (bone and cartilage, for example), and
replacement tissue for deteriorating or diseased tissue. It also could be used
with gene therapy to prevent genetic diseases and birth defects.

   Despite all this promise, stem cell research has been controversial from the
start. That's because it appeared that the cells most able to evolve into
whatever tissue is desired are the ones extracted from embryos and aborted
fetuses.

   This month, the research has taken a welcome turn to the non-controversial: A
new study by researchers at the University of California at Los Angeles and the
University of Pittsburgh suggests that stem cells can be harvested from ordinary
fat tissue obtained through liposuction. Lord knows most Americans have a
surplus of fat, so the supplies of stem cells could be, for all intents and
purposes, limitless.

   Meanwhile, three other studies are showing promising results when adult stem
cells from bone marrow are used to treat animals that have had heart attacks.

   Heart tissue has actually regenerated from injected cells; the muscle has
been strengthened. "No one has ever seen this kind of thing before - complete
regeneration,'' says the co-author of one study.

   "The implications are profound,'' points out a heart researcher who was not
involved in the research. "The health care industry would be revolutionized if
the treatment of heart failure could be moved from organ transplants down to
cell transplants.''

   Human clinical trials using these techniques could begin next year.
Meanwhile, stem cell research that would solve other medical problems continues.
Some of it requires the use of stem cells from embryos.

   Clearly, this kind of experimentation should be encouraged. Advances in the
next few years could be as miraculous as these most recent studies predict.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2002


                             1872 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            April 12, 2001 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part C; Financial Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: CALIFORNIA;
AMGEN WINS EPOGEN PATENT SUIT IN U.K.;
DRUGS: THE RULING AGAINST TRANSKARYOTIC AND ROCHE HELPS PAVE THE WAY FOR THE
COMPANY'S NEW ANTI-ANEMIA TREATMENT.

BYLINE: DENISE GELLENE, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Amgen Inc. on Wednesday won a patent infringement lawsuit in the United
Kingdom over its blockbuster anti-anemia drug, Epogen. The ruling should ease
the June debut of Amgen's widely anticipated successor to Epogen.

   The British High Court of Justice ruled that Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. and
Roche Holdings Ltd. infringed on Amgen's patent on erythropoietin, a protein
that spurs production of red blood cells.

   Transkaryotic said it will appeal. The Cambridge, Mass.-company also is
appealing a similar ruling in U.S. District Court in Boston. Transkaryotic,
which plans to market its drug in partnership with Aventis, claims it has
developed an alternative method for producing the critical protein.

   "We have strong grounds to appeal," Transkaryotic President and Chief
Executive Richard F. Seldon said, regarding the U.K. decision. "We look forward
to a resolution of this case in mid-2002."

   Roche, which markets a version of the protein called NeoRecormon in Europe,
is expected to appeal. A spokeswoman had no immediate comment.

   Thousand Oaks-based Amgen doesn't market Epogen in Europe. Johnson & Johnson
sells it in Europe under the name Eprex pursuant to a licensing agreement with
Amgen. But the ruling is significant to Amgen in two ways. In dealing a setback
for J&J's competitors, it protects licensing revenue due Amgen from Eprex sales.

   Beyond that, Amgen plans to launch in June a successor drug to Epogen in
Europe, where final approval to market the drug, Aranesp, is expected soon.
Wednesday's court ruling potentially reduces the competition the drug will face
in the $ 65-million U.K. market.

   The drug is used to treat kidney dialysis patients whose ability to produce
red blood cells is impaired. Analysts say the European market for anti-anemia
drugs in the dialysis market is $ 800 million, with the U.K. representing an
important piece of Aranesp's anticipated debut.

   Aranesp hasn't yet been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration,
but analysts said no safety or efficacy issues have been raised about the drug
and an OK is expected soon.

   Amgen is testing Aranesp for use by cancer patients who suffer from anemia
following chemotherapy. Analysts estimate that business accounts for half of
J&J's $ 2.5 billion in sales from the drug, which it markets as Procrit for
non-dialysis use in the United States.

   Amgen shares closed at $ 51.87, up 36 cents, on Nasdaq. Transkaryotic closed
at $ 15.10, down $ 3.30, also on Nasdaq.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2001


                             1873 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     April 12, 2001 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 05A

LENGTH: 327 words

HEADLINE: Dementia patients die faster than researchers thought

BYLINE: JANET MCCONNAUGHEY Associated Press

BODY:

   People with dementia caused by Alzheimer's disease or narrowed blood vessels
in the brain often die within about three years, a far grimmer prognosis than
generally thought, Canadian researchers say.

   Previous studies that put the average at five to nine years did not take into
account people who die so soon after the disease hits that they cannot be
included in studies, the researchers said in today's New England Journal of
Medicine.

   " We know these are terrible, rapidly progressing, devastating diseases. But
the way we've looked at the data, it's even worse than we thought," said
Christina Wolfson of the epidemiology and biostatistics department at McGill
University's Montreal Neurological Institute.

   Survival time after diagnosis for 821 patients with dementia was found to be
about 6.6 years. But when the " survivors-only bias" was taken into account, the
study found that half of the patients would live less than 3.3 years and half
would live longer.

   The study also estimated the median life expectancy at 5.7 years for people
diagnosed between the ages of 65 and 74; 4.2 years for people diagnosed between
75 and 84; and 2.75 years for those at least 85 when diagnosed.

   Other experts said Wolfson's overall estimate is so low because the patients
were so old -- almost 84, on average.

   "To say your mean life expectancy is 3.3 years at age 84 is not nearly as
dramatic as saying it's 3. 3 years at age 50," said Claudia H. Kawas, a
neurology professor at the University of California at Irvine.

   In a related development, neurosurgeons in San Diego reported that they have
injected genetically modified cells into the brain of an Alzheimer's patient in
a pioneering procedure that may hold the promise of halting or reversing brain
cell loss caused by the disease.

   The 11-hour procedure at the University of California in San Diego marked the
first use of human gene therapy in the treatment of brain disease, researchers
said.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2001


                             1874 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            April 12, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 90 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
AMGEN WINS AGAIN IN PATENT CASE AGAINST TRANSKARYOTIC

BYLINE:  AP

BODY:

        A British judge has found that Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. infringed on
a patent held by Amgen Inc. to produce a drug to treat anemia.

   The case involves British patents for the substance erythropoietein, which
Amgen produces as the drug Epogen. A United States District Court judge in
Boston ruled in January that Transkaryotic, based in Cambridge, Mass., violated
valid United States patents belonging to Amgen. The ruling yesterday effectively
blocks Transkaryotic from selling the drug in Britain. Transkaryotic said it
would appeal.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2001


                             1875 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            April 12, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 457 words

HEADLINE: Researchers discover link to back-pain gene;
But treatment won't be offered for years

BYLINE: By John Pope; Staff writer

BODY:

   A variation in a particular sequence of genes increases the risk of
developing such painful spinal afflictions as sciatica and lumbar-disc disease,
Tulane University and Finnish researchers reported Wednesday.

   Even though the investigators have found the quirk that seems to explain why
certain back diseases run in families, gene therapy or corrective treatment is
possible, but years away, said Dr. Leena Ala-Kokko, a Finnish native who is a
researcher at the Tulane Center for Gene Therapy.

   "We're just trying to manage the pain," she said, "but we can't treat the
disease. It's like every other disease: When you know what causes it, you can
start planning."

   Although scientists developed a test for the gene sequence to conduct this
research, it cannot be offered locally yet, Ala-Kokko said, because work is
still under way to establish the company that will manufacture it.

   She said she hopes the test will be available within months.

   The scientists' report, based on analyses of Finnish hospital records and
family histories, appeared in Wednesday's issue of The Journal of the American
Medical Association.

   Lower-back pain is estimated to strike one person in five. No one is certain
how many cases are hereditary.

   Until gene therapy or targeted treatment is available for inherited back
problems, people with a family history of spinal pain should take good care of
their backs by eating sensibly to avoid obesity and resulting strain, giving up
tobacco and exercising, she said.

   "You have to have good muscles in the back to support your back," Ala-Kokko
said . "If you leave everything for your discs, that's too much."

   Even though discs have no blood vessels, they are sites of nonstop
metabolism, she said. "So you need to have some kind of exchange of nutrients,
and the best way to do that is exercise because discs flatten and return to
normal size (during exercise), and that's the way discs get their nutrients."

   Ala-Kokko can speak with authority about spinal trouble, not only because she
has studied it, but also because she suffered from lower-back pain when she was
16.

   The only available treatment: painkillers and waiting.

   "It's so painful," she said. "You cannot move. You cannot do anything."

   The researchers suggested that the variation they discovered does not cause
lumbar-disc disease but increases the risk of it and, therefore, is a risk
factor for other muscle and bone disorders.

   "This disease affects a lot of people," Ala-Kokko said. "What's the most
important thing about this finding is this: Most probably, genetic factors are
the main determinants whether you get this disease. It's not just bad luck."

John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3317.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2001


                             1876 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                  April 11, 2001, Wednesday FOUR STAR EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 22 SPOTLIGHT ON HEALTH

LENGTH: 715 words

HEADLINE: FLABULOUS! FAT YIELDS STEM CELLS

BODY:
LOS ANGELES - A team of scientists says it has grown everything from human
muscle to bone from stem cells taken from fat - a breakthrough that could
eliminate the controversial use of fetal cells in the quest to mend damaged or
dead tissue.

   Researchers at the University of California at Los Angeles and the University
of Pittsburgh isolated the stem cells - immature cells that can be coaxed into
maturing into specific types of tissue - from ordinary fat removed by
liposuction.

   They then grew the cells into bone, cartilage, muscle and fat.

   Stem cells have been taken from bone marrow, brain tissue and aborted fetuses
and frozen embryos - a practice opposed by many anti-abortion groups. The use of
fat as a source could end such controversy. The study was published this week in
the journal Tissue Engineering. Researchers predict the first practical use of
laboratory-engineered tissue could come within five years.

   Eventually, scientists hope to use fat from a patient's beer gut to help
repair his bum knee, or other injuries.

   "There is potential for regenerating a lot of different tissues, perhaps
someday solid organs, glands, nerves or brain tissue, " Dr. Marc Hedrick of UCLA
said yesterday.

   The discovery comes at a time when President Bush has signaled he may block
federal funding for studies that use embryonic or fetal cells. He wants
scientists to focus on adult stem cells, which until now have been more
difficult to harvest.    The Associated PressMORE HEALTH NEWSAltered cells
injected into Alzheimer's brain

   SAN DIEGO - Neurosurgeons have injected genetically modified cells into the
brain of an Alzheimer's patient in a procedure that may hold the promise of
halting or reversing brain cell loss caused by the disease.

   The 11-hour procedure at the University of California at San Diego marked the
first use of human gene therapy in the treatment of brain disease, researchers
said yesterday.

   Improved brain function might be seen in the next few weeks, but doctors
cautioned it will take years to learn if the therapy will help Alzheimer's
patients in general.

   Scientists took skin cells from a 60-year-old woman in the early stages of
Alzheimer's disease and isolated genes that secrete a protein found in healthy
brains called nerve growth factor. On Thursday, two drops of a solution
containing those genes were injected into the woman's brain.

   She was discharged from the hospital two days later.  News Wire Services

   Sex marks spot for Viagra-like pill

   LEVERKUSEN, Germany - The company famous for making aspirin hopes to become
famous for making whoopee.

   German drug maker Bayer's alternative to Viagra has proved effective in 75%
of men who popped the pill, the company reported yesterday.

   Three-quarters of impotent patients who took 20-mg. doses of the test drug
Vardenafil were able to have routine successful sexual intercourse by the end of
a three-month study, officials said yesterday.

   Bayer says the drug does not have the side effects of Viagra, which cannot be
given to men who take nitrate drugs for heart conditions because Viagra lowers
blood pressure.

   The company presented results - from a study of 580 patients at 39 clinics in
the U.S. and Europe - at the 16th Congress of the European Association of
Urology on Monday. Further test results will be released later in the year, and
the drug could be available in Europe early next year.  News Wire Services

   Blood substitute OKd in South Africa

   JOHANNESBURG - A product that can emulate the work of red blood cells,
transporting oxygen throughout the body, has been approved for use in South
Africa, making it the first human blood substitute available anywhere in the
world, the products' developers said yesterday.

   "Every unit of blood you get is different, whereas ours is a consistent,
reproducible, pharmaceutical-grade product," said chief executive officer Carl
Rausch of Biopure, the U.S. company that makes the substitute.

   Medical experts still are unsure about the product and say Hemopure is not a
substitute for real blood.

   Biopure plans to file an application this year for approval of Hemopure in
the United States and Europe. It has received approval in the United States and
Europe for a different blood substitute for dogs.  The Associated Press


LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2001


                             1877 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2001 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      April 11, 2001 Wednesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-01

LENGTH: 646 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for Alzheimer's patient is a first

BYLINE: By Sandra Blakeslee, The New York Times,

BODY:

   Six days ago, a woman in the early stages of Alzheimer's  disease entered a
California hospital, had a small hole drilled  through her skull and was
injected with millions of her own cells,  in what researchers said was the first
time gene therapy has been  tried on an Alzheimer's patient.

   The researchers who announced the experiment Tuesday at a  news conference at
the University of California in San Diego,  where the surgery took place, said
it was also the first time that  doctors have tried to prevent progressive cell
loss in a  neurodegenerative disease.

   The 60-year-old patient, who asked to remain anonymous, was  discharged from
the hospital on Saturday and is recovering well at  home, said Dr. Mark
Tuszynski, a neurologist at the university who  led the research.

   'We hope to learn within the next three months if the  procedure is working,'
he said. 'But this is just one patient. It  may take years before we know if it
works in a large number of  people.'

   'This is a very important first step' toward finding a novel  way to treat
Alzheimer's, said Dr. William Mobley, who is chairman  of the neurology
department at Stanford University and is familiar  with the research. 'The work
is being done very carefully. Their  logic is very good.'

   That logic is based on 20 years of exploring the changes that  accompany
normal aging of the human brain and the disease  processes that lead to
dementias such as Alzheimer's disease,  Tuszynski said. Both conditions share
certain biological  mechanisms. For example, higher brain regions where
language,  memory and other cognitive functions reside are nourished by a
chemical substance made in a small clump of cells, called the  nucleus basalis,
found deep in the brain just under each frontal  lobe. About the size of a human
thumbnail, the nucleus basalis  makes a substance called acetylcholine that is
sent to target  cells all over the brain. Acetylcholine modulates the
excitability  of distant neurons, increasing or decreasing their electrical
activity depending on the amount of the chemical supplied by the  nucleus
basalis.

   When a cell in a distant area gets particularly excited and  needs more
acetylcholine, it sends a signal, called nerve growth  factor, back to the
nucleus basalis telling it to make more.

   In Alzheimer's disease, some mysterious process kills cells  throughout
higher brain regions, and the nucleus basalis does not  get the nerve growth
factor that it needs to prod it into making  more acetylcholine. Without
acetylcholine, higher brain areas that  control things like memory, attention,
personality and the ability  to navigate through space can be severely impaired.

   The gene therapy experiments are intended to fix this problem  by putting a
source of nerve growth factor back into the nucleus  basalis. First, researchers
took skin cells from the Alzheimer's  patient and inserted the gene that makes
nerve growth factor. By  adding substances that promote gene expression, they
turned her  skin cells into tiny nerve growth factor pumps. Then Dr. Hoi Sang
U, the neurosurgeon on the team, injected 2.5 million cells that  produce nerve
growth factor next to the patient's right nucleus  basalis. The new cells are
expected to produce enough nerve growth  factor to bring atrophied cells back to
life.

   In aged monkeys, the same procedure not only stopped cells  from dying, it
revived them from their atrophied state, U said.  'They got plump. And their
many target cells made new connections.'

   Whether the therapy will restore memory in Alzheimer's  patients is not
known, Tuszynski said. The hope is that it will at  least slow the disease. The
patient, a former schoolteacher from  Oregon, will be tested in coming weeks and
months.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2001


                             1878 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    April 11, 2001, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 897 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy begins in effort to slow woman's Alzheimer's

SOURCE: Washington Post

BYLINE: SUSAN OKIE

BODY:

   Doctors in California have implanted genetically modified cells into the
brain of a 60-year-old woman with early Alzheimer's disease in an effort to slow
her mental decline, a research team announced Tuesday.

   The experimental surgery, which researchers hope to test in seven more
patients, represents the first trial of gene therapy for a degenerative brain
disorder, said neuroscientist Mark Tuszynski, who heads the project.

   The cells, obtained from the woman's skin, were equipped with a gene to
produce nerve growth factor, a natural substance that promotes growth and
survival of brain cells. The radical treatment is not expected to cure
Alzheimer's disease, although studies in animals suggest that it may help
preserve the recipients' capacity to learn and remember.

   "We hope that we can keep people at a higher level of function for a longer
time period," said Tuszynski, an associate professor of neurosciences at the
University of California at San Diego and the Veterans Affairs Hospital.

   But some experts expressed concern that if complications occur, they may be
difficult to treat, since there's no simple way to remove the genetically
modified cells or stop their action once they've been implanted in the brain.

   "It's quite aggressive," said Vassilis Koliatsos, an associate professor of
pathology and neurology at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. "Growth factors are
extremely powerful compounds, and they're not selective for a particular brain
system. We've got to be watching here."

   Alzheimer's disease is a progressive brain disorder affecting 2 million to 4
million Americans. It gradually damages and destroys cells in many regions of
the brain, initially causing loss of recent memory and eventually rendering its
victims helpless and often unable to recognize their loved ones. Current
treatments produce only modest and short-lived improvement at best.

   Doctors said the patient, a former teacher from Oregon with mild Alzheimer's
disease whose name was not released, gave her consent to the experimental
procedure. In an 11-hour operation Thursday, neurosurgeon Hoi Sang U and his
team injected a half-million genetically modified cells into each of five sites
on the right side of her brain.

   The surgical team used brain-imaging tests and special equipment to precisely
pinpoint the target for the treatment, an area at the base of the brain's
frontal lobe called the nucleus basalis of Meynert. It contains nerve cells,
called cholinergic cells, that use the chemical messenger acetylcholine to
transmit messages to other brain areas involved in learning and memory.

   The woman was awake but sedated during the surgery, which was performed under
local anesthesia so doctors could talk to her to monitor her responses, U said.
She was released from the hospital Saturday and is doing well, he added. It may
take several weeks before researchers can detect any possible impact on the
woman's brain function, and several years before they know whether the treatment
is effective.

   "We are happy so far at this point that we have not done any harm," U said.
"We hope that it will do some good."

   The Food and Drug Administration and the National Institutes of Health's
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee approved the pilot study of gene therapy in
Alzheimer's patients in 1999. Tuszynski said the approval was based on years of
research in rats and monkeys that showed nerve growth factor could enhance
survival and function of cholinergic nerve cells in animals after surgery or the
partial degeneration associated with aging.

   Cholinergic nerve cells are one of many kinds of brain cells that are damaged
or destroyed by Alzheimer's disease, but they play an important role in memory
and learning. All four FDA-approved drugs for Alzheimer's disease work by
boosting the level of acetylcholine, the chemical transmitter in these cells.

   In monkeys, cholinergic nerve cells lose many connections with neighboring
cells during normal aging. When Tuszynski and his team implanted fibroblasts
that made nerve growth factor into elderly monkeys, nerve cells in the target
area grew new axons (threadlike projections) and established new connections
with other brain cells.

   The researchers chose genetically engineered cells to deliver nerve growth
factor because it's difficult to get the substance into the brain by other
means. It cannot be taken orally, because it is broken down by digestive
enzymes.

   Swedish researchers previously treated three patients with nerve growth
factor by pumping it into the fluid surrounding their brains, but that treatment
produced severe side effects. It stimulated cells in several parts of the
nervous system, causing pain, weight loss and abnormal growth of cells that
produce the outer coating of nerves, Tuszynski said.

   He said such side effects aren't expected with the procedure now being tested
because the dose is lower and studies in monkeys indicate that the growth factor
won't leak out from the injection site into brain fluid.

   "I don't think anybody knows what the ultimate response will be," said
William Thies, vice president for medical and scientific affairs of the
Alzheimer's Association, a patient advocacy organization. "We don't really know
these fibroblasts will stay in place and produce nerve growth factor. We don't
know that they won't begin to divide and produce a tumor."


TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2001


                             1879 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            April 11, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 692 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Is Performed In Bid to Halt Alzheimer's

BYLINE:  By SANDRA BLAKESLEE

BODY:

   Six days ago, a woman in the early stages of Alzheimer's disease entered a
California hospital, had a small hole drilled through her skull and was injected
with millions of her own cells, in what researchers said was the first time gene
therapy had been tried on an Alzheimer's patient.

        The researchers who announced the experiment yesterday at a news
conference held at the University of California at San Diego, where the surgery
took place, said it was also the first time that doctors had tried to prevent
progressive cell loss in a neurodegenerative disease.

    The 60-year-old patient, who asked to remain anonymous, was discharged from
the hospital last Saturday and is recovering well at home, said Dr. Mark
Tuszynski, a neurologist at the university who led the research.

   "We hope to learn within the next three months if the procedure is working,"
Dr. Tuszynski said in a telephone interview. "But this is just one patient. It
may take years before we know if it works in a large number of people."

   Dr. William Mobley, the chairman of the neurology department at Stanford
University, who is familiar with the research, called the procedure "a very
important first step" toward finding a novel way to treat Alzheimer's disease.

   "The work is being done very carefully," Dr. Mobley said. "Their logic is
very good."

   That logic is based on 20 years of exploring the changes that accompany
normal aging of the human brain and the disease processes that lead to dementias
like Alzheimer's disease, Dr. Tuszynski said. Both conditions share certain
biological mechanisms. For example, higher brain regions where language, memory
and other cognitive functions reside are nourished by a chemical substance made
in a small clump of cells, the nucleus basalis, found deep in the brain just
under each frontal lobe. About the size of a human thumb nail, the nucleus
basalis makes a substance, acetylcholine, which is sent to target cells all over
the brain.

   Acetylcholine modulates the excitability of distant neurons, increasing or
decreasing their electrical activity depending on the amount of the chemical
supplied by the nucleus basalis.

   When a cell in a distant area gets particularly excited and needs more
acetylcholine, it sends a signal, called nerve growth factor, back to the
nucleus basalis telling it to make more.

   In Alzheimer's disease, some still mysterious process kills cells throughout
higher brain regions and the nucleus basalis does not get the nerve growth
factor it needs to prod it into making more acetylcholine. Without
acetylcholine, higher brain areas that control things like memory, attention,
personality and the ability to navigate through space can be severely impaired.

   The gene therapy experiments are designed to fix this state of affairs by
putting a source of nerve growth factor back into the nucleus basalis. First,
researchers took skin cells from the Alzheimer's patient and inserted the gene
that makes nerve growth factor. By adding substances that promote gene
expression, they turned her skin cells into tiny nerve growth factor pumps.

   Then Dr. Hoi Sang U, the neurosurgeon on the team, injected two and one-half
million cells that produce nerve growth factor next to the patient's right
nucleus basalis. The new cells are expected to produce enough nerve growth
factor to bring atrophied cells back to life.

   In aged monkeys, the same procedure not only stopped cells from dying, it
also revived them from their atrophied state, Dr. U said. "They got plump. And
their many target cells made new connections."

   Whether the therapy will restore memory loss in Alzheimer's patients is not
known, Dr. Tuszynski said. The hope is that it will at least slow the disease
process. The patient, a former teacher from Oregon, will be tested in coming
weeks and months to see if her right hemisphere regains any function or if it
maintains function compared with the untreated side of her brain.

   Dr. Tuszynski said a second patient would receive genetically engineered
cells in three months, again on one side of the brain. If no harm is detected,
six more patients will receive the engineered cells in both sides of the brain.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2001


                             1880 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            April 11, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 984 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:

        INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

U.S. Sends Beijing Formal Statement of Regret
Senior administration officials said the United States, after days of
negotiations with Beijing, had submitted a formal statement of regret to the
Chinese government and was waiting for China's leaders to say whether they would
accept it and release the crew of an American spy plane.   A1

Kmart has received thousands of calls and e-mail messages from customers urging
the discount retailer to stop buying so many of its wares from China, prompting
the company to warn Chinese diplomats that it will seek new suppliers unless the
detained crew members are released promptly, company executives said.
   A1


   Bush Meets with Jordanian King
President Bush told King Abdullah II that enacting a free trade agreement with
Jordan was a top priority at the White House. But he indicated that provisions
negotiated by the Clinton administration to safeguard workers' rights and the
environment may require readjustment.   A7

Stalled Mideast Security Talks
Palestinians fired mortar rounds at Israeli targets in the Gaza Strip and inside
Israel, and Israel responded by firing antitank missiles at Palestinian police
posts in Gaza. The Palestinians decided for the second day against participating
in security talks with Israel, as a senior Palestinian security official
described the situation on the ground as a "state of war."   A4

Widening Japan Election
Two more contenders entered the race for Japan's prime minister: Shizuka Kamei,
the Liberal Democratic Party's policy chief, and Taro Aso, the minister in
charge of economic and fiscal policy.   A10

World Briefing   A8

NATIONAL   A14-21

Detroit Police Accused Of Arresting Witnesses
Dozens of people say the Detroit Police Department has been illegally detaining
witnesses in homicide cases, taking them in handcuffs to headquarters and
holding them for questioning for hours or even days without obtaining a court
order or filing criminal charges.   A1

A Guide to the Rich Pardon
A review of the campaign to persuade former President Bill Clinton to pardon
Marc Rich, drawn from interviews with people directly involved and documents
made public for Congressional hearings, shows how Mr. Rich and his supporters
orchestrated the use of every imaginable chit to win their goal.   A1

Budget Discrepancies
Members of Congress said that President Bush's spending plan was hundreds of
billions of dollars short of the overall blueprint approved last week by the
Senate, and it was not immediately clear how the discrepancies would be
resolved.   A1

New Massachusetts Governor
Jane M. Swift, the former lieutenant governor of Massachusetts, became the
state's first female governor. Ms. Swift is the nation's youngest governor, and,
come June, she expects to be the first to give birth while in office.   A17

Bombing Trial Postponed
One of two men charged with the 1963 bombing of a Birmingham, Ala., church that
killed four girls was granted a postponement of his murder trial, after a judge
received a report that the man was mentally unfit to stand trial. The second man
is to go on trial on Monday.   A17

Poll on Religion-Based Plan
Americans like the idea of giving government money to religious groups that
provide social services but only if those groups are Christian or Jewish, do not
proselytize the poor, and do not use religious guidelines in deciding whom to
hire, according to a poll of 2,041 adults.   A14

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Plans for CVS Store Draw Protest in Woodstock
A proposal to close a supermarket in Woodstock, N.Y., and replace it with a CVS
drugstore has graying veterans of the 60's taking to the streets, pledging to
block traffic with human chains.   B1

More A.T.M.'s in Poor Areas
Citigroup, which was hired by New York State to distribute welfare benefits
through A.T.M. cards, has agreed to install more than 140 new A.T.M.'s in
low-income neighborhoods in New York City. The agreement comes as part of a
settlement between Citigroup and the attorney general's office.   B2

Troopers Tell of Harassment
New Jersey state troopers testifying before a legislative committee recounted
racial harassment by fellow troopers in station houses and on the road, which
they said is still condoned by superiors.   B5

EDUCATION   B8

DINING   F1-12

ARTS   E1-12

Rapper's Legacy Mined
Tupac Shakur remains a magnetic figure four and a half years after his death.
"Up Against the Wind," a play about his life, opened last week in the East
Village, and his latest legitimate posthumous album is No. 1 on the pop charts.
E1

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Gene Therapy for Alzheimer's
A woman with Alzheimer's disease entered a Calfornia hospital last week, had a
small hole drilled through her skull and was injected with millions of her own
cells, in what researchers said was the first time gene therapy had been tried
on an Alzheimer's patient.   A20

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Markets in Broad Rally
Stock prices rose broadly. The Dow rose 257.59 points, or 2.62 percent, to
10,102.74, closing above 10,000 for the first time since March 15. The Nasdaq
jumped 106.32 points, to 1,852.03, and the S.& P. 500 gained 30.77 points, or
2.7 percent, to finish at 1,168.36.   A1

Corporate Titles Inflated
The tight labor market of recent years, corporate growth, mergers and
acquisitions and the need to retain senior executives have led to the
proliferation of high-powered titles, executive recruiters and compensation
advisers say.   A1

'Survivor' Creators Sue Fox
The creators of the hit show "Survivor" and the show's network, CBS, have filed
lawsuits accusing the Fox network and the creators of "Boot Camp" of stealing
the concept behind the show from "Survivor."   C2

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

SPORTS   D1-8

OBITUARIES   B7

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Freezing government; China's generals; Verlyn Klinkenborg on city
tulips.

Columns:Paul Krugman, Maureen Dowd.

Crossword   E6
TV Listings   E12
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D7

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2001


                             1881 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    APRIL 11, 2001 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 947 words

HEADLINE: NEWS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   In the Nation

   Genetic surgery on Alzheimer's patient

   * Doctors have surgically implanted genetically modified tissue into the
brain of an Alzheimer's patient in a complicated 11-hour operation aimed at
preventing cell death associated with the devastating illness, officials said
yesterday. The groundbreaking procedure was performed by doctors at the
University of California at San Diego School of Medicine, launching the first
phase of an experimental gene-therapy protocol for the progressive disease that
preys primarily on the elderly. The 60-year-old woman with early Alzheimer's has
been released from the hospital.

   Bush's former cat no longer missing

   * President Bush's former cat, missing for weeks, turned up yesterday morning
strolling Los Angeles' Avenue of the Stars. Recognized by a watchman, Ernie was
reportedly in ragged shape and without his custom-fitted toe caps. By afternoon
the orange and white tabby was back with Bush fund-raiser Brad Freeman, to whom
the Bushes gave the cat, and was "doing interviews," Laura Bush's office
announced.

   Report on submarine inquiry due Saturday

   * The U.S. Pacific Fleet commander will be told Saturday what, if any,
disciplinary action has been recommended against three officers of the USS
Greeneville submarine in the deadly sinking of a Japanese fishing trawler, a
Navy official said yesterday. Adm. Thomas Fargo, who will receive the
three-admiral panel's report in San Diego, will have 30 days to review it and
decide whether to accept or reject the recommendations, or make his own
findings.

   Nurse beaten to death at psychiatric hospital

   * A man being checked into a psychiatric hospital beat a nurse to death and
injured two patients early yesterday, authorities in Port St. Lucie, Fla., said.
Alberto Serrano, 33, was arrested on murder charges in the death of Alda
Ellington, 47, a nurse at privately run Savannahs Hospital. Serrano also was
charged with attempted murder in the beatings of two female patients. One, 75,
was admitted to a hospital; the other, 64, was treated and released to the
mental hospital.

   Couple charged with aiding murder suspect

   * A husband and wife pleaded not guilty yesterday in Buffalo to federal
charges that they obstructed justice by helping James Kopp avoid capture after
the 1998 shooting of an abortion provider. Loretta Claire Marra, 37, and Dennis
John Malvasi, 51, are accused of sending money to Kopp in Ireland and France and
plotting to bring him back to the United States. Kopp is charged with the murder
of Dr. Barnett Slepian, who was killed by a sniper's bullet.

   Release of kidnapped Nebraska girl sought

   * A Nebraska couple pleaded for the release of their teenage daughter, an
honor student who was kidnapped from a mall parking lot. Anne Sluti was
kidnapped Friday evening. Her purse and other belongings were found lying in the
parking lot of the Hilltop Shopping Center in Kearney, Neb., where her locked
car was found. On Monday, her parents pleaded with the kidnapper to release
their daughter.

   In the World

   Arrest of Colombian rebel commander ordered

   * Colombia's prosecution service for the first time ordered the arrest of a
rebel commander for drug trafficking, officials said yesterday. The suspect,
Tomas Medina, commands the 16th Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia (FARC). The arrest order undercuts the government line in peace talks
that FARC was not involved in drug trafficking.

   Pope will kneel, not walk, at Colosseum service

   * For the first time in his 22-year papacy, Pope John Paul II will not walk
around the Colosseum on Good Friday but watch the traditional Via Crucis (Way of
the Cross) service while kneeling, the Vatican said yesterday. The Pope turns 81
next month and his health has been declining in recent years.

   Bomb damages Bosnian Croat's house

   * A moderate Croat who serves as a minister in the Bosnian government, Mladen
Ivankovic, said yesterday that his house was badly damaged in a car bombing that
he blamed on Croatian separatists seeking self-rule in Bosnia-Herzegovina. The
nationalist Croat Democratic Union, which has condemned any Croats participating
in the Bosnian government as traitors, denied involvement.

   Peacekeepers in Kosovo fired on

   * Gunmen fired on U.S. and Polish peacekeepers in Kosovo as they were
patrolling the rugged mountains near the border with Macedonia, a U.S. Army
spokeswoman said yesterday. The peacekeepers returned fire and suffered no
injuries in Monday's gunfight, the spokeswoman said.

   Test of new Concorde tires is authorized

   * France's civil aviation authority has authorized an Air France Concorde to
fly to a test base to try out new tires developed after last year's crash of one
of the supersonic jets, officials said yesterday. Authorities believe the crash
was caused when a metal strip lying on the runway gashed one of the Concorde's
tires.

   Two enter race to be prime minister of Japan

   * Japanese Economic Minister Taro Aso and Shizuka Kamei, head of the ruling
Liberal Democratic Party's policy council, yesterday entered the race to become
LDP president and succeed Prime Minister Yoshiro Mori. Former Prime Minister
Ryutaro Hashimoto and former Health Minister Junichiro Koizumi also are expected
to run. The election is April 24.

   Release of Syrian political prisoners urged

   * A Syrian rights group urged the government yesterday to release 800
political prisoners still in jail despite the freeing of more than 600 political
detainees last year. The Committee for the Defense of Human Rights in Syria also
called on authorities to permit the return of nearly 1.5 million exiles who left
the country for political reasons.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1882 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    April 11, 2001 Wednesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE, Pg.A-3

LENGTH: 262 words

HEADLINE: ALZHEIMER'S PATIENT GETS GENE THERAPY

BODY:

   Doctors in California have implanted genetically modified cells into the
brain of a 60-year-old woman with early Alzheimer's disease in an effort to slow
her mental decline, members of the research team announced yesterday.

    The experimental surgery, which researchers hope to test in seven additional
patients, represents the first trial of gene therapy for a degenerative brain
disorder, said neuroscientist Mark Tuszynski, who heads the project.

    The cells, obtained from the woman's skin, were equipped with a gene to
produce nerve growth factor, a natural substance that promotes growth and
survival of brain cells. The radical treatment is not expected to cure
Alzheimer's disease, although studies in animals suggest it may help preserve
the capacity to learn and remember.

    "We hope that we can keep people at a higher level of function for a longer
time period," said Tuszynski, an associate professor of neurosciences at the
University of California at San Diego and the Veterans Affairs Department
Medical Center.

    But some experts expressed concern that if complications occur, they may be
difficult to treat, since there's no simple way to remove the genetically
modified cells or stop their action once they've been implanted in the brain.

    Alzheimer's disease is a progressive brain disorder affecting 2 million to 4
million Americans. It gradually damages and destroys cells in many regions of
the brain, initially causing loss of recent memory and eventually rendering its
victims helpless and often unable to recognize their loved ones.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2001


                             1883 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           April 11, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 671 words

HEADLINE: Ceregene 'excited' by UCSD gene therapy experiment

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 UCSD researchers yesterday jubilantly announced a landmark gene therapy
experiment performed on an Alzheimer's patient -- science that a San Diego
biotech is hoping to take to the marketplace.

   Ceregene, the latest local biotech to spring from the increasingly fertile
pairings of entrepreneurial scientists and biotech investors, has the exclusive
license to the technology behind the experimental UCSD therapy.

   "Ceregene is excited by this groundbreaking study," said Jeffrey Ostrove,
president and chief operating officer of Ceregene.  "The disease is complex and
the development of gene therapy products is complex, but we believe gene therapy
is the future of medicine."

   The procedure, the first attempt to use gene therapy to treat a disease of
the nervous system, involves surgically implanting cells that have been
genetically engineered to produce nerve growth factor.  Nerve growth factor is a
natural protein that has proved helpful in restoring brain cells that
deteriorate with aging.

   The treatment performed last week on a volunteer Alzheimer's patient is also
planned for seven more patients, who will take part in a study to assess the
therapy's safety.  Should it prove safe, larger patient studies will be
conducted to determine if the treatment slows the progress of the devastating
disease.

   The therapy was developed by UCSD neurologist Mark Tuszynski.  Tuszynski, the
lead investigator of the UCSD study, is also a founder and stockholder of
Ceregene.

   Ceregene was formed in January from a blending of Neurologic Gene
Therapeutics, a private company co-founded earlier by Tuszynski, and a $10
million investment and additional technology from publicly traded Cell Genesys.

   Foster City-based Cell Genesys owns a 60 percent stake in Ceregene, while 40
percent is owned by other investors, including Tuszynski.

   Tuszynski, who serves on the board of directors and scientific board of
Ceregene, said it will take the financial clout of biotech investors to move the
gene therapy forward.

   "We face doing studies that involve potentially hundreds of patients and
hundreds of millions of dollars -- and one doesn't apply for a federal grant for
that amount of money because they don't fund it," said Tuszynski, who has been
conducting gene therapy research for 14 years.

   "Those of us developing this haven't taken the biotech route to personally
gain, though that isn't to say we don't have stock and we do stand to gain,"
Tuszynski said.  "The motivation was to move this forward, and thank goodness
the biotech alternative is available."

   To manage conflict-of-interest issues that arise from Tuszynski's affiliation
with both the UCSD study and Ceregene, the researcher is not involved in patient
recruitment or the analysis of data that emerges from the patient study,
according to UCSD.

   Tuszynski raised about $1 million from private foundations and donors to
launch the initial Phase I clinical trial.  If it proves safe, Ceregene will
become involved in financing later patient studies, with the ultimate goal of
seeking regulatory approval to market the therapy.

   But for now, Ceregene and UCSD have a long, hard research road to travel.  So
far, no gene therapy has been approved as a medical treatment, despite more than
two decades of research.

   It wasn't until 1999 that French researchers, using a gene therapy to boost
the immune system of babies born with a rare genetic disorder, announced the
first unequivocal success.

   Yet the potential payoff for a successful Alzheimer's treatment has proved
attractive enough for Cell Genesys and other companies to sink millions into the
quest for a new therapy.

   Currently, there is no cure for Alzheimer's, and the only drugs approved to
treat it can only alleviate some symptoms.  Meanwhile, health-care experts
predict the number of Alzheimer's cases will rise from the present 4 million to
as many as 14 million by 2050.

   Penni Crabtree's e-mail address is penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com. Her phone
number is (619) 293-1237.


LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2001


                             1884 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           April 11, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1037 words

HEADLINE: UCSD performs first gene therapy for Alzheimer's

BYLINE: Scott LaFee; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 The UCSD School of Medicine announced yesterday that for the first time doctors
surgically implanted genetically modified skin cells into the brain of an
Alzheimer's patient, hoping to delay, and possibly prevent, further damage from
the devastating neurological disease.

   The operation, performed last week on a 60-year-old woman from Oregon, is the
first attempt to use human gene therapy to treat a neurological condition.  The
woman, who requested anonymity, was released from UCSD's Thornton Hospital two
days after the surgery and is reported to be doing well.

   "Our hope is that this procedure will be a way of delaying the progress of
Alzheimer's disease, of improving the quality of life for up to several years,"
said UCSD neurologist Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski.

   Tuszynski described the groundbreaking work in a news conference with
colleagues Dr. Hoi Sang U, a UCSD neurosurgeon; Dr. Leon Thal, director of the
UCSD Alzheimer's Disease Research Center; and clinical coordinator Mary Margaret
Pay.

   Tuszynski said the experimental surgery probably will not cure Alzheimer's, a
disease characterized by escalating brain cell death and subsequent loss of
mental functions such as memory and learning.

   Alzheimer's disease afflicts more than 4 million Americans, with estimates
projecting this figure to double within 20 years and more than triple by 2050.
Currently, there is no cure or, as Tuszynski noted, even an effective treatment.

   Last week's operation is a profound leap forward from earlier animal tests.
In those experiments, published in 1999, Tuszynski, Fred Gage of The Salk
Institute and others reported that injecting additional nerve growth factor -- a
naturally occurring protein -- into the brains of rats and monkeys halted brain
cell death, sometimes stunningly.

   Monkeys that had suffered significant neuron loss because of ordinary aging
showed significant brain growth after being injected with the protein NGF.
Existing neurons in the monkeys re-created lost connections, producing
rejuvenated brains that biologically mirrored their younger counterparts.

   Whether similar results will occur in humans remains to be seen, particularly
since Alzheimer's is a uniquely human disorder.

   "This is a first attempt to transfer the technique from animal to human,"
Tuszynski said.  "When you do that, there are always unknown factors.  We don't
know with any certainty yet that this will prove to be protective or beneficial
to humans."

   The human trial involved a former schoolteacher.  Skin cells were taken from
her thigh, abdomen and back, then genetically modified in the lab over several
months to essentially become mini-factories for NGF.

   "We have four children and one grandchild," the patient's husband said in a
written statement.  "If there is a genetic trail associated with this disease,
we are concerned about their future.  Our main motivation is to see if we can
contribute to patient care in the future by participating in the study.  If
there are benefits for my wife, that will be a plus."

   On April 5, a medical team headed by Dr. U precisely targeted the nucleus
basalis of Meynert, a thumb-sized region deep in the central interior of the
brain.

   Though small, the nucleus basalis of Meynert is broadly wired to the brain's
cortex and is significantly involved in higher cognitive functions such as
memory and learning.  Its cholinergic cells, the brain cells that produce
chemical signals used by the brain to process information, also are profoundly
vulnerable to the ravages of Alzheimer's disease.

   Using ultra-thin needles, U and colleagues inserted the modified skin cells
into five locations of the nucleus basalis of Meynert on the right side of the
woman's brain, who was locally anesthetized and conscious during the procedure.
The amount of infused material was less than two drops.

   Delivering the cells with precision was critical, U said, not just because
the targeted area is so small, but also because nerve growth factor does not
travel far from its source.

   "NGF diffuses just one to two millimeters, so accurate placement was
essential," U said.

   A millimeter is about the thickness of a nickel.

   Now researchers must wait to see what happens next.

   Because this is the first phase of human clinical trials, researchers'
primary focus will be identifying any negative medical effects, such as
unexplained weight loss.  During the longer term, they will search for changes
in cognitive function.

   At regular intervals during the next 12 months, the woman will undergo brain
imaging scans and tests of her cognitive abilities.  The latter will be compared
with exams taken before the operation.

   Tuszynski said it will take years before researchers can determine whether
the treatment effectively delays the effects of Alzheimer's.

   The researchers are optimistic, not only about finding an effective treatment
for Alzheimer's but about developing therapies for a range of other neurological
disorders, including Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease and amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis.

   "This is the beginning of a new approach," said Dr. Zaven Khachaturian, a
neurology consultant and medical adviser to the Alzheimer's Association.  "First
we have to learn how to slow down the degeneration, then we can start to figure
out how to regrow brain cells.  This is part of the larger effort."

   Dr. Chris Clark, an associate professor of neurology at the University of
Pennsylvania, added, "Any therapy that can alter the course of the illness would
be of tremendous value."

   Neurosurgeon U said that as the trials progress, the operation -- which
required 11 hours for the first patient -- eventually may be refined to an
outpatient procedure.

   "Certainly that is what we hope," he said.

   Depending on findings, Tuszynski said, it may prove possible to repeat the
operation as needed.

   UCSD researchers have lined up their second patient, who is scheduled to
undergo the surgery in three months.  They are seeking six more patients for the
first-phase trials, each of whom must have a confirmed diagnosis of early
Alzheimer's disease but be otherwise healthy.

   For more information, call the Alzheimer's Disease Research Center at (858)
622-5800.


GRAPHIC: 2 PICS | 1 GRAPHIC; 1,3. John Gastaldo / Union-Tribune 2. SOURCES:
UCSD; Union-Tribune research | PAUL HORN / Union-Tribune; 1. Hoi Sang U (left)
examined a model brain with Mark H. Tuszynski yesterday at a news conference. 2.
Alzheimer's breakthrough? 3. Dr. Hoi Sang U, a UCSD neurosurgeon, pointed to an
MRI image of the area of a 60-year-old woman's brain where genetically modified
tissue was implanted. (A-10)

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2001


                             1885 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 11, 2001 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 662 words

HEADLINE: Ceregene `excited' by UCSD gene therapy experiment

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   UCSD researchers yesterday jubilantly announced a landmark gene therapy
experiment performed on an Alzheimer's patient -- science that a San Diego
biotech is hoping to take to the marketplace. Ceregene, the latest local biotech
to spring from the increasingly fertile pairings of entrepreneurial scientists
and biotech investors, has the exclusive license to the technology behind the
experimental UCSD therapy. "Ceregene is excited by this groundbreaking study,"
said Jeffrey Ostrove, president and chief operating officer of Ceregene.

   "The disease is complex and the development of gene therapy products is
complex, but we believe gene therapy is the future of medicine." The procedure,
the first attempt to use gene therapy to treat a disease of the nervous system,
involves surgically implanting cells that have been genetically engineered to
produce nerve growth factor.

   Nerve growth factor is a natural protein that has proved helpful in restoring
brain cells that deteriorate with aging. The treatment performed last week on a
volunteer Alzheimer's patient is also planned for seven more patients, who will
take part in a study to assess the therapy's safety.

   Should it prove safe, larger patient studies will be conducted to determine
if the treatment slows the progress of the devastating disease. The therapy was
developed by UCSD neurologist Mark Tuszynski.

   Tuszynski, the lead investigator of the UCSD study, is also a founder and
stockholder of Ceregene. Ceregene was formed in January from a blending of
Neurologic Gene Therapeutics, a private company co-founded earlier by Tuszynski,
and a $10 million investment and additional technology from publicly traded Cell
Genesys. Foster City-based Cell Genesys owns a 60 percent stake in Ceregene,
while 40 percent is owned by other investors, including Tuszynski. Tuszynski,
who serves on the board of directors and scientific board of Ceregene, said it
will take the financial clout of biotech investors to move the gene therapy
forward. "We face doing studies that involve potentially hundreds of patients
and hundreds of millions of dollars -- and one doesn't apply for a federal grant
for that amount of money because they don't fund it," said Tuszynski, who has
been conducting gene therapy research for 14 years. "Those of us developing this
haven't taken the biotech route to personally gain, though that isn't to say we
don't have stock and we do stand to gain," Tuszynski said.

   "The motivation was to move this forward, and thank goodness the biotech
alternative is available." To manage conflict-of-interest issues that arise from
Tuszynski's affiliation with both the UCSD study and Ceregene, the researcher is
not involved in patient recruitment or the analysis of data that emerges from
the patient study, according to UCSD. Tuszynski raised about $1 million from
private foundations and donors to launch the initial Phase I clinical trial.

   If it proves safe, Ceregene will become involved in financing later patient
studies, with the ultimate goal of seeking regulatory approval to market the
therapy. But for now, Ceregene and UCSD have a long, hard research road to
travel. So far, no gene therapy has been approved as a medical treatment,
despite more than two decades of research. It wasn't until 1999 that French
researchers, using a gene therapy to boost the immune system of babies born with
a rare genetic disorder, announced the first unequivocal success. Yet the
potential payoff for a successful Alzheimer's treatment has proved attractive
enough for Cell Genesys and other companies to sink millions into the quest for
a new therapy. Currently, there is no cure for Alzheimer's, and the only drugs
approved to treat it can only alleviate some symptoms.

   Meanwhile, health-care experts predict the number of Alzheimer's cases will
rise from the present 4 million to as many as 14 million by 2050. Penni
Crabtree's e-mail address is penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com. Her phone number is
(619) 293-1237.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1886 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 11, 2001 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1025 words

HEADLINE: UCSD performs first gene therapy for Alzheimer's

BYLINE: Scott LaFee, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The UCSD School of Medicine announced yesterday that for the first time
doctors surgically implanted genetically modified skin cells into the brain of
an Alzheimer's patient, hoping to delay, and possibly prevent, further damage
from the devastating neurological disease. The operation, performed last week on
a 60-year-old woman from Oregon, is the first attempt to use human gene therapy
to treat a neurological condition.

   The woman, who requested anonymity, was released from UCSD's Thornton
Hospital two days after the surgery and is reported to be doing well. "Our hope
is that this procedure will be a way of delaying the progress of Alzheimer's
disease, of improving the quality of life for up to several years," said UCSD
neurologist Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski. Tuszynski described the groundbreaking work
in a news conference with colleagues Dr. Hoi Sang U, a UCSD neurosurgeon; Dr.
Leon Thal, director of the UCSD Alzheimer's Disease Research Center; and
clinical coordinator Mary Margaret Pay. Tuszynski said the experimental surgery
probably will not cure Alzheimer's, a disease characterized by escalating brain
cell death and subsequent loss of mental functions such as memory and learning.
Alzheimer's disease afflicts more than 4 million Americans, with estimates
projecting this figure to double within 20 years and more than triple by 2050.
Currently, there is no cure or, as Tuszynski noted, even an effective treatment.
Last week's operation is a profound leap forward from earlier animal tests. In
those experiments, published in 1999, Tuszynski, Fred Gage of The Salk Institute
and others reported that injecting additional nerve growth factor -- a naturally
occurring protein -- into the brains of rats and monkeys halted brain cell
death, sometimes stunningly. Monkeys that had suffered significant neuron loss
because of ordinary aging showed significant brain growth after being injected
with the protein NGF. Existing neurons in the monkeys re-created lost
connections, producing rejuvenated brains that biologically mirrored their
younger counterparts. Whether similar results will occur in humans remains to be
seen, particularly since Alzheimer's is a uniquely human disorder. "This is a
first attempt to transfer the technique from animal to human," Tuszynski said.

   "When you do that, there are always unknown factors.

   We don't know with any certainty yet that this will prove to be protective or
beneficial to humans." The human trial involved a former schoolteacher.

   Skin cells were taken from her thigh, abdomen and back, then genetically
modified in the lab over several months to essentially become mini-factories for
NGF. "We have four children and one grandchild," the patient's husband said in a
written statement.

   "If there is a genetic trail associated with this disease, we are concerned
about their future.

   Our main motivation is to see if we can contribute to patient care in the
future by participating in the study.

   If there are benefits for my wife, that will be a plus." On April 5, a
medical team headed by Dr. U precisely targeted the nucleus basalis of Meynert,
a thumb-sized region deep in the central interior of the brain. Though small,
the nucleus basalis of Meynert is broadly wired to the brain's cortex and is
significantly involved in higher cognitive functions such as memory and
learning.

   Its cholinergic cells, the brain cells that produce chemical signals used by
the brain to process information, also are profoundly vulnerable to the ravages
of Alzheimer's disease. Using ultra-thin needles, U and colleagues inserted the
modified skin cells into five locations of the nucleus basalis of Meynert on the
right side of the woman's brain, who was locally anesthetized and conscious
during the procedure.

   The amount of infused material was less than two drops. Delivering the cells
with precision was critical, U said, not just because the targeted area is so
small, but also because nerve growth factor does not travel far from its source.
"NGF diffuses just one to two millimeters, so accurate placement was essential,"
U said. A millimeter is about the thickness of a nickel. Now researchers must
wait to see what happens next. Because this is the first phase of human clinical
trials, researchers' primary focus will be identifying any negative medical
effects, such as unexplained weight loss.

   During the longer term, they will search for changes in cognitive function.
At regular intervals during the next 12 months, the woman will undergo brain
imaging scans and tests of her cognitive abilities.

   The latter will be compared with exams taken before the operation. Tuszynski
said it will take years before researchers can determine whether the treatment
effectively delays the effects of Alzheimer's. The researchers are optimistic,
not only about finding an effective treatment for Alzheimer's but about
developing therapies for a range of other neurological disorders, including
Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
"This is the beginning of a new approach," said Dr. Zaven Khachaturian, a
neurology consultant and medical adviser to the Alzheimer's Association. "First
we have to learn how to slow down the degeneration, then we can start to figure
out how to regrow brain cells.

   This is part of the larger effort." Dr. Chris Clark, an associate professor
of neurology at the University of Pennsylvania, added, "Any therapy that can
alter the course of the illness would be of tremendous value." Neurosurgeon U
said that as the trials progress, the operation -- which required 11 hours for
the first patient -- eventually may be refined to an outpatient procedure.
"Certainly that is what we hope," he said. Depending on findings, Tuszynski
said, it may prove possible to repeat the operation as needed. UCSD researchers
have lined up their second patient, who is scheduled to undergo the surgery in
three months.

   They are seeking six more patients for the first-phase trials, each of whom
must have a confirmed diagnosis of early Alzheimer's disease but be otherwise
healthy. For more information, call the Alzheimer's Disease Research Center at
(858) 622-5800.

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; 1 GRAPHIC; CAPTIONS: 1. Hoi Sang U (left) examined a model
brain with Mark H. Tuszynski yesterday at a news conference. 2. Alzheimer's
breakthrough? 3. Dr. Hoi Sang U, a UCSD neurosurgeon, pointed to an MRI image of
the area of a 60-year-old woman's brain where genetically modified tissue was
implanted. (A-10); PHOTOBY: 1,3. John Gastaldo / Union-Tribune 2. SOURCES: UCSD;
Union-Tribune research | PAUL HORN / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1887 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    April 11, 2001, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 8D

LENGTH: 494 words

HEADLINE: Can skin cells repair brains? Gene therapy for Alzheimer's gets first
test in San Diego

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   Researchers have performed the first gene therapy procedure for
Alzheimer's disease on a 60-year-old Oregon woman as a step toward
learning whether implants of genetically engineered tissue can
arrest the loss of brain function.

   The gene therapy safety trial is being conducted by the University
of California-San Diego. The strategy, developed by UCSD neurologist
Mark Tuszynski, is to genetically engineer skin cells taken from
a patient and convert them into biological factories that produce
a natural substance called nerve growth factor. The cells are
then transplanted into areas deep in the brain where, theoretically,
they release nerve growth factor into the surrounding tissue and
prevent or slow nerve cell degeneration.


   The hope is the altered cells containing nerve growth factor will
restore vitality to brain cells ravaged by Alzheimer's disease,
Tuszynski says.

   The patient, who wishes to remain anonymous, was treated April
5. She received five implants of the gene-altered cells.

   Tuszynski received permission to conduct the gene therapy trial
from the Food and Drug Administration in October 1999. Published
studies conducted by Tuszynski in rats and primates have suggested
that nerve growth factor may slow the destruction of a type of
brain cell that is thought to contribute to dementia in Alzheimer's
disease. The brain cells produce a substance called acetycholine,
which is critical to normal brain function. Current Alzheimer's
drug therapies attempt to boost acetylcholine in the brain. Rats
and primates do not develop Alzheimer's disease, so scientists
can only speculate about possible results in humans.

   "When studies were done in animals, the beneficial effects of
nerve growth factor have been detected as soon as weeks to months
after implantation. It will take several years to ultimately determine
whether this therapy is effective, however," Tuszynski says.

   The purpose of this Phase 1 study is to determine only whether
the implants cause damage or toxicity to the brain. If the cell
transplants are deemed safe by the FDA, the research can progress
to Phase 2 to begin looking at whether patients are benefiting.

   Tuszynski says the current study is funded by a private foundation
and a private trust. But future research will be sponsored by
a newly formed company, Ceregene, in which he says he has a financial
interest.

   Ceregene is a subsidiary of Cell Genesys of Foster City, Calif.,
which has created several other successful subsidiaries in the
biotechnology arena. Ceregene has licensed the methods developed
by Tuszynski for converting skin cells into "mini-pumps" for
nerve growth factor.

   "This is an area that is building increasing momentum in gene
therapy," says Stephen Sherwin, chairman of Ceregene and chairman
and CEO of Cell Genesys. "We have taken what we consider to be
precious assets, patents and genes, and made this bet."

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2001


                             1888 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            April 11, 2001 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 1047 words

HEADLINE: Alzheimer's Operation Is a Gene Therapy First;
Surgeons Implant Modified Cells Into Brain Of Woman in Effort to Slow Mental
Decline

BYLINE: Susan Okie, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    Doctors in California have implanted genetically modified cells into the
brain of a 60-year-old woman with early Alzheimer's disease in an effort to slow
her mental decline, members of the research team announced yesterday.

    The experimental surgery, which researchers hope to test in seven additional
patients, represents the first trial of gene therapy for a degenerative brain
disorder, said neuroscientist Mark Tuszynski, who heads the project.

    The cells, obtained from the woman's skin, were equipped with a gene to
produce nerve growth factor, a natural substance that promotes the growth and
survival of brain cells. The radical treatment is not expected to cure
Alzheimer's, although studies in animals suggest it may help preserve the
recipients' capacity to learn and remember.

    "We hope that we can keep people at a higher level of function for a longer
time period," said Tuszynski, an associate professor of neurosciences at the
University of California at San Diego and the Veterans Administration San Diego
Healthcare System.

    But some experts expressed concern that if complications occur, they may be
difficult to treat, because there is no simple way to remove the genetically
modified cells, called fibroblasts, or stop their action once they have been
implanted in the brain.

    "It's quite aggressive," said Vassilis E. Koliatsos, an associate professor
of pathology and neurology at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. "Growth factors
are extremely powerful compounds, and they're not selective for a particular
brain system. . . . We've got to be watching here."

    Alzheimer's is a progressive brain disorder that affects between 2 million
and 4 million Americans. It gradually damages and destroys cells in many regions
of the brain, initially causing loss of recent memory and eventually rendering
its victims helpless and often unable to recognize loved ones. Current
treatments produce only modest and short-lived improvement at best.

    Doctors said the patient, a former teacher from Oregon who has mild
Alzheimer's and whose name was not released, gave her consent to the
experimental procedure. In an 11-hour operation Thursday, neurosurgeon Hoi Sang
U and his team injected half a million genetically modified cells into each of
five sites on the right side of her brain.

    The surgical team used brain-imaging tests and special equipment to pinpoint
the target of the treatment, an area at the base of the brain's frontal lobe
called the nucleus basalis of Meynert. It contains nerve cells, called
cholinergic cells, that use the chemical messenger acetylcholine to transmit
messages to other brain areas involved in learning and memory.

    The woman was awake but sedated during the surgery, which was performed
under local anesthesia so doctors could talk to her to monitor her responses, U
said. She was released from the hospital Saturday and is doing well, he added.
It could take several weeks before researchers can detect any impact on the
woman's brain function, and several years before they know whether the treatment
is effective.

    "We are happy so far at this point that we have not done any harm," U said.
"We hope that it will do some good."

    The Food and Drug Administration and the National Institutes of Health's
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee approved the pilot study of gene therapy in
Alzheimer's patients in 1999. Tuszynski said the approval was based on years of
research in rats and monkeys that showed nerve growth factor could enhance
survival and function of cholinergic nerve cells in animals after surgery or the
partial degeneration associated with aging.

    Cholinergic nerve cells are one of many kinds of brain cells that are
damaged or destroyed by Alzheimer's disease, but they play an important role in
memory and learning. All four FDA-approved drugs for Alzheimer's work by
boosting the level of acetylcholine, the chemical transmitter in these cells.

    In monkeys, cholinergic nerve cells lose many connections with neighboring
cells during normal aging. When Tuszynski and his team implanted fibroblasts
that made nerve growth factor into elderly monkeys, nerve cells in the target
area grew new axons (threadlike projections) and established new connections
with other brain cells.

    The researchers chose genetically engineered cells to deliver nerve growth
factor because it is difficult to get the substance into the brain by other
means. It cannot be taken orally because it is broken down by digestive enzymes.

    Swedish researchers previously treated three patients with nerve growth
factor by pumping it into the fluid surrounding their brains, but that treatment
produced severe side effects. It stimulated cells in several parts of the
nervous system, causing pain, weight loss and abnormal growth of cells that
produce the outer coating of nerves, Tuszynski said.

    He said such side effects are not expected to occur with the procedure now
being tested because the dose is lower and studies in monkeys indicate that the
growth factor will not leak out from the injection site into brain fluid.
Nevertheless, study participants are warned that bleeding, tumors, chronic pain
and weight loss are among the potential risks of the treatment.

    "I don't think anybody knows what the ultimate response will be," said
William Thies, vice president for medical and scientific affairs of the
Alzheimer's Association, a patient advocacy organization. "We don't really know
these fibroblasts will stay in place and produce nerve growth factor. We don't
know that they won't begin to divide and produce a tumor."

    Fibroblasts implanted in the brain have been shown to live and produce nerve
growth factor for at least a year in monkeys and for at least 18 months in rats,
Tuszynski said. Fibroblasts in normal locations such as skin can live for many
years, but no one knows how long implanted fibroblasts can survive in the brain,
he added.

    Tuszynski used a modified virus, with its disease-causing genes removed, as
a carrier to insert the gene for nerve growth factor into fibroblasts. He is a
co-founder of Ceregene Inc., a San Diego company that owns the product rights to
the technology used to make the modified cells. Cell Genesys Inc., based in
Foster City, Calif., recently became the majority owner of Ceregene.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2001


                             1889 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            April 11, 2001 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 1163 words

HEADLINE: Cold War's Hot Idea;
Md.'s Celsion Banks on 'Star Wars' Microwaves as Treatment for Tumors

BYLINE: Terence Chea, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   For most of its nearly two decades, Celsion Corp. has struggled to stay in
business, scraping by on a financial shoestring in its dogged quest to fight
cancer with heat.

    The Columbia biotechnology company, formerly known as Cheung Laboratories
Inc., faced a chronic cash shortage, its managers worked without pay for months
at a time, doctors lost faith in heat-based cancer treatment and investors
constantly feared the company would go belly-up.

    "In the past, we were struggling every day of the week," said John Mon,
Celsion's general manager, who joined the company 15 years ago. "People thought
we'd go under."

    Now Celsion officials believe success is close. Armed with new money and new
technology, the company may soon bring to market new treatments for breast
cancer and a common prostate disease. If results of ongoing advanced human tests
are positive, the company could get approval from the Food and Drug
Administration to sell the devices in the next two years.

    The successful launch of its heat-based therapy would mark a big victory for
a small company that has managed to survive the booms and busts of the medical
technology industry for nearly two decades but has yet to generate significant
revenue or sustained profits.

    Celsion's future is far from certain, however. The company must first win
regulatory approval for its products, and in a difficult financing environment
it will probably need to raise more money to bring them to market. It also faces
competition from other firms developing treatments. And it will have to convince
doctors, patients and insurance companies of the benefits of its heat-based
therapy.

    Celsion's chief technology -- deep, focused heat -- comes from the
unlikeliest of sources. It was created by scientists at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology for the proposed "star wars" anti-missile defense system
at the height of the Cold War. While U.S. military officials hoped to use the
microwave technology to detect and destroy enemy missiles, Celsion scientists
are harnessing it to attack cancer and other ills.

    Unlike earlier versions of heat-based cancer treatments, including
Celsion's, the MIT technology focuses the heat, allowing it to kill tumors
without burning or overheating surrounding healthy tissue.

    While Celsion officials believe the technology can be used to treat a
variety of cancers, its first heat-based treatment is aimed at breast cancer,
diagnosed in about 200,000 American women each year. The treatment is intended
to be used in combination with radiation therapy or chemotherapy. They say the
treatment can eradicate small tumors and shrink large ones, offering a less
destructive alternative to surgery.

    In its first human tests conducted last year, the experimental treatment was
shown to shrink tumors in eight out of 10 women with breast cancer, with half
the patients showing "dramatic" tumor shrinkage, said Robert Gardner, director
of the Center for Breast Cancer in West Palm Beach, Fla., the principal
investigator of Celsion's breast cancer treatment. The company is now enrolling
175 patients in expanded human trials.

    "This could be a major advancement because it makes use of very
sophisticated technology to further the trend toward kinder and gentler
treatment of breast cancer," Gardner said.

    Celsion is also employing the MIT technology to alleviate a common prostate
disease called benign prostate hyperplasia or BPH, which occurs when an enlarged
prostate causes painful, weak and frequent urination. The company estimates the
disease affects half of all men over 55 and 90 percent of men over 70, creating
a potential $ 3 billion annual market in the United States.

    The treatment combines focused heat and a balloon catheter to open passages
blocked by an enlarged prostate. Celsion officials believe the treatment is
faster, cheaper and less invasive than current treatments. The company recently
started an advanced human study involving 160 men and could get approval to sell
the device as early as next year.

    Meanwhile, the company, which has only 17 employees and outsources most of
its research and development, is working with several universities to
commercialize other types of heat-based technology. It is collaborating with
Duke University to develop heat-sensitive molecules called liposomes that are
designed to release a drug when a treatment area reaches a certain temperature,
a technology the company hopes will lead to a new generation of heat-activated
cancer drugs. And last year, the company licensed another technology for gene
therapy that can activate new genes with focused heat.

    Celsion was launched in 1982 by Augustine Cheung, a Hong Kong-born scientist
who pioneered research on the biological effects of microwave energy. As the
idea of hyperthermia -- using heat to kill cancer -- caught on in the early
1980s, Cheung started a consulting firm to dispense technical advice to a host
of new ventures launched to develop heat-based cancer treatments.

    Three years later, the company went public and became Cheung Laboratories,
riding a wave of investor interest in hyperthermia to raise money to develop its
own systems. After several years of research and testing, the company finally
won regulatory approval in 1989 to sell its cancer treatment system, which was
designed to be used in combination with radiation therapy.

    The company had sold about 15 machines when it was dealt a crushing blow. A
new medical study claimed that heat-based systems offered no benefit over
radiation therapy alone, prompting insurance companies to drastically reduce
coverage of hyperthermia treatments, which slashed the company's revenue.

    The company decided to shift its focus overseas, selling its machines to
hospitals in Europe and Asia. The decision paid off, at least for a while. In
the early 1990s, the company sold about 150 machines, reaching short-lived
profitability, before sales declined sharply. Meanwhile, the company was running
out of money again.

    Cheung still believed in heat's ability to kill tumors, and in 1993 he ran
into Alan J. Fenn, an MIT scientist who was looking for an alternative use for
the "star wars" technology. The two started retooling the technology for cancer
treatment, and in 1996, Cheung raised enough money to license the technology
from MIT.

    When Spencer Volk, a former executive at Sunbeam International, became
Celsion's new president and chief executive four years ago, he joined a company
that was mired in debt and on the verge of bankruptcy.

    Volk and other Celsion executives worked without salary for 15 months, and
Volk poured more than $ 500,000 of his own money into the company to keep it
running. The company has since raised about $ 15 million in private funding and
has about $ 6 million in the bank.

    "We knew that if we could develop the technology and make it work, we could
really make a business out of it," Mon said.

   More stories on BIOTECH/MEDICAL online at Washtech.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2001


                             1890 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                   April 8, 2001, Sunday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SUBURBAN; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 754 words

HEADLINE: HARD TIME DIDN'T HARDEN HIS HEART

BYLINE: BY DENIS HAMILL

BODY:
TO PROVE THAT PRISON has not affected his sense of humor, radio deejay Goumba
Johnny Sialiano is coming to Queens for a Cooley's Anemia Foundation charity
fund-raiser on Friday, two days before the IRS deadline.

   Last year, Goumba Johnny of WKTU did five months in a federal pen for tax
evasion - taking cash off the books as a nightclub manager and failing to report
a $40,000 football pool.

   "I should be the poster boy for the IRS," Goumba Johnny says. "The slogan
should be the lesson I learned in the cell with five other guys - a murderer, a
stickup artist, three other violent criminals - on a tier with eight toilets for
135 men eating swill three times a day in a prison with over 1,000 inmates,
designed for 480: PAY YOUR TAXES, BABY! The first thing I did after I got out
was hire an accountant. I no longer do my own returns."

   The second thing Goumba Johnny did was return to his old job as a morning
deejay on WKTU with more than 2 million listeners a week, making people laugh on
their way to work and school and touting his favorite charities.

   "I can't thank the listeners enough for all their amazing support, their
cards and letters," he says. "And my bosses, Scott Elberg and Frankie Blue, who
kept their promises to save my job."

   Prison did not harden Goumba Johnny's charitable heart.

   "I'm actively involved in 24 different charities including organizations for
cancer, kidney disease, leukemia, autism and child abuse," he says.

   But on Friday, Goumba Johnny Sialiano will be honored by the Queens Chapter
of the Cooley's Anemia Foundation at a Gift of Life Ball at Russo's on the Bay,
Cross Bay Blvd. in Howard Beach.

   "This is a disease that greatly affects people of the Mediterranean," says
Goumba Johnny. "Just like African-Americans suffer from sickle cell anemia,
Greeks and Italians get Cooley's anemia. The real name of it is thalassemia, the
oldest blood disorder known to science. Kids born with it need a blood
transfusion every two to four weeks to stay alive."

   But transfusions leave dangerous deposits of iron in the system, leading to
heart failure and early death. A drug called desferal can remove some of the
iron, extending life for a few precious years. But this drug must be injected
into the stomach, attached to a battery-powered machine for eight painful hours
a night for as long as the patient lives.

   "This is worse than doing hard time," Goumba Johnny says, "because there is
no cure yet. Experimental bone-marrow transplants and gene therapy suggest a
cure is on the distant horizon. But only money for research will lead to a cure.

   "The thing I love about this charity is that they can document that 82% of
all of your generous donations are used for patient care, research and
education."

   More than 200,000 Americans are carriers of the genetic trait for Cooley's
anemia. In the U.S., Cooley's strikes predominately those of Mediterranean,
Asian Indian, South Asian and Chinese ancestry.

   The disease is found in 60 countries. There is a one in four chance that
couples who both carry the trait will pass on the fatal form of the disease.

   Just 25 years ago, children born with this insidious disease rarely survived
a decade. Recent advances have added 10 to 15 years to the average life span of
Cooley's kids. So fund-raisers like this one are crucial, and can make a
difference in giving a kid a shot at this wonderful thing called life.

   Tickets for this gala, including cocktails, entertainment and dinner, are
$80.

   "All legitimately tax deductible," Goumba Johnny says with a laugh. "Take it
from someone who knows the tax laws - this is a charitable 501-3C organization.
So if you want to buy a table for $5,000, $10,000 or $15,000, you can give your
money to these kids instead of Uncle Sam."

   "My job on the radio, charity work and working the comedy circuit has helped
me decompress from jail," he says. "I have some residual anger because what I
saw of jail tells me that the system is more interested in punishment than
redemption.

   'SO INSTEAD OF looking for a second chance when they get out, many angry cons
look for a second victim. It's counterproductive. Someday I intend to involve
myself in prison reform organizations. But right now it gives me inner peace to
do my deejay job, make people laugh and help charities like this one, where I
can maybe make a difference in the lives of people with real problems."

   For information on this event or the Cooley's Anemia Foundation, call
toll-free (877) 595-CURE (2873).

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2001


                             1891 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              April 8, 2001 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: PART A; Part 1; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1071 words

HEADLINE: IN STUDIES OF FAMILY MEDICAL TIES, PRIVACY MAY STALL SCIENCE;
RESEARCH: A FATHER'S SHOCK AT FORM SENT TO HIS DAUGHTER SPURS A REVIEW OF HOW
CONSENT IS GAINED AND WHOM IT AFFECTS.

BYLINE: MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   When Rick Curtin tore into the large, thick envelope bearing his daughter's
name on a fall day in 1998, he had no inkling he also was opening a Pandora's
box that would shake the biomedical research community and prompt a federal
inquiry into protecting the privacy of patients in scientific experiments.

   Inside, Curtin found a 25-page questionnaire from a Virginia Commonwealth
University researcher who was building a database on the health of twins born in
the state and was asking his daughter Allison, who has a twin brother, to
participate. But she was off at college and had asked her father to check her
mail.

   When Curtin began to read, he was stunned. The questions were not only about
his daughter but also about other family members, including him. And they were
intensely personal.

   Had her father ever suffered from depression? Did he have abnormal genitalia?
Curtin, a financial manager for the Defense Department, felt they needed his
permission before his daughter could answer those questions.

   Federal regulators agreed and temporarily shut down the research. Now they
are struggling to craft a national policy on just who beyond patients deserves
privacy protection. On Monday, a Health and Human Services Department advisory
panel plans to begin the task of drafting guidelines.

   The notion of "informed consent"--fully explaining to patients in research
experiments the potential risks of their participation--has been around since
Congress made it the law in 1981. But the law does not specifically address
family members or others whose privacy could be invaded, albeit unintentionally,
by broadening new avenues in research, particularly in the study of genes.
Entire populations and family lines--not just individuals--are now under the
microscope.

   "This is a new generation of privacy issues--uncharted territory," said Mary
Faith Marshall, director of the bioethics program at the University of Kansas
Medical Center, who chairs the panel. "We are pushing a new envelope and need to
come up with new answers."

   "This is really a Solomon-esque type of problem," agreed Abbey Meyers, a
member of the panel, which will debate and draft recommendations for the
government in the coming months. "Family members need to know if information
about themselves is to be used." But, she said, if you demand that family
members give consent, "research, especially genetic research, could come to a
grinding halt."

   Francis S. Collins, director of the National Human Genome Research Institute,
recently received an e-mail from a researcher complaining that his proposal to
study the genetics of alcoholism had been rejected by a local review panel
because he hadn't obtained consent from "secondary" subjects.

   "He believes his primary subjects would be extremely reluctant to involve
family members in any way . . . that it would kill his project," Collins said.
"So this is not a hypothetical concern. A lot hinges on what this advisory
committee decides to do. . . . Much of our hope in understanding inherited
conditions lies in our being able to study families."

   On the other hand, there clearly are cases in which "private information
could cause serious harm to a person's reputation and livelihood, if disclosed,"
said Greg Koski, director of the HHS office for human research protections,
which ultimately will decide the policy.

   "If a wife enrolls in a research study and is asked, 'Does your husband have
any health problems?' does she have the right to disclose that he has HIV
without the permission of her husband?" Koski asked.

   Lana Skirboll, director of the National Institutes of Health's office of
science policy, which oversees the conduct of federally funded research, called
the current dilemma "the world's most impossible issue," adding: "It seems
simple at first. But then when you poke your finger into it, you realize that
it's far more complex than you ever thought."

   To be sure, privacy always has been an issue in health care. Patients
routinely fill out forms in their doctors' offices, answering questions about
their family medical history without giving it a second thought. Yet, there are
no rules to safeguard that information from abuse--only the implicit trust
between doctor and patient that the information will remain confidential.

   In research, the stakes are different. The information is taken not for the
care of the patient but for the benefit of science, increasing the risk of
disclosure and raising basic questions about who owns a patient's family
history.

   There are thousands of clinical trials underway at any given time and at many
places in the United States and abroad, a large number funded by the federal
government.

   Before an experiment can begin, it must be approved--and continued to be
monitored--by a local institutional review board, an independent panel of
physicians, statisticians, community representatives and others who ensure that
the research is ethical and that participants' rights are protected.

   Controversy over patient rights grew after the September 1999 death of
18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson, who had been participating in a gene
therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania. His case did not directly
involve the use of secondary research subjects. But the panel formed in the
furor over Gelsinger's death has been asked to deal with a wide range of patient
protection issues, including whether researchers can delve into the medical
histories of their patients' relatives.

   The panel is not expected to recommend a rigid standard but rather to
encourage local review boards to consider certain criteria each time they
evaluate a research proposal.

   This kind of blueprint should give the local boards latitude in making
decisions. For example, they might decide that in a small town, where most
people know each other, inadvertent disclosure of personal medical information
about a patient's relatives might be too risky, while it would pose much less of
a concern in a large city.

   "We'll have to go back and do some very careful thinking in light of the new
possibilities for information that we have now," said Marshall, the panel's
chairwoman.

   Marshall acknowledged that the task ahead is formidable, but "we would be
remiss if we didn't try to answer those questions and come up with the best
answer we can, one that does the most good and involves the least amount of
harm. Sometimes, in bioethics, that's the best you can do."

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2001


                             1892 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                      April 7, 2001 Saturday Finl Edition

SECTION: MET; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1001 words

HEADLINE: Test of CF treatment planned

BYLINE: Tim Bonfield, The Cincinnati Enquirer

BODY:

   Early lab findings promising

   By Tim Bonfield

   The Cincinnati Enquirer

   Researchers at the University of Cincinnati and Children's Hospital Medical
Center plan to launch a clinical trial this summer to test what could be a
breakthrough treatment for cystic fibrosis.

   Half the people born with cystic fibrosis die before age 32. But if human
testing of an experimental treatment patented by UC lives up to initial hopes,
many more cystic fibrosis patients could live a normal life span.

   The researchers say much more work needs to be done.

   "We've seen a nice effect in cells in the lab. But whether we will see an
effect on the whole body remains to be seen. That's why we are doing the
studies," said Dr. Robert Wilmott, director of pulmonary medicine at Children's
Hospital and a leading expert on cystic fibrosis.

   The excitement stems from two promising findings presented this week at
scientific meetings in Seattle and Orlando.

   Dr. John Cuppoletti, a physiologist with UC's department of molecular and
cellular physiology, presented lab results on two compounds at the Experimental
Biology 2001 meeting in Orlando. One of the compounds is omeprazole, the active
ingredient in the heartburn medication Prilosec.

   The studies report that both compounds can trigger an alternative way for the
body to process salt, a crucial issue for cystic fibrosis patients. The genetic
inability of CF patients to properly process salt leads to lung inflammation,
excessive mucus build-up and dangerous infections that are the most common cause
of death for CF patients.

   "The hope is that we can activate these other ion channels and repair the
defect that causes cystic fibrosis," Dr. Cuppoletti said.

   Dr. Wilmott presented preliminary human test results involving the Prilosec
compound Monday in Seattle at a research meeting of the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation.

   The yearlong study involved 10 volunteers who did not have cystic fibrosis.
Their nostrils were irrigated with a liquid version of the Prilosec drug to see
if it had any effect on salt levels in their nasal tissue. It did.

   "We saw some interesting trends, but the results are not statistically
significant," Dr. Wilmott said.

   The results were positive enough to begin repeating the tests in another 10
normal volunteers. However, reporting success in the lab and an effect in normal
people is not the same as reporting a therapeutic effect in CF patients, Dr.
Wilmott said.

   The next two steps will be key: launching a small study in Cincinnati to see
if an effect can be measured in CF patients. If that succeeds, then a multisite
clinical trial involving hundreds of CF patients would follow, Dr. Wilmott said.

   The national Cystic Fibrosis Foundation is closely following the research
efforts in Cincinnati, said Chris Penland, the foundation's research director.

   "We think the work is very important. If these compounds can increase
chlorine secretions and aid in clearing the airways of CF patients, it would be
an important advance," Dr. Penland said.

   Children's Hospital has a long history of research involving cystic fibrosis,
including curing mice of the disease through genetic modifications and testing
would-be genetic therapies in humans. For the past three years, Children's
Hospital has been one of eight centers nationwide in the Cystic Fibrosis
Therapeutic Development Network.

   Dr. Wilmott cautioned that cystic fibrosis patients and their families should
not assume too much about this new research project.

   "Dr. Cuppoletti has come up with an excellent idea. It is worth pursuing. But
I still think this is in a very early phase," Dr. Wilmott said. "We start a lot
of things that don't pan out."

   A few years ago, after the discovery of the genetic defects causing cystic
fibrosis, hope swelled that CF could be conquered with genetic therapy.

   However human testing of those treatments, including a major study led by
Children's Hospital, proved disappointing. Studies in Cincinnati had to be
stopped because the modified cold virus used to carry treatment into the lungs
caused too much inflammation.

   The Prilosec option Dr. Cuppoletti discovered appears promising because it
attacks the most dangerous aspect of cystic fibrosis without relying heavily on
genetic therapy.

   It also involves a drug that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has
already approved for another use. Should the compound work as a CF therapy, the
FDA approval status would cut several years off the time it would take to bring
the product to market.

   Doctors say much study is needed to see if the Prilosec drug provides a big
enough and long-lasting effect to help control cystic fibrosis. Other questions
include whether the dose level needed to produce an effect can be tolerated
without harmful side effects and how best to administer the drug -- as a pill,
an inhaled mist or another form.

   Research has not progressed as far on the second CF-related compound Dr.
Cuppoletti patented. That compound has not been used in humans before, which
means turning it into a medicine would require years of lab and animal testing
before human testing could begin.

   That work is on hold to see if the potentially quicker-to-market compound can
be successful, Dr. Cuppoletti said.

   Progress against cystic fibrosis

   Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disease that affects the lungs, pancreas,
intestines and other organs. It is most common among Caucasians, affecting one
in every 2,500 Caucasian births.

   There is no cure for cystic fibrosis, but years of improvements in infection
control, special diets, enzyme therapies and other medications have gradually
lengthened life expectancy.

   Year Median life expectancy*

   1940 less than one year

   1950 1 year

   1960 10 years

   1970 16 years

   1980 18 years

   1990 29 years

   1999 32 years

   *means that 50 percent of patients die by this age and 50 percent live
longer.

   Source: Children's Hospital Medical Center

   For information about cystic fibrosis studies at Children's Hospital, call
513-636-6771.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2003


                             1893 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             April 7, 2001 Saturday
                                 Valley Edition

SECTION: PART A; Part 1; National Desk; Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 306 words

HEADLINE: PANEL URGES FOLLOW-UP TO GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: From Associated Press

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   Participants in some gene therapy trials should be closely followed for up to
20 years after a study's completion to guard against future complications, a
U.S. advisory group said Friday.

   Currently only organ transplant recipients are monitored that long, but Food
and Drug Administration advisors said so little was known about the long-term
consequences of gene therapy that it was better to err on the side of caution.

   The 1999 death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, during treatment for an inherited
liver disorder sent shock waves through the genetic research world and led the
FDA to tighten its oversight of the area.

   The FDA asked the advisory panel to review whether new reporting and
monitoring requirements set by the agency were adequate to protect patients.

   In a second and final day of discussions, the panel also said that giving the
public more information about ongoing trials involving gene therapy was a good
idea, although a balance was needed between the public's need for reassurance
and industry's desire to protect proprietary information.

   On Thursday, the panel supported independent monitors for gene therapy
studies. The FDA usually follows the advice of its advisory panels.

   Panel chairman Daniel Salomon, a professor at the La Jolla-based Scripps
Research Institute, acknowledged the public's grave concerns about safety of
gene therapy or any genetic engineering and said the panel should act to
reassure Americans by insisting on long-term follow up.

   The main concerns with gene therapy are:

   * The genetic material could make a patient sick by altering their DNA in a
harmful way.

   * Viruses used to deliver gene therapy, called vectors, have the potential to
replicate or become active years or decades later, which could lead to a chronic
infection, cancer, autoimmune disease, or a neurological or blood disorder.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2001


                             1894 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              April 6, 2001 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: METRO; Part B; Letters Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 203 words

HEADLINE: STEM CELL RESEARCH

BODY:

   * I am a 44-year-old, active wife and mother who was diagnosed with
Parkinson's disease two years ago. I take medication three times a day and
couldn't get through the day without it.

   I am stiff and in pain every day but get up and exercise, as my doctor has
advised and as I have done all of my life. I do as much as I can physically do
daily, to show my sons, husband and people I know that even with obstacles in
life you have to keep trying and never, ever give up.

   On March 4, I ran the L.A. Marathon for Team Parkinson to raise money for
Parkinson's research. My time was 5 hours, 21 minutes--not the fastest but not
the slowest. I did my little bit to help researchers find a cure. My question
is: Why isn't President Bush doing his part? Fetal stem cell research and gene
therapy give me hope that someday my life will be better, that my family will
have me with them, healthy, for a long time. People like me depend on the
leaders of our great country to help, not put up roadblocks by trying to keep
any federal funding from these promising research areas. Please look beyond your
own healthy world to all the people who are not so healthy and need to keep that
hope alive.

   FLORENCE WOOLERY

   Westlake Village

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2001


                             1895 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            April 4, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 82 words

HEADLINE: TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING: RESEARCH;
RIGHTS TO GENE TREATMENT

BYLINE:  By Andrew Pollack

BODY:

        Introgen Therapeutics, a gene therapy company, said it had gained back
full rights to its lead product candidate from Aventis, which is restructuring
its gene therapy activities.

   Introgen, based in Austin, Tex., and Aventis, a big French-German
pharmaceutical company, have worked since 1994 to develop a therapy for head and
neck cancer that is now in the final phase of clinical trials. The treatment
involves injection of a tumor suppressor gene that is known as p53.   Andrew
Pollack

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2001


                             1896 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2001 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                             April 2, 2001, Monday

SECTION: Sport+Late City Final; Pg. 009

LENGTH: 389 words

HEADLINE: HOPE FOR AIDS VACCINE - TRIAL DRUG USES GENE THERAPY TO PROTECT
MONKEYS

BYLINE: Tracy Connor

BODY:

   An experimental AIDS vaccine has shown promising results in monkeys - it
doesn't prevent infection by the deadly virus, but it cripples the disease's
progress.

   Three rhesus monkeys that received the vaccine are healthy eight months after
being infected with the AIDS virus, while four out of six of the unvaccinated
animals have died, The Washington Post reports.

   "We have no idea how this will translate to people," said John Shiver,
director of vaccine research at Merck & Co., which is developing the vaccine.

   "But it certainly gives the suggestion that a vaccine based [on this
strategy] could have potential for effectiveness in the clinic," Shiver said.

   The strategy being used is known as cell-mediated immunity, in which the body
is stimulated to produce cells known as T-lymphocytes. They target and kill
cells infected by a virus.

   In the Merck study, the researchers took a gene from the monkey form of the
AIDS virus and stitched it into a cold virus that was disabled so it wouldn't
spread after it delivered the gene.

   Three monkeys were injected with the vaccines several times and then injected
with a particularly aggressive form of the AIDS virus three months later.

   At first, tests showed the level of AIDS virus in their bloodstream was up,
while the number of protective cells, called CD4 lymphocytes, was down.

   Two months later, though, it was a different story - with virus levels
undetectable and the CD4 cells back to normal. The trio remain healthy and with
apparently normal immune systems.

   The six monkeys that were not vaccinated before being injected with the AIDS
virus didn't fare as well. Four quickly developed full-blown AIDS and were
euthanized, the researchers said.

   The Merck method diverged from the strategy used by most vaccines, which are
designed to stimulate antibodies that attack a virus before it takes hold.

   Researchers have not been able to find an AIDS vaccine that works that way,
but the outcome of the monkey tests suggests cell-mediated immunity could be an
alternative, the newspaper said.

   Experts hailed the findings, announced at an AIDS conference in Colorado
yesterday.

   "This is the manifestation of what we in the field have been saying - we have
good stuff in the pipeline," said National Institutes of Health AIDS researcher
Anthony Fauci.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2001


                             1897 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 April 1, 2001, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. B3

LENGTH: 716 words

HEADLINE: ARE WE A DRAGON'S LAIR?;
YE OLDE GENETIC MAPPE

BYLINE: Gerard MagillGENETICS

BODY:


THE HUMAN GENOME PROJECT

   The assembly and analysis of the human genome -- so tiny in size yet almost
limitless in its potential for health -- constitute an astonishing breakthrough
in modern science and technology. Few doubt that we will have effective genetic
therapies within a few years. So, it is no wonder that society applauds this
remarkable accomplishment.

   However, we must temper this legitimate anticipation with a healthy dose of
apprehension. Midst the euphoria of such "eureka" moments we also need to
recognize potential problems and difficulties.

   Some ancient maps indicate areas of unexplored territories by writing "there
be dragons." As we begin to explore our new map of the human genome, prudence
cautions us to be wary of minuscule monsters that could assault and possibly
cause devastating harm to the human condition.

   Caution makes most sense when we can identify particular events that
genuinely illustrate serious underlying ethical concerns. Here are a few such
situations.

   First, we will have to monitor privacy, consent, confidentiality and
discrimination issues in the new genetic landscape of medicine. Naturally, there
will be many new tests and screening opportunities to diagnose molecular
predispositions and risks for gene-related diseases. That can be good news
insofar as it will encourage a helpful shift to preventive care. But it may be
bad news if we invade privacy, compromise consent or confidentiality, or foster
discrimination (even unwittingly).

   Some employers or insurers could be inclined to obtain genetic information to
decline coverage or claims. Earlier this year, the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission filed a lawsuit in Iowa. The EEOC claimed a company violated its
employees' privacy rights by requiring genetic tests. The company required some
employees who filed claims for a specific work-related injury to provide blood
samples for genetic tests. Interestingly, just days after the lawsuit was filed
the company discontinued its policy requiring genetic tests! Congress has yet to
pass regulation in this arena -- but it needs to do so urgently.

   Second, we need to ensure that our scientists, hospitals and genomics
corporations do not place any patient in jeopardy in the race to file patents
and develop highly profitable genetic therapies. Strict protocol requirements
for medical research must be followed to ensure the safety of human research
subjects. The avoidable death of Jesse Gelsinger in 1999, the first reported
death of a gene therapy patient, illustrates the need for such caution. The
teen-ager died with severe immune reaction to an experimental genetic therapy
virus for an inherited liver disease.

   Third, we need to be aware that genetic intervention may hold terrible
surprises for the human species. In January, an Australian research team
reported that an apparently harmless animal experiment had disastrous
consequences. The team inserted into the mouse pox virus (a cousin of the human
smallpox virus) a mouse gene to trigger the mouse immune system as a means of
controlling fertility -- but the virus crippled the immune system and killed the
mice population. This unforeseen but disastrous result simply illustrates the
difficulty of navigating our genetic terrain. That difficulty will not be
removed even with a reliable map of the human genome.

   Unforeseen issues may give us pause as we explore the human genome. Two
obvious questions about future interventions already are being asked. May
science play God in its control of the human genome by enabling couples to have
so-called "designer babies" -- not just to avoid diseased genes, but to select
preferred traits such as skin color and intelligence? How will science assess
the relative risks of germ-line genetic manipulation that will alter the progeny
of the patient and subsequent offspring?

   In sum, we might ponder this point: Given that evolution has enabled the
human species to flourish in its biological diversity over a period of 500
million years, it should be with great modesty that we celebrate our astounding
accomplishments in mapping the human genome and with even greater fear and
trepidation that we use this map to manipulate our genetic makeup. After all, we
may encounter unfriendly dragons.

NOTES:
COMMENTARY Gerard Magill is executive director and department chair of the
Center for Health Care Ethics at St. Louis University.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO PHOTO/ILLUSTRATION BY SHAWN CANDELA - Double Helixland
 Cellfield
 Strandopolis
 Genomeville
 Chromosome Island
 DNA Sea

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2001


                             1898 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              April 1, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 574 words

HEADLINE: NOTES

BYLINE: Compiled by John DeShazier

BODY:

   Gene therapy

He doesn't receive the acclaim of some of his teammates, but New Orleans native
Eugene Edgerson again proved Saturday that he's more than big hair and a smile.
Edgerson, the Arizona senior forward who prepped at St. Augustine High, provided
valuable relief off the Wildcats bench in the first half against Michigan State.
He scored a basket for each of the first two minutes he was on the floor and
added two rebounds as Arizona held on for a 32-30 halftime lead. Edgerson came
in averaging 4.7 points and four rebounds, and he finished with six points and
six rebounds.

To catch a thief

Arizona had 12 steals against MSU, nine in the second half. The Wildcats popped
into passing lanes so frequently they appeared to be intended targets of
Michigan State's passes. "We've got some good athletes," Arizona coach Lute
Olson said. "If we're alert, I think we've got a pretty good chance of getting
some (steals)."

The Wright time

Talk about repairing your image. Arizona forward Michael Wright, a third-team
All-American, was scoreless in the first half of the Wildcats' 80-61 victory.
Wright took one shot and didn't have a rebound in eight minutes. But in the
second half, when the Wildcats outscored MSU 48-31, Wright came to life with 13
points and three rebounds. He made six of nine field-goal attempts.

Still hot

It was a little more difficult the second time around, but MSU senior forward
David Thomas definitely carried over to the Final Four the shooting eye he
unveiled in the South Regional championship game. Thomas, who scored a
career-high 19 points against Temple on 8-for-10 shooting in the South Regional
title game, hit Arizona for a quick six in the first half Saturday. He made
three of four shots, the highlight being a steal and dunk that closed the
Spartans to 21-20 with 6:50 left in the half. He finished with eight points,
topping his season average of 5.3 points.

Bell doesn't toll

MSU senior guard Charlie Bell will leave the program with three trips to the
Final Four, a national title and more victories than any other player in Big Ten
history. He will not, however, leave with fond memories of his last game. Bell,
the Outstanding Player of the South Regional, missed nine of his 10 field-goal
attempts in his finale. He was 0-for-6 from 3-point range and finished with
three points.

James gang

Duke trailed Maryland 49-38 at halftime and likely considered itself fortunate.
The deficit would have been much more formidable if senior forward Nate James,
who was replaced in the starting lineup eight games ago by freshman guard Chris
Duhon from Slidell, hadn't come off the bench and scored seven points. James
also had seven first-half rebounds, five offensive.

Duhon gets going

Speaking of Duhon, he had just two points in the first half and missed all four
field-goal attempts. But his first field goal was a big one -- a 3-pointer from
the right wing that closed Duke to 52-48 with 18:25 left.

Block party

Few teams have matched Arizona's athleticism this season, so it was no surprise
that Michigan State couldn't, either. The longer, leaner, grasshopper-like
Wildcats blocked four shots in the first half, by four players -- Wright,
Richard Jefferson, Loren Woods and Jason Gardner. Gilbert Arenas was the only
starter without a block in the half, and he had two steals. Arenas finished with
six steals.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2001


                             1899 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 31, 2001, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 726 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   Wireless price slumps

   Shares of Wireless Facilities fell 35 percent yesterday in response to its
first-quarter earnings reduction.  The company, which was downgraded by Thomas
Weisel Partners, J.P. Morgan and Credit Suisse First Boston, saw its stock price
drop $2.22 to $4.13, a 52-week low.  The wireless network builder blamed the
shortfall on the slowing U.S. economy and a decrease in spending on
telecommunications equipment.

   Collateral loss widens

   Collateral Therapeutics of San Diego has reported a loss of $4.7 million in
the fourth quarter ended Dec. 31, compared with a loss of $2.3 million for the
same period a year ago.  For the year, the company lost $14.6 million, compared
with a loss of $7.7 million in 1999. The gene therapy company had revenue of
$100,000 for the fourth quarter, compared with $1.1 million for the same period
a year ago.  Revenue for the year fell 69 percent, to $2 million.  Collateral,
which has a product in early-stage development, attributed the decrease in
revenue to reduced reimbursement for research costs from Schering, its partner.
The company had cash and short-term investments of $27.2 million as of Dec. 31.

   Jobs lost at SVI

   SVI Solutions of San Diego has laid off about 30 workers from its operations
in Irvine and San Diego as part of a restructuring that is expected to save the
company $2.3 million.  SVI makes software for retailers, including Toys R Us and
JC Penney.  SVI says it has reached a 30-day extension of its debt agreement
with Union Bank of California in hopes of negotiating a longer-term extension.
The company is experiencing strains on its cash and is looking for new
investment.  Shares in SVI, which trades on the Amex Exchange under the symbol
SVI, rose 12 cents yesterday to close at $1.03.

   Microsoft picks Conexant

   Conexant Systems of Newport Beach says Microsoft has selected Conexant's
video encoder technology to connect Microsoft's Xbox video game system to
televisions.  Conexant says the technology was developed at its design center in
San Diego.

   Now it's CyberDog

   GuardDog Communication, a year-old company developing Internet security
technologies, has changed its name to CyberDog Communication.  The company says
its chip-based encryption system is designed for use in modems and Internet
communication ports for ethernet and wireless networks.

   Exten receives more funding

   Exten Industries of San Diego has received a second round of funding for
$500,000 from an investor group in Dallas.  The medical device company is
developing an artificial liver through its subsidiary, Xenogenics.

   Northrop-Litton deal near

   Northrop Grumman has received regulatory clearance to buy Litton Industries,
the defense electronics specialist and shipbuilder.  The clearance paves the way
for a $3.8 billion merger.  Northrop, the No. 5 U.S. defense contractor, makes
weapons systems and says Litton will enhance its portfolio of electronics
offerings.  Northrop, which has its headquarters in Los Angeles, also extended
its tender offer for Litton shares to Monday.  The offer should close then,
Northrup says.

   WORLD AND NATION

   GE to buy FFCA

   General Electric will buy Franchise Finance Corp. of America for $1.4
billion.  GE Capital, through its Commercial Equipment Financing business, has
agreed to buy FFCA, which is based in Scottsdale, Ariz. The agreement also calls
for GE to assume $700 million in debt and liabilities.  The company will operate
as Franchise Finance Corporation of America, a division of GE Capital Commercial
Equipment Financing.  FFCA provides real estate financing to operators of chain
restaurants, convenience stories and others.

   Meatpacker sues Tyson

   IBP, a meatpacking company in South Dakota, has filed a lawsuit to force
Tyson Foods, the world's top poultry producer, to complete its $3.2 billion
purchase of IBP. The suit, filed in Chancery Court in New Castle County, Del.,
came a day after Tyson nixed the deal and filed its own lawsuit to end the
merger.  "Tyson's actions are completely unjustified by anything that has
transpired and we will do what is necessary to protect our shareholders and our
company," Robert L. Peterson, IBP's chairman and chief executive officer, said
in a statement late yesterday afternoon.


LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2001


                             1900 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 31, 2001 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 703 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA Wireless price slumps Shares of Wireless Facilities
fell 35 percent yesterday in response to its first-quarter earnings reduction.

   The company, which was downgraded by Thomas Weisel Partners, J.P. Morgan and
Credit Suisse First Boston, saw its stock price drop $2.22 to $4.13, a 52-week
low.

   The wireless network builder blamed the shortfall on the slowing U.S. economy
and a decrease in spending on telecommunications equipment. Collateral loss
widens Collateral Therapeutics of San Diego has reported a loss of $4.7 million
in the fourth quarter ended Dec. 31, compared with a loss of $2.3 million for
the same period a year ago.

   For the year, the company lost $14.6 million, compared with a loss of $7.7
million in 1999. The gene therapy company had revenue of $100,000 for the fourth
quarter, compared with $1.1 million for the same period a year ago.

   Revenue for the year fell 69 percent, to $2 million.

   Collateral, which has a product in early-stage development, attributed the
decrease in revenue to reduced reimbursement for research costs from Schering,
its partner.

   The company had cash and short-term investments of $27.2 million as of Dec.
31. Jobs lost at SVI SVI Solutions of San Diego has laid off about 30 workers
from its operations in Irvine and San Diego as part of a restructuring that is
expected to save the company $2.3 million.

   SVI makes software for retailers, including Toys R Us and JC Penney.

   SVI says it has reached a 30-day extension of its debt agreement with Union
Bank of California in hopes of negotiating a longer-term extension.

   The company is experiencing strains on its cash and is looking for new
investment.

   Shares in SVI, which trades on the Amex Exchange under the symbol SVI, rose
12 cents yesterday to close at $1.03. Microsoft picks Conexant Conexant Systems
of Newport Beach says Microsoft has selected Conexant's video encoder technology
to connect Microsoft's Xbox video game system to televisions.

   Conexant says the technology was developed at its design center in San Diego.
Now it's CyberDog GuardDog Communication, a year-old company developing Internet
security technologies, has changed its name to CyberDog Communication.

   The company says its chip-based encryption system is designed for use in
modems and Internet communication ports for ethernet and wireless networks.
Exten receives more funding Exten Industries of San Diego has received a second
round of funding for $500,000 from an investor group in Dallas.

   The medical device company is developing an artificial liver through its
subsidiary, Xenogenics. Northrop-Litton deal near Northrop Grumman has received
regulatory clearance to buy Litton Industries, the defense electronics
specialist and shipbuilder.

   The clearance paves the way for a $3.8 billion merger.

   Northrop, the No. 5 U.S. defense contractor, makes weapons systems and says
Litton will enhance its portfolio of electronics offerings.

   Northrop, which has its headquarters in Los Angeles, also extended its tender
offer for Litton shares to Monday. The offer should close then, Northrup says.
WORLD AND NATION GE to buy FFCA General Electric will buy Franchise Finance
Corp. of America for $1.4 billion.

   GE Capital, through its Commercial Equipment Financing business, has agreed
to buy FFCA, which is based in Scottsdale, Ariz. The agreement also calls for GE
to assume $700 million in debt and liabilities.

   The company will operate as Franchise Finance Corporation of America, a
division of GE Capital Commercial Equipment Financing.

   FFCA provides real estate financing to operators of chain restaurants,
convenience stories and others. Meatpacker sues Tyson IBP, a meatpacking company
in South Dakota, has filed a lawsuit to force Tyson Foods, the world's top
poultry producer, to complete its $3.2 billion purchase of IBP. The suit, filed
in Chancery Court in New Castle County, Del., came a day after Tyson nixed the
deal and filed its own lawsuit to end the merger.

   "Tyson's actions are completely unjustified by anything that has transpired
and we will do what is necessary to protect our shareholders and our company,"
Robert L. Peterson, IBP's chairman and chief executive officer, said in a
statement late yesterday afternoon.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1901 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    March 29, 2001, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C7

LENGTH: 103 words

HEADLINE: REGIONAL BUSINESS IN BRIEF;
GENZYME, TKT GET INITIAL EUROPEAN OK

BYLINE: BY NAOMI AOKI

BODY:

   In the race to get their treatments for Fabry's disease to market, Genzyme
Corp. and Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. both edged forward yesterday: A European
Union committee recommended that the EU's equivalent of the US Food and Drug
Administration approve both drugs for use in EU nations. The two Cambridge firms
are developing nearly identical drugs to treat Fabry's, a rare inherited
disorder, and sought approval in Europe and the United States within weeks of
each other. Both are awaiting a decision from the FDA. Genzyme's shares rose 28
cents to $89.79. TKT's shares rose $2 to $17.25.


LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2001


                             1902 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           March 28, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: OPINION;Pg. B-7

LENGTH: 757 words

HEADLINE: San Diego a leader in new era of biomedical research

BYLINE: Ed Holmes; Holmes is vice chancellor for health sciences at UCSD and
dean of the School of Medicine.

BODY:
 We have entered the new millennium with an ever-expanding list of dramatic
discoveries and advances in biomedical science.  Today, more than at any time in
history, we have the unprecedented potential to effectively treat, cure and even
prevent a growing number of diseases.

   As momentum builds, our continued advancement in the battle against disease
and disability depends upon high quality, well-coordinated medical research
conducted at research and patient care centers around the country.

   The progress we are making has a real impact on people's lives.  Each step
toward pinpointing the underlying causes of devastating diseases such as cancer,
heart disease, diabetes and Alzheimer's brings us closer to improved treatment
for patients.  Just last month, research teams from the public and private
sectors reported the sequencing of the entire human genome, giving us an
important key to deciphering and influencing the human condition, both in health
and illness.  In the past year we have seen rapid progress in stem cell biology;
as we perfect the process of cultivating readily available cells we can
anticipate the eventual replacement of tissues and even organs that have been
injured by disease or aging.

   The pace of discovery has accelerated due to the united efforts of clinicians
and scientists from disciplines as far ranging as molecular biology and
genetics, physics and mathematics, engineering and chemistry, all turning their
focus to the science of life.  The translation of research findings into
improved patient care is only possible when basic and clinical scientists join
ranks, moving fundamental laboratory findings into animal models of human
disease and finally to clinical trials of new drugs and technologies in
patients.

   Individual research and collaborations among multiple institutions, including
the clinical trials that bring promising treatments to patients, are supported
largely through the funding provided by Congress to the National Institutes of
Health (NIH). We commend President Bush for joining with Congress, which has
vowed to double the NIH budget over a five-year period ending in 2003. Clearly
the public views research to improve health as important -- in a poll conducted
by Research!America, 67 percent of respondents support the national effort to
double the NIH budget for medical research.  They recognize that this funding is
a direct investment in the health of people living today, and of future
generations.

   We applaud the 106th Congress, and the California delegation, which last year
responded to this call for action and approved a 14 percent or $2.5 billion
increase in the NIH budget for FY 2001. This year, we urge Congress and the new
administration to continue this investment in the health of this nation and
approve a $3.4 billion increase, or 16.5 percent, of the NIH budget.

   Most of these funds are awarded by NIH to research institutions all around
the country.  Given the strength of research in California, in FY 2000 over $2
billion in NIH funds was awarded to institutions throughout the state.  In
addition to supporting basic research and clinical studies to improve health and
health care, these dollars directly impact our local and statewide economy.

   The dynamic biotechnology sector in San Diego, which is the third largest in
the nation, is in no small measure the result of the success of nationally
respected investigators and institutions like UCSD, San Diego State University,
the Scripps Research Institute, the Salk Institute for Biological Studies,
Burnham Institute and others.  These excellent institutions attract significant
research funds from NIH and other federal agencies to support their work,
creating a fertile environment for companies that create practical applications
from research findings and in turn strengthen the economy of our region and
nationwide.

   San Diego scientists are leading the way in developing new therapies, such as
utilizing genetically modified tissues to treat disorders ranging from
Alzheimer's disease to diabetes to joint disease.  Gene therapy trials are in
progress to treat a variety of cancers and novel therapeutics are being
developed for cardiovascular disorders.

   As the dawn breaks on this era in biomedical research, we thank our members
of Congress and our own delegation who have endorsed this national agenda.  We
look forward to a healthier future as the NIH budget continues to expand,
supporting and stimulating life-saving and health-enhancing medical research.


GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; John Overmyer

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2001


                             1903 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 28, 2001 Wednesday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. B-7

LENGTH: 748 words

HEADLINE: San Diego a leader in new era of biomedical research

BYLINE: Ed Holmes, Holmes is vice chancellor for health sciences at UCSD and
dean of the School of Medicine.

BODY:

   We have entered the new millennium with an ever-expanding list of dramatic
discoveries and advances in biomedical science.

   Today, more than at any time in history, we have the unprecedented potential
to effectively treat, cure and even prevent a growing number of diseases. As
momentum builds, our continued advancement in the battle against disease and
disability depends upon high quality, well-coordinated medical research
conducted at research and patient care centers around the country. The progress
we are making has a real impact on people's lives.

   Each step toward pinpointing the underlying causes of devastating diseases
such as cancer, heart disease, diabetes and Alzheimer's brings us closer to
improved treatment for patients.

   Just last month, research teams from the public and private sectors reported
the sequencing of the entire human genome, giving us an important key to
deciphering and influencing the human condition, both in health and illness.

   In the past year we have seen rapid progress in stem cell biology; as we
perfect the process of cultivating readily available cells we can anticipate the
eventual replacement of tissues and even organs that have been injured by
disease or aging. The pace of discovery has accelerated due to the united
efforts of clinicians and scientists from disciplines as far ranging as
molecular biology and genetics, physics and mathematics, engineering and
chemistry, all turning their focus to the science of life.

   The translation of research findings into improved patient care is only
possible when basic and clinical scientists join ranks, moving fundamental
laboratory findings into animal models of human disease and finally to clinical
trials of new drugs and technologies in patients. Individual research and
collaborations among multiple institutions, including the clinical trials that
bring promising treatments to patients, are supported largely through the
funding provided by Congress to the National Institutes of Health (NIH). We
commend President Bush for joining with Congress, which has vowed to double the
NIH budget over a five-year period ending in 2003. Clearly the public views
research to improve health as important -- in a poll conducted by
Research!America, 67 percent of respondents support the national effort to
double the NIH budget for medical research.

   They recognize that this funding is a direct investment in the health of
people living today, and of future generations. We applaud the 106th Congress,
and the California delegation, which last year responded to this call for action
and approved a 14 percent or $2.5 billion increase in the NIH budget for FY
2001. This year, we urge Congress and the new administration to continue this
investment in the health of this nation and approve a $3.4 billion increase, or
16.5 percent, of the NIH budget. Most of these funds are awarded by NIH to
research institutions all around the country.

   Given the strength of research in California, in FY 2000 over $2 billion in
NIH funds was awarded to institutions throughout the state. In addition to
supporting basic research and clinical studies to improve health and health
care, these dollars directly impact our local and statewide economy. The dynamic
biotechnology sector in San Diego, which is the third largest in the nation, is
in no small measure the result of the success of nationally respected
investigators and institutions like UCSD, San Diego State University, the
Scripps Research Institute, the Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Burnham
Institute and others.

   These excellent institutions attract significant research funds from NIH and
other federal agencies to support their work, creating a fertile environment for
companies that create practical applications from research findings and in turn
strengthen the economy of our region and nationwide. San Diego scientists are
leading the way in developing new therapies, such as utilizing genetically
modified tissues to treat disorders ranging from Alzheimer's disease to diabetes
to joint disease.

   Gene therapy trials are in progress to treat a variety of cancers and novel
therapeutics are being developed for cardiovascular disorders. As the dawn
breaks on this era in biomedical research, we thank our members of Congress and
our own delegation who have endorsed this national agenda. We look forward to a
healthier future as the NIH budget continues to expand, supporting and
stimulating life-saving and health-enhancing medical research.

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; PHOTOBY: John Overmyer

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1904 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      March 27, 2001 Tuesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 04A

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: Field of gene therapy still suffering

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   New Orleans -- The death of an Arizona teenager in 1999 and revelations about
sloppy research have had a chilling effect on the field of gene therapy research
-- so much that applications to do it dropped 50% last year.

   The vast majority of gene therapy experiments around the nation are being run
ethically and with adequate steps to protect patients' safety, the first Food
and Drug Administration review of such research has concluded.

   Still, said Philip Noguchi, who oversees gene therapy for the FDA, "The
public has lost confidence in this area, there's no doubt about that. We're
trying to win it back."

   Noguchi spoke Monday at a convention of more than 12, 000 scientists, the
American Association for Cancer Research.

   Gene therapy began about a decade ago as a promising way to treat many
diseases and genetic disorders that today are usually fatal. The idea is to give
a patient a dose of a healthy gene to replace or make up whatever defective gene
is causing the disease, such as cystic fibrosis.

   No gene therapy has won FDA approval yet, but about 200 experiments are being
done with FDA permission at universities and other research settings. More than
half are for cancers.

   After the 1999 death of Jesse Gelsinger, the occurrence of a life-
threatening side effect in a cystic fibrosis patient in another gene therapy
experiment, and revelations about financial conflicts of interest involving some
researchers, the FDA decided last year to review such experiments around the
country.

   "We felt we had to do it" to see if ethical and procedural problems like
those found in the Gelsinger case were widespread, Noguchi said.

   The agency looked at 15% of the 200 gene therapy experiments, encompassing 69
different sites, and found more than half in full compliance, he said. Most of
the rest needed to make only small changes, usually in record-keeping.  Only 3%
to 4% -- one or two centers -- needed to make a substantial change in procedure
or policy.

   "This field, on inspection, is no better or worse than any other field the
FDA regulates," Noguchi said. The results will be presented to an FDA gene
therapy advisory panel next week.

   Meanwhile, the field has suffered a backlash, said Savio Woo, genetics expert
from Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York and past president of the
American Society for Gene Therapy.

   The public's safety fears were compounded by subsequent revelations of
financial conflicts, inadequate informed consent and other ethical problems at
the University of Pennsylvania, where the Gelsinger experiment was conducted,
Woo said.

   The consequence: Applications to the FDA to do gene therapy were down 50%,
fewer patients are enrolling in such experiments, and the cost of doing them has
risen, Woo said.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2001


                             1905 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             March 27, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 4; Science Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1797 words

HEADLINE: THE DOCTOR'S WORLD;
Cardiologists See Cheney As a Useful Case Study

BYLINE:  By LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN, M.D.

DATELINE: ORLANDO, Fla., March 23

BODY:

   At a meeting of the American College of Cardiology here this week, the case
of Vice President Dick Cheney, now the world's most prominent heart patient, was
often used to highlight the vast improvement in cardiac care over recent years.

        Leading cardiologists compared the differences in care for Mr. Cheney
and President Dwight D. Eisenhower after his serious heart attack in 1955 at age
64. Mr. Cheney quickly returned to work after two brief hospitalizations since
November for a mild heart attack and for procedures to open constricted
arteries.

    During a vacation in Denver, after Mr. Eisenhower had complained of chest
pains during the night, his doctor ordered Mamie Eisenhower to cuddle up in bed
next to her husband, to keep him warm, until he was taken to the hospital in the
morning.

   There doctors treated him with the standard care of the day, which included a
combination of drugs, a stay in an oxygen tent and bed rest.

   Doctors had little more to offer Mr. Eisenhower then because few of the now
standard drugs like clot busters existed, and there were no angioplasties,
stents, coronary care units, defibrillators, pacemakers, ultrasound devices or
bypass surgeries.

   As often happens in celebrity medicine, doctors cited Mr. Cheney's case in
making a point about heart disease, which is the leading cause of death in this
country. At a news conference, for example, an expert entered data from Mr.
Cheney's case into a hand-held computer to illustrate how processing the
information with data from key medical studies could help doctors deliver the
latest care starting in the emergency room and continuing after discharge.

   And President Bush paid tribute to the research that enabled Mr. Cheney, 60,
to survive four heart attacks since he was 37 and a coronary bypass operation in
1988, allowing him to reach high office.

   Six years ago, the American College of Cardiology asked Mr. Cheney to speak
at its annual meeting and paid his $25,000 fee.

   This year, Mr. Bush invited himself to the meeting, described Mr. Cheney as a
model patient who exercised regularly and pushed away desserts, and jocularly
said Mr. Cheney had stayed home because "he said he has seen enough
cardiologists lately."

   Mr. Cheney and his doctors have provided substantial but not full details of
his case in news conferences and interviews. His treatments, apparently
successful, have led some cardiologists to criticize their profession publicly
for not beating its own chest to show how an improved understanding of heart
disease and development of newer drugs and sophisticated technologies have
extended Mr. Cheney's life.

   Turning Mr. Cheney into a teaching case was one response to such criticism,
and it generally met with favor despite the objections of one moderator of a
panel at a news conference.

   Dr. David R. Holmes Jr. of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., refused to
allow cardiologists to answer a reporter's question about how new findings from
a study under discussion might apply in a case like Mr. Cheney's.

   The question concerned treatment of restenosis, the complication Mr. Cheney
recently developed after a stent was placed in a coronary artery in November. In
rejecting the question, Dr. Holmes said he wanted a scientific discussion and
not speculation about an individual patient.

   But Dr. Christopher P. Cannon of the Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston
was among the experts who did use Mr. Cheney's case at a news conference. Dr.
Cannon showed how a hand-held computer could be used to calculate a cardiac
score for a patient's risk of death and future cardiac problems. The score is
derived from proven risk factors like a patient's age, personal and family
history of heart disease, frequency of chest pain, prescribed medications,
electrocardiographic abnormalities and findings from blood tests for cardiac
enzymes and cholesterol.

   Using public information about Mr. Cheney's case, Dr. Cannon showed that in
November Mr. Cheney's risk score was high, 5 out of 7, for developing fatal and
nonfatal heart problems in the future. When Mr. Cheney came back to the hospital
with chest pains this month his score had improved a notch, to 4 out of 7,
because this time blood enzyme tests did not show evidence of a heart attack,
Dr. Cannon said.

   The pains were not from progression of Mr. Cheney's heart disease, but a
common complication known as restenosis from scar tissue that blocks a stent
after it has been inserted. Computers cannot predict which patients develop
restenosis, but they can help a doctor select the best treatment and strategy.

   Dr. Cannon's program uses a patient's risk score to calculate the likelihood
of the effectiveness of different treatments based on major studies and
guidelines set by the American College of Cardiology and the American Heart
Association.

   The care that Mr. Cheney's cardiologist, Dr. Jonathan S. Reiner of
Washington, rendered matched standard recommendations, said Dr. Cannon. He added
that Dr. Reiner "did a superb job in practicing the best possible medicine while
under world scrutiny."

   In the mid-1990's, a national survey showed that the quality of care for
heart attack patients was being compromised because proven interventions were
not used often enough in everyday practice. For example, the University of
Michigan found that it did not provide certain therapies of proven effectiveness
in as many as half of its heart attack patients. Michigan then began a program
that improved care.

   That success led the cardiology college to ask Dr. Kim A. Eagle, the
University of Michigan's chief of cardiology, to conduct a pilot program at 10
hospitals in the Detroit area to monitor how often doctors adhered to standard
guidelines in caring for heart attack patients.

   The program included dispensing pocket cards to the medical staff, brochures
to patients and tracking how many patients received guideline-recommended tests
and drugs like aspirin, ACE inhibitors and beta blockers throughout their care.
Among the program's successes were increasing use of beta blocker drugs to 74
percent from 65 percent and counseling on stopping smoking to 65 percent from 53
percent, Dr. Eagle said at the meeting.

   Attempts are being made to expand such programs across the country to raise
the percentage of Americans who receive optimum care for heart attacks.

   Had Mr. Cheney joined the nearly 33,000 participants from 150 countries at
this meeting and walked through the commercial exhibit hall that was larger than
11 football fields, he would probably have been dazzled by the displays. For
example, there were dozens of different catheters, or thin tubes, that doctors
keep in their tool chests ready to perform the heart procedures that hundreds of
thousands of Americans like Mr. Cheney undergo each year.

   But Mr. Cheney might have been horrified if he went to one scientific session
about cardologists' "worst nightmares,"during which doctors described
experiences of having a catheter pierce a coronary artery and their inability to
seal the leak. As the participants watched blood gush from a coronary artery on
the angiogram X-rays, one described it as "a little volcano."

   Also, Mr. Cheney would have heard new evidence that challenges a long-held
belief about heart attacks. The belief has been that most heart attacks occur
when a blood clot forms on a coronary artery that has become nearly completely
narrowed by fatty deposits known as plaques. The clot stops blood flow, leading
to the death of heart muscle cells. According to the belief, little cellular
activity occurred in the plaques.

   But the new thinking holds that the artery need not be severely narrowed
before the clot forms and that cells are actively producing inflammation in the
plaques. Precisely what causes the inflammation is not known, though cholesterol
is an obvious suspect. Scientists are pursuing clues that factors like
infectious agents might also be culprits.

   Ultrasound pictures have shown that large plaques often exist in what
angiogram X-rays portray as normal arteries. Now the belief is that many heart
attacks result when blood clots form on plaques that break in not-so-narrowed
arteries and then stop blood flow. What causes the plaques to break is not
known, but the inflammation is suspected to be a major factor.

   Like many cardiologists, Mr. Cheney would have been confused by the constant
use of acronyms to describe the many heart studies that have established the
safety and effectiveness of therapies and prevention procedures. The cardiology
college lists more than such 160 acronyms.

   Medicine progresses incrementally and in unexpected ways.

   For years, scientists have sought to develop more effective therapies for the
growing problem of a potentially fatal condition known as heart failure, or a
severely weakened heart.. The condition can result from heart attacks and
long-term starvation of heart muscle cells by constricted arteries that deprive
the heart of a sufficient blood supply.

   Such research has focused largely on drugs. But in a surprising development,
Dr. William T. Abraham, the head of cardiology at the University of Kentucky,
reported a trial in which electrical therapy led to striking improvement among
patients with severe heart failure characterized by certain abnormalities in
their electrocardiograms. The therapy was delivered by a type of pacemaker made
by Medtronic Inc. of Minneapolis.

   Two rigorous trials showed promise in the use of proteins known as growth
factors to stimulate formation of new blood vessels, a form of angiogenesis, for
people with blocked arteries in the heart or leg.

   Dr. Cindy L. Grines of the William Beaumont Hospital in Royal Oak, Mich.,
reported that angina patients who, in a form of gene therapy, were injected with
fibroblast growth factor-4, carried into their coronary arteries by adenovirus,
could exercise longer when compared with those who were injected with a placebo.
However, there was a marked placebo effect, which "further emphasizes the need
for double blind, randomized controlled trials," Dr. Grines said.

   Dr. Grines said it was the first gene therapy trial for heart disease to be
placebo-controlled and the first to infuse adenovirus directly into the coronary
arteries.

   The second study, from the University of Michigan, found that patients with
severely diminished blood flow to a leg who were directly injected with
fibroblast growth factor-2 could exercise longer than those who received a
placebo. Dr. Robert J. Lederman said the findings were important because it was
the first scientifically, rigorously controlled study to show that angiogenesis
worked.

   The studies reversed skepticism about the prospects of angiogenesis and gene
therapy, the researchers said, but more research is needed to determine whether
they can become part of standard practice.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Christopher P. Cannon with a hand-held computer that can
calculate a cardiac score for a patient's risk of death and future heart
problems. (Rick Friedman for The New York Times)(pg. F3)

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2001


                             1906 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                             March 25, 2001, Sunday

SECTION: FEATURES - ACCENT & ARTS, Pg. 1H

LENGTH: 988 words

HEADLINE: BODY OF KNOWLEDGE

BYLINE: Dennis Fiely, Dispatch Accent Reporter

BODY:


   The future of medicine is not pretty, given the graphic images that
illustrate a four-part Learning Channel series airing this week.

   Watching Superhuman Body: The Future of Medicine is like having a ringside
seat at an autopsy.

   Microscopic, time-lapse and slow-motion photography combine with medical
imaging and animation to expose views of a rushing bloodstream, a tubercular
lung and a brain tumor.

   One scene sweeps viewers through the birth canal with a baby.

   Thankfully, narrator Dr. Robert Winston of London -- one of Europe's leading
infertility specialists -- tempers the blood and guts with warmth and wry humor.

   Winston brandishes his humor in one scene when he fondles a bladder -- the
first whole human organ to be grown from living tissue -- in a pub against a
background of merrymakers swilling beer.

   He has the bravado to strip to his underwear in an igloo to demonstrate the
body's control over its temperature.

   Superhuman Body, though, is more than a special effects-laden gross-out. Like
all good journalistic efforts, it tells its stories through the lives of
ordinary people. Their experiences have opened new avenues to healing that, in
many cases, challenge longstanding medical conventions.

   In Kenya, Winston introduces Salome, a Nairobi prostitute for 20 years who
never has contracted the virus that causes AIDS, despite repeated exposures.

   Salome and other Kenyans with a natural resistance to the virus are part of a
study that could help scientists develop an AIDS vaccine. Winston wonders
whether such a vaccine would be affordable for the African people responsible
for its discovery.

   In another case study, Winston visits Penny Roberts, who severed her spinal
cord in a 1995 skydiving accident, a 2,000-foot fall captured on camera.

   Five years later, the paralyzed Roberts, who no longer can walk, learns to
voluntarily twitch a muscle in her leg.

   "It is like hearing from a long-lost friend," she says. The twitch proves her
body still is working hard to heal itself.

   The stories of Roberts and others dramatize efforts such as gene therapy and
stem-cell research to create organs and repair damaged ones from living tissue
and cells.

   In one segment, a mouse skitters about with a human-shaped ear sprouting on
its back from a tissue implant.

   Progress has been made. A single infant foreskin -- removed during
circumcision -- can be used to grow enough skin to blanket six soccer fields, a
fact the host happily reports from a soccer pitch.

   The show profiles 25-year-old Robert Swan, for whom injections of the herpes
simplex virus into his inoperable brain tumor appears to have destroyed the
tumor cells, keeping the growth in check.

   After four years, the virus has yet to escape and cause damage elsewhere.

   The one-hour segments are titled Trauma, Spare Parts, Self Repair and Killers
Into Cures.

   A unifying theme is the body's remarkable ability for self-healing that
sometimes requires doctors to fight their instincts to intervene.

   "Sometimes, the less we interfere with the body, the better," Winston says.

   A Los Angeles doctor makes a courageous decision when he postpones surgery on
Guillermo Vasquez, who suffered a fractured skull, ruptured liver and internal
bleeding in a factory explosion.

   The doctor packed the liver of Vasquez with gauze and covered his open wounds
with plastic to give the patient's body time to stabilize and to begin healing.
After three days of doing nothing, the doctor reconstructed the patient's
abdominal wall and treated his other injuries.

   Vasquez returned home three months after the explosion.

   Paramedics, too, are learning to refrain from giving to some trauma victims
blood and other fluids that may interfere with the body's natural clotting
process.

   Such treatment killed injured soldiers in the Vietnam War because it
dissolved clots and sparked re-bleeding, said trauma surgeon Dr. Jim Ryan.

   Cooling instead of warming the bodies of some people with brain injuries is
another new treatment. It recognizes that a slight dip in body temperature helps
stop cell death in the brain.

   Thrown head-first from a horse, Kate Close shivered bleeding on the ground on
a cold winter's day. The fact that paramedics did not find her for hours helped
her survive with no permanent brain damage.

   Doctors kept her cool while they removed a blood clot from her brain.

   The most dramatic example of self-repair is 5-month-old Tommy Palmer's full
recovery from a stroke without treatment. His neuro stem cells -- still present
in the brains of young babies -- grew new brain tissue.

   The script relies on metaphors to explain complex physiological processes.
The action of the immune system, with white blood cells searching for and
destroying bacteria, is depicted as a Pac-Man game.

   In serious trauma, the rush of small white blood cells to invading microbes
is compared to a traffic jam that cuts off blood flow to organs.

   Superhuman Body projects a realistic prognosis for future advances, noting
that promising therapies often prove unsuccessful.

   Two patients with transplants demonstrate the difficulty of recapturing the
dexterity and touch of the human hand.

   "I am almost more handicapped with my new hand," one said.

   They also are sentenced to a lifetime of taking anti-rejection drugs that
suppress their immune systems and make them susceptible to illness.

   The show reinforces the notion that medicine is as much art as science, and,
in some cases, Western medicine is a victim of its own success.

   The medication miracle of antibiotics has led to the evolution of drug-
resistant bacteria that are impossible to treat.

   The dramatic rise in asthma and other allergies may be the result of an
immune system looking for something to do in an antiseptic environment.

   Superhuman Body illustrates the dilemmas confronting modern medicine with
clarity, heart and candor.

GRAPHIC: Phot, (1) Penny Roberts, whose heart stopped three times after a 2,000-
foot fall to Earth during a skydiving accident, severed her spinal cord. She is
shown skydiving again, with the help of a partner, nearly five years after the
accident.  The Learning Channel photos (2) Host Dr. Robert Winston braves the
cold in an experimental attempt to lower his body temperature. His temperature
dropped by only 4.6 degrees in four hours, illustrating how well the body can
maintain its temperature when threatened by hypothermia.  (3) Despite repeated
exposure to HIV as a prostitute in urban Kenya, Salome has never contracted the
virus that causes AIDS. About 130 other people, who also seem to have natural
resistance to the virus despite a history of repeated exposure, may help
scientists develop an AIDS vaccine.  (4) A state-of-the- art bionic hand is more
clumsy and cumbersome than the human hand

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2001


                             1907 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            March 22, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 295 words

HEADLINE: Tax-financed research fuels economic growth

BODY:

   In partial reply to the March 15 letter from Bruce D. Smith ("Is tax help
profiting investors?") I would like to point out the following facts.

   The technology licenses underlying the formation of the new company,
CollaGene Diagnostics Inc., do not arise from research conducted at Tulane. The
licenses are from universities outside Louisiana.

   CollaGene Diagnostics Inc. is being established in New Orleans. It is not
funded by The Louisiana Gene Therapy Research Consortium.

   The consortium has, however, created circumstances favorable to the
development of related business activities.

   The relocation of Dr. Prockop and his group to Tulane is directly relevant to
the interests of Select Therapeutics based on our relationship with Dr. Prockop
and his work.

   These points of fact are incidental to a much larger issue posed by Mr.
Smith. He explicitly suggests that benefits from public funds should "accrue to
the public, rather than just a few private investors."

   In this suggestion he demonstrates a lack of understanding of the process of
economic development.

   There is enormous economic leverage to be gained by the state in funding,
among others, Tulane University and LSU through the Louisiana Gene Therapy
Research Consortium.

   It is the stated goal of the consortium to foster commercialization of its
activities in the hope that this will provide a nucleus for economic development
to the benefit of the whole community.

   The use of state funds in a broad-based approach is courageous and visionary.

   My company is pleased and proud to be associated with this effort and looks
forward to establishing and growing activities resulting from it. A start has
been made.

Robert Bender

Chairman

Select Therapeutics

Woburn, Mass.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2001


                             1908 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 20, 2001, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 3297 words

HEADLINE: Second in an occasional series.;
TEDDY BEARS AND VEILED THREATS TO ATTRACT CHILDREN INTO MEDICAL EXPERIMENTS,
RESEARCHERS INCREASINGLY USE 'INCENTIVES' AND APPEALS TO PARENTS' DEEPEST FEARS

BYLINE: By Alice Dembner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Jennifer Munger was literally dancing her way through life when a government
doctor convinced the little girl's parents that her rare heart condition was
likely to worsen if she didn't get a pacemaker immediately.

   Victor and Lydia Munger say their daughter had virtually no symptoms from the
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy that made her vulnerable to heart failure. With the
defect controlled by medication, Jennifer was active, even taking dancing
lessons.

      But Dr. Lameh Fananapazir of the National Institutes of Health persuaded
the family to enter Jennifer in an experiment in September 1994 in which she
would get the pacemaker to regulate her heartbeat instead of drugs.

   Fourteen months later, the 8-year-old collapsed and died at her school
playground in Southbury, Conn. Only afterward did her parents find out that
exercise tests at the NIH in Bethesda, Md., showed she had been doing worse with
the pacemaker than without it.

   "Fananapazir had his own set of rules," said Victor Munger, who, along with
his wife, has filed a federal lawsuit against the NIH and several doctors,
including Fananapazir. "It doesn't appear that he was held to any standards."

   Amid a rising wave of medical experiments involving children, there is
growing concern about the tactics some researchers are using to attract parents
and their children as test subjects. Regulators are increasingly finding that
some researchers sidestep protections and engage in outright coercion.

   Over the last three years, a Globe investigation has found, federal
regulators have cited more than three dozen hospitals and universities -
including some of the nation's most prestigious - for breaking research rules
protecting children.

   Even when rules aren't broken, researchers often work in an ethical gray zone
by offering children or their parents gift certificates to McDonald's or toy
stores, or as much as $400 to take part in research that may expose them to
risk.

   "It's a huge issue," said Brian P. O'Sullivan, a pediatrician who chairs the
human subjects committee at the University of Massachusetts Memorial Hospital in
Worcester. "You don't want parents to make a profit by offering their child as a
guinea pig."

   For the Mungers, there is bitter irony mixed with their grief. They say they
took Jennifer to the National Institutes of Health believing they were getting
the best care in the nation, and the government failed them. Federal regulators
later found that Fananapazir and other NIH doctors overstated the potential
benefits of pacemakers, downplayed the risks and didn't offer enough information
about alternatives. The family of another child in the study, Douglas Gray Jr.,
also have filed suit, alleging that the pacemaker made him sicker.

   Government lawyers said NIH would not comment about the case because of the
pending suits. But speaking to the broader issue of NIH's place at the center of
medical research, deputy director Michael Gotteson stated: "We should be the
paragon of virtue. The requirements are complex and we try to follow them. Most
of the time we succeed."

   But following the rules "most of the time" may not be enough. As the Globe
reported on Feb. 18, medical experiments across the country appear to have
killed at least eight children and subjected hundreds more to harmful side
effects in the last seven years. Without stronger enforcement of the rules,
ethicists fear a jump in the number of tragedies as an estimated 45,000 children
participate in industry-funded drug research this year, up from 16,000 in 1997.

   Driving the increase is a federal initiative aimed at improving drug safety
that has made pediatric research quite lucrative. Companies may get a six-month
extension on patents for existing drugs in exchange for studying their safety
and effectiveness in children, potentially boosting drug sales by hundreds of
millions of dollars.

   The federal effort is expected to improve children's health by providing
detailed information about which drugs are safest and work best for them. But
researchers say they are struggling to recruit enough children for their
studies, in part because of parents' resistance to any experimentation on their
children.

   "The number one roadblock to pediatric research is recruitment of qualified
volunteers," said Kathleen Drennan, president of Drennan Healthcare
International, a Chicago-based consulting firm. "It will be an expensive
endeavor that will require a lot of creativity."

   To solve the test subject crunch, some researchers are moving experiments
overseas, while others are enlisting help from specialists like Drennan. Still
others are resorting to unethical tactics.

   Even before the initiative kicks into high gear, regulators are finding
violations of human protections at leading research centers. For instance,
regulators temporarily shut down all research at Duke University in North
Carolina after finding pervasive gaps in protections for patients of all ages.

   At Yale University, the federal Office for Human Research Protections found
that psychiatrists failed to fully inform 32 children and adults about the side
effects of a schizophrenia drug that the subjects were given. In addition,
regulators faulted Yale's ethical review of the research. Yale subsequently
overhauled its review process, paying special attention to the children's rules.

   "What good does it do us to have a set of protective regulations if they're
widely ignored," asked Dr. Peter Lurie, deputy director of Public Citizens
Health Research Group.

   Today's protections for children were developed in response to historical
abuses, such as the 1970s case in which doctors used promises of a bed at
Willowbrook State School in New York City to get parents' permission to inject
their mentally retarded children with hepatitis in order to study the disease.

   The rules, which build on regulations governing all human experimentation,
recognize children's vulnerability - both to coercion and to physical harm.
Experimental drugs that may leave adults unscathed could slow the development of
children's growing brains and bodies. In addition, adults may be able to weigh
the risks of research, but most children cannot.

   Thus, the rules reserve the most invasive research for the sickest children,
and allow risky tests only if researchers can show that they might help the
children. Both parents and children must agree to the research, and review
committees with pediatric expertise must scrutinize the experiments before they
begin.

   But many believe the protections are flawed. Congress plugged a major
loophole last fall, extending the rules for the first time beyond
government-funded studies to most industry research as of this April. Still, no
rules require that tests be conducted first in adults. No rules specifically
cover the cash flowing to researchers or the gifts offered to attract children
to participate. And little protects parents of seriously ill children for whom a
clinical trial has come to symbolize hope.

   "Without an education in the ethics and an understanding of how much money is
at stake, parents can't really make an informed decision about letting their
children take part," said Paul Gelsinger, whose son, Jesse, was killed in a gene
therapy experiment in September 1999.

   University of Pennsylvania officials had decided the experiment was too risky
for children and required Jesse to wait until he turned 18 to participate. But
Paul Gelsinger, of Tuscon, Ariz., said the family didn't learn of the true risks
- including deaths in animal studies - or the researchers' financial stake in
the study until after Jesse's death.

   "There's a lot of thinking that it's OK to sacrifice a few human beings for
the welfare of others. It's not right," he said.

   University of Pennsylvania officials have said they have no intention of
sacrificing anyone, but have acknowledged serious problems with the experiment,
paying Gelsinger an undisclosed amount to settle his wrongful death lawsuit.

   In the pacemaker research, some parents say NIH doctors used undue pressure
to get their children in an experiment that was unlikely to help them and ended
tragically.

   The researchers, led by Fananapazir, a cardiac surgeon, put pacemakers into
68 children between 1992 and 1996 to test whether the devices could treat or
cure an inherited disease called hypertrophic cardiomyopathy that can cause
thickening of the heart and sudden death. Because the theory was unproven, the
experiment - supported by pacemaker manufacturers - was supposed to target
children not helped by medication.

   From the time of her diagnosis at 7 months, Jennifer Munger had been treated
successfully with drugs. She took weekly dance lessons from age 3 and was a
cheerleader for the local Pop Warner team. Her father, Victor, said that for
years they resisted Fananapazir's insistence that they enroll her in the study
because "the only course for Jen was a pacemaker." Then, during a checkup,
Fananapazir said he detected an obstruction in her heart and told them that if
they waited much longer, a pacemaker would not be as effective in improving her
condition. Frightened, Victor and Lydia Munger agreed to the pacemaker
operation.

   In their lawsuit filed after Jennifer's death, the Mungers question whether
Jennifer ever had an obstruction and say Fananapazir never discussed other
treatment options and never told them there were signs she was getting worse
with the pacemaker. "We think her death could have been prevented," Victor said,
most likely by keeping her on the medication that had been working.

   "Fananapazir had one mission - proving pacemakers worked" for hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, Victor Munger said. "It seems there was a lot of self-interest
in his decisions."

   Douglas Gray Jr.'s parents say they were also stampeded into a pacemaker for
their son without even being told it was an experiment. Gray was 12 and quite
sick when Fananapazir told Gray's parents he would die if they didn't act
quickly, Judith Gray said.

   Fananapazir offered three options, she said: Medications that already had
failed Doug, a heart-thinning operation that Fananapazir said might kill him,
and the pacemaker, which he presented as a terrific choice. When Gray and her
husband asked for time to consider the options, she said, Fananapazir told them
funding for the pacemakers was running out.

   "He had my husband and me scared to death," she said.

   After Fananapazir implanted the pacemaker, Gray became so weak he could
barely walk the 25 yards to the family's mailbox at their home in Roanoke, Va.
He was repeatedly hospitalized and had to be schooled at home, according to the
Grays' lawsuit. Finally, the couple took Douglas to another doctor, who
recommended heart-thinning surgery. Doug recovered quickly and, at 21, now works
full-time and enjoys long walks and other exercise.

   "I know I was used," said Douglas Gray.

   A government lawyer barred the NIH doctors from talking with the Globe. The
government also refused to provide public information about the outcome of the
experiment, including the number of children helped and harmed. In its response
to the suit, the government denies any coercion, negligence or responsibility
for Jennifer's death or Gray's ill health.

   Today, Fananapazir is still conducting research at the NIH, although he was
demoted and subjected to greater scrutiny. According to the NIH Web site, a
version of the children's experiment is ongoing.

   "Research in children should be treated with 10 times the level of caution as
research in adults," said Lisa Salberg, who resisted the NIH's attempts to
recruit her niece and daughter into the pacemaker study after her sister died in
a similar test. "It is sad, sick and reprehensible that researchers,
corporations or those who call themselves healers would toy with children's
lives as if they were somehow less than human."

   Darcy Trick had a similar experience. When her 5-year-old daughter, Molly
Foley, was diagnosed with an inoperable brain tumor in March 1999, Trick said an
East Coast children's hospital, which she declined to name for fear of
retribution, pushed her to enroll Molly in a national experiment with the drug
taxotere.

   "One doctor played hardball," said Trick, who lives in Virginia. "He told us
if we didn't proceed immediately, Molly would die very quickly.

   "I think they knew that what they were offering to Molly would not help her.
But there are so few children with brain tumors that they need to use them -
they need their bodies."

   Trick and her husband decided to spare Molly from the trial's ravaging
chemotherapy in her last days.

   Theodore Zwerdling, the national director of the Children's Oncology Group,
acknowledged that the study was testing a long-shot treatment because nothing
else works for those with Molly's disease, recurrent glioma. If even one child
had responded, he said the study would have been considered a success. Instead,
the experiment was closed after it failed to help any of the 10 children
enrolled.

   He said he had not heard of any complaints about pressure, but "if that were
substantiated, that should be taken very seriously. It would be unethical."

   While everyone agrees that parents shouldn't be pressured into enrolling
children in research, there is less agreement over an increasingly common
practice - offering financial incentives.

   About 25 percent of pediatric studies in 1999 advertised some compensation
for the children or parents, according to a survey by an NIH researcher. Amounts
typically ranged from $200 to $400, but occasionally reached $1,000.

   Research shows the incentives do have an impact.  A poll of a small group of
children conducted by Children's Mercy Hospital in Kansas City, Mo., found that
28 percent of those in medical trials said they participated because of
"age-appropriate incentives."

   Bonny Sullivan, a research technician at Riley Hospital in Indianapolis, said
she finds that mentioning the availability of travel reimbursement in radio ads
helps fill pediatric studies for the mood disorders clinic. Using money supplied
by the drug maker, she recently offered children with depression $360 in travel
expenses for a 12-week study of Zoloft.

   "It seems like many of these people don't have a lot of money," she said. "It
seems to sway people into thinking it will be OK to drive into Indianapolis."

   The flow of money troubles many ethicists and an increasing number of
researchers themselves because, in some cases, children are essentially being
paid to take a risk they don't understand.

   The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends limiting any payment to a
"token gesture of appreciation" and not mentioning it until the experiment is
over. They support reimbursement for costs resulting from the child's
participation, but say these also must be monitored to ensure they are not an
inducement. The guidelines say nothing about the common practice of paying
research participants for their time.

   "I do worry that children are unduly influenced by sums that don't sound like
a lot to you and me," said Brian O'Sullivan, a pediatrician at UMass Memorial.
"Thirty dollars or $40 is a lot of money to a grade-school child."

   O'Sullivan said UMass encourages small gift certificates to McDonald's or
Toys R Us rather than money, and, as much as possible, restricts payments to
travel expenses, parking and meal money. "The reward should just compensate for
time and expenses," he said.

   At Children's Hospital in Boston, researchers have offered as much as $750
for participation in a yearlong study involving at least one hospital stay, but
more often restrict reimbursement to under $100, according to Susan Kornetsky,
director of clinical research compliance, who declined to name the company or
describe the study.

   "We're seeing larger and larger amounts offered by drug companies, even where
there's a therapeutic benefit," she said. "Our philosophy is that parents can be
reimbursed for expenses such as parking, food, child care at home, but anything
above and beyond that has to go to the child and be a token - a gift
certificate, CD, or stuffed animal - or be put in a savings bond. We don't agree
with paying someone for the risk and we don't want it to be coercive."

   The NIH itself offers compensation for time and inconvenience to most of its
study volunteers. Each 6- to 10-year-old child in a recent two-day obesity
experiment that required a hospital stay received $270 until regulators shut the
research down.

   "We discussed whether that would be coercive and decided it would not be,"
said Gottesman, the NIH deputy director for intramural research. But, he
conceded, "that's a subjective judgment."Part 1 of this series ran on Feb. 18.
The final part will appear on Sunday.

   Alice Dembner can be reached at a dembner@globe.com.  SIDEBAR SHOULD A
HEALTHY CHILD EVER BE A TEST SUBJECT?

   If a child is deathly ill, few will quibble with an ethically conducted
medical experiment that may offer the only real chance of survival. But should a
healthy child ever be a test subject?

   "In general, we don't think that ought to be happening," said Dr. Dianne
Murphy, who heads the Food and Drug Administration's initiative to ensure that
more drugs used for children are fully tested. But increasingly, she said, the
FDA is getting proposals from drug companies to test healthy children.

   Federal rules - that will apply to many drug company tests starting in April
- allow studies on healthy children only if the risks are minimal or if the
secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services approves. But there is
no consensus on what constitutes minimal risk.

   For example, National Institutes of Health officials say there is little, if
any risk, from the MRI, X-rays, blood tests and overnight blood sugar
manipulation healthy children were exposed to in their study of biological and
genetic factors in childhood obesity. In a report, they called the tests "safer
than playing actively on sidewalks and streets."

   But regulators disagreed. They shut down the study last fall, after 100 obese
children and 93 healthy children of obese parents had undergone the tests.

   When NIH protested that the study involved no more risk than other NIH
studies of normal children, officials of the research protection office launched
a review all of those studies. Some observers expect more citations.

   Patient advocates and some ethicists also have challenged a study at Yale
that is testing whether a potent antipsychotic drug can prevent schizophrenia.
Researchers are giving either Zyprexa or a sugar pill to children and adults
whom they have classified as preschizophrenic. But most of the people have never
been diagnosed with mental illness, and the researchers themselves acknowledge
that up to 60 percent may never develop schizophrenia. The experiment is funded
in part by Eli Lilly, which last year sold more than $2 billion worth of
Zyprexa.

   The lead researcher, Thomas McGlashan, has publicly said he believes there is
as much risk in doing nothing as in giving these children the drug because of
the possibility they will become psychotic. He declined to speak with the Globe.

   But research protection officials questioned in December whether Yale had
given participants enough information to judge that for themselves. Yale has
since revised its consent process.

   "A clinical trial involves risk and, if a child doesn't have a condition,
they shouldn't be put at risk just because they're helpless and accessible,"
said Vera H. Sharav, president of Citizens for Responsible Care & Research.

   "The biggest question is whose children are being sought as subjects. Do
those who profit from research volunteer their own children?"

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. GLOBE PHOTO/STEVE MILLER/ Yale University overhauled its
review process after federal officials found that 32 children and adults were
not fully informed about the side effects of a schizophrenia drug they were
given. 2. AP PHOTO/ Jesse Gelsinger, 18, posed for a snapshot in Philadelphia in
September 1999 shortly before entering a University of Pennsylvania gene therapy
experiment that would lead to his death.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2001


                             1909 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 20, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 472 words

HEADLINE: Study shows promise for heart care; Collateral Therapeutics' testing
is in early stage

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Collateral Therapeutics' experimental gene therapy has shown promise in easing
chest pain in some heart patients and improving their ability to exercise,
according to a new study.

   Though it's still in early-stage testing, the San Diego biotech company's
Generx therapy provides the first concrete evidence that a gene therapy can be
used safely in heart patients to spur the growth of new blood vessels, said Dr.
Robert Engler, co-founder of Collateral Therapeutics.

   Collateral is one of a number of San Diego companies testing experimental
gene therapies for a variety of medical conditions, including heart disease and
cancer.  Yet researchers caution that such therapies, if successful, are still
years away from regulatory approval.

   In the Collateral study, 60 heart patients were injected with various dosages
of Generx, a disabled virus that delivers a human growth factor gene to the
heart.  Once there, the gene triggers heart cells to produce a growth hormone,
which in turn stimulates the growth of new blood vessels, according to the
company.

   All 60 of the heart patients had angina, which causes chest pain because of a
lack of oxygen in the heart muscle.  After 12 weeks, half the patients who
received the most effective dosages of Generx showed more improvement in their
ability to exercise than the improvement expected in patients who undergo heart
bypass surgery, Engler said.

   According to the American Heart Association, angina affects approximately 6.2
million Americans, with 300,000 new cases diagnosed each year.

   "This appears to prove the principle that gene therapy can work, and work
safely, in patients with cardiovascular disease," said Engler, a professor of
medicine at UCSD and the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in San Diego, where
some of the patient studies were performed.

   Collateral is developing the gene therapy with German drugmaker Schering AG.
The partners are seeking permission from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
to launch a larger patient study by midyear.

   Several companies are testing therapies designed to spur blood vessel growth,
called angiogenesis.  San Francisco biotech giant Genentech recently reported
disappointing results in a therapy that used human growth factor proteins, as
opposed to genes designed to stimulate the production of proteins.

   Collateral hopes its gene therapy will ultimately be used as an alternative
to bypass surgery or angioplasty procedures.  By stimulating new blood vessel
growth, the gene therapy could provide alternate routes for blood to flow into
oxygen-deprived areas of the heart, the company said.

   The company's stock, which trades under the ticker symbol CLTX, fell more
than 5 percent to close at $17.07.

   Penni Crabtree's e-mail address is penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com. Her phone
number is (619) 293-1237.


LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2001


                             1910 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 20, 2001 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 466 words

HEADLINE: Study shows promise for heart care;
Collateral Therapeutics' testing is in early stage

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Collateral Therapeutics' experimental gene therapy has shown promise in
easing chest pain in some heart patients and improving their ability to
exercise, according to a new study. Though it's still in early-stage testing,
the San Diego biotech company's Generx therapy provides the first concrete
evidence that a gene therapy can be used safely in heart patients to spur the
growth of new blood vessels, said Dr. Robert Engler, co-founder of Collateral
Therapeutics. Collateral is one of a number of San Diego companies testing
experimental gene therapies for a variety of medical conditions, including heart
disease and cancer.

   Yet researchers caution that such therapies, if successful, are still years
away from regulatory approval. In the Collateral study, 60 heart patients were
injected with various dosages of Generx, a disabled virus that delivers a human
growth factor gene to the heart.

   Once there, the gene triggers heart cells to produce a growth hormone, which
in turn stimulates the growth of new blood vessels, according to the company.
All 60 of the heart patients had angina, which causes chest pain because of a
lack of oxygen in the heart muscle.

   After 12 weeks, half the patients who received the most effective dosages of
Generx showed more improvement in their ability to exercise than the improvement
expected in patients who undergo heart bypass surgery, Engler said. According to
the American Heart Association, angina affects approximately 6.2 million
Americans, with 300,000 new cases diagnosed each year. "This appears to prove
the principle that gene therapy can work, and work safely, in patients with
cardiovascular disease," said Engler, a professor of medicine at UCSD and the
Veterans Affairs Medical Center in San Diego, where some of the patient studies
were performed. Collateral is developing the gene therapy with German drugmaker
Schering AG. The partners are seeking permission from the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration to launch a larger patient study by midyear. Several companies
are testing therapies designed to spur blood vessel growth, called angiogenesis.

   San Francisco biotech giant Genentech recently reported disappointing results
in a therapy that used human growth factor proteins, as opposed to genes
designed to stimulate the production of proteins. Collateral hopes its gene
therapy will ultimately be used as an alternative to bypass surgery or
angioplasty procedures.

   By stimulating new blood vessel growth, the gene therapy could provide
alternate routes for blood to flow into oxygen-deprived areas of the heart, the
company said. The company's stock, which trades under the ticker symbol CLTX,
fell more than 5 percent to close at $17.07. Penni Crabtree's e-mail address is
penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com. Her phone number is (619) 293-1237.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1911 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2001 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                             March 19, 2001 Monday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 404 words

HEADLINE: When scientists break the rules

BODY:

   Our position: Some researchers have gone too far with clinical experiments on
humans as they race for fame and medical breakthroughs.

   Do no harm, the first commandment of medicine, is being broken at a dreadful
pace and often by scientists sponsored by the federal government and funded by
an unsuspecting public.

   An egregious example was uncovered last year at a University of Pennsylvania
clinical trial on gene therapy in which a teen-ager died. An investigation found
that half the people enrolled in the experiment had not been informed of the
risks involved; many did not meet eligibility requirements; and researchers
failed to monitor the health of participants.

   Such incidents are not unusual, says Adil Shamoo of the University of
Maryland School of Medicine. He claims thousands of deaths and untoward
incidents involving human research subjects are never reported.

   A particularly tragic result of an experiment was reported recently, however,
in the New England Journal of Medicine. A clinical trial in Parkinson's disease
therapy went tragically awry. The process involved implanting cells from aborted
fetuses into the brains of Parkinson's patients. Not only was there no benefit
to any of the participants, but 15 percent suffered nightmarish side effects.
They were left constantly writhing and jerking uncontrollably. Researchers have
found no way to undo the harm done.

   There will be no more fetal transplants for me, said one researcher. He is
among those who believe it is time to go back to the laboratory and to
experimenting on animals before any further human trials are attempted. The
delay is disappointing because cell transplants had been hailed as a promising
way to cure Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and other neurological diseases.

   Promises are cheaper by the dozen in this age of dazzling medical
breakthroughs. Spurred by the lure of fame and fortune, scientists are racing
against time to see who hits the finish line first. According to Shamoo, many
are taking shortcuts and ignoring caution signs. A notorious example are the two
fertility specialists who said they will clone babies for childless couples.

   Experiments in cloning sheep and other higher forms of animal have a 97
percent failure rate. Grotesque deformities are the norm. One wonders what the
arrogant duo will do with their failures.

   It is often said that whatever science can do will be done. The probability
grows scarier by the day.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2009


                             1912 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       March 18, 2001 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 030

LENGTH: 570 words

HEADLINE: SUNDAY PEOPLE; Easter Seals names Bateman Greater Boston chair

BYLINE: By A.J. O'Connell

BODY:

   Easter Seals named Maureen Scannell Bateman, executive vice president and
general counsel of State Street Corp., as chair of the Greater Boston 2001
Easter Seals Campaign for Independence.

   Carol Fusaro was named vice president at Sullivan Creative, a Watertown
marketing firm.

   Jonathan Spector was named chief executive at the Seurat Company, a Cambridge
technology consulting firm.

   Seyfarth Shaw, a national law firm with offices in Boston, appointed Ariel
Cudkowicz and Lynn Kappelman partners.

   Seth Jeannotte was promoted to vice president of strategic development for
R.L. Jeannotte, a Shirley-based contracting firm.

   ADS Financial Services Solutions, a tech consulting firm in Quincy, named
Cathy Sullivan as vice president, business development.

   Virginia Buckingham, executive director and chief executive of the
Massachusetts Port Authority, and Robert Mudge, president of
Verizon-Massachusetts, joined the board of directors of the New England Council,
a business organization based in Boston.

   Sharon Merrill Associates Inc., a Boston-based investor relations and
corporate communications company, named Paula Navin and Marilyn Wrenn as account
specialists.

   Candela Corporation, a Wayland developer of aesthetic laser systems, named
Kathleen McMillan as vice president of research.

   MEGA International Inc., an international software developer with offices in
Waltham, named Curt Bloom as president of its North American subsidiary.

   Macgregor, a technology firm with offices in Boston, named Stephen Alpha as
executive vice president, networks and e-markets, and Dianne Cincotta as vice
president, networks and e-markets.

   Dyax Corp., a Cambridge-based biopharmaceutical company, appointed Scott
Chapel as executive vice president of research and technology, Jessica Wolf as
director of investor relations and Elaine Rosenberg Crowley as senior vice
president of human resources.

   Allen & Gerritsen, a Watertown marketing firm, hired Paula Albertin as media
designer, Barry Rollins as manager ofinteractive manager and George Rajkowski as
quality control manager.

   Boston-based advertising firm Hill, Holliday appointed Thomas Jump to
executive vice president, group account director.

   ImmunoGen Inc., a Cambridge biopharmaceutical company, named Gregg Beloff as
vice president and chief financial officer.

   Paul Casale was elected treasurer of The Massachusetts Extended Care
Federation, an organization representing nursing homes, assisted living
residences and retirement communities.

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., a Cambridge biopharmaceutical firm, named
Anthony Murabito as vice president, management information systems.

   Adriana Bobinchock was promoted to public affairs manager at McLean Hospital
in Belmont.

   Cannon Design, a national architecture firm with offices in Boston, named
Michael Roughan as associate principal.

   Boston-based investment bank Adams, Harkness & Hill appointed Deborah Widener
to head its West Coast biotechnology investment banking efforts.

   The Talbots Inc., a Hingham-based clothing retailer, promoted Julie Lorigan
to vice president, investor relations.

   Essex Partners, a division of Keystone Partners, a Boston-based career
management firm, named Anne Hartman partner.

   Please send items to the Boston Herald, Sunday Business People, attn. A.J.
O'Connell, One Herald Square, Boston, Mass. 02106 or fax them to (617) 426-1865.
No phone calls, please.


LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2001


                             1913 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2001 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                    March 17, 2001, Saturday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Faith & Values; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 1266 words

HEADLINE: Engineered immortality;
A debate has begun over what life will mean - both to individuals and society -
as developments in genetics allow people to live much longer.

BYLINE: Warren Wolfe; Staff Writer

DATELINE: New Orleans, La.

BODY:

   Then the Lord God said, "See, the man has become like one of us, knowing good
and evil; and now, he might reach out his hand and take also from the tree of
life, and eat, and live forever" _ therefore the Lord God sent him forth from
the garden of Eden.

        _ Genesis 3:22

   .

   The woman from West St. Paul walked the conference halls at the national
gathering of experts on aging last week with a button identifying her clearly:
Miriam Reibold, Old Woman.

        "It seems pretty silly, this idea of genetic engineering to help us live
to be 150 or 200, especially when you think about how society treats old people
now," said Reibold, 84.

        "Look at the lack of respect for older people _ especially older women,"
said Reibold, former president of the metro region of the Minnesota Senior
Federation. "Why would anybody want to be 150?"

        Indeed, there were few proponents of the notion last weekend at a
symposium examining the ethical issues of genetic alteration to extend the human
lifespan past the generally accepted limit of 125 years.

        It was among hundreds of discussions about aging issues at the American
Society on Aging annual meeting in New Orleans.

        In recent years, genetic research _ especially by private firms _ has
fueled speculation that that scientists might unlock the door toward a much
longer lifespan _ living in good health for 150 years, 200 years, perhaps even
1,000 years, some researchers have suggested.

        And if that happened, might it also herald a golden age of human
development? Could it be a time when a doubling of life experiences would lead
to far greater individual and societal growth?

        Or with the likelihood of death pushed even farther into the misty
future, would life be defined even more than now by the pursuit of pleasure and
consumerism.

        "The present gives a glimpse of what the future looks like," said Rick
Moody, a philosopher and prolific writer about aging who heads the Institute of
Values and Aging at Hunter College in New York City.

        "And if you think we're a youth-obsessed, consumerist culture now, try
to imagine what we might be like when death is something that might happen in a
century or so.

        "For that matter, try to imaging being married to the same person for
150 years," he said. "If you double the lifespan, it will affect who we are as
individuals, and it will change who we are as a society. If we just plunge into
this new world, I'm pessimistic about what we will become."

   .

   Pursuit of immortality?

        Most damaging is not merely the prospect of much longer life, but what
amounts to the pursuit of immortality, said Larry Polivka, director of the
Florida Policy Exchange Center on Aging at the University of South Florida in
Tampa.

        "That comes with the notion that there is no positive value in aging,
that aging is merely the source of physical decline and limited capacity to
experience life," he said.

        To combat what they see as "the disease of aging," he said, researchers
are seeking to change genetic codes that tell body cells to die, and develop new
ways of integrating man and mechanics in cyborg technology.

        What that ignores, he said, is "rich lessons that older people teach us
_ that vulnerability, weakness and even suffering opens us to a far deeper
understanding of ourselves.

        "It's from this process that we derive a sense of connection to others,
of ethical and moral obligation to our community," Polivka said. "But will that
change? Will we be able to resist unbridled biotechnology?"

        And will religious institutions withstand the impact if a major tenet of
faith _ the inevitability of death _ grown murky?

        "The most basic agreement among nearly all religions is that life is
finite," said Stephen Sapp, professor of religious studies at the University of
Miami. "Mortality is the inescapable lot of all human beings, and the refusal to
accept that is at the heart of human problems."

        It's a story told to Christians, Jews and Muslims in Genesis, the story
of God evicting Adam and Eve from the garden of Eden to prevent them from eating
of the tree of everlasting life, after tasting fruit of the tree of knowledge.

        It is a core belief in Hinduism and Buddhism, that reality is an
unchanging oneness, and clinging onto life is an illusion.

        "Most religions will really have to do a second thinking of their
doctrine," Sapp said. "And most likely, people with religious beliefs will
protest the scientific assault on their faith."

   .

   'Total poppycock'

        But Minneapolis physician and ethicist Steve Miles dismisses much of the
angst over genetic manipulation of the lifespan as "just total poppycock."

        Most advances from genetic therapy now under study might help people
avoid or recover from illness or injury, said Miles, a researcher at the Center
for Bioethics at the University of Minnesota. At best, that may extend slightly
the human life expectancy _ the average number of years people live _ but not
the potential lifespan of the species.

        "I fully expect that in a few years somebody will be cloned, someone
with enough money and a big enough ego," he said. "That will set off a firestorm
of debate, although frankly I'm not sure it will mean much."

        The notion of a cyborg human-machine body _ like the movies depicting
Godzilla developing from a radiation accident, Frankenstein's monster or a new
Hitler cloned from a DNA fragment _ are "ogres that each generation develops
that capture the popular imagination that deal with deeper problems than the
technical feasibility.

        "The real threat is that technology is diminishing the capacity for
complex human reflection and critical thinking," he said. "Public investment in
the arts and humanities will do more" to solve that then buying more
biotechnology.

        "I was talking at Ebenezer Nursing Home a year ago to about 70 people
whose average age was 70 or 80," Miles said. "I was struck that the combined
life experience in the room was greater than 5,000 years. If we want to gather
collective wisdom, we don't have to look far."

   .

   Wisdom in aging

        Reibold couldn't agree more.

        "It makes me mad sometimes that there are so many older people _ active,
intelligent and very experienced _ who could help our society do better job of
problem solving." she said. "But nobody asks, and most of us are too polite to
push."

        Reibold, a former librarian from Iowa who moved to the Twin Cities in
retirement, is not among those refusing to push.

        "People don't always like it when I speak up, but like a lot of older
people, I'm not too concerned with what others think of me," she said. "Well, I
care a little, but it doesn't stop me."

        So after speaking up in public places, she has been invited to talk
about issues of older people with medical students at the University of
Minnesota and with police at training seminars. She's active in her neighborhood
association and carries her mission to raise the visibility of older people
nationally as chairwoman of the National Coalition of Consumer Organizations.

        "Oh, I think the idea of a greatly increased lifespan could be quite
wonderful _ if it means a healthy longer life, and especially if it leads to
greater valuing of older people," she said.

        "But I am not very optimistic. I suspect that the search for longer life
really is a search for perpetual youth. It doesn't sound very grown-up to me."

   .

        Warren Wolfe can be contacted at wolfe@startribune.com


GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2001


                             1914 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 15, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1051 words

HEADLINE: BELOW 10,000; Dow tumbles along with stock markets worldwide

BYLINE: Dean Calbreath; STAFF WRITER | The Associated Press contributed to this
report.

BODY:
 Stock markets throughout the world were clobbered yesterday by the specter of a
prolonged economic slowdown.  The Dow Jones industrial average fell below the
10,000 mark, and Wall Street's blue-chip stocks were positioned for their worst
weekly performance in more than a decade.

   Market watchers pinned the blame on Japan, which announced this week that its
economy is in a state of deflation after being plagued by a plummeting currency,
collapsing stock market and the second round of a decade-long recession.

   Concern that Japanese consumers will stop buying foreign goods -- and that
Japanese banks will sell off foreign investments -- pushed stock prices lower
throughout Europe and the United States.

   The Dow slid 317.34 to close at 9,973.46, the first time it has closed below
10,000 since October.  The technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite Index fell 42.69 to
1,972.09, while the Standard & Poor's 500 Index, which entered bear market
territory this week, dropped 30.95 to 1,166.71.

   "When I woke up at 5 a.m. in the morning and saw that the Dow was already
poised to drop 350 points, I thought I was having a nightmare," said George
Hallad, director of retail sales at Torrey Pines Securities in Carmel Valley.
"And then it just continued to snowball.  When you're in this kind of market,
the bears rule."

   The Wall Street plunge, in turn, touched off a new round of sell-offs in
Tokyo.  At press time, the Nikkei stock index had lost about 400 points --
setting a new 16-year low and foreshadowing continuing weakness on the world
market.

   But Japan is not the only reason for Wall Street's woes.

   Just as Japan's problems date back to a stock market bubble in the late
1980s, many of the ills on Wall Street resulted from the bubble that formed
around high-tech businesses in the late 1990s. The popping of that bubble has
begun to set off reverberations throughout the economy.

   "The real impact will come as companies cut back their capital spending --
and there's evidence that's already happening," said Tom Lieser, economist with
the University of California Los Angeles.  "The decline in Nasdaq will have a
greater-than-average impact on California, since so many technology firms are
located here."

   Alan Gin, economist with the University of San Diego, said stock market
declines could help put the United States into a recession as early as June.

   "The big worry is having a reverse wealth effect, where people who have lost
a lot of money on the stock market stop buying such high-ticket items as
housing, automobiles, furniture and major appliances," he said.

   One potential ray of hope, economists say, is if Federal Reserve Chairman
Alan Greenspan dramatically reduces interest rates next week in an effort to
revive the increasingly sluggish economy.  The market is already expecting rates
to fall by half a percentage point, however, so a rate cut might have little
effect unless it is at least three-quarters of a point.

   Locally, the hardest-hit stocks were in the biotech sector.  San Diego's
Applied Molecular Evolution, a gene-therapy laboratory, saw its price drop 18
percent to $7.75 per share, down from an October high of $40.25.

   Discovery Partners dropped 14 percent, and Advanced Tissue Sciences, Arena
Pharmaceuticals and Nanogen each fell 10 percent.

   Despite the steep declines, local investors seem to be taking the drop-off
with an attitude of wary resignation.

   At the YMCA gym in Mission Valley, most people on the exercise machines
ignored the news of the collapse, which was being broadcast on a television
monitor tuned to CNBC-TV.

   Matthew Darjany of Kearny Mesa checked his stock portfolio on the computer
screen attached to his exercise bike, but he did not seem overly concerned when
he discovered that it had declined by $100.

   "For me, it's a hobby, so I'm not going to lose too much money," he said.
"But it looks like it's going to keep getting worse."

   Charles Strizak, a retired airline worker from Bay Park, kept an eye on CNBC
as he went through his paces on a treadmill.  But he no longer has a stake in
the market.  He sold his shares in such companies as Qualcomm and Cypress
Semiconductor in December, shortly after the election.

   "George Bush started talking down the economy as soon as he won the election,
and that didn't fill me with a great deal of confidence about his leadership,"
Strizak said.  "Whatever you say about Bill Clinton's personal character, at
least things went well on the market for the past eight years."

   Yesterday, President Bush told a gathering in New Jersey that he was "sorry
people are losing value in their portfolios.  That worries me." Once again, he
reiterated his view that "the economy is beginning to sputter."

   He said, however, that he is confident his plan to cut taxes and tighten
spending will provide a "second wind."

   "I've got great faith in our economy," he said.

   Despite the dark clouds, local stockbrokers and investment managers say their
clients have stayed calm this week -- partly because they've become accustomed
to major fluctuations on Wall Street, and partly because many have already
diversified their holdings.

   George Hallad of Torrey Pines said his customers have been buying municipal
bonds and certificates of deposit in recent days instead of investing in stocks.

   "I've had a few people calling in and wondering if they should sell their
stocks, but I tell them not to run into the storm," he said.  "But it's nothing
like the panic of 1987, when everybody wanted to sell and then the market
bounced back in six months.  It reminds me more of the downturn of 1973-4, which
was just a long, continued erosion."

   Ginita Wall, a financial planner in Carmel Valley, said that one reason for
the lack of panic is that many people wrongly feel that they are far removed
from the pain being inflicted on Wall Street.

   "I saw one woman on the news the other night who said, 'I don't care about
the stock market.  I don't have any investments,' " Wall said.  "I wonder how
she'll feel when she gets her quarterly statement for her 401(k)."

   March 29, 1999

   10,006.8 - First time Dow closes above 10,000.

   Jan. 14, 2000

   11,723 - Dow hits an all-time high.

   Yesterday

   9,973.46 - Dow drops below the 10,000 level, a mark it first exceeded nearly
two years ago.


GRAPHIC: 2 PICS | 1 GRAPH; 1. Sue Ogrocki / Reuters 2. Laura Embry /
Union-Tribune; 1. Anderson Bell, a futures trader at the Chicago Board of Trade,
watched an overhead monitor that listed falling stock prices yesterday morning.
2. Charles Strizak walked past the stock market report on television yesterday
after a workout at Mission Valley YMCA. Strizak said he sold all his stock after
last year's election because he lacked confidence in the Bush administration.
(A-19)

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2001


                             1915 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            March 15, 2001 Thursday
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 177 words

HEADLINE: Is tax help profiting investors?

BODY:

   With regard to a recent article in The Times-Picayune Money section
("Bio-medical firm touted as wave of future in New Orleans," March 7) concerning
the capitalization of a new firm to market a genetic test devised by the
director of Tulane's Center for Gene Therapy, I have a couple of questions.

   First, why is a nonprofit corporation partly funded with state money, the
Louisiana Gene Therapy Consortium, giving money to a private institution such as
the Tulane University Health Sciences Center?

   If Tulane University is in fact receiving money for scientific research from
this or any other publicly funded foundation, why is it matter-of-factly
planning to license marketable technology arising from such research for its own
financial gain?

   Shouldn't the benefits of any practical applications arising from research
paid for, wholly or in part, by public funds accrue to the public, rather than
just a few private investors?

   One final question: In raising these questions, am I merely being stupid and
naive?

Bruce D. Smith

New Orleans

CORRECTION-DATE: March 16, 2001 Friday

CORRECTION:
Bender misidentified: Robert Bender, chairman of Select Therapeutics Inc., was
misidentified in photo captions that appeared on Thursday's Editorial page and
in the March 7 Money section.

GRAPHIC: STAFF FILE PHOTO Robert Bender, chief executive of Select Therapeutics
Inc. of Woburn, Mass., is planning a business partnership with Dr. Darwin
Prockop, the director of Tulane's Center for Gene Therapy.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2001


                             1916 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

               March 13, 2001, Tuesday ***EMPTY FIELD*** EDITION

SECTION: HOUSTON; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1330 words

HEADLINE: Orchestral antidote;
Houston doctors, students trade medicine for music

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: BARBARA KARKABI

BODY:

   It's Wednesday night, and Libi Lebel is energetically moving chairs around -
arranging and rearranging until everything looks just right.

   There is, she explains, a reason for her mad scramble, and it's not because
she likes to redecorate. Lebel is getting ready for an orchestra rehearsal, and
everything has to be perfect.

   "I want them to be comfortable. If the room is in a mess when the players
come in, then the rehearsal is bad," Lebel said. "If it is neat, then the
rehearsal is good. It has something to do with the energy."

   Lebel continues talking to a lone doctor, who is calmly putting together her
bass clarinet. The horns will go here, another group over there. Some like one
type of chair more than another, she says, almost to herself.

   "What kind of chair do you want?" she asks.

   "I'm not particular, " said Dr. Melissa Thompson, an anesthesiologist,
watching Lebel in amazement. "She is so energetic. I picked that up over the
phone."

   Within minutes, Lebel has transformed a fifth-floor gallery at the University
of Texas Medical School into an orchestra rehearsal room. And it's just in time.

   As rehearsal time approaches, people straggle in. Tired-looking residents and
interns, still dressed in blue or green scrubs, arrive with everything from a
tuba to violins. Several doctors in neat office attire set up their music
stands. Others in University of Texas and Baylor T-shirts busily put their
instruments together and start chatting and practicing scales.

   Lebel is the heart and soul of the newly formed Doctor's Orchestra of
Houston, with 65-plus medical musicians. Created last fall, it joins the ranks
of older doctor's orchestras in Los Angeles, Boston, Philadelphia and New York
City.

   At the stroke of 7 p.m., Lebel, a professional pianist and conductor, steps
onto the box, baton in hand. She is joined by Dr. Daniel Musher: "OK,
everybody?" Musher asks.

   "Where are all my violins?" Lebel questions plaintively, as several rush in.

   Baton lifted, Lebel leads these doctors and medical students as they
enthusiastically play Bizet's Carmen Suite No. 1. The sounds of Spain fill the
room and spill into the hallway.

   Attracted by the music, a young doctor in surgical attire stands at the back
and listens. A look of contentment comes over his face. He's on trauma call at a
nearby emergency room.

   It's only practice, but Lebel is pleased. Things, she tells them, are coming
together. She introduces new players - the bass clarinet, a tuba player and an
English horn.

   "You are saving our life," she said. "We need a horn; I couldn't sleep for a
week worrying about it."

   The players laugh, but it's a fond laugh. Lebel, after all, is the reason
they are there.

   "Libi is awesome," said trumpet player and first-year medical student
Jonathan Wilks. "Half the fun of coming to rehearsals is that she sits up there
and tries to tell us how she feels about the music."

   If not for Lebel, they would be studying, working in operating rooms or
perhaps headed home.

   Lebel came to Houston with her husband, Dr. Vadim Barg, an anesthesiology
resident, in August.

   "I knew if I was going to be happy in Houston, I had to do something in
music," she recalled. "I knew there were doctors' orchestras in Boston and New
York and in Los Angeles. I thought: 'Why not here?' "

   Lebel first met with her husband's boss, Dr. Jeffrey Katz, chairman of the
UT-Houston Medical School department of anesthesiology.

   "People think physicians are into their own world of medicine and don't care
about other things," he said. "We felt this would broaden our base. There are
lots of people with music backgrounds (who) went into medicine."

   Katz responded to Lebel's passionate appeal and took her to meet Dr. L.
Maximilian Buja, dean of the UT-Houston Medical School. Buja was equally
supportive and provided audition and rehearsal space.

   E-mails were sent, auditions were scheduled, and their first rehearsal was
held Nov. 1. Not one to let the grass grow under her feet, Lebel and the
Doctor's Orchestra debuted Jan. 27 to a packed house of 1,200 people.

   The group is now preparing for its next free concert - May 19 at Rice
University's Stude Hall - and has recently made a CD they hope to sell. The
funds will go toward a medical-related charity.

   "I was overwhelmed at the response," Lebel said. "There are lots of different
levels. Some have played consistently for years, others not for 15 years. But
the purpose is to let people get back into shape and eventually use the
orchestra to raise money for medical charities."

   Because the Texas Medical Center is so large, 99 percent of the players are
from the medical profession - though it is open to others. And there is no
hierarchy. Doctors sit next to first-year students. Physician's assistants sit
next to genetic researchers or administrators.

   "I tell them every week that they have given me a gift," Lebel said. "This
really made my life here. The orchestra has brought me great happiness. I'm a
professional musician, but it's great to listen to them; they are on a very high
level."

   The admiration is mutual: These medical-musicians feel Lebel has also given
them a gift.

   "I'm not sure who else could galvanize us like she did," said third-year
medical student Brooke Divine, who had just arrived after 24 hours on call.
"Everybody respects her and wants to work harder."

   Lebel says her passion for music comes from her Russian roots. She was born
there and came to the United States via Israel. A pianist trained at the
Juilliard School of Music, Lebel loves people as much as music and began to feel
isolated as a pianist. She turned to conducting and studied at Princeton
University's Westminster Conservatory.

   She tells her musicians:

   "Look, I am a young woman - 27. I have experience conducting, but not like
for 27 years," she said. "But I have expectations, and I will make you work
hard."

   Musicians in the orchestra range from people who have never stopped
performing to others who are picking up instruments after a few years, even a
30-year break.

   Musher, chief of infectious disease at the VA Medical Center and a professor
at Baylor College of Medicine, is the group's concertmaster and principal
violinist. Musher, who has played violin since he was 8, was a concertmaster for
student and community orchestras in his undergraduate and graduate years.

   In Houston, he has played for many years with a string quartet.

   "This is a tremendous cultural asset to the Medical Center," he said. "We do
have a long tradition of physician-musicians. The musical training gives you
discipline, and for me it's a wonderful sense of relaxation."

   On the other end is cellist Paul Marrack, a research associate at Baylor's
Center for Cell and Gene Therapy who had not picked up a cello in 25 years.

   "I was in the first graduating class at HSPVA and played for a year in
college," he said. "My son and wife fixed my cello up for me for Father's Day,
but the rust doesn't come off easily. Playing definitely takes some of the edge
off the day's stress."

   Lebel is aware that many of her musicians might just have left an operating
room or had a very stressful day. So, while she expects them to do their best,
she also tries to relax them and get their imaginations working with Russian
folk tales, jokes and an occasional dance.

   During one recent rehearsal, Lebel gave the group a lecture they took to
heart.

   "Musicians are just like doctors," she said. "They are competitive, and they
want it bad. I can hear when you are improving, but I hate it when you are old
gum. Please come here with the hope of improving; don't come here chewing the
same old gum."

   In the weeks following, Lebel says, she was surprised to receive numerous
e-mails and messages saying: "That is so philosophical. We can use it in life
and our careers."

   If she inspires them in music and life, that pleases Lebel.

   "I'm very open," she said. "I love when they let me be myself and I don't
have to pretend."


GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. Libi Lebel, a pianist and conductor of the Doctor's
Orchestra of Houston, works with medical musicians at a weekly rehearsal. (
color ); 2. Ilyas Colombowala, foreground, a third-year medical student at
Baylor College of Medicine, plays the trumpet, while Dr. Walter Kutz, a surgical
resident at Baylor, plays the tuba at a recent rehearsal. ( color ); Ben DeSoto
photos / Chronicle

TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2001


                             1917 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             March 12, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 778 words

HEADLINE: When Not to Grasp at a Cure

BYLINE:  By Jerome Groopman;  Jerome Groopman, a professor of medicine at
Harvard, is the author, most recently, of "Second Opinions."

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   Thirty years ago, one of my favorite uncles noticed that his hands trembled
even when they were at rest. He was in his 60's, still robust and proud of his
prowess as a champion handball player in the Bronx. The trembling was the first
sign of Parkinson's disease. My uncle's course was typical. Although drugs
helped for a while, the disease proved unrelenting as cells in his brain died
and he was deprived of dopamine, an essential chemical. His warm smile was
replaced by the blank mask of largely immobile facial muscles. His trembling
hands spilled food. Walking was a struggle of shuffling and the terror of
falling.

        It is no wonder that desperate patients with Parkinson's would take
great risks in search of a cure. One novel approach that has gripped the public
imagination is therapy aiming to regenerate healthy brain tissue using immature
brain cells from embryos and fetuses. Over the last decade, researchers
conducted experiments of cellular therapy in small numbers of patients, and the
anecdotal results were said to be promising.

    Last week, physicians at the University of Colorado and Columbia University
reported the first controlled study on the risks and benefits of this therapy.
Analyzing the same results, the researchers appear to have split sharply over
the wisdom of continuing human experiments. The Colorado team plans to proceed,
testing different fetal cell preparations implanted more selectively in the
brain. One of the Columbia researchers has called for a halt to these
transplants.

   Can we ethically give license to human experiments that appear to have done
little good and caused devastating and possibly permanent harm? Yet can we deny
desperate patients the procedure if they are informed of new data on risk and
choose to take it?

   The pivotal study randomly assigned 20 patients to receive the transplant and
20 to undergo sham surgery. Neither the patients nor the neurologists evaluating
them knew which patients had received which treatment.  After one year, there
was no significant difference in the condition of the two groups. But later five
patients who had received transplants began experiencing severe side effects:
uncontrollable movements, with swinging and writhing of their arms and jerking
of their heads. It appears that the new brain tissue from the fetal cells
overgrew and began pouring out too much dopamine.

   This is not the first time a highly innovative approach to a severe disease
has caused catastrophe. The initial patients undergoing bone marrow
transplantation in the 1950's all died in short order. In 1999, a gene therapy
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania caused the death of a young man.
Severe side effects are not uncommon in opening new frontiers of medical
therapy.

   It is often emotionally and logistically difficult to apply the brakes
abruptly to a treatment hailed as having extraordinary promise. But workable
cellular therapy for severe Parkinson's is unlikely to be discovered without
more research in the laboratory. Something instructive happened with bone marrow
transplants: the initial ones failed because of blanket rejection, and
researchers suspended clinical trials until critical knowledge from the test
tube and animals was gained. Only then were humans subjected to this harsh
procedure, and with decades of incremental research, now many are cured of
illnesses like leukemia and lymphoma.

   In retrospect, after the outcome of the Parkinson's disease trial, it seems
almost naive to count on fragments of fetal tissue that are not standardized
with regard to their cellular and molecular contents to grow, mature, migrate
and function with the exquisite equipoise of an organ like the brain. While
physicians engaged in experimental medicine can justify taking great leaps
forward on behalf of desperate patients with incurable diseases, it is rare that
clinical success is achieved in the absence of an understanding of the
fundamental science.

   As so often occurs with apparently revolutionary treatments, the first blush
of anecdotal achievements pales in the setting of prospective studies that
include a control group. One of the most painful moments for a research
physician is to accept experimental failure. Judgments about suspending further
treatments are never perfect and can always be second-guessed. But researchers
who suspend clinical trials need not relinquish the dream of curing patients.
Their work in the laboratory is only made more urgent.

   Before we have more confidence that we can do good for people suffering from
Parkinson's disease and other degenerative conditions, we must rely on an
ancient dictum of the physician: First, do no harm.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Sergio Ruzzier)

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2001


                             1918 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             March 11, 2001 Sunday
                                Bulldog Edition

SECTION: PART A; Part 1; Advance Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1202 words

HEADLINE: TWINS' ILLNESS PUTS ANGELS AT THEIR DOORSTEP;
AS YVETTE AND LAWRENCE EARLEY FACED BANKRUPTCY OVER CARING FOR THEIR SONS, THEIR
WHOLE VILLAGE PITCHED IN TO HELP. THE OUTPOURING OF SUPPORT HAS SPREAD FAR AND
WIDE.

BYLINE: REBECCA MAHONEY, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: CASCO, Maine

BODY:

   Last summer, as Shayne and Corey Earley lay curled into commas on the couch,
intravenous poles hovering above them, their mother was explaining to a creditor
why she couldn't pay her bills again that month.

   "My boys are dying," Yvette Earley remembers saying. "We're going to lose
them both."

   The creditor, like the others, was unyielding: Pay the money.

   But there was no money.

   Yvette and her husband, Lawrence, were on the verge of losing their house.
Their families were hundreds of miles away in Connecticut. They were virtual
strangers in Casco, having moved to town only eight months before. And their
3-year-old twin sons, the center of their world, were dying from a rare genetic
disease.

   They felt utterly alone.

   They were not.

   Today the family's mortgage is paid through the end of March. The kerosene
tank is full. Nurses come daily to help care for the boys. The twins have new
pajamas, new toys, new sheets for their beds.

   And the Earley family has new reason to believe in people, thanks to an
extraordinary outpouring of support that started in their town, spread across
the state and even reached into Canada.

   "I've said it before, but we have truly been touched by angels," said Yvette
Earley, 32. "We were put in this town for a reason."

   The boys cannot talk or swallow. They see only shadows. They need daily
medication to keep their muscles from going into spasms.

   But they are still kids: Dangling from their IV poles are fluffy white
stuffed animals, two moose and two bears dressed as angels.

   "We have angels all around us," Yvette said.

   Yvette and Lawrence Earley moved to Maine in 1994 shortly after they were
married. They were drawn in late 1999 to the quiet beauty of Sebago Lake in the
town of Casco, whose year-round population is 3,300. There they bought a cabin.
They wanted children, and three years later Yvette became pregnant with Shayne
and Corey.

   Lawrence, 31, worked as a landscaper, Yvette as a nurse. Corey and Shayne
loved crawling around behind their daddy, climbing on the furniture and digging
in the sandbox. Photos on the walls show the twins in matching outfits with
unruly curls and mischievous grins.

   Rare Illness Diagnosed

   But troubling signs began to appear by their first birthday, when the boys
still hadn't started walking independently. Doctors chalked it up to being born
six weeks early. Three months later, the twins began working with an
occupational therapist. When the boys reached 19 months, Yvette and Lawrence
began to ask questions.

   Doctors performed tests but had no answers. As the months passed, the boys'
conditions worsened.

   "They stopped developing. They stopped being able to stand, able to feed
themselves. Every week we'd see them lose something, until it was every day,"
Yvette said. "It was absolutely terrifying."

   Last May the Earleys took the twins to Children's Hospital in Boston, where a
geneticist was finally able to deliver a chilling diagnosis: metachromatic
leukodystrophy, a rare genetic disorder that destroys the fatty covering that
insulates nerve fibers in the brain.

   Symptoms usually appear when a child is 12 to 18 months old. The disease
slowly robs its victims of the ability to walk and talk and causes severe pain
in the limbs, and sometimes convulsions. There is no cure, and victims rarely
live past 5.

   The boys were given months to live.

   When their day care center told the Earleys they could no longer take the
boys, Yvette and Lawrence began taking turns calling in sick. When Lawrence
missed too many days, he had to quit his job.

   Money was tight. The couple fell behind on bills. Creditors began calling
repeatedly, demanding money. The Earleys were on the verge of bankruptcy.

   "Nothing else mattered but the boys," Lawrence said.

   Increasingly desperate, the Earleys called the Jason Program, a social
service group in Cumberland, which recommended they get in touch with neighbors.

   They knew only one. Deborah Poulin, who worked at the town hall, had
introduced herself when the Earleys registered their car.

   The Earleys broke down and dialed.

   Poulin called friends, and a town meeting was organized. Twenty people who
showed up were given tips from a representative from the Jason Program on things
they could do to help.

   The town soon took the Earleys under its wing.

   A car repair shop fixed their vehicles for free. A stranger gave them some of
the money from each cord of wood he sold. Children collected coins in tin cans.
Grown-ups held benefit suppers and dances, a bike raffle and a golf tournament.

   A local lawyer stepped in to placate creditors. A carpenter and electrician
worked on their house, free. A pizza parlor, Bob's Place, invited the Earleys to
call whenever they wanted a free meal.

   Their church, aptly named Our Lady of Perpetual Help in Windham, collected
money.

   "We've been there since the beginning, and we'll be there at the end," said
the Rev. Ed Thompson. "The community wants to be there for this family."

   In September Yvette left her job, finally able to dedicate her time to taking
care of her boys.

   "It's been an awesome experience--a tragedy, but one that's touched us and so
many people," Yvette said, even as she has come to accept that without gene
therapy, any more children she and Lawrence have would likely be afflicted with
the same rare disorder.

   The spirit of giving rippled through the state after the story made the news.
The Earleys declined to say how much has been donated, but they said the
donations have not ceased in the months since their story was first told.

   The publicity has brought the Earleys letters from all over the country and
has put them in contact with other parents of children who have the disease.

   "A few weeks ago a man knocked on the door and handed me an envelope,"
Lawrence said. "I thought it was a subpoena. I turned it over and it said, 'To
Corey and Shayne.' Inside was $ 50. All I could do was wave to the man as he
pulled out of the driveway."

   A musician, Dave Thibodeau of Portland, gave in his own way: He wrote a song,
"Two of a Kind," with proceeds going to the family. The song is an upbeat melody
that celebrates the twins' lives.

   "I wanted to write something that served as a reminder to people that the
twins were once able to share everything normal kids share," he said.

   Couple's Burden Eased

   The twins' story is uplifting because of the way it has brought the community
together. But a tragic ending is inevitable.

   Doctors believe the boys will die this spring. A funeral parlor is donating
its services. The church plans to hold a reception. Musicians have offered to
play.

   "We don't have to worry about anything except how to say goodbye," Yvette
said. "We don't know how that will be. Right now they are still here. We can
still touch them, still talk to them. Still tell them we love them."

   Yvette believes her boys have touched the community in a unique way. But she
hopes their short lives will achieve one more goal: to raise awareness of
leukodystrophy and the need to screen for the disease.

   "Our boys have touched so many people," their mother said. "They're angels
themselves."

   *

   Metachromatic leukodystrophy: http://www.mldfamily.org/

   *

   To contact the Earley family: P.O. Box 760, South Casco, Maine 04077.

GRAPHIC:  Lawrence and Yvette Earley hold 3-year-old twins Corey, front, and
Shayne at their home in Casco, Maine.  PHOTOGRAPHER: JOEL PAGE / Associated
Press

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2001


                             1919 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2001 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    March 10, 2001 Saturday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 548 words

HEADLINE: STOCKS FOLLOW BUMPY NASDAQ RIDE

SOURCE: JULIE TRIPP of the Oregonian Staff

BODY:

   Summary:

   OREGON: Most tech companies take elevator down during year

   Some Oregon stocks paddled against the Nasdaq current this year to post big
gains, but most were not so lucky.

   Of the top 50 Oregon-based Nasdaq stocks by market capitalization, 39 were in
negative territory compared with a year ago, when the Nasdaq posted its all-time
high of 5,048.62. The technology-rich index closed Friday at 2,052.78, down 59
percent from its high set Dec. 17, 1998.

   So while Columbia Sportswear kept off the chill with a 183 percent gain,
online medical records company Medicalogic caught the cold when Nasdaq sneezed.
Medicalogic was down 92.6 percent from a year ago.

   The investors who suffered the most in the past 12 months, said Rex Wardlaw,
U.S. Trust senior vice president, are those who chased the performance of last
year's Nasdaq darlings, the "TNT" stocks, until those technology and
telecommunications stocks blew up.

   Investors who had stocks in other sectors and bonds have weathered the Nasdaq
storm well, Wardlaw said.

   Columbia Sportswear, for example, had enough cold weather in northern states
to clear the shelves of its parkas and boots.

   "You didn't have to be a skier this year to want to wear their product,"
Wardlaw said. "They were just hitting on all eight cylinders."

   Chip designer Mentor Graphics did well because chip manufacturers rely on it
and similar companies to keep them competitive. That means research contracts
keep flowing even when the market slows, as it has for manufacturers such as
Intel.

   And Metro One Telecommunications makes it money from directory assistance in
the cell phone market, not from making phones or selling long distance. This was
the right side of the business to be in last year. The company's stock rocketed
from $15 to $36 before settling back to $24.

   The niche market for Planar Systems, which makes flat-panel displays, wasn't
directly affected by the tech crash and may capitalize on increased military
spending in the Bush administration. Its shares have risen 41 percent since last
March.

   The other winners were community banks, where cuts in interest rates act like
an IV drip straight to a bank's bottom line. This sector was slammed when rates
were rising two years ago and is prospering as they decline. After six
consecutive rate increases, the Federal Reserve lowered rates by 1 percentage
point in January.

   Among the big winners were Cascade Bancorp, Oregon Trail, Klamath First,
Columbia Bancorp, Umpqua Bancorp and West Coast Bancorp. Centennial Bancorp was
down on the year but is up 50 percent since it began a rebound in September.

   Among other losers -- big and small -- were Oxis International, which makes
therapeutic and diagnostic products for fighting oxidative disease; Digimarc, a
digital watermarking company; WebTrends, an e-business analysis company; AVI
Biopharma, a gene therapy company; and TRM Corp., a copy machine company that
ran into trouble entering the automatic teller machine business in Europe.

   Just about any other high-tech company you could name also suffered in
varying degrees. But it may help teach a lesson about diversifying stock
portfolios, too, Wardlaw counsels.

   "People will remember this," he added. "This kind of pain is hard to forget."

GRAPHIC: Graphic -- Sidebar text by TED MITCHNER - The Oregonian -- IN OREGON,
GOOD AND BAD...; Some Oregon-based Nasdaq stocks have turned in powerful
performances in the past 12 months, but others have tanked.; Winners: Price
3/10/00, Price 3/9/01, Pct. change; Losers: Price 3/10/00, Price 3/9/01, Pct.
change

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2001


                             1920 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 10, 2001, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 387 words

HEADLINE: Cypress Bioscience uses reverse stock split

BYLINE: UNION-TRIBUNE

BODY:
 Cypress Bioscience Inc. yesterday completed a 1-for-8 reverse stock split, a
move designed to meet requirements for continued listing of the stock on the
Nasdaq Stock Market.

   The company also reported a loss of $1.6 million in the fourth quarter ended
Dec. 31, compared with a loss of $831,000 in the same period a year ago.  For
the year, the company lost $8.5 million, versus a loss of $7.8 million in 1999.

   In January, Cypress sold rights to its lead product, a device to treat
rheumatoid arthritis, to Fresenius HemoCare for $8 million in cash.  Cypress
employees involved in the column were offered jobs at Fresenius.

   After closing the Fresenius transaction, Cypress had cash and cash
equivalents of $15 million.

   In other local earnings news:

   Channell Commercial Corp. of Temecula reported lower sales and earnings for
its fourth quarter after a slowdown in the broadband telecommunications market.

   Channell's sales for the quarter ended Dec. 31 fell to $27 million, down from
$32 million for the same period the prior year.  The company's net loss was $3.2
million, or 35 cents a share, largely due to $6.1 million in special charges
linked to restructuring and equipment write-downs.

   Channell makes equipment for broadband communications companies.  The market
has been slow lately as broadband hasn't caught on as fast as analysts
predicted.

   The company has cut is work force by 10 percent worldwide and consolidated
some overseas operations.  Total sales of the fiscal year were $128 million,
compared with $120 million the prior year.  Profits were $3.9 million, or 39
cents a share, after special charges.  That's down from $9.3 million, or $1.02 a
share, the prior year.

   GenStar Therapeutics posted a loss of $2.9 million in the fourth quarter
ended Dec. 31, compared with a loss of $1.1 million in the same period a year
ago.  Revenue was $48,000, compared with $51,000 for the same period a year ago.

   For the year, the San Diego developer of gene therapy products reported a
loss of $9.6 million, compared with a loss of $3.8 million in 1999. Revenue for
the year was $162,000, compared with $118,000 in 1999.

   GenStar had $21.1 million in cash and cash equivalents at the end of the
year.


LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2001


                             1921 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 10, 2001 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 364 words

HEADLINE: Cypress Bioscience uses reverse stock split

BYLINE: UNION-TRIBUNE

BODY:

   Cypress Bioscience Inc. yesterday completed a 1-for-8 reverse stock split, a
move designed to meet requirements for continued listing of the stock on the
Nasdaq Stock Market. The company also reported a loss of $1.6 million in the
fourth quarter ended Dec. 31, compared with a loss of $831,000 in the same
period a year ago.

   For the year, the company lost $8.5 million, versus a loss of $7.8 million in
1999. In January, Cypress sold rights to its lead product, a device to treat
rheumatoid arthritis, to Fresenius HemoCare for $8 million in cash.

   Cypress employees involved in the column were offered jobs at Fresenius.
After closing the Fresenius transaction, Cypress had cash and cash equivalents
of $15 million. In other local earnings news: Channell Commercial Corp. of
Temecula reported lower sales and earnings for its fourth quarter after a
slowdown in the broadband telecommunications market. Channell's sales for the
quarter ended Dec. 31 fell to $27 million, down from $32 million for the same
period the prior year.

   The company's net loss was $3.2 million, or 35 cents a share, largely due to
$6.1 million in special charges linked to restructuring and equipment
write-downs. Channell makes equipment for broadband communications companies.

   The market has been slow lately as broadband hasn't caught on as fast as
analysts predicted. The company has cut is work force by 10 percent worldwide
and consolidated some overseas operations.

   Total sales of the fiscal year were $128 million, compared with $120 million
the prior year.

   Profits were $3.9 million, or 39 cents a share, after special charges.

   That's down from $9.3 million, or $1.02 a share, the prior year. GenStar
Therapeutics posted a loss of $2.9 million in the fourth quarter ended Dec. 31,
compared with a loss of $1.1 million in the same period a year ago.

   Revenue was $48,000, compared with $51,000 for the same period a year ago.
For the year, the San Diego developer of gene therapy products reported a loss
of $9.6 million, compared with a loss of $3.8 million in 1999. Revenue for the
year was $162,000, compared with $118,000 in 1999. GenStar had $21.1 million in
cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1922 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 8, 2001, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 652 words

HEADLINE: MARTIN F. NOLAN;
THE PLUCK OF THE IRISH

BYLINE: By MARTIN F. NOLAN

BODY:

   SAN FRANCISCO

   ST. PATRICK'S MONTH FEATURES THE GNOME VS. THE GENOME. SCIENCE SAYS THAT
99.99 PERCENT OF EVERYONE'S DNA is the same. The Irish make the most of the
other .01 percent.

   Can gene therapy cure ethnic embarrassment? The many hundreds of
Irish-Americans I know would not ingest a thimbleful of green beer. They cringe
at the self-parody March 17 suggests. The Globe's Maureen Dezell provides an
antidote to this mournful seasonal ailment in "Irish America: Coming Into
Clover."

      California is matter-of-fact about its Irish heritage. In 1843, Jasper
O'Farrell saw opportunity here in what was a village of 400 people. The Dublin
native, an engineer, drew up a distinctive grid. "The early San Francisco Irish
made their mark," writes Dezell, including O'Farrell, who "designed the streets
in what would become America's favorite tourist city." The all-Irish Bonanza
Kings made millions in the Comstock Lode, mined in 1859, while their fellow
immigrants huddled in the East. San Francisco elected an Irish-born mayor in
1867, 18 years before Boston did.

   Yet 3,000 miles prove a perspective not nearly as bracing as the nine
chapters and 220 pages of "Irish America." Dezell does not warble "Danny Boy."
She is concise and well-organized. A chapter on the dark legacy of booze, "The
Creature and Related Demons," is followed by "The Urge to Serve," a bright
portrait of the Irish presence in international relief efforts. She quotes Dr.
Tom Durant, who has worked a leprechaun's magic in refugee camps worldwide: "The
Irish are always the first ones there and the last to leave."

   Others admire the Irish more than they admire themselves. Irish-Americans
share "a remarkable instinct for survival and a culturally inbred mistrust of
their own success," constantly asking themselves, "Who do you think you are?"
The Irish are the world's champion self-censors. Dezell heaps Hibernian scorn on
self-appointed censors who "mouth off about books they haven't read and movies
they haven't seen."

   Those drunk on piety are as offensive as those drunk on green beer. Dezell
disdains what she calls "Eiresatz" and produces a roll call of real heroes.
Business leaders like Tom Flatley and Tony O'Reilly boosted the Ireland Fund.
Few Irish-Americans acted as heroically as the "Four Horsemen," who stood
against Ulster violence in 1977: Ted Kennedy, Tip O'Neill, Hugh Carey, and Pat
Moynihan. In Congress, Brian Donnelly, Joe Moakley, and Bruce Morrison pushed
for more Irish visas and persuaded Ron Mazzoli, Howard Berman, and Chuck Schumer
to help.

   In "Bridget, Open the Door," a chapter on the achievements of women, Dezell
gives Irish-Americans reason to be proud of writers like Maureen Dowd, Mary
McGrory, Eileen McNamara, Peggy Noonan, and Anna Quindlen.

   Mothers need not be Machrees. "It was Finley Peter Dunne's mother, Ellen, who
introduced the first chronicler of Irish-American life to Dickens, Scott, and
Thackeray," she writes of the creator of "Mr. Dooley," the mythical Chicago
bartender, and his patient customer, Hennessy.

   Dooley wrote about Irish-Americans 100 years ago and, like Dezell, unlocked
the genetic and/or cultural code of concealing success and ambition. Dezell
writes: "In the secular trinity of Irish-American values, loyalty and humor are
father and son. Self-deprecation is the spirit that works in mysterious ways."

   Dunne wrote: " 'Tis a good thing to be an Irishman because people think that
all an Irishman does is to laugh without a reason an' fight without an objick.
But ye an' I, Hinnisy, know these things ar-re on'y our divarsions. It's a good
thing to have people size ye up wrong. Whin they've got ye'er measure, ye're in
danger."

   "Sometimes I think we boast too much," said Mr. Hennessy.

   "Well" said Mr. Dooley, "it's on'y on Pathrick's Day we can hire others to
blow our horns f'r us."

   Martin F. Nolan's email address is martynolan@aol.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2001


                             1923 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                   MARCH 8, 2001 Thursday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 659 words

HEADLINE: BEAUMONT PIONEERS PROSTATE TREATMENT

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT FREE PRESS MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   A Canadian man sent home with no treatment options for his recurrent prostate
cancer has become the first person in the world to undergo a new combined
treatment invented by a Beaumont Hospitals team.

   The therapy is the first new option developed in years for men with recurrent
prostate tumors. It alternates courses of heat with high-dose radiation
implants, a procedure known as brachytherapy (brake-e-THER-a-pee), over an
intense three-day period.

    "Canadian doctors had nothing to offer me; now, instead of a death sentence,
I have hope," said G. Barry Shields, a retired business owner from Renfrew, near
Ottawa. He spoke at a news conference Wednesday called to announce that Beaumont
Hospital in Royal Oak had started the new treatment. Shields initially was
treated with conventional radiation and hormone-suppressing drugs following his
December 1996 prostate cancer diagnosis.

   The new therapy is in its earliest stages. Insurance varies but most likely,
most plans won't entirely cover the $27,000 cost because it is an
investigational therapy. Still, given the few options for men with recurrent
prostate cancer, it is an important beginning.

   "We need to develop more options for those patients who didn't get cured the
first time," said Dr. Alvaro Martinez, chairman of radiology oncology at
Beaumont.

   Martinez said that as many as a third of the estimated 200,000 men who will
be diagnosed with prostate cancer this year will develop a recurrence. An
estimated 31,500 men are expected to die this year of prostate cancer.

   The approach works in two stages. Both the heat and radiation pellets are
delivered with tiny needles left in place for three days in the perineum -- an
area between the scrotum and the anus. Doctors use ultrasound to guide the
needles into place and X-rays to ensure they are positioned correctly and
immobilized.

   Heat comes first, delivered for three to four hours, from a small generator
attached to a plastic belt threaded with flexible electronics.

   Radiation follows. Unlike the big machines that deliver conventional
radiation, this approach uses higher doses delivered by tiny radioactive
pellets, each the size of a grain of rice. The pellets are inserted inside
needles and are left in place for five minutes.

   In all, a man receives four 5-minute courses of high-dose radiation and 24
hours of heat. Patients receive epidural anesthesia for the procedure.

   Shields began the procedure Feb. 26. He said he felt no pain, only discomfort
from lying on his right side for three days. "It was much less onerous than I
thought," he said.

   He was discharged to recover at a Beaumont apartment. "For the first few
days, I felt like I had been hit by a truck," said Shields, who plans to return
home today.

   A $1-million U.S. Army grant, the largest awarded by the federal government
for prostate cancer research, led to the development of the heating technique by
Martinez, Dr. Peter Corry and David Gersten, a physicist and computer
specialist.

   Martinez is recognized internationally as a pioneer in brachytherapy, also
known as high-dose radiation (HDR). Only about two dozen U.S. centers offer the
approach. Martinez said long-term studies show that brachytherapy is as
effective as other options such as surgery for early-stage prostate cancer. Its
major side effects are urinary and rectal urgency, which typically subside after
a week, Martinez said.

   The team is starting slowly. It has federal approval to treat 15 men with the
approach. If this stage proves safe, the team will add a third element, gene
therapy, for a final course of treatment.

   In this type of gene therapy, doctors will deliver an altered virus through a
needle inserted into the prostate. The virus, when heated, will aim to
selectively kill tumor cells.

   * For more information, call Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak, at 248-551-7058
anytime.

   Contact PATRICIA ANSTETT at 313-222-5021 or anstett@freepress.com.

GRAPHIC: Photos by DONNA A. SELENICH, Beaumont;
Alvaro Martinez, head of radiology oncology, describes Beaumont's new procedure
at a news conference Wednesday. The patient, G. Barry Shields, above, is doing
fine so far.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2001


                             1924 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 8, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: ZONE;Pg. NI-7

LENGTH: 449 words

HEADLINE: Teen Leader; Girl honored for raising money for cancer research

BYLINE: Kelly O'Connor; COMMUNITY NEWS WRITER

BODY:
 CARMEL VALLEY -- When Carrie Hamerslag was younger, she would put her dollar
allowance in the charity tins at grocery-store checkouts.

   Now, at only 15 years old, she has helped raise $70,000 for cancer research.

   For her efforts, the sophomore at Torrey Pines High School has been chosen a
recipient of the KGTV/Channel 10 10Leadership Award.

   "If you had told me last year that I would be getting the 10Leadership Award,
I would have laughed," Carrie said.

   But her mother, Jean, wasn't surprised at all.  "She's always had good
ideas," she said.

   At the age of 12, Jean Hamerslag said, Carrie saved up her allowance for one
year and donated it to the Make-A-Wish Foundation.  "She was born with that
giving gene," Jean Hamerslag said.

   The selection committee at KGTV chooses one individual each week to receive
the 10Leadership Award.  Those chosen are community members who make a
difference in the lives of others.

   The day after Christmas two years ago, Carrie felt the reality of cancer when
her mom was diagnosed with ovarian cancer.

   Four months later, the Hamerslags found out she was misdiagnosed.

   But Carrie had been inspired by her family's trying time and decided to find
a way to help support cancer research.  She now has a fund in her name -- The
Carrie Hamerslag Cancer Research Fund at the Salk Institute in La Jolla has
raised $70,000 to date.

   "This was a really hard time for my family," Carrie said.  "I would like to
prevent other families from going through what we went through."

   In one evening last November, Carrie raised $43,000 through a silent auction
at the Salk Institute that featured her mother's ceramic artwork.  The proceeds
of the auction went to gene therapy cancer research being done by Dr. Inder
Verma at the institute.

   Anne Mound, director of fund-raising at the Salk Institute, said the
donations are still coming in.  "We just got one for $1,000 the other day," she
said.

   The money goes to support the post-doctoral fellows at the institute.  One
has already been hired to help Verma with his research.

   Carrie said the 10Leadership Award is a reminder to her of what she can
accomplish.

   "A lot of people my age don't think they can make a difference," she said.
"That's what I thought for a while.  Then I did it and proved I could."

   Carrie plans to continue to raise money for cancer research and explore new
fund-raising projects.  Now that she has one auction under her belt, she would
like to plan another that this time includes art work by local artists in
addition to her mother's work.

   Do you have a story idea for Carmel Valley?  Contact Kelly O'Connor at (760)
476-8221 or kelly.oconnor@uniontrib.com.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; Nelvin Cepeda / Union-Tribune; Carrie Hamerslag placed ceramic
boots created by her mother, Jean, on display for an auction at the Salk
Institute in La Jolla in November. Carrie has received the KGTV/Channel 10
10Leadership Award for her fundraising for cancer research.

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2001


                             1925 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 8, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: ZONE ; Pg. NI-7

LENGTH: 438 words

HEADLINE: Teen Leader;
Girl honored for raising money for cancer research

BYLINE: Kelly O'Connor, COMMUNITY NEWS WRITER

DATELINE: CARMEL VALLEY

BODY:

   CARMEL VALLEY -- When Carrie Hamerslag was younger, she would put her dollar
allowance in the charity tins at grocery-store checkouts. Now, at only 15 years
old, she has helped raise $70,000 for cancer research. For her efforts, the
sophomore at Torrey Pines High School has been chosen a recipient of the
KGTV/Channel 10 10Leadership Award. "If you had told me last year that I would
be getting the 10Leadership Award, I would have laughed," Carrie said. But her
mother, Jean, wasn't surprised at all.

   "She's always had good ideas," she said. At the age of 12, Jean Hamerslag
said, Carrie saved up her allowance for one year and donated it to the
Make-A-Wish Foundation.

   "She was born with that giving gene," Jean Hamerslag said. The selection
committee at KGTV chooses one individual each week to receive the 10Leadership
Award.

   Those chosen are community members who make a difference in the lives of
others. The day after Christmas two years ago, Carrie felt the reality of cancer
when her mom was diagnosed with ovarian cancer. Four months later, the
Hamerslags found out she was misdiagnosed. But Carrie had been inspired by her
family's trying time and decided to find a way to help support cancer research.

   She now has a fund in her name -- The Carrie Hamerslag Cancer Research Fund
at the Salk Institute in La Jolla has raised $70,000 to date. "This was a really
hard time for my family," Carrie said.

   "I would like to prevent other families from going through what we went
through." In one evening last November, Carrie raised $43,000 through a silent
auction at the Salk Institute that featured her mother's ceramic artwork. The
proceeds of the auction went to gene therapy cancer research being done by Dr.
Inder Verma at the institute. Anne Mound, director of fund-raising at the Salk
Institute, said the donations are still coming in.

   "We just got one for $1,000 the other day," she said. The money goes to
support the post-doctoral fellows at the institute.

   One has already been hired to help Verma with his research. Carrie said the
10Leadership Award is a reminder to her of what she can accomplish. "A lot of
people my age don't think they can make a difference," she said. "That's what I
thought for a while.

   Then I did it and proved I could." Carrie plans to continue to raise money
for cancer research and explore new fund-raising projects.

   Now that she has one auction under her belt, she would like to plan another
that this time includes art work by local artists in addition to her mother's
work. Do you have a story idea for Carmel Valley?

   Contact Kelly O'Connor at (760) 476-8221 or kelly.oconnor@uniontrib.com.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Carrie Hamerslag placed ceramic boots created by her
mother, Jean, on display for an auction at the Salk Institute in La Jolla in
November. Carrie has received the KGTV/Channel 10 10Leadership Award for her
fundraising for cancer research.; PHOTOBY: Nelvin Cepeda / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1926 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            March 7, 2001 Wednesday

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1665 words

HEADLINE: Bio-medical firm touted as wave of future in N.O.;
Business enterprise uses local research

BYLINE: By Stewart Yerton; Business writer

BODY:

   When the Tulane University Health Sciences Center dedicates its new $21
million Center for Gene Therapy today, the event also will usher in a new
private, for-profit company spawned from technology developed by the center's
director.

   The company is in its infancy. It is so new, in fact, that it does not even
have a name. Its main backer, businessman Robert Bender, says his initial
investment amounts to only about $300,000. And the company's market is limited
by its product: a test for a bone disease with an estimated 20,000 known
victims.

   Still, economic development officials and civic leaders say Bender's company
is helping to lay the groundwork for New Orleans' economic future. The company,
they say, is an example of the sort of bio-medical companies New Orleans has an
opportunity to nurture by building on work done by scientists at Tulane and
Louisiana State University medical centers.

   The test at the heart of Bender's company was developed by a team led by Dr.
Darwin Prockop, the director of Tulane's Center for Gene Therapy. Prockop and
his colleagues, Dr. Leena Ala-Kokko and Dr. Jarmo Korkko, invented the tests
while at MCP Hahnemann University and Thomas Jefferson University. Bender has
licensing agreements with those institutions to use the technology for a royalty
fee; Bender will run the company that will sell the tests to patients.

   Tulane will benefit because Bender's company, tentatively called Collagene
Diagnostics, will hire Prockop's team at Tulane, which will conduct the tests on
the lab's equipment when not conducting basic scientific research.

   State and local officials are bullish on this kind of venture. In fact, the
state has committed $44 million over five years for operations and capital
investment for the Louisiana Gene Therapy Consortium, a private, nonprofit
corporation that supports gene therapy research at several facilities statewide:
Tulane, LSU, LSU in Shreveport and primate research centers in St. Tammany
Parish and New Iberia.

   The Tulane center has received support from the consortium, as well as the
National Institutes of Health, Tulane's Health Sciences Center and HCA-The
Healthcare Co.

   "This is the kind of thing that we were hoping this Gene Therapy Research
Consortium would do and begin to spin off," Sam LeBlanc III, general counsel of
the Gene Therapy Consortium, said of Bender's company.

   "It's important to New Orleans because it shows that the Gene Therapy
Consortium has credibility," LeBlanc said. Bender "is coming here for one
reason: He's choosing Louisiana because he believes Prockop and his group are on
to something."

   Brian Schwaner, a spokesman for the New Orleans Regional Chamber of Commerce,
said university researchers provide two tools with which to leverage private
investment: federal grant money for research and the intellectual property
produced by such research.

   "The potential here is greater than anybody thinks," he said. "You've got a
Congress that is very disposed toward appropriating funds for research,
particularly in the health care field. You have a concentration of mind power
here. What you haven't had is the real match to light the fuse on the dynamite."

   The company bodes well for downtown New Orleans, said Roy Rodney Jr., 2001
chairman of the Downtown Development District, an economic development
organization that promotes investment in the Tulane Avenue medical corridor and
other downtown locales.

   "This is a situation that proves if the state gives some interest in downtown
New Orleans, they will be successful in their economic development activities,"
Rodney said. "Downtown New Orleans is the most attractive asset in the entire
state of Louisiana."

   Julio Guichard, Mayor Marc Morial's executive assistant for economic
development, said the joint efforts of Tulane and LSU are laying the groundwork
for a new industry, just as civic leaders laid the groundwork for the tourism
industry 20 years ago.

   "I think we're off to a good start," Guichard said.

Science to stock market

   The 14,000-square-foot center houses Prockop's team of 33 scientists. That
number is expected to grow to 60 in the near future, said Brian Butcher, the
center's associate director.

   More scientists mean more federal grant money and more opportunities to
develop technology that could have commercial applications, something that
Prockop has shown an almost uncanny knack for doing.

   For much of his almost 50-year career, Prockop's research has focused on
collagen. A main ingredient of bones and tendons, collagen is used by surgeons
to anchor artificial joints, among other things. Chemists refine collagen to
make gelatin, which has a host of medical applications, including
gelatin-coating for capsules.

   Typically, doctors and drug companies use collagen from pigs and cows. But
while at Thomas Jefferson University, Prockop devised ways to use a human gene
to grow human collagen. Prockop has licensed this technology to the San
Francisco company FibroGen Inc., which has refined the technique.

   Armed with Prockop's science, FibroGen has raised almost $100 million,
including a recent $56 million financing round from the parent of the Franklin
Templeton Investment funds. The company has its own building in the bio-tech
capital of South San Francisco.

   FibroGen thinks its human collagen can replace the animal-source material and
alleviate consumer and regulatory concerns about using such material,
particularly important in countries where Creutzfeld-Jakob disease, or mad cow
disease, is a problem.

   Prockop's collagen research led him to discover the genetic defect that
causes osteogenesis imperfecta, commonly known as brittle bone disease. The
ailment usually shows up in early childhood, when infants and young children
inexplicably begin breaking bones.

   Prockop identified the gene defect that causes the disease and with his
colleagues, including Ala-Kokko and Korkko, designed a genetic test to diagnose
the gene deficiency. Bender has licensed this test.

   Bender acknowledged that the market for the brittle bone test is unlikely to
reach the size of the market for collagen. But he said the market is big enough
to support the start-up company. Initially, Bender expects the cash flow from
the tests to be about $500,000 annually, which will almost cover the company's
operating costs: an unusual situation for a bio-medical start-up.

   A main market is parents of children with the affliction. Such parents often
are wrongly accused of abusing the young victims, and the tests will let the
parents clear themselves of the abuse accusations.

   Beyond the financial value, Butcher said, the tests have a tremendous
humanistic one. "Imagine if you took your kid to the hospital because he broke
his arm and they accused you of beating him up," Butcher said.

   Down the road, Bender said, the test might have applications for diagnosing
other, more common collagen-related diseases, such as sciatica, a lower-back
ailment often cited in workman's compensation claims. If the test proves to have
such an application, it could be used to settle insurance disputes involving
back injury.

   Depending on the range of applications it develops, the company could be able
to tap a market that would support annual sales of $2 million to $20 million,
said Bender, who is also chairman of Select Therapeutics Inc., a publicly held
bio-technology firm in Woburn, Mass. Recently listed on the American Stock
Exchange, Select Therapeutics has a market value of $32 million.

   Prockop is not the only Tulane scientist whose research has attracted
investment. In fact, Tulane ranked ninth among private universities in revenue
produced by patent licensing deals with out-of-state firms, according to the
association of University Technology Managers. Tulane made $7.7 million from
such deals in 1999, said Carla Fishman, executive director for research
administration and technology development at Tulane.

   That ranked Tulane ahead of prestigious universities such as Washington
University in St. Louis, Duke, Vanderbilt and Northwestern. The 1999 data is the
latest available, Fishman said.

   Such license deals provide revenue for Tulane but have not nurtured a
bio-medical commercial center in New Orleans. That's because patent rights have
been licensed to out-of-state companies that have the capital to undergo the
risky and expensive task of developing basic research until it can go to the
market.

   That trend may change, Fishman said.

   "I think you will see more venture creation coming out of here rather than
strict licensing where we, if you will, pass the baton on to other companies,"
she said.

One step more

   For his part, Prockop hardly is stopping with the brittle bone test. The
assay grew from early studies that detected the gene. Prockop now is conducting
research on gene-based treatments of brittle bone disease; he is conducting a
clinical trial in Memphis.

   The treatment uses regenerative cells, called stem cells, to deliver to the
victims healthy cells without the genetic defect. Prockop's therapy uses stem
cells taken from the hips of donors instead of controversial fetal stem cells.

   Prockop also is researching the use of adult stem cells to treat Parkinson's
disease, Alzheimer's disease, osteoarthritis and osteoporosis.

   Meanwhile at LSU Health Sciences Center, researchers are taking a different
approach to gene therapy, researching the use of viruses as the carriers, or
vectors, of healthy cells to the patients.

   Bender and his scientist partners are optimistic about New Orleans'
opportunities.

   "When you start attracting the capital and the know-how, you start attracting
other companies," Ala-Kokko said.

   "That's what we're looking at, trying to seed something that can serve as a
commercial nucleus," Bender said. "That's what everybody's hoping to get out of
this."

   . . . . . . .

Stewart Yerton can be reached at (504) 826-3416 or at syerton@timespicayune.com

GRAPHIC: STAFF PHOTOS BY MATT ROSE Medical research technician Sheyla Orengo
prepares blood samples for DNA extraction at Tulane University Health Sciences
Center's new $21 million Center for Gene Therapy, which is being dedicated
today. Robert Bender, chief executive of Select Therapeutics Inc., a
bio-technology firm in Woburn, Mass., is planning a business partnership with
Dr. Darwin Prockop, the director of Tulane's Center for Gene Therapy. Bender is
developing a private, for-profit company based on technology developed by
Prockop's team.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2001


                             1927 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     March 6, 2001, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg. F-5, RESEARCH FRONT

LENGTH: 1251 words

HEADLINE: AN INNOVATIVE SEARCH FOR A CURE TO LOU GEHRIG'S DISEASE;
BROTHERS SET UP A FOUNDATION TO FUND OVERLOOKED TREATMENT POSSIBILITIES

BYLINE: BROTHERS SET UP A FOUNDATION TO FUND OVERLOOKED TREATMENT;
POSSIBILITIES; JAMIE TALAN, NEWSDAY

BODY:


   Late last year, eight patients with a fatal neurological disorder gathered in
Newton, Mass., with their loved ones and a handful of scientists for a crash
course: ALS 101. Their goal: to learn everything they could about amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease.

   Their instructor was Jamie Heywood, a 34-year-old engineer turned teacher,
scientist and pharmaceutical entrepreneur who, in 1998, took his own course when
his brother Stephen was diagnosed.

   Heywood quit his job at a neuroscience think tank in California and headed
home to Massachusetts to take care of his brother. He's now taken on the task of
finding a cure for the disease, which strips away the body's motor neurons and
leaves its victims trapped inside their bodies. A progressive paralysis takes
hold, and patients die within an average of five years of diagnosis, when the
motor neurons that guide respiration give out.

   "The thing about Jamie," says Stephen, "is that he can be very focused, but
not for a long period of time." But as Stephen Heywood's disease has progressed,
his older brother's determination has not lost its fire. His efforts remain
focused on trying to produce treatments for the 30,000 people diagnosed with ALS
-- a disease with no known cure.

   The Heywoods are a new breed of patient advocates: people who want to speed
the science along by raising money that allows researchers to pursue ideas that
might not qualify for scarce federal funding. These brothers have gone a step
further: They started the ALS Therapy Development Foundation, and hired
scientists to carry out the studies.

   The brothers, supported by their parents, are collaborating on a project
called FDA 2000, a plan developed by Harvard's Dr. Steve Gullans to test all
1,500 drugs approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to see if any can
work against ALS. This is the first time scientists have taken such an approach.

   The goal is a shortcut to an effective ALS drug; the development of new
compounds can take more than a decade. So Jamie Heywood became executive
director of the foundation and began, in effect, to build a pharmaceutical
company from the outside in: hire the scientists, design the studies, stock up
on mice. "This is definitely the way to go," he said.

   And he knows he's racing against time. "We can now screen thousands of drugs
and play it backward. Anything that is promising in mice becomes stunningly
important as a candidate in human ALS."

   Heywood and his staff -- including six scientists -- work closely with
Gullans, who turned his attention to ALS when a relative was diagnosed. It was
Gullans who proposed the radical approach of "opening the medicine cabinet and
testing every drug."

   Gullans is funded in his new career by Heywood's organization and Project
ALS, another research and advocacy group started by the Estess sisters of New
York City, one of whom has ALS. Gullans is hoping that medicines already in the
pipeline could have an impact not just on ALS but also on other neurological
disorders.

   A 'hit list' of drugs

   The first round of tests targeted neuronal cells primed to die a death
similar to ALS motor neurons. (Motor neurons themselves are too finicky to use
in testing.) The scientists identified about 30 promising drugs. Further testing
found eight of the 30 were potent enough to warrant more tests.

   That's where Jamie Heywood comes in. He hired the scientists and opened two
laboratories in Boston, where hundreds of mice engineered to develop ALS are
going to be tested with Gullans' "hit list" of drugs.

   Gullans said it is too early to release the names of the medicines.

   Already, research suggests that a massive inflammatory system attack occurs
in the diseased motor neurons. Scientists who have analyzed spinal cord tissue
from ALS patients have found the same thing: reactive astrocytes and microglia,
evidence of an inflammatory process. Gullans and others now believe there is a
powerful inflammatory component that could be driving the motor neurons -- the
cells that crowd the spinal cord and receive messages from the brain that
coordinate movement -- to death.

   When Heywood set out to find a cure for ALS, what he read was discouraging.
Many medicines had been tried, all unsuccessfully. Then he read about glutamate
transporter protein, which seemed to be missing in the spinal tissue of ALS
patients. He called Dr. Jeffrey Rothstein, an ALS researcher at Johns Hopkins
Medical Institutes whose work on the gene that produces the glutamate
transporter protein convinced Heywood that gene therapy to repair the glutamate
transporter system was a potential cure for his brother. An animal study
suggested that the concept would work.

   With Rothstein's paper in hand, Heywood called Dr. Matthew During, the
director of the Gene Therapy Center at Jefferson Medical College in
Philadelphia. Years earlier, During had conducted gene therapy trials on
newborns with Canavan's disease, a fatal neurogenerative disorder that causes
damage to the brain's white matter. The geneticist worked with Heywood and
Rothstein to devise a study, and the trial was approved by Jefferson Medical
College's Institutional Review Board. But it wound up on hold after Jesse
Gelsinger, a teen-ager with a rare metabolic disorder, died in September 1999 in
a gene therapy experiment just miles from During's lab, at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   Stem cell therapy has shown promise in a number of neurological disorders.
Rothstein has pursued stem cells' role in ALS, setting sights on placing them in
the environment of the spine to replace the lost motor neurons. Even if these
newly dividing cells only nourished the patient's existing motor neurons with
enriching growth factors, scientists say, it could slow the disease process and
extend the lives of patients.

   In addition, During and his colleagues are working on vaccines to protect the
motor neurons from succumbing to the disease.

   Rainbow treatments

   At the ALS 101 course, Stephen talked to fellow patients about some of the
medicines he's been taking. He'd been involved in an experimental drug trial of
BDNF, or brain-derived growth factor, supported by Amgen Pharmaceuticals. He
tried a Chinese herb, one of the substances that protected the neurons from
dying in a test-tube, but the tar-like substance tasted awful and had to be
consumed three times a day. He's taking an anti-inflammatory COX-2 inhibitor as
well as creatine, which has been shown in animals to protect the motor neurons.
He added Prozac, shown in studies to have neuroprotective effects.

   These days, Jamie Heywood sounds more like a scientist than an engineer. He
and During have written a scientific paper and have submitted it to a medical
journal. Gullans and Heywood are getting the FDA 2000 list in shape to go online
in the next few months. The list will include information about each of the
medicines and supporting data, Heywood says.

   Stephen Heywood says it is hard to say what treatments work and what don't.
Today, two years after his diagnosis, he spends most of his time in a
wheelchair, a trained carpenter directing from the sidelines. He's gotten
married and had a son. He continues to help his brother run the foundation,
whose Web site is www.als-tdf.org/.

   Jamie Heywood thinks that he has already made a difference in his brother's
life. Stephen agrees. "My brother thinks big. What he has done doesn't surprise
me. If there's an answer, he'll find it."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Photo: Murray Becker/Associated Press: Lou Gehrig wipes away a
tear; during a tribute to him at Yankee Stadium on July 4, 1939. The great New
York; first baseman's playing career was cut short by amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis,; also commonly known as Lou Gehrig's disease.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2001


                             1928 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             March 6, 2001 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 715 words

HEADLINE: Discovering Lab Space;
Scheer Partners Finds a Niche Meeting Md. Biotech Firms' Real Estate Needs

BYLINE: Terence Chea, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    Ashortage of laboratory space has Maryland biotechnology companies
scrambling to find room for their microscopes, gene analyzers and protein
purifiers. But the tight market has created a fresh business opportunity for at
least one real estate firm.

    At a time when demand for "wet lab" facilities far outstrips supply,
Rockville-based Scheer Partners Inc. has carved out a profitable slice of the
local real estate market by helping to ease the biotech industry's space crunch.
As companies expand, contract and get bought out, the firm has played a key role
in many of the sector's biggest real estate deals.

    The firm helped fast-growing start-ups such as Avalon Pharmaceuticals Inc.
and Aptus Genomics Inc. find larger facilities when they outgrew their
incubators. At the other end of the life cycle, Scheer has been hired by the new
owners of Life Technologies Inc. and Genetic Therapy Inc. to dispose of surplus
properties after the local firms were acquired.

    "We consider ourselves part of the biotech community," said Ken Berkman,
senior vice president at Scheer Partners. "The growth of the industry has helped
us grow our organization."

    Scheer Partners is one of several local real estate firms that help biotech
companies locate and lease lab facilities. But it has tried to go beyond the
usual duties of showing properties and negotiating leases.

    Three years ago, Scheer launched a biotech services unit to help companies
redesign space to meet their needs, manage labs and equipment, and navigate a
complex web of safety and environmental regulations. The firm, which has 35
employees, has hired a dozen biologists and engineers to work with clients to
create lab facilities tailored to the demands of their research.

    "We want to make sure their facility . . . helps them achieve their business
objectives," said Pat Larrabee, director of the biotech unit. She previously
managed facilities at Crop Genetics International Corp., a Columbia firm that
was acquired by California-based Biosys Inc. six years ago. "We take as many
responsibilities away from the researchers as possible, so they can focus on
their science," she said.

    The biotech division is overseeing the construction of new facilities for
Large Scale Proteomics Corp. in Germantown and Covance Laboratories Inc. in
Chantilly. It's helping Human Genome Sciences Inc. and MedImmune Inc., two of
Maryland's most successful biotech companies, draw up plans for new corporate
campuses.

    "They have a real understanding of what elements are needed to build a
facility that meets a biotech company's requirements," said Constance Seniff,
vice president of operations at Large Scale Proteomics, which just moved into a
new 53,000-square-foot protein research facility. "You're spared the pain of the
learning curve because you can rely on people who have already had this
experience."

    Scheer Partners is capitalizing on the industry's growth at a time when lab
space is scarce and available facilities rarely meet the needs of new occupants.
Berkman believes Maryland's vacancy rate for lab space hovers around 1 percent.
He estimates that the state, which has about 10 million square feet of lab
space, is 500,000 to 750,000 square feet short of the industry's needs.

    Although the sector faces a chronic space shortage, real estate developers
aren't willing to build lab space without first securing tenants or buyers
because of the high costs, driven by the specialized equipment and ventilation
systems biotech firms need to conduct research. While basic office space costs
about $ 30 per square foot to build, wet lab space typically runs about $ 150
per square foot and sometimes more than $ 500 per square foot for manufacturing
facilities.

    When Scheer and his partner, Chuck Kusbit, launched the firm 10 years ago,
biotech deals made up less than 2 percent of the business, Scheer said. But in
the mid-1990s, the firm watched former clients such as MedImmune and Genetic
Therapy make successful stock offerings and bring products to the market. It
began to focus more on the emerging biotech sector.

    "It became apparent to me that biotech was going to be one of the economic
engines driving the country and the state in the next century," Scheer said.

   More stories on BIOTECH/MEDICAL online at Washtech.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2002


                             1929 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              March 5, 2001 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part S; View Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 563 words

HEADLINE: SAY 'AAAH';
YOUR HEALTH ONLINE;
WEB SITES THAT SEEK CLINICAL TRIAL CLIENTS

BYLINE: Benedict Carey

BODY:

   Acurian.com http://www.acurian.com

   Background: Founded in 1998 by health-care executives and a group of venture
capitalists who focus on health care, Acurian attempts to find patients and
investigators for new clinical trials. Its customers include drug manufacturers
and biotech companies.

   What Works: One of the strongest features here is a page called All About
Clinical Trials, which explains what clinical trials are, why they're important
and what's meant by the various phases, from I and II (small studies of a drug
or treatment's safety and effectiveness) through phase III (large-scale studies
of all the risks and benefits) and beyond.

   What Doesn't: You have to register with your e-mail address to even browse
the trials, and it's not clear which trials the site lists. Are these only the
trials being run by the site's clients? Do they include all government-sponsored
projects? One thing is certain: Acurian is providing only a portion of what's
out there. If you searched for trials in late February, under the categories of
gastroenterology, hematology or ophthalmology (to take just a few), you got only
a message saying, "You have selected a therapeutic area that is still under
development." Acurian's general information about diseases also needs
development.

   Veritas Medicine

   http://www.veritasmedicine.com

   Background: Veritas was launched last year by venture capitalists and a group
of Boston-area doctors, many of them affiliated with Harvard University School
of Medicine. The site says it provides "information on clinical trials and
treatment options for over 40 serious, chronic medical conditions, including
breast cancer, diabetes, hepatitis C, HIV-AIDS, Alzheimer's and rheumatoid
arthritis." Its clients also include big pharmaceutical companies and biotechs.

   What Works: Doctors work here, for starters, and they're paying attention.
The site is well organized, with information where you need it. Interested in
diabetes? Click on that disease and you will be dropped into the capable hands
of Dr. Evan Rosen, instructor at Harvard Medical School, whose page will tell
you the basics, such as what diabetes is, its current treatments and the main
areas being investigated, such as islet cell transplantation, gene therapy and
new drug development. When you're ready to search for trials, Veritas will ask
for relevant facts (age, type of disease, medications, for example) and list all
trials for which you qualify, outlining what investigators are trying to do and
what's required to participate.

   What Doesn't: Here again, the site doesn't make clear which trials you're
being shown and whether the list is comprehensive. According to Veritas' chief
executive, Dr. Joseph Avellone, the site has all 1,200-odd government-sponsored
trials online and will add hundreds more private experiments over the coming
months. It would be nice to have this information available on the site, though,
especially for people who want to enter a trial but don't qualify for anything
on Veritas. The site could also make its considerable expertise more available
to users; for now, there's no convenient Ask An Expert feature for specific
questions.

   *

   Shopping for a clinical trial online is like shopping for anything else: You
have to poke around. Other sites to check include the National Institute of
Health's listing, at clinicaltrials.gov; and Centerwatch.com.

GRAPHIC:  (no caption)
 (no caption)

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2001


                             1930 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              March 5, 2001 Monday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 343 words

HEADLINE: Harnessing killers

BODY:

   It's a fascinating idea: defanging deadly microbes and transforming them into
harmless delivery systems for gene therapy.

   This bold strategy is emerging in the field of gene therapy, and it holds
promise for people who suffer from cystic fibrosis, an inherited disease that
causes chronic lung and digestive problems.

   Cystic fibrosis patients have a life expectancy of about 30 years, and a cure
would be a godsend for them and their families.

   But the cure starts to sound a little scary when it involves names like
"ebola" and "HIV."

   Those are the viruses that scientists in Philadelphia think can deliver a
corrected gene to enable cystic fibrosis patients to manufacture a crucial
protein. People with the disease have inherited flawed copies of the gene from
their parents.

   The researchers say that they've removed the parts of the viruses that make
them deadly but preserved those that allow the microbes to get into the body and
stay there. The resulting hybrid virus combines ebola's ability to attach itself
to lung tissue with HIV's staying power. The next step is to attach the critical
gene. If they succeed, the resulting hybrid would be sprayed directly into
patients' lungs.

   The approach is new, controversial and, thus far, untested. Researchers are
also somewhat divided over how safe it is. Robert Gallo, the co-discoverer of
HIV, put it succintly: "I wouldn't want this thing put into me."

   It won't be easy to get past such objections, nor should it be. Something
this new and potentially risky should be approached with great caution, both by
scientists and by regulators who may eventually be asked to approve the
treatment.

   But older medical technologies doubtless sounded equally radical when they
were new -- like injecting people with weakened or killed viruses. The day may
come when an ebola-HIV hybrid treatment is no more worrisome than getting a dose
of polio vaccine.

   But even though it's important to develop new treatments and cures, the
bottom line has to be safety for patients and researchers, not speed.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2001


                             1931 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                  March 4, 2001 Sunday, 1N/5/6/7 SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 399 words

HEADLINE: CURE SOUGHT IN BLEND OF KILLER VIRUSES

BYLINE: RICK WEISS; Washington Post

BODY:

   Scientists in Philadelphia have combined pieces of two of the world's
deadliest microbes, the ebola virus and the virus that causes AIDS, to make a
hybrid virus they hope will someday cure cystic fibrosis when sprayed into
patients' lungs.

    The idea of intentionally infecting someone with a blend of the two killer
viruses may seem bizarre, scientists said, but the new creation lacks key
components needed to cause disease. The goal is to make a virus with ebola's
unusual talent for attaching to lung cells and the AIDS virus's exceptional
ability to persist in the body, then use that new virus to deliver curative
genes to patients with the lung disease.

   The hybrid virus, not yet ready for human testing, is the most extreme and
controversial example of a new strategy emerging in the field of gene therapy,
which aims to cure diseases by giving people new genes. After a decade of
failures using other methods to get helpful genes into patients' cells,
researchers are turning to some of the world's most notorious microbes as tiny
vehicles for delivering therapeutic payloads.

    Hybrids made from the human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV, and the ebola
virus, which causes the fatal bleeding disease featured in the nonfiction
thriller "The Hot Zone," are not to be feared, according to the University of
Pennsylvania researchers who made them. The team removed the parts of both
viruses most responsible for their deadliness. Now they plan to add copies of
the gene that cystic fibrosis patients lack.

    Some researchers agreed that the approach was safe. "It's not even HIV
anymore, it's just pieces," said W. French Anderson, a gene therapy pioneer at
the University of Southern California. "And ebola sounds horrible, but this has
nothing to do with the ebola virus that knocks out all your defense mechanisms
and kills you. Those genes are all gone."

    But others said they were not so sure. "I wouldn't want this thing put into
me," said Robert Gallo, director of the Institute of Human Virology in Baltimore
and co-discoverer of HIV.

    It's possible that the new virus could prompt an immunological response
severe enough to harm the patient, Gallo said. Equally frightening, he said, the
hybrid virus might combine with wild HIV to create an entirely new kind of
virus.

    The new work comes from Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy and its
director, James Wilson.


LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2001


                             1932 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     March 04, 2001, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: ZEST; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1034 words

HEADLINE: Tallying the score at halftime in the genome game

BYLINE: BARBARA LISS; Barbara Liss lives in Houston and is a frequent reviewer.

BODY:

   'CRACKING THE GENOME: Inside the Race to Unlock Human DNA.' By Kevin Davies.
Free Press, $ 25.

    IN the spring of 1953, shortly before his historic paper describing the
double helix appeared in the journal Nature, James Watson wrote to a friend, "It
is a strange model and embodies several unusual features. However, since DNA is
an unusual substance, we are not hesitant in being bold."

   Bold does not begin to cover the accomplishments in gene research since
Watson and Francis Crick discovered the structure of the hereditary chemical DNA
and enabled science to understand how genetic instructions are written and
transmitted from one generation to the next. Now, almost 50 years after that
breakthrough, researchers have sequenced the genome, the 3 billion pairs of
nucleotide bases that make up human DNA.

   For Kevin Davies, who is both molecular geneticist and science journal
editor, sequencing the genome - the blueprint for building human life -
represents "perhaps the defining moment in the evolution of mankind." But not so
fast with the celebration. In Cracking the Genome he informs us that it is only
halftime in the game. In the second half, our challenge will be to understand
what the sequence actually means.

   Davies identifies the promises inherent in unlocking the genome. Within 20
years he predicts we will experience a revolution in medicine. Researchers will
be able to locate and identify disease genes and possibly devise strategies to
prevent and treat them. People will carry their personal DNA around on DVD,
complete with information about their genetic susceptibility to particular
diseases and tolerance to drugs.

   Gene therapies will come into their own, individually tailored to alleviate
potential side effects. And as controversial as this seems now, we will be able
to create "designer babies" by selecting traits for our children in embryo.

   Davies discusses the efforts to create genetic databases of geographically
isolated populations to identify certain disease genes. He spotlights the
fascinating enterprise going forward in Iceland where one man and his
biotechnology company are close to acquiring the genome of the entire island
population.

   Beyond its potential for changing medicine, Davies argues, the genome holds
the key to our evolutionary past. He supports the popular Eve theory that modern
humans evolved about 200,000 years ago from a small founding population that
left Africa in one migration. This issue is not as settled as Davies suggests.
Evidence exists for many migrations out of Africa, with those groups then mixing
with more ancient human types that eventually lost out to natural selection.

   Most of Cracking the Genome concentrates on the race to complete the genome
sequence. Davies establishes for us the social and political context in which
the competition developed between the Human Genome Project, led by Francis
Collins, and Celera Genomics, the enterprise run by scientist-entrepreneur Craig
Venter - "Darth Venter" to his detractors (it seems no one but Venter's
shareholders like the idea of his getting rich).

   In 1998, eight years into the project, the HGP had sequenced only 3 percent
of the genome. That's when Venter announced he would take on the assignment and,
with a measly 300 million corporate dollars, sequence the genome within three
years. He was counting on a simplified "whole-genome shotgun sequencing"
technique to make good his plan.

   If you were to guess the winner of a contest between a $ 3 billion federally
funded 15-year project employing thousands of researchers in hundreds of labs
around the world and a private biotech company focused on lucrative gene patents
and equipped with an innovative supercomputer and a motto, "Speed matters.
Discovery can't wait," whom would you pick?

   It's an interesting question, one that remains unanswered because the two
have agreed to downplay the competition. Davies thinks Celera is winning in the
eyes of the media. On June 26, 2000, Collins and Venter jointly announced the
completion of a rough draft of the genome sequence. But no one involved believes
the race between the public and private projects is ended.

   Davies discusses some hard questions that divide the camps. Who will own the
genome information? Unlike Venter, Collins insists it belongs in the public
domain. Still, Davies thinks Venter gets a bum rap in the dispute over DNA
patenting. Celera is not the leading collector of human gene patents, he writes,
"and most likely never will be." He airs the pharmaceutical argument: Without
gene patents protection, the industry has no incentive to invest in research to
bring a drug to market.

   On the issue of safeguarding genetic privacy rights, Davies says nothing new.
"Without effective legislation," he writes, "the risk of discrimination in
seeking health insurance and employment is very real."

   The author's position as then-editor of the journal Nature Genetics gave him
insider status. Everyone who ever put on a white coat eagerly provided sound
bites - far too many - for the book. And if high school biology class gave you
sweaty palms, this book will finish you off. Look at Matt Ridley's Genome for a
more readable guide to gene science.

   The problem may be that Davies can't decide whether he's writing for the pop
culture crowd or biologists. He veers from breezy comments about actor Jeff
Goldblum to lectures on chimpanzee DNA. Mindful that genetics can be tough
going, he applies what he calls the "Hawking Rule." (Stephen Hawking's editor
once warned the physicist to tone down the technical writing because "every
equation will halve sales.")

   Overall, Davies wants us to see science as a human endeavor: Real people -
ambitious, cunning, envious, dedicated - are launched on this amazing adventure.
But was it all so ironic? Davies must think straightforward writing as well as
equations deflates science-book sales. He is as dedicated to the idea of irony -
the strange twist of events - as O. Henry ever was.

   Finally, though, it is not O. Henry who comes to mind. It is Aldous Huxley.
Cracking the Genome may be a latter-day Brave New World, one in which, with
luck, we all turn out to be Alpha pluses.


TYPE: -LINKS-; Book Review

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2001


                             1933 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              March 4, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 3; Column 1; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 682 words

HEADLINE: MARKET WATCH;
A Year Later, Time to Think About Buying Again

BYLINE:  By ALEX BERENSON

BODY:

   TIME to be greedy.

        A year ago, investors were wise to be afraid. Between October 1998 and
March 2000, the technology-fattened Nasdaq composite index had more than
tripled. After a decade of gains, information technology stocks were
extraordinarily expensive. Cisco Systems, then the world's most valuable
company, traded at almost 200 times earnings. Newer companies had
multibillion-dollar valuations, though they had no profits -- and in some cases
almost no sales.

    The broader stock market was also overvalued. One year ago, the Standard &
Poor's 500-stock index traded at almost 30 times its expected earnings for 2000,
offering investors an earnings yield of barely 3 percent. At the time, long-term
bonds were paying more than 6 percent. Usually, earnings yields are much more
closely linked to interest rates. The gap indicated investors were overpaying
for stocks.

   So March 2000 was a time for fear. But greed ruled the markets.

   Investors, even professional money managers and analysts, worried more about
the risk of not making money than the risk of losing it. "I certainly became
trained to always ask the question, 'What am I missing on the upside?' " said
Henry Blodget, the Internet analyst at Merrill Lynch.

   Now everything has changed. The Nasdaq has fallen 58 percent from its peak,
and many technology companies are down much more. The S.& P. 500 is off almost
20 percent, the not-so-magic number that defines a bear market. Wall Street
seems locked in a never-ending stream of earnings warnings and layoff
announcements.

   Just this week, Oracle, Gap and Nike said their profits would fall short of
forecasts, JDS Uniphase announced the layoff of 3,000 workers, and eToys said it
would file for bankruptcy. The debate over whether the economy is slowing has
turned into a debate over whether the current slowdown is more likely to
resemble a "V," with a quick turn by the summer, or a "U," with a rough bottom
that does not end until at least year-end. Wall Street's mood is ugly.

   Everything has changed.

   Except nothing has changed. As last year's euphoria has turned to this year's
depression, it is easy to forget that the technological advances that drove the
1990's bull market are happening faster than ever.

   DO you own a cell phone? A personal computer? Do you have Internet access?
Did you have any of those a decade ago? How many of the prescription drugs that
you take were created in the last decade? Did you ever imagine that gene therapy
would be anything other than science fiction?

   These are more than theoretical questions. Gains in technology have fueled
the fastest-growing companies in history. In 1990, Microsoft, Dell Computer and
Cisco had combined sales of $2 billion. Last year, their sales were $80 billion.

   If you are an investor with a reasonably long time horizon -- five years or
more -- stop worrying about the "V" or "U" debate. The only way you will lose
money in stocks is if the markets head into an "L," a bottom that lasts for
years. Anything is possible, of course, as investors in Japanese stocks are
still finding out -- to their chagrin. But believing in an "L" means believing
that the technological gains of the last decade were illusory.

   Stocks, meanwhile, have become more reasonably valued, because they have
fallen so much and long-term interest rates have fallen, too. The forward
earnings yield on the S.& P. 500 is now just under 5 percent, close to the yield
on long-term bonds. Cisco trades at just 33 times earnings.

   The risk of a short-term recession is high. But help for the economy is on
the way. Monetary and fiscal policy, so tight during the last year, are being
loosened. And inflation remains only a distant threat. The biggest driver of
inflation over the last six months has been the price of energy, especially
natural gas, and gas prices have fallen by half since their peak in December.

   This may not be absolute bottom, since the bad news will not end for at least
a couple of months. But it is too late to be afraid, too late to sell at the
peak. Stocks are much cheaper than they were a year ago.

   It is time to be greedy.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2001


                             1934 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             March 3, 2001 Saturday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 641 words

HEADLINE: Tulane hits state jackpot;
Businesses reap big paybacks

BYLINE: By Joan Treadway; Staff writer

BODY:

   When Dr. Paul Whelton, a senior vice president at the Health Sciences Center
of Tulane University, picked up the phone recently, he learned a check for
$27,500 was making its way to his institution.

   The source? Not a foundation or wealthy alumni or a federal research program.
It was the state in Baton Rouge calling to say the center is the businesses with
unclaimed property on hold in state coffers.

   "We're thrilled -- we have a lot of needs," Whelton said Friday.

   The money could support gene therapy research at Tulane or help needy young
Louisianians attend Tulane's School of Medicine or School of Public Health and
Tropical Medicine, he said. The bounty comes from insurance proceeds, utility
deposits, vendor checks, credit balances and dividends owed to the center that
were somehow sent to the unclaimed property section of the state's Treasury
Department.

   State Treasurer John Kennedy said the call to Tulane was part of his agency's
ongoing effort to return to businesses, institutions, nonprofit organizations
and individuals the money that is rightfully theirs. Collectively, the state
holds more than $180 million belonging to someone else, Kennedy said.

   Sometimes people leave jobs and move without picking up their last paychecks,
and this money is sent to the Treasury Department, in accordance with state law,
he said. Other times, a company may send a check to a vendor but get the address
wrong. It, too, can land in the state treasury.

   At least 60 percent of all the unclaimed money is owed to individuals, and at
a special event at Lakeside Shopping Center last month, state workers urged
passers-by to stop and check a computer terminal to find out if they were on the
list of about 500,000 people or entities due money. This one-day project
returned more than $100,000 to state residents.

   Now, with plans in the works for an official ceremony to turn the $27,500
check over to Tulane, state officials are switching to alerting organizations
and businesses that they may have money out there.

   Mulate's Cajun Restaurant on Julia Street is one such place. Monique
Christina, president and general manager, learned Friday that the restaurant was
entitled to $113.20 in premium refunds from an insurance policy. "I'm
surprised," she said. "I was not aware we were due that money."

   Kennedy said that Louisiana, while average in its amount of unclaimed money,
has been more aggressive than other states in its effort to give it back since
the mid-1990s. "In the past five years, we have returned between $26 million and
$27 million to over 60,000 people, businesses or nonprofits."

   The largest sum ever returned was $1,026,000, which was given out in 1998 to
a woman who still lives in a modest home Uptown and does not want to be
identified, Kennedy said. Her husband had bought securities decades ago, but she
did not know about them, and after he died they had gradually increased in value
and had reverted to the state treasury.

   Up to 7 percent of the unclaimed money is collected to finance the office
that keeps track of such funds and help find its owners. Some people oppose the
project and think that cash-strapped Louisiana should hold onto the money and
continue to earn interest from investing it, Kennedy said.

   But it is a matter of principle, he said. It would be hypocritical for the
state to demand that people pay taxes, and then not to pay its residents what it
owes them, he said.

   Those interested in learning whether they are entitled to money from the
state agency can visit the Treasury Department's Web site,
www.treasury.state.la.us, and click on "unclaimed property." If they are on the
list, they can get more information by calling (888) 925-4127.

   . . . . . . .

Joan Treadway can be reached at jtreadway@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3305.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2001


                             1935 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     MARCH 1, 2001 Thursday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 580 words

HEADLINE: PENN REPORTS PROMISE AGAINST CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: Huntly Collins INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Two of the world's deadliest viruses may hold the key to developing an
effective gene therapy for cystic fibrosis, an inherited lung disorder that
afflicts about 30,000 Americans.

   Scientists at the University of Pennsylvania report promising results in
laboratory experiments that make use of a novel vector to deliver correct copies
of the gene that goes awry in cystic fibrosis.

   The vector is made with fragments of the genetic material from HIV, the virus
that causes AIDS, combined with a protein from the deadly Ebola virus. In
experiments in cell culture and mice, James M. Wilson and colleagues at Penn's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy found that the vector could effectively deliver
a new gene to target cells.

   The work, reported in today's issue of Nature Biotechnology, indicates it may
be possible to overcome the technical problems that have plagued nearly a decade
of research into gene therapy for cystic fibrosis.

   The paper is among the first to emerge from Wilson's lab since its human
gene-therapy experiments were halted by the Food and Drug Administration last
year after the death of a teenager in a gene-therapy trial for a liver disorder.

   The FDA ban on human research at the institute is still in place, and the
agency is weighing whether to strip Wilson of his right to conduct human trials
in the future - a threat that Wilson is fighting.

   An FDA spokeswoman yesterday said the agency had no problem with Wilson
continuing to do laboratory and animal research. "This may be a promising area,"
said one federal official, who asked not to be named. "It's not as scary as it
sounds."

   Dr. Melissa Ashlock, director of drug discovery for the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation, which helped finance the research, said the organization was very
happy with the findings. "We know these are early results and not automatically
applicable [to people], but the evidence in the lab indicates that strides have
been made."

   In the past, scientists have been unable to find a vector that effectively
reaches target cells and prompts them to make the protein that is missing in
cystic fibrosis.

   "It's a nice step forward," said Gary P. Kobinger, a molecular virologist at
Penn's gene-therapy institute and lead author of the paper. "It opens the door
to improve the system."

   However, the Penn team cautioned that much more work needs to be done to test
the approach in animals before experiments can be safely conducted on humans. "A
clinical trial is way, way down the road," said Nelson Wievel, the institute's
deputy director.

   People with cystic fibrosis produce excessive mucus, predisposing them to
chronic lung infections and premature death. While antibiotics help fight the
infections, there is no effective treatment for the underlying disease and no
cure.

   The Penn team hit upon the novel HIV-Ebola vector after comparing it with
other viruses capable of delivering a correct copy of the cystic fibrosis gene.
None of the others, including the flu virus, did the job as well.

   Because Penn's vector is made from only a small portion of HIV genes and only
one coat protein of Ebola, it cannot reproduce and cannot cause disease, the
Penn scientists emphasized.

   Still, the Penn team cautioned in its paper that a number of safety concerns
will have to be resolved.

   One is whether the therapy prompts a dangerous immune response - something
not seen in the mice experiments. Further tests of that are to be conducted in
monkeys, scientists said.

GRAPHIC: James M. Wilson and the gene therapy institute at Penn reported the
findings.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1936 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    March 1, 2001, Thursday, REGION EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 357 words

HEADLINE: VECTOR TESTED TO DELIVER NEW GENE TO TARGET CELLS

BYLINE: HUNTLY COLLINS, KNIGHT RIDDER NEWSPAPERS

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA --

BODY:


   Two of the world's deadliest viruses may hold the key to developing an
effective gene therapy for cystic fibrosis, an inherited lung disorder that
afflicts about 30,000 Americans.

   Scientists at the University of Pennsylvania today will report promising
results in laboratory experiments that make use of a novel vector to deliver
correct copies of the gene that goes awry in cystic fibrosis.

   The vector is made with fragments of the genetic material from HIV, the virus
that causes AIDS, combined with a protein from the deadly Ebola virus.

   In experiments in cell culture and mice, James M. Wilson and colleagues at
Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy found that the vector could effectively
deliver a new gene to target cells.

   The work, reported in today's issue of Nature Biotechnology, indicates that
it may be possible to overcome the technical problems that have plagued nearly a
decade of research into gene therapy for cystic fibrosis.

   The paper is among the first to emerge from Wilson's lab since last year,
when its human gene-therapy experiments were halted by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration after the death of a teen-ager in a gene-therapy trial for a
liver disorder.

   The FDA ban on human research at the institute is still in place and the
agency is now weighing whether to strip Wilson of his right to conduct human
trials in the future -- a threat that he is fighting.

   An FDA spokeswoman yesterday said the agency had no problem with Wilson
continuing to do laboratory and animal research.

   "This may be a promising area [of research]," said one federal official.
"It's not as scary as it sounds."

   Dr. Melissa Ashlock, director of drug discovery for the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation, which helped fund the research, said the organization was "very
happy" with the first findings.

   "We know these are early results and not automatically applicable [to
people], but the evidence in the lab indicates that strides have been made."

   Scientists have been unable to find a vector that effectively reaches target
cells and prompts them to make the protein that is missing in cystic fibrosis.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2001


                             1937 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             March 1, 2001 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 762 words

HEADLINE: 2 Diseases May Yield A Cystic Fibrosis Cure

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    Scientists in Philadelphia have combined pieces from two of the world's
deadliest microbes, the ebola virus and the virus that causes AIDS, to make a
hybrid virus they hope will someday cure cystic fibrosis when sprayed into
patients' lungs.

    The idea of intentionally infecting someone with a blend of the two killer
viruses may seem bizarre, scientists said, but the new creation lacks key
components needed to cause disease. The goal is to make a virus with ebola's
unusual talent for attaching to lung cells and the AIDS virus's exceptional
ability to persist in the body, then use that new virus to deliver curative
genes to patients with the lung disease.

    The hybrid virus, not yet ready for human testing, is the most extreme and
controversial example of a new strategy emerging in the field of gene therapy,
which aims to cure diseases by giving people new genes. After a decade of
failures using other methods to get helpful genes into patients' cells,
researchers are turning to some of the world's most notorious microbes as tiny
vehicles for delivering therapeutic payloads.

    Hybrids made from the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and the ebola
virus, which causes the fatal bleeding disease featured in the nonfiction
thriller "The Hot Zone," are not to be feared, according to the University of
Pennsylvania researchers who created them. The team removed the parts of both
viruses most responsible for their deadliness. Now, they plan to add copies of
the gene that cystic fibrosis patients lack.

    Some researchers agreed that the approach is safe. "It's not even HIV
anymore; it's just pieces," said W. French Anderson, a gene therapy pioneer at
the University of Southern California. "And ebola sounds horrible, but this has
nothing to do with the ebola virus that knocks out all your defense mechanisms
and kills you. Those genes are all gone."

    But others said they are not so sure.

    "I wouldn't want this thing put into me," said Robert Gallo, director of the
Institute of Human Virology in Baltimore and co-discoverer of HIV.

    It's possible that the new virus could prompt an immunological response
severe enough to harm the patient, Gallo said. Equally frightening, he said, the
hybrid virus might combine with wild HIV to create an entirely new kind of
contagious virus.

    The Food and Drug Administration has already raised those and other yellow
flags. At a conference in 1998, FDA official Anne M. Pilaro warned that such
viruses would present "unique issues regarding determination of safety."

    The new work comes from Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy and its
director, James Wilson. The institute has focused on inventing new gene delivery
methods since the FDA ordered it last year to halt all human clinical studies
after a young gene therapy patient died there.

    Wilson, who in November settled a lawsuit filed by the patient's father and
is now fighting additional sanctions from the FDA, declined to be interviewed.
But another scientist on the project, Gary Kobinger, said the research offers
early proof that the approach is worth pursuing.

    "The words are scary or sound scary, but for now we are on the level of
science, not on the level of recruiting someone to try it," Kobinger said.

    The team combined the genes that allow ebola to attach to lung cells, those
that help HIV infect and persist inside cells, and "marker" genes that helped
the researchers track the fate of their new creation. The hybrid virus infected,
in test tubes, lung cells from mice and people, the team reports in the March
issue of Nature Biotechnology. And when squirted into the windpipes of mice, the
viruses infected the animals' lungs and delivered the marker genes.

    Work on the viruses was conducted on the Penn campus in a "biosafety level
3" containment module, a double-doored, specially ventilated lab space that
federal regulations require for all experiments involving exotic microbes that
"may cause serious or potentially lethal disease as a result of exposure by the
inhalation route."

    Many questions remain unanswered, Kobinger and others said. Will the virus
attach to lung cells in cystic fibrosis patients, who typically have lots of
mucus in their lungs? Will a patient's immune system attack and neutralize the
virus? Could the new virus, like related viruses, disrupt genes inside lung
cells, causing lung cancer or other problems?

    "It's quite a ways from being useful," said Melissa Ashlock of the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation in Bethesda. "But it's definitely a step forward in a field
that has not had many forward steps."

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2002


                             1938 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  February 28, 2001, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1424 words

HEADLINE: BABY BOOMERS A generation rewrites the rules

BYLINE: Marilyn Elias

BODY:

   Sally Rosloff is changing careers at age 51. Rather than fantasizing
about "golden years" on the golf course, she's planning to make
her 60s and 70s decades of adventure, challenge -- and reward.

   "I don't see myself as 'winding down,' " Rosloff says. "I'm
just gearing up for a new life."

   She'll be a psychotherapist.

   And evidence abounds that she's typical of baby boomers -- whose
oldest members turn 55 this year -- in her plans to transform
the nature of American life after 60.


   On the work front, in marriages and relations between the generations,
in leisure and lifestyle, a tsunami of change is approaching as
76 million boomers surge into their elder years.

   Like many of her age-mates, Rosloff married and had children later
than her parents. When Rosloff was 40, Emma, her youngest, arrived,
so there's an 11-year-old at home now.

   A political activist and leader of the California women's movement
during her youth, she worked full time in university fundraising
for many years but came to feel "it just wasn't fulfilling."

   In her mid-40s, Rosloff began graduate school to become a therapist.
She finished and now must do about two more years of supervised
counseling before she can take an exam -- an exam that 45% fail
-- to be licensed for practice. "It's daunting," she says, "but
I'm determined to do it."

   Work will be routine during baby boomers' older years, many surveys
suggest. A recent AARP national poll of boomers found that 80%
intend to work at least part time during their "retirement"
years.

   In their favor: labor shortages, the shift away from physical
to mental work, the rise of computer-related employment and, most
of all, their sheer numbers. By 2030, a fifth to a quarter of
Americans will be 65 and older, the U.S. Census projects.

   Marketing gurus at Del Webb, the retirement housing builders,
report a radical shift. "Requests for his-and-her offices are
big," says Paula Jennings of Del Webb. "We never used to get
that."

   "Del Webb will never build another shuffleboard court," CEO
LeRoy Hanneman says. "We are, however, building computer labs,
health spas and college classrooms in our communities."

   AARP research has just sparked the launch of a new magazine, My
Generation. It will replace the group's flagship Modern
Maturity for AARP's 3.1 million baby-boomer members because
the older, more staid magazine just didn't reflect their kind
of later years.

   In charge of health issues

   Good health, of course, is key to the generation's lofty plans.
Average life spans are rising, and "the idea of checking out
-- drinking lemonade and playing games for 20 or 30 years -- just
doesn't fit," says gerontologist Ken Dychtwald, author of Age
Power: How the 21st Century Will Be Ruled By the New Old.

   "When people died at 62, it made sense to retire at 60. But baby
boomers are the healthiest, wealthiest and best educated generation
in American history," Dychtwald says.

   They also approach health care in a far more assertive "take-charge"
way than their elders usually do, evidence suggests, and that
could spare their own kids aggravation later on.

   In a scenario many midlife boomers can relate to, Janice Malett
describes listening to her 82-year-old mom talk about her stepfather's
doctor visit. " 'The doctor gave Jake medication,' and I say,
'What medication?' She says, 'I don't know.' 'For how long?' Again,
'I don't know.' You just wring your hands in exasperation." Malett
even had to insist on their getting a second opinion before a
surgery.

   But when Malett, a Larchmont, N.Y., nurse, faced a recent bout
with breast cancer, she researched all her medical options on
the Net and joined helpful support groups.

   New multigeneration studies done through the MacArthur Foundation
confirm what many midlifers know: Their parents are more likely
to feel that getting better is "in the doctor's hands," while
boomers feel they can -- and must -- take control.

   But such need for and perception of control, a hallmark of many
boomer attitude surveys, has its downside. There's evidence that
adults who feel most in control fare the worst emotionally when
hit by traumas they can't control. So as baby boomers age and
face death, "they may have a harder time with it than their parents
did," says Harvard Medical School sociologist Ronald Kessler.

   Surviving a spouse also could take a bigger emotional toll on
boomers. Studies of widowhood show "people in conflicted marriages
grieve less; those in happy marriages grieve a lot more," says
University of Michigan sociologist Deborah Carr. "Today, people
are much less likely to stay in bad marriages. So it could be
a lot harder on them to lose a spouse."

   In practical matters, it will be easier, though. Middle-age women,
whose moms often didn't have credit in their own names, own 401(k)s
and know how to get along financially. And multigeneration studies
show that men are less and less strangers in the kitchen or to
their children.

   But the likelihood of mates "orbiting in and out of work" after
60, as Dychtwald puts it, could spur marital stress. If both spouses
don't retire at the same time, that often creates marital trouble,
says sociologist Phyllis Moen of Cornell University, who has studied
couples' retirement patterns. "With these two-career couples,
you're not always on the same work timetable."

   And who's going to have time for grandparenting? "We're already
seeing couples in their 30s and 40s complaining that their parents
aren't playing the typical grandparents' role," says Plantation,
Fla., psychologist Priscilla Marotta. "But boomers will really
redefine the role."

   They will still love grandkids, but time will be more interest-
and activity-driven, Marotta predicts. "They'll take them on
trips -- you're already starting to see that -- and do activities
together."

   Kids will have a different view of their grandparents, too. Moen
points to a recent New Yorker cartoon, a sign of the change:
A small boy is shown looking up at a woman behind an enormous
desk, and he says, "Grandmother, what a big desk you have."

   Keeping "blended" and far-flung families together will be harder
than in the past.

   "It will take more work. Rituals and holidays will become much
more important as families come together for planned holidays,"
Philadelphia psychologist Matti Gershenfeld says.

   Nuclear families of today's middle-age adults are smaller than
their parents' generation, but there's reason to think they may
be closer to these fewer kids later on. Recent studies show much
more similarity in values and more of a "friendship" between
boomers and their children than the previous generation.

   Along with having smaller families than their parents did, more
baby boomers are staying single. Single women and racial minorities
are most likely to lag economically as the generation overall
enjoys a comfortable old age.

   'A Saks-or-Wal-Mart world'

   Boomers' income levels are at least a third higher than their
parents' generation, national figures show, and they're better
set for later years.

   "But the bottom one-quarter are going to be barely making it,"
says John Rother, director of legislation and public policy for
AARP.

   It's going to be a Saks-or-Wal-Mart world for elderly boomers,
says Rother, who recently spent a sabbatical year studying the
generation. "There will be much greater economic polarization
than was true for their parents. Those who have will have big-time."

   And they'll be able to buy big-time -- perhaps even additional
years of life -- he predicts. "A lot of marketers will be targeting
these wealthy, older boomers. All that high-tech stuff, the genetic
therapies -- who do you think they'll go after?"

   Many of these wealthy, healthy boomers will crave the stimulation
of work, and poorer age-mates will work because they have to,
but not necessarily the 50-hour weeks of their youth.

   "They're going to rewrite the rigid script of work design,"
Moen says. "They're going to change the rules against part-time
or contract work and see how they can take their pensions and
start new careers. Because of their position in the ranks of movers
and shakers, they're going to be able to create things that work
for them.

   "Every institution these people have touched, from kindergarten
on, has been transformed. Just wait and see -- they'll do the
same for old age."



GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, Color, Julie Snider, USA TODAY, Source: Office of the Chief
Actuary, Social Security Administration (Line graph); PHOTOS, Color, Bob Riha
Jr., USA TODAY (2); Looking ahead: Boomer Sally Rosloff has charted her course.
Family comes first -- here she's with daughter Emma, 11 (and Ti, the cat) -- but
she's also training to become a therapist. "The reality is, even if I won the
lottery tomorrow, I'd still want to do something purposeful and meaningful to
me."

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2001


                             1939 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     February 27, 2001 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 014

LENGTH: 280 words

HEADLINE: New gene therapy halts cancer in lab mice

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Gene therapy has been used for the first time to prevent cancer from
developing in mice, and doctors say they may be able to try it in humans within
a year.

   "The results were really striking," said Dr. Carlo Croce of the Jefferson
Medical College in Philadelphia, lead author of the paper published in the
online version of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   "Most of the mice were protected, not just in the number of those that
developed tumors, but in the number of tumors per mouse."

   The researchers experimented on mice who were missing a gene called FHIT. The
healthy FHIT gene causes damaged cells to commit suicide before they can start
the out-of-control growth of cancer.

   In a prior study, the researchers exposed mice to a cancer-causing substance
that triggered the development of numerous esophageal tumors in all the mice.

   In this study, researchers gave some of the mice oral doses of gene therapy,
using three different methods to deliver the FHIT gene. Mice in all the groups
developed dramatically fewer tumors than those in a control group that did not
get the gene therapy.

   "Treatment with the virus prevented the mice from developing cancer, which
indicates we can prevent cancer with gene therapy," Croce said.

   In one group, the mice that got the gene delivered by an adenovirus, only
half developed tumors. In another group, which got something called an
adeno-associated virus, only three of eight mice developed tumors. All the mice
in the control group developed tumors.

   Croce said he hopes to be able to test the gene-therapy technique on humans
within a year, probably first in patients with incurable lung cancer.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2001


                             1940 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2001 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                    February 27, 2001 Tuesday No dot Edition

SECTION: OBITUARIES; Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 400 words

HEADLINE: Dr. Joseph Beninson was beloved by his patients

BYLINE: Janet Naylor Vandenabeele

BODY:

   BLOOMFIELD HILLS -- Dr. Joseph Beninson liked to sing and dance, but it was
his research that enabled many patients to sing their own songs of joy.

   A world-renowned researcher whose career at Henry Ford Hospital spanned 46
years, Dr. Beninson died from cancer on Friday, Feb. 23, 2001, at Peachwood Inn
nursing home in Rochester Hills. He was 82.

   Up until his illness prevented his work, Dr. Beninson continued research into
genetic therapy, and was beloved by patients and co-workers alike for his
penchant for singing and dancing.

   "He loved to sing and dance. His patients knew him as the singing doctor,"
recalled his wife of 23 years, Evelyne.

   A native of Brooklyn, N.Y., Dr. Beninson served in the Army Air Corps during
World War II. Originally trained in veterinary sciences, with a DVM from Texas
A&;M University in 1947, he knew his calling was in research and treating
humans, his wife said.

   He enrolled in medical school at the University of Texas, and earned his
medical degree in 1951.

   Dr. Beninson began his residency in Texas, but followed one of his mentors to
Henry Ford Hospital in 1953, where he would rise to the position of chair of the
division of dermatologic vascular disease. He also was founding director of the
Leg Ulcer and Lymphedema Clinic.

   His major contribution to medical science came as a pioneer in pressure
gradient therapy, to help patients with lymphedema, where lymphatic fluids build
up in body tissues. His support and pumping devices, co-developed with patient
Conrad Jobst, were sold under the name The Jobst Institute.

   "He was such a good man," Evelyne Beninson said. "He treated patients at home
for free. It's a good thing he didn't have a private practice or we'd be
starving."

   In 1990, Dr. Beninson received the Distinguished Career Award from Henry Ford
Hospital. He was president emeritus of the American College of Angiology and a
founder and past president of the North American Society of Lymphology, among
many other professional affiliations.

   In addition to his wife, Dr. Beninson is survived by his son Jonathan;
daughters Maureen, Ellen, Ilene, Fern and Jennifer; one brother; one sister; and
three grandchildren. His first wife, Eleanor, preceded him in death in 1966. He
lived in Bloomfield Hills for 40 years.

   Services will be held at 11 a.m. today at the Clover Hill Park Cemetery
Chapel, 3607 W. 14 Mile, Birmingham.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2002


                             1941 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   February 27, 2001, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 691 words

HEADLINE: Poor oversight puts research subjects at risk

BODY:

   Anyone considering experimental medical treatments might take
a minute to weigh the case of James Rowsey. A federal investigation
concluded that the prominent Florida eye surgeon used an unapproved
experimental surgical procedure on more than 60 patients.

   According to a USA TODAY investigation published Monday, two suits
allege that Rowsey used an experimental blade in corneal transplants
without the patients' informed consent. One patient, 85, says
the surgery worsened his eyesight, and he is now legally blind.
The other, now 14, faces yet another operation.

   Rowsey denies the charges, but the facts are not flattering --
not to him and more importantly, not to the government's slapdash
system for monitoring experimental medicine. Designed to oversee
clinical trials and protect patients, it nonetheless failed to
uncover Rowsey's experiments, even though the local review panel
was advised that Rowsey's work needed a full review. He was exposed
because co-workers turned him in.

   In 1995, after testing his new technique on cats and seeking approval
to conduct a clinical trial, Rowsey began using it on patients.
But he used the experimental procedure without patients' knowledge.
A government report last year concluded that this work "introduced
unknown risks" to patients and that he had practiced "unequivocally"
improper human research.

   Such allegations illuminate tremendous gaps in federal regulation
of clinical studies. Although an estimated 19 million Americans
participate in clinical trials a year, oversight is so disorganized
that no one even knows how many clinical studies are underway
or how many participating patients are injured or killed.

   For years, the federal government has been aware of this problem.
More than a quarter-century ago, it implemented laws that have
led to a network of about 6,000 Institutional Review Boards in
hospitals and universities to oversee clinical trials involving
human subjects.

   But the system is plainly inadequate. At the time, the University
of South Florida, where Rowsey was chairman of the Ophthalmology
Department, had one review panel to oversee as many as 1,400 clinical
trials. Officials hope to increase that staff this year and release
new, voluntary standards for the review panels this spring.

   Given years of warnings, that's close to pitiful, and it is surely
not enough to counteract the temptation by researchers to bend
the rules. The prestige and wealth attached to medical breakthroughs
can easily cloud institutional and individual judgment. Rowsey
calculated that if successful, his device would generate $ 112
million in sales over five years.

   Oversight isn't totally lacking. In 1999, federal regulators briefly
shut down as unsafe 2,000 clinical trials at Duke University.
A year earlier, the University of Oklahoma at Tulsa was forced
to shut down all of its government-sponsored clinical trials after
an independent review found flaws in a vaccine study that the
local review board missed.

   Yet the drug industry and the federal government pour more than
$ 14 billion a year into medical research. The size and scale of
that work, along with the immense stakes, mean that until government
reforms gain real heft and muscle, patients will remain at the
mercy of universities, hospitals and doctors who have more on
their minds than your health.



   Experiments can go awry

   Improperly managed human experiment can result in real, albeit
rare, tragedies. Two tales from that crypt:

   * 1996. Joe Foster, 58, stopped taking his blood pressure medicine
to participate in a new drug trial. Researchers failed to tell
him that he was in a control group and that his new pills were
placebos. Six days later, he suffered a major heart attack and
a debilitating stroke.

   * 1999. Jesse Gelsinger, 18, enlisted in a gene-therapy trial
to treat an inherited liver disorder. He died during treatment,
and in the aftermath, investigators charged that researchers had
failed to report adverse reactions and other indications of risk
to the Food and Drug Administration.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2001


                             1942 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            February 26, 2001 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part S; View Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1238 words

HEADLINE: TAKING MATTERS--AND SCIENCE--INTO THEIR OWN HANDS;
RESEARCH * TWO BROTHERS ARE TRYING TO STAMP OUT DEADLY LOU GEHRIG'S DISEASE BY
RAISING FUNDS AND HIRING SCIENTISTS.

BYLINE: JAMIE TALAN, NEWSDAY

BODY:

   Late last year, eight patients with a fatal neurological disorder gathered in
Newton, Mass., with their loved ones and a handful of scientists for a crash
course: ALS 101.

   Their goal: to learn everything they could about amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease.

   Their instructor was Jamie Heywood, a 34-year-old engineer turned teacher,
scientist and pharmaceutical entrepreneur who, in 1998, took his own course when
his brother Stephen was diagnosed.

   Heywood quit his job at a neuroscience think tank in California and headed
home to Massachusetts to take care of his brother. He's now taken on the task of
finding a cure for the disease, which strips away the body's motor neurons and
leaves its victims trapped inside their bodies. A progressive paralysis takes
hold, and patients die within an average of five years of diagnosis, when the
motor neurons that guide respiration give out.

   "The thing about Jamie," says Stephen, "is that he can be very focused, but
not for a long period of time." But as Stephen Heywood's disease has progressed,
his older brother's determination has not lost its fire. His efforts remain
focused on trying to produce treatments for the 30,000 people diagnosed with
ALS--a disease with no known cure.

   *

   The Heywoods are a new breed of patient advocates: people who want to speed
the science along by raising money that allows researchers to pursue ideas that
might not qualify for scarce federal funding. These brothers have gone a step
further: They started the ALS Therapy Development Foundation and hired
scientists to carry out the studies.

   The brothers, supported by their parents, are collaborating on a project
called FDA 2000, a plan developed by Harvard's Dr. Steve Gullans to test all
1,500 drugs approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to see if any can
work against ALS. This is the first time scientists have taken such an approach.

   The goal is a shortcut to an effective ALS drug; the development of new
compounds can take more than a decade. So Jamie Heywood became executive
director of the foundation and began, in effect, to build a pharmaceutical
company from the outside in: hire the scientists, design the studies, stock up
on mice. "This is definitely the way to go," he said.

   And he knows he's racing against time. "We can now screen thousands of drugs
and play it backward. Anything that is promising in mice becomes stunningly
important as a candidate in human ALS."

   *

   Heywood and his staff--including six scientists--work closely with Gullans, a
scientist who turned his attention to ALS when a relative was diagnosed. It was
Gullans who proposed the radical approach of "opening the medicine cabinet and
testing every drug."

   Gullans is funded in his new career by Heywood's organization and Project
ALS, another research and advocacy group started by the Estess sisters of New
York City, one of whom has ALS. Gullans is hoping that medicines already in the
pipeline could have an impact not just on ALS but also on other neurological
disorders.

   The first round of tests targeted neuronal cells primed to die a death
similar to ALS motor neurons. (Motor neurons themselves are too finicky to use
in testing.) The scientists identified about 30 promising drugs. Further testing
found that eight of the 30 were potent enough to warrant more tests.

   That's where Jamie Heywood comes in. He hired the scientists and opened two
laboratories in Boston, where hundreds of mice engineered to develop ALS are
going to be tested with Gullans' "hit list" of drugs.

   Gullans said it is too early to release the names of the medicines.

   Already, research data suggest that a massive inflammatory system attack
occurs in the diseased motor neurons. Scientists who have analyzed spinal cord
tissue from ALS patients have found the same thing: reactive astrocytes and
microglia, evidence of an inflammatory process. Gullans and others now believe
there is a powerful inflammatory component that could be driving the motor
neurons--the cells that crowd the spinal cord and receive messages from the
brain that coordinate movement--to death.

   When Heywood set out to find a cure for ALS, what he read was discouraging.
Many medicines had been tried, all unsuccessfully. Then he read about glutamate
transporter protein, which seemed to be missing in the spinal tissue of ALS
patients. He called Dr. Jeffrey Rothstein, an ALS researcher at Johns Hopkins
Medical Institutes whose work on the gene that produces the glutamate
transporter protein convinced Heywood that gene therapy to repair the glutamate
transporter system was a potential cure for his brother. An animal study
suggested that the concept would work.

   With Rothstein's paper in hand, Heywood called Dr. Matthew During, the
director of the Gene Therapy Center at Jefferson Medical College in
Philadelphia. Years earlier, During had conducted gene therapy trials on
newborns with Canavan's disease, a fatal neurogenerative disorder that causes
damage to the brain's white matter. The geneticist worked with Heywood and
Rothstein to devise a study, and the trial was approved by Jefferson Medical
College's Institutional Review Board. But it wound up on hold after Jesse
Gelsinger, a teenager with a rare metabolic disorder, died in September 1999 in
a gene therapy experiment just miles from During's lab, at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   Stem cell therapy has shown promise in a number of neurological disorders.
Rothstein has pursued stem cells' role in ALS, setting sights on placing them in
the environment of the spine to replace the lost motor neurons. Even if these
newly dividing cells only nourished the patient's existing motor neurons with
enriching growth factors, scientists say, it could slow the disease process and
extend the lives of patients.

   In addition, During and his colleagues are working on vaccines to protect the
motor neurons from succumbing to the disease.

   *

   At the ALS 101 course, Stephen talked to fellow patients about some of the
medicines he's been taking. He'd been involved in an experimental drug trial of
BDNF, or brain-derived growth factor, supported by Amgen Pharmaceuticals. He
tried a Chinese herb, one of the substances that protected the neurons from
dying in a test-tube, but the tar-like substance tasted awful and had to be
consumed three times a day. He's taking an anti-inflammatory COX-2 inhibitor as
well as creatine, which has been shown in animals to protect the motor neurons.
He added Prozac, shown in studies to have neuroprotective effects.

   These days, Jamie Heywood sounds more like a scientist than an engineer. He
and During have written a scientific paper and have submitted it to a medical
journal. Gullans and Heywood are getting the FDA 2000 list in shape to go online
in the next few months. The list will include information about each of the
medicines and supporting data, Heywood says.

   Stephen Heywood says it is hard to say which treatments work and which don't.
Today, two years after his diagnosis, he spends most of his time in a
wheelchair, a trained carpenter directing from the sidelines. He's gotten
married and had a son. He continues to help his brother run the foundation,
whose Web site is at http://www.als-tdf.org.

   Jamie Heywood thinks that he has already made a difference in his brother's
life. Stephen agrees. "My brother thinks big. What he has done doesn't surprise
me. If there's an answer, he'll find it."

GRAPHIC:  Jamie Heywood, far left, and brother Stephen, top, represent a new
breed of patient advocates, waging a grass-roots battle against the disease.
Stephen Heywood is among the 30,000 Americans who have ALS.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2001


                             1943 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     February 26, 2001 Monday, Final / All

SECTION: PERSONAL FINANCE; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1186 words

HEADLINE: Cure for the common portfolio;
Ambitious research has biotech funds thriving, but be ready to endure the long
haul

BYLINE: TERESA DIXON MURRAY, PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   Whoever discovers a cure for cancer or Alzheimer's disease will become an
instant gazillionaire. Bet you'd like to have a piece of that.

   Hoping to capitalize on every investor's ultimate dream, mutual fund
companies are scrambling to come up with ways to strike both a financial and a
social chord with investors.

   Thus the surge of highly specialized biotech mutual funds that not only
invest in health care and pharmaceutical companies, but also focus strictly on
companies involved in futuristic medical research, ranging from the search for a
cure for cancer and treatment of attention deficit disorder to the prevention of
various birth defects.

   The funds are catching more investor interest, and companies are responding
with more choices: In roughly the last year, the number of biotech mutual funds
has doubled. At the same time, their focus is getting narrower and narrower -
giving investors an opportunity to feel like they're supporting a specific
cause, but also making the funds more risky in an already precarious sector.

   Not unexpected

   The explosion in the last year is no surprise given the recent performance of
biotech funds: the four veteran biotech funds posted returns averaging 77
percent in 1999, well above the 19.6 percent return for health funds overall and
the 21 percent increase in the S&P 500 in 1999.

   In the broader health-care category, of which biotech is a subsector,
investors pumped in more than $14 billion last year. Much of that investment
arguably stemmed from the success of health funds last year, which posted an
average 55 percent return. The S&P 500, by comparison, dropped 9 percent.

   While there aren't figures detailing how much investors socked into biotech
last year - it's not yet regarded as its own category - the 11 funds that are
most clearly biotech have net assets of more than $3 billion. About $350 million
of that is in the five newest funds.

   Emily Hall, a health and biotech stock analyst for the investment research
company Morningstar Inc. of Chicago, said the biotech bonanza is similar to past
rushes toward Internet and wireless technology investments.

   "You'll often see a surge in companies trying to capitalize on this," she
said. "There definitely has been a spurt."

   Peter Di Teresa, biotech and health fund senior editorial analyst with
Morningstar, said five new biotech-focused funds were launched in 2000, taking
the number of fairly pure biotech mutual funds to 10.

   And that doesn't include other new investment options such as iShares Nasdaq
Biotechnology, a fund whose shares trade like stock. It was launched three weeks
ago.

   Only one before 1997

   Before 1997, the only biotech fund was Fidelity Select Biotech (FBIOX).

   "Research into things like cancer and diabetes and gene therapy is huge now,"
Di Teresa said.

   Among the most intriguing new funds is Kinetics Medical Fund (MEDRX), which
is touted as the only fund focusing primarily on companies researching a cure
for cancer.

   Portfolio manager Paul Abel of Kinetics Asset Management in New York said the
fund is a way for investors to get in on a cure for cancer. "There is so much
interesting research and development going on right now," he said.

   The fund posted a 57 percent return last year, its first full year, and now
has $60 million in assets.

   Abel acknowledged that the fund, started in October 1999, is potentially
riskier than the average high-caffeine biotech fund. But he noted that all major
research labs and universities are involved in cancer studies. "By choosing to
focus on cancer, we felt we were capturing the best of the best of the
pharmaceuticals."

   Kinetics Medical Fund is split evenly among large-cap pharmaceuticals,
profitable biotech companies and "unprofitable but promising" biotech companies.

   Another new biotech entry is GenomicsFund.com (GENEX), which focuses largely
on the study of human genes. Genomics is all the rage because of the
@public/private Human Genome Project to map out human DNA and find the true
origins of devastating diseases. Just last month, the U.S. Department of Energy
announced an alliance to dig into humans' genetic makeup. Part of the project
involves building a powerful computer to sort through the genome sequence to
find out where each gene is located and what each one does.

   Another company, the Monument Genomics Fund, announced its own effort in
November. Maryland-based Monument boasts that its fund manager has the unusual
combination of both a doctorate in genetics and a master's in business
administration.

   Monument was preceded last year by Amerindo Health & Biotechnology (DNAAX),
which launched in May, and American Century Life Sciences (ALSIX) and SunAmerica
Biotech/Health (SBHAX), both in June.

   "Yes, it's growing and it's growing fast," Hall said.

   The surge in biotech even caused the Monterey Murphy New World (MNWBX) fund
to switch in 1997 from casinos and leisure investments to medical research.

   Other mutual fund companies push efforts to find cures for diabetes and
multiple sclerosis, treat obesity, and develop drugs for illnesses like autism,
depression and anxiety.

   The excitement of that research and the potential financial returns are what
drove Frank Semancik of Bay Village to the Franklin Biotechnology Discovery Fund
(FBDIX), which had a 98 percent return in 1999.

   "I was looking for an area to invest in that was burgeoning," said Semancik,
who invested in the Franklin fund early last year. "Overall it should be a
strong performer because everybody, at one time or another, is going to get sick
and is going to need some drugs. It's always going to be important to have that
kind of research."

   Semancik said he wanted in before the fund closed, which it did last year.
He's invested nearly $10,000 in the fund to date.

   While he enjoyed a 47 percent return last year, he's been jolted by the
fund's 14 percent decline in the first seven weeks of 2001.

   The pre-eminent biotech funds are all down for the year, with declines
ranging from 6 percent to 19 percent. Health funds overall are down about 7
percent for the year. The S&P is up about 3.6 percent.

   The typical biotech firm will spend five to 15 years and up to $1 billion to
get a product to market. And that's if it works and the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration approves it.

   But with the vaccines, treatments and immunizations that have come in our
lifetimes, it's not hard to imagine cures for cancer and paralysis in the
not-too-distant future.

   Many companies these funds invest in, however, will close or run out of money
before they get to the finish line. Because of this and the extreme uncertainty
of medical research, Di Teresa and Hall both recommend limiting biotech
investments to 5 percent of your portfolio.

   "The long-term prospects of making money look good, but a lot of these funds
can be a really wild ride," Di Teresa said. "They do have products going to
market. It's just a matter of when."

   E-mail: tmurray@plaind.com

   Phone: 216-999-4113

   GRAPHIC by THE PLAIN DEALER / ASSOCIATED PRESS:

   Bullish on biotech

   (SOURCE:  Morningstar Inc.)

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2001


                             1944 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2001 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                    February 26, 2001, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 772 words

HEADLINE: How the world shapes up;

BYLINE: KURT LOFT, of The Tampa Tribune;

BODY:


   After an exhaustive look at trends, two forecasters make predictions that
suggest a race  between population and technology.

   Depending on your point of view, the new century holds either promise or
premonition. The pace  of technology, threats of war, medical advances,
dwindling resources and an information economy add  to our lives as much hope as
they do angst, especially when we don't often recognize the trends  that lead to
an idea or event.

   Two forecasters decided to do something about it with the special report
"Fifty Trends Now  Changing the World," a 28-page booklet just published by the
World Future Society, a 30,000-member  nonprofit think tank based in Bethesda,
Md. The report includes observations on trends influencing  technology, the
economy, business and culture, many of which will have a direct impact on our
lives.

   The report isn't speculative but is based on an enormous amount of technical
information from  hundreds of indicator sources, says co-author Owen Davies, a
former senior editor at Omni magazine.  Davis collaborated with Marvin J.
Cetron, the president of Forecasting International in Virginia.

   "We don't think in terms of the glass being half full or half empty," Davies
says. "It's not  optimistic or pessimistic. Nothing on our list is based on
imagination; we go where the data leads  us."

   The authors based observations on multiple sources, not isolated trends, says
Dan Johnson, a  spokesman at the World Future Society.

   "And the more you have on trends that are woven together," he says, "the more
accurate the results."

   Here's a selective look at some of the trends on the horizon, in no
particular order:

    Genetic engineering will control or eliminate some 4,000 hereditary
disorders within three  decades.

    The increasing influence of women in global politics will erode restrictions
placed on women's  careers in Asia and other developing regions.

    By the middle of the century, global agriculture will need to supply as much
food in one  decade as has been produced during all of human history.

    Advanced laser surgery will make bloodless surgery the norm.

    Moderate Republican and conservative Democrats will continue to lead their
respective parties,  while extremist views will remain unpopular.

    Global population will double in 40 years, with the greatest growth in
countries least able to  support existing populations.

    Memory-enhancing drugs will reach clinical use within a decade.

    The sinking water table in China will set off one of the world's first major
water shortages,  and by 2040, some 3.5 billion people worldwide will be faced
with dwindling water supplies.

    As the pace of technology accelerates, more industries will face tighter
competition, making  low-wage jobs scarce.

    The relatively lower cost of publishing on the Internet will lead to the
demise of printed  encyclopedic works.

    Students will conduct a large portion of academic study through Internet
courses.

    Time will become the world's most precious commodity.

    Low-cost preventive medicine will compete with traditional medicine.

    By 2025, 70 percent of the landfills in the United States will be at
capacity.

    With the continued loss of biodiversity, drugs made from natural sources
will become more  expensive.

    Superconductors operating near room temperature will be in commercial use
within 20 years.

    Technology-rich countries will draw more and more skilled workers from
around the world,  creating a brain drain and adversely affecting the economies
of less advanced countries.

    Microscopic machines will remove cholesterol plaques from artery walls.

    In the United States, super-fast trains will compete with and possibly
replace commercial  airlines for shorter trips.

    Accidents will be reduced as cars and trucks are separated by law onto
different highway  lanes.

    Gene therapy will allow more and more people to live beyond 100 years.

    A larger population of elderly people will create a larger population of
disabled people.

    Telecommunications and transportation advances will create a tightly
integrated global  culture.

    A tunnel under the Mediterranean Sea will link Europe and Africa.

    Advanced weaponry and ethnic and religious hostility will intensity global
conflicts.

    Some 6,000 new schools and 190,000 new teachers will be needed by the end of
this decade.  "Fifty Trends Now Changing the World" is available for $ 8 from
the World Future Society, 7910 Woodmont Ave., Suite 450, Bethesda MD 20814. The
society's Web site is www.wfs.org

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (5C),
 AP photos Photo from the Discovery Channel Tribune file photo (1998) (C) The
future holds the potential for changes good and bad - from new models of
transportation to overcrowded cities to microscopic medical tools. Time,
predicted to become the world's most precious commodity, will tell what the
future actually holds.

NOTES: SCIENCE

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2001


                             1945 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    February 26, 2001, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 2369 words

HEADLINE: Federal rules for research on people often fail Two former patients
suing eye surgeon in Florida over an 'experimental' device

BYLINE: Edward T. Pound

DATELINE: TAMPA

BODY:

   TAMPA -- In 1994, eye surgeon James Rowsey invented a medical
device that he thought would revolutionize corneal transplant
surgery and make millions of dollars. It did neither.

   Instead, it cost him a high-paying university job and led to federal
findings that he performed unapproved research on more than 60
people, including children. The device and the case against Rowsey
exposed severe flaws in the nation's system for protecting humans
in medical experiments.

   Rowsey began using his new corneal transplant technique on cats.
Then, without telling the university, he started doing the procedure
on humans. "He was using all of us as guinea pigs," says Joanne
Cassidy, 14, a straight-A high school student from St. Petersburg,
Fla. Rowsey used his new technique when he operated on Joanne's
left eye in 1996. The transplant didn't take. Her parents say
he did not tell them he was using an experimental technique. They
recently sued him in Florida and accused him of "wanton and willful
disregard of human rights and safety."

   Her father, Hugh Cassidy, a cable television installer, says she
will undergo another transplant this year. He expresses frustration:
"Who in the hell is he to be experimenting on my kid?"

   No one died at Rowsey's hands, and he denies experimenting on
anyone. But his story is about more than one man's fall from grace.
Stripped to its essentials, it shows how federal rules for human
research often fail to protect a vulnerable public.

   Despite issuing critical findings, regulators did not play a role
in stopping him. His university, which could have profited from
his invention, did not monitor his work. It was his staff members,
worried that he might harm patients, who finally blew the whistle.

   Across the nation, clinical studies on human subjects -- designed
to test the safety and efficacy of drugs and medical devices --
are multiplying rapidly. Studies are underway in universities,
other research centers and doctors' offices. Great medical advances
have been made, but there also has been a cost: increasing scientific
misconduct and patient deaths. Shocked into action, officials
in the Department of Health and Human Services vow to improve
protections. Patient advocates say changes are overdue.

   Research is big business. The drug industry spends about $ 9 billion
a year, and the federal government, primarily through the National
Institutes of Health, pours in $ 5 billion more. As doctors and
drug companies rush to find the next big discovery, patient advocates
say they worry that the most important protection -- fully informing
human volunteers of health risks -- is being eroded in a mad dash
for money and fame.

   "I call it Nasdaq medicine," says Alan Milstein, a plaintiffs'
lawyer in New Jersey. "It is not scientists racing for a cure.
It is scientists racing against each other for the money that
a cure would bring."

   Milstein represented the family of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, who died
in a gene therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania in 1999.
His death pointed to flaws in the protections system and prompted
a national debate on clinical studies. Jesse's father, Paul Gelsinger,
who recently settled a lawsuit with the university for an undisclosed
amount, says he worries that many volunteers "are not being protected."

   Patient advocates say the government has a long way to go to improve
protections. So much research is going on that officials don't
even know how many studies are underway in the USA and overseas,
although the number reaches into the tens of thousands. Also,
there are no reliable statistics on how many people volunteer
for studies. Though regulators acknowledge that people die in
research, they don't know how many.

   "We know more about cats, pigs and frogs in research than we
do about people," says Arthur Caplan, a bioethicist at the University
of Pennsylvania. "How many people are involved in experiments?
How many old people are involved? How many children? Try and find
out how many people died in human experiments last year in the
United States.

   "There is no place to get that answer. My hunch is dozens of
people die from adverse events," he says.

   The problems are many:

   * Local boards, set up at research sites under federal
regulations adopted in the 1970s, review and approve experiments.
These Institutional Review Boards, numbering about 6,000 in the
USA, serve as the foundation for patient protection. But the federal
health department's inspector general office says many are "overwhelmed"
with work and have too little expertise. The boards generally
consist of physicians, scientists and community members.

   * Many researchers have financial ties with private companies
that pay for clinical trials. In the case of teenager Jesse Gelsinger,
the principal researcher had a financial stake in a company that
funded the gene therapy research and stood to profit from it.

   * Federal regulators are undermanned. The Office for Human
Research Protections, a principal oversight agency in the health
department, has only six people on its compliance staff yet has
about 150 open investigations. One inquiry can take a year or
more to complete. Officials promise more staff.

   FDA: No crisis

   Some regulators see no crisis. "We do not have massive problems
in clinical trials. We do have isolated problems, clearly," says
David Lepay, the senior adviser for clinical science at the Food
and Drug Administration.

   But prodded by the health department's inspector general, regulators
are doing more inspections of review boards and research centers.
In their boldest move, they shut down briefly all 2,000 medical
experiments at Duke University in North Carolina in May 1999 because
of safety issues.

   Even so, the government's chief regulator, Greg Koski, says he
hopes that voluntary standards for Institutional Review Boards
will help cure the problem. The standards are to be issued this
spring.

   Koski, director of the Office for Human Research Protections,
says boards and researchers must be more accountable. He won't
get an argument from the University of South Florida, the institution
that employed Rowsey. Largely as a result of the Rowsey case,
the school says it has implemented reforms, which include keeping
a closer watch on its 1,400 clinical trials.

   When Rowsey served as the $ 380,000-a-year chairman of its Department
of Ophthalmology, the university had only one Institutional Review
Board. That board didn't supervise his work, despite evidence
that he was doing research on humans. In a report, regulators
found its lax oversight "objectionable." The university now
has two more review panels.

   University officials say the lack of oversight wasn't influenced
by money. Both Rowsey and the university stood to profit if his
transplant device, which he called the Tampa Trephine, had been
marketed successfully. He projected $ 112 million in sales over
five years.

   Former patients interviewed by USA TODAY say Rowsey never told
them of the risks they might face from the technique. Two sued
him in a state court in Tampa. They allege that he experimented
on them without their consent.

   Joanne Cassidy was 9 years old when Rowsey operated on her in
August 1996 at Tampa General Hospital. Her lawsuit says he did
not reveal he had departed from "the standard method for performing
a corneal transplant." It says he attached an "adult-size"
and "misshapen" cornea to her left eye.

   Her vision in that eye was blurred before her operation, and she
says her eyesight never improved, despite repeated promises from
Rowsey that it would.

   Sitting in the kitchen of her pink-shingled house in St. Petersburg,
Joanne says she has 20-20 vision in her right eye. But because
of poor sight in her left eye, she says, she broke her ankle in
a basketball game. She expresses no bitterness, only disappointment:
"Maybe my eyesight would be better if he had done the normal
procedure."

   Harry Rogers, 85, of Homosassa, Fla., who filed the other lawsuit,
says he had lost the sight in his left eye before he went to see
Rowsey. In June 1995, Rowsey implanted a new cornea in his right
eye. Rogers says his vision in that eye worsened. Now, he says,
he is legally blind and can't stand sunlight.

   "Everything's a blur," says Rogers, once a gifted athlete who
ran against the fabled Jesse Owens. "Rowsey did not tell me my
eyesight could get worse. He just decided that this new procedure
was safe without telling me of the risks. I don't know whether
it was or wasn't. All I know is I can't see."

   Rowsey won't comment on the lawsuits. He has disputed such assertions
and maintained that he told patients of the possibility of transplant
rejection, bleeding, infection and glaucoma -- the same risks
in conventional surgery.

   In written answers to USA TODAY's questions, he says he did not
tell patients of his financial interest in the Tampa Trephine
because any chance he might profit from its sale was purely "speculative."

   He also denies allegations in a government report last year that
he experimented on patients. Regulators wrote that in operating
on patients, he had collected data on "the safety and effectiveness
of the Tampa Trephine," had "introduced unknown risks and uncertain
efficacy" and had "unequivocally" engaged improperly in human
research. Rowsey, describing research as a "systematic investigation"
designed to broaden general knowledge of a medical issue, says
his technique "was never used on my patients as part of any systematic
investigation."

   He was forced to resign as chairman of the ophthalmology department
in October 1997. He left the university two years later to become
a surgeon at St. Luke's Cataract & Laser Institute in Tarpon
Springs, Fla.

   Research or clinical care?

   Rowsey, now 57, has been a leading eye surgeon for three decades.
He has helped design important modifications on surgical tools
used in corneal transplants, an operation that has a 90% per cent
success rate. His development of the Tampa Trephine in 1994 seemed
to cap a prestigious career.

   That October, the university gave him the go-ahead to test his
technique on cats. But while those studies were underway, he began
using the technique on humans.

   Traditional trephines, which are blades, cut round sections of
tissue from the donor eye of a cadaver. The donated cornea is
sewed into the patient's eye. Though successful in restoring vision
to about 40,000 people annually, the healing time often takes
a year or more. Rowsey was certain his trephine would reduce healing
time and complications from surgery. It cut a piece of tissue
from the donated cadaver eye with petal-like tabs that were attached
to the patient's eye. This allowed for fewer sutures. The trephine
never touched the patient.

   Rowsey's questionable conduct might never have surfaced had it
not been for his born-again religious beliefs. Some staff doctors,
feeling that he was forcing them to pray at faculty meetings,
began looking into his new technique.

   What developed was an internal debate over whether Rowsey was
doing unapproved research on humans or just caring for patients.
That debate underscores how the line between research and clinical
practice can be blurred.

   In May 1995, two months after first using the technique on a human,
Rowsey asked the university's Institutional Review Board to approve
a clinical trial. The 18-member panel, mostly university affiliated
personnel, gave its approval. The informed consent document for
volunteers described the Tampa Trephine as an "investigational
device" and said the trial would evaluate its safety and effectiveness.

   Rowsey never conducted the trial, but he continued operating on
humans. When questions arose, he convinced the review board that
he was providing "standard therapy" not requiring its oversight,
according to minutes of a meeting on Oct. 2, 1995. The board rejected
the views of a university lawyer, Camille McWhirter, who quoted
the advice a regulator had given her staff: "When in doubt, give
the project full review."

   However, doctors in Rowsey's department moved to stop him. The
most persistent were Robert Urban and Curtis Margo, who no longer
work at the university. Urban later filed a federal lawsuit for
religious discrimination against Rowsey. Documents released by
Urban's attorney, John MacKay, helped shed light on his and Margo's
actions.

   Rowsey confronted

   In sworn testimony, Margo, who as director of eye pathology reviewed
Rowsey's cat studies, testified that he uncovered design flaws
in the Tampa Trephine. He said he confronted Rowsey to no avail:
"I told him that I thought it was inappropriate to be using this
device when you don't know how safe it's going to be." Margo
went to the Tampa health care center where Rowsey performed operations;
the center directed Rowsey to stop using his technique. But Rowsey
continued using it at Tampa General Hospital.

   That, too, would end, this time because of Urban.

   After leaving Rowsey's staff in March 1997, Urban went to work
at Tampa General, a university teaching hospital. He lodged complaints
about Rowsey with hospital officials and with the American Academy
of Ophthalmology, an organization of eye doctors. Urban got results.
In the summer of 1998, Tampa General told Rowsey to stop using
the trephine. The academy later concluded he had violated its
ethics rules for informed consent and conflict-of-interest.

   To this day, Rowsey says he did his best for patients and never
harmed them. Meanwhile, regulators closed their inquiry in January
after the university notified patients they were unwitting participants
in experimental surgery.

   Nevertheless, bitterness lingers. In his testimony, Margo described
Rowsey as a great manipulator, "a Jimmy Swaggart" type: "You
have a person telling you how religious he is and how pure he
is and how he respects humans and then (he) practices experiments
on humans without even giving them informed consent."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Color, Robert Rogers for USA TODAY; PHOTOS, B/W, Robert Rogers
for USA TODAY (2); "Everything's a blur": Harry Rogers says doctor's experiment
was improper. Rowsey: He compares his Tampa Trephine, left, with another
trephine. Both cut tissue from cadaver-donated corneas to treat eye patients.
'Guinea pig': Transplant didn't take in Joanne Cassidy's left eye.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2001


                             1946 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    February 26, 2001, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 6D

LENGTH: 668 words

HEADLINE: Informed consent underpins studies

BYLINE: Edward T. Pound

BODY:

   Some issues to think about if you want to participate in a research
project:

   Q. What is medical research?

   A. It's a systematic investigation designed to develop general
knowledge about a medical issue. Researchers, meaning doctors
and health scientists, prepare a protocol setting forth their
goals and how they plan to achieve them while conducting a study.
These studies are known as clinical trials. By contrast, in standard
care, the goal is to provide undivided attention to the patient.
"Medical research encompasses everything from trying to investigate
whether listening to classical music can decrease nausea associated
with chemotherapy all the way up to gene therapy studies," says
Cynthia Dunn, director of the Clinical Research Institute at the
University of Rochester.


   Q. Where are clinical trials done?

   A. Doctors' offices, universities, health care centers and hospitals.
In the past decade, the amount of research done at doctors' offices
and clinics has increased significantly, because there are more
patients available in those locations. Also, the drug industry
has turned to so-called Contract Research Organizations to manage
many trials, citing lower costs and faster results.

   Q. Are there various kinds of clinical trials?

   A. Yes. Phase 1 is a study of safety and dosage, usually done
with healthy volunteers paid for their participation. Phase 2
is an expanded version of Phase 1 but also looks for effectiveness.
Phase 3 studies also test effectiveness but in multiple locations;
positive results with few side effects are essential for marketing
approval by the Food and Drug Administration.

   Q. How do I know a clinical trial is legitimate?

   A. Generally, an investigator cannot enroll a subject in research
before obtaining the informed consent of the subject. The consent
form usually provides a phone number of a subject advocate, often
the Institutional Review Board, which must review and approve
research. These review boards are based at the site and play a
vital role in protecting subjects. In trials funded by the National
Institutes of Health (NIH), further information can be found at
www.nih.gov.

   Q. What are the potential benefits and risks if I enroll in
a clinical trial?

   An investigational drug might be more effective and have fewer
side effects than available drugs. Also, if you are at the end
stage of your disease, a trial might be an opportunity to contribute
to society as a test subject. The downside: You don't know what
the side effects might be, and the drug might be life-threatening.

   Q. Where is the best place to find a trial if I need one?

   A. The NIH Web site, which lists all of the trials it funds. There
are other helpful sites, such as www.clinicaltrials .com and centerwatch.com.

   Q. What are the basic elements of informed consent?

   A. This is the most important protection in human research. Federal
regulations require, among other things, the following to be included
in the consent form: a statement that a subject is participating
in an experiment; an explanation of the purposes of the study
and its expected duration; a description of the risks and potential
benefits; a statement describing how confidentiality will be maintained;
an explanation of compensation in case of injury; and a disclosure
of alternative treatments.

   Q. Can I back out of the trial whenever I wish?

   A. Yes. The informed consent document must state that participation
is voluntary. Federal regulations say that "the subject may discontinue
participation at any time without penalty or loss of benefits
to which the subject is otherwise entitled."

   Q. Who regulates clinical trials?

   A. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Its Office
for Human Research Protections monitors federally funded research.

   The FDA handles compliance for drugs and devices needing its approval.
Both agencies work closely with Institutional Review Boards.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Shameful past:
Modern clinical trials have safeguards, unlike the Tuskegee Syphilis Study, in
which patients were denied information and treatment.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2001


                             1947 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     February 25, 2001 Sunday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1397 words

HEADLINE: Heat device offers hope;
 Celsion finishing 20-year warm-up in anti-cancer field;
 'Star wars' technology;
 Tests show promise of breakthrough in noninvasive therapy

BYLINE: Julie Bell

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   It is against all odds that Columbia-based Celsion Corp. may soon offer the
world a new weapon against breast cancer.

   The company's unlikely cast of characters includes tumor-heating technology
recycled from the "star wars" anti-missile program, a chief executive officer
fired from a company that made coffeepots, and founder Augustine Y. Cheung, a
noted scientist who couldn't read a balance sheet when he began.

   But none of that matters to breast-cancer patients who may be able to avoid
mastectomies thanks to Celsion's latest focused-heat machine.

   In its first tests in people, the technology shrank or damaged tumors in
eight of 10 breast-cancer patients, all volunteers who hoped to help future
patients but were required to have mastectomies themselves.

   Unlike previous heat-focusing devices, including Celsion's old one, the new
machine apparently didn't burn healthy tissue surrounding tumors in initial
tests.

   "It's so much less invasive to put probes in you and zap," said Linda
O'Neill, 53, a Vero Beach, Fla., patient whose 2-inch breast tumor shrank to
half that size. "It was too late for me but if, five years down the road, some
women won't have to go through what I went through" it will have been worth it.

   It may not be that long. If Celsion gets similar results in the pivotal Phase
II human tests now beginning, the company hopes to get Food and Drug
Administration approval to put its new product on the market by the end of 2002.

   Another Celsion device that uses focused heat to immediately alleviate
problems associated with an enlarged prostate could be on the market by mid-2002
if approved, and the company has grand plans for other products.

   Among them: Tiny, heat-sensitive fat globules, known as liposomes, that can
carry chemotherapy drugs deep inside the body before focused heat signals them
to dump the drugs on cancerous cells.

   The tiny drug-carriers are being tested in animals with liver cancer at the
National Institutes of Health. In addition, Celsion is working with Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York to develop heat-activated gene therapy
to keep tumors from repairing themselves after radiation and chemotherapy.

   In short, it appears that publicly traded Celsion may finally be at the end
of its long and tortuous beginning.

   Besides the indefatigable Cheung, it owes no small thanks to a chance
encounter at a Little League baseball game. And it didn't hurt that Chief
Executive Officer Spencer Volk wanted to finish his career doing something other
than working at another consumer-products company after he was fired from a top
spot at Albert "Chainsaw" Dunlap's Sunbeam Corp. in 1996.

   "I thought it'd be nice to have it end on something as meaningful as this,"
said Volk, 67, of a career that has included stints as CEO of juice-maker
Tropicana Products Inc. and executive positions at PepsiCo International and Arm
& Hammer's parent company. "It's hilarious: I'm now being recruited to go run
biotech companies."

   With the Cold War winding down, Alan J. Fenn's superiors at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology's Lincoln Laboratory came to him with an assignment:
Find another use for the technology he had invented for the now-sidelined
Strategic Defense Initiative, a space-based program to detect and destroy
missiles. Fenn, who holds a doctorate in electrical engineering, holed up in the
library, thumbing through scientific journals until he came across a
possibility.

   An entire industry had come of age in the early 1980s on the promise of using
microwaves to heat up tumors and kill them. But the industry had fallen flat
once it became apparent that the first generation of microwave machines seemed
likely to burn patients with deep-seated tumors without eradicating their
cancers.

   Fenn's "star wars" radar system, like many others, worked in part by bouncing
microwaves off objects, throwing back echoes that helped determine a missile's
trajectory. But it also used software to more succinctly focus the microwaves
than did other systems, allowing the radar to home in on a moving target while
blocking out enemy jamming.

   It seemed to Fenn that focusing on a tumor had similarities: Doctors needed a
better way to aim microwaves so they would reach peak intensity in the tumor,
rather than in surrounding healthy tissue.

   But Fenn was at a loss as to what cancer to attack or how to design the
machine. His "eureka" moment came while sitting at his son's Little League
baseball game. "I was talking to a radiologist who reads mammograms," Fenn said,
The doctor spoke of the huge need for a breast-cancer treatment that wouldn't
rely on disfiguring surgery. "I could see how I wanted to design the system:
Like a mammogram!" Fenn said.

   He dialed up companies involved in microwave treatment, looking for one to
develop the technology. Cheung, by that time an expert in the field of what
would come to be known as thermotherapy, was prominent in the scientific
literature. After a few wrong numbers, Fenn got him on the line.

   'It will disappear'

   "I contacted all the companies in the field," Fenn said. "Dr. Cheung was the
only one to step up to the plate."

   Cheung had devoted his entire career to studying the use of microwave
therapy. He organized international symposiums on the subject. His early work
custom-designing microwave systems to treat cancer patients in conjunction with
radiation at the University of Maryland had convinced him it worked.

   "At that time I was certain, if you heat the tumor totally, it will
disappear," Cheung said.

   In 1981, he started Cheung Laboratories Inc. in Beltsville to develop and
market its own product. The company, renamed Celsion Corp., began selling its
first microwave therapy machine in 1989. But through 1994, the company had sold
only about 150 of the Microfocus 1000 machines worldwide for as little as
$60,000 apiece, despite Cheung's international marketing efforts.

   Dejected, Cheung decided to "refocus the company and give it one more try."
Serendipitously, Fenn found Cheung in 1993 and the two began to reshape the
technology for cancer. Cheung scraped together the money to license MIT's
technology in 1996.

   About the same time, Volk heard about Cheung from Walter B. Herbst of
engineering firm Herbst Lazar Bell Inc., a company with which both Celsion and
Sunbeam were working. Soon, Volk was Celsion's new chief executive.

   Volk plowed more than $500,000 of his own money into the company to help keep
it afloat. Under him, the company also brought in three new outside directors:
former Sandoz Pharma AG Chairman Max E. Link, former American College of
Surgeons President La Salle D. Leffall Jr., and Claude Tihon, the CEO of a
medical-device company who previously was research and technology assessment
vice president for a Pfizer Inc. subsidiary.

   Most importantly, Volk focused the company on getting two big potential
money-makers to market: The heat-focused machine for benign prostatic
hyperplasia, a problem with an estimated worldwide market of up to $10 billion,
and the breast cancer treatment.

   Uphill battle

   But after 20 years in business, Cheung and Celsion still face an uphill
battle. The company almost surely must find a pharmaceutical partner to help it
market its liposome products. Like other biotechnology companies, it soon will
need to raise cash. And it must get FDA approval for its first two products and
successfully market them - its biggest challenge in the past.

   "The general history of this sector is that people have done a lot of press
releases and never sold anything," industry analyst Jim D. McCamant said about
the use of focused heat. McCamant is editor at large of the Berkeley,
Calif.-based Medical Technology Stock Letter and an analyst with Moors & Cabot
Inc., a Boston-based investment banking firm that is working to raise money for
Celsion.

   There is no lack of excitement among doctors about what might be coming. Dr.
Robert Gardner, a surgeon and principal investigator on the Celsion breast
cancer trial at Columbia Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla., can't wait to try
the drug-carrying fat globules in conjunction with heat to see if the two
technologies in combination can kill some breast tumors entirely.

   "The little liposomes ... are a form of stealth chemotherapy," he said. "As
soon as they have that ready, we'd adore to use it."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO(S) / CHART(S), 1. 'Stars wars' medicine: Celsion Corp. founder
Augustine, Y. Cheung with his company's new heat-focusing device, designed to,
attack tumors without burning surrounding healthy tissue.; , 2. Using heat to
attack deep tumors; , 1. DOUG KAPUSTIN : SUN STAFF , 2. L.B. PEARL : SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2001


                             1948 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 25, 2001, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 1629 words

HEADLINE: GIANT IN THE PIPELINE AMGEN'S SUCCESS SIGNALS MATURING OF BIOTECH
SECTOR

BYLINE: By Anthony Shadid, Globe Staff

BODY:

   THOUSAND OAKS, Calif. - Not long ago Amgen, the world's largest biotechnology
company, shared its corporate headquarters with a limousine service and a local
choir society. It went by the name Applied Molecular Genetics and wagered
precious capital on turning hard science into genetically engineered dyes and
detergents and growth hormones for pigs, salmon and chickens.

   Much of that work went nowhere, but after switching to human therapeutic
research, Amgen went on to develop one of the most formidable drug pipelines in
the biotech industry. The company offers treatments for anemia, arthritis and
cancer. It now employs 7,000 people worldwide, many of them on a 120-acre site
in Southern California's Conejo Valley. Soon, it will establish a beachhead in
Cambridge to tap the local biotech community's capital and talent. In the
marketplace, Amgen looks more like a pharmaceutical company than the scrappy
biotech it once was.

      In many ways, Amgen's success symbolizes the maturing of the biotech
industry, whose companies have begun competing on more aggressive terms with the
huge multinational drug firms that have long overshadowed them and often called
the shots in deals to turn biotech developments into profitable products.

   Companies like Amgen and Genentech in South San Francisco are now big
companies themselves. They are more integrated, meaning they do not depend as
much as they once did on striking arrangements with the big drug players, and
the alliances and licensing deals they do enter are weighted more in their
favor.

   In the years ahead, the once-meek may inherit the market.

   "Amgen's grown up, and I think you'll see more and more biotech companies
doing the same," said Carl Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology Industry
Association, a trade group that represents companies and research centers. "A
lot of the biotech companies have excellent advantages and a lot of them are
holding excellent cards."

   Amgen has as good a hand as anyone.

   The company reported a 25 percent decline in net income in the fourth quarter
last year, stemming in part from its acquisition of Kinetix Pharmaceuticals Inc.
in Medford, Mass. And sales of one of its blockbuster drugs, Neupogen, which
increases white blood cell levels, have softened markedly. But Amgen still
posted profits last year of more than $1.1 billion and has had a run of good
news of late.

   Last month, US District Court Judge William Young in Boston ruled in its
favor in a closely watched patent dispute. He found that Amgen proved three of
its patents covering Epogen, the company's other major drug, were enforceable
and infringed by Cambridge-based Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., which had claimed
the patents were too broad.

   Epogen, which is used to treat anemia by increasing red blood cell levels,
brought Amgen nearly $2 billion in sales last year, one of the top-selling drugs
worldwide.

   Now, the company is hoping to have the same kind of success with several
other drugs in development, particularly Aranesp, a next-generation anemia drug
that, in the short run, will treat kidney disease and, as early as 2002, may
enter the more lucrative market for chemotherapy patients. Aranesp and at least
four other drugs that could come to market soon may push the company's annual
sales to between $8 billion and $9 billion by 2005, according to company
officials.

   Among those drugs are SD-01, a next-generation Neupogen treatment, and
Abarelix, a treatment for prostate cancer.

   "This wave of new products should carry the company for the next five years
probably," said David Molowa, an analyst with JP Morgan. "They're going to look
a lot more like [a big drug company] than your typical biotechnology company."

   That prominence has allowed Amgen to operate more and more like a
pharmaceutical company in its partnerships and licensing deals, a trend also
evident among other big biotech companies like Genentech. Amgen well remembers
the billions of dollars in sales it lost when, as a far younger company, it
struck an agreement with Johnson & Johnson that gave its bigger, more
established competitor the rights to market Epogen for everything but the kidney
dialysis market.

   Those kinds of agreements, the company says, are a thing of the past.

   "We don't deal with pharmaceutical companies in general. We are large enough
and have enough resources that we can bring to market our own products," said
Kevin Sharer, Amgen's chief executive.  "Our interest is in acquiring products
to develop from small companies rather than selling our own innovation to larger
companies."

   This summer, the company plans to move into an eight-story building in
Cambridge that once housed the Boston Hose Co., eventually setting up a research
staff of 100, including some Kinetix employees. The move into turf already
occupied by biotech giants like Biogen Inc. and Genzyme was motivated in part by
the company's desire to become a member of what some industry observers say is
the nation's number one biotech center, according to company spokesman David
Kaye.

   "We've participated in it to date from afar," he said. "To be integrated in
that community, you really need to be physically there."

   Other biotech companies are also seeking to expand by going beyond their
traditional roles as research centers to take on manufacturing, sales and
marketing. Like Amgen, they are all on the prowl for products from their younger
brethren. Genentech has stood out among these firms, as have Biogen, Genzyme - a
group Sharer calls "elder statesmen." Even second-tier companies are doing deals
with smaller biotech firms.

   "It used to be that pharmaceutical companies financed drug development with
retained earnings and biotech companies did it with equity capital, but that is
not true of the mature first-generation biotech companies anymore," said Joe
Dougherty, senior biotechnology analyst at Lehman Brothers. "Amgen doesn't need
to go out there and raise money. They buy a billion of their stock back every
year."

   "The distinctions between biotechnology companies and pharmaceutical
companies are being blurred," he added.

   So blurred, in fact, that Dougherty recalls a meeting earlier this winter at
Eli Lilly and Co., the traditional drug maker based in Indianapolis. At the
meeting, the company tried to convince analysts of its core identity as a
biotech firm. One reason was that biotech firms have enjoyed large runups in
their stock prices, as investors are lured by the prospects of breakthrough
treatments and advances in human genome research.

   The big biotech companies aren't the only ones profiting from a maturing
industry. Gone are the days when a start-up sold the rights to promising drugs
like Epogen, making sure there would be money for developing new products but
getting little more than royalties in return. Now they insist on substantial
profit-sharing.

   Biotech investment has posted record numbers, and even smaller firms have
cash in reserves. Their products, meanwhile, are making their mark: a record 32
drugs were approved by the FDA last year, up from 22 in 2000 and just seven in
1994. In all, 113 biotech products are on the market and 350 are in late-stage
development, the final step before approval, according to the Biotechnology
Industry Organization.

   With patents set to expire and pipelines less than full, the big drug
companies seem more anxious than ever to make deals with biotech companies - an
implicit acknowledgment that their methods for product development don't stand
up to the biotech companies' sophisticated techniques.

   The number of alliances between pharmaceutical and biotech companies have
decreased - to 158 in 2000 from a high of 235 in 1997 - but terms are better and
money is bigger.

   "The smaller companies are becoming more sophisticated in how they deal with
the larger companies," Sharer said. "What we see is that the cost of innovation,
the price of innovation is going up. All the larger companies are hungrier for
products, there aren't very many choices for truly innovative products, and
we're all out looking for them."

   Examples abound:

   Bayer AG, the giant German drug company, recently signed a deal with CuraGen,
a small biotech, to invest $1.3 billion jointly over 15 years to develop drugs
for obesity and diabetes. Unlike past deals, New Haven-based CuraGen gets a
nearly 50 percent stake in products that emerge. Other major pharmaceutical
firms, including Novartis and Aventis have struck major deals with small biotech
companies, promising as much as 50 percent of profits of any drugs that reach
the market.

   The challenge for the biotech companies, though, is to keep the pipelines
full. Even Amgen, despite having a lineup that most companies would envy,
worries about the next wave of prospective products. As officials readily admit,
its early-stage drugs are far less impressive than its current drug list.

   "We've got some work to do, and I think we've got time to do it," Sharer
said.

   The cost of looking more like a pharmaceutical means competing with the
pharmaceuticals, too. Nearly all of Amgen's new drugs will enter a competitive
market. Abarelix faces several established prostate cancer treatments.

   "For the first time, they're going to have some competition against big
pharmaceuticals," said Molowa, the analyst.

   And that challenge means Amgen - and other biotech companies in its class -
will have to maintain the entrepreneurial skill, quick decision-making,
flexibility and speedy clinical trials that marked its success in the first
place.

   "For Amgen, we'll have the issues of scale," Sharer said.  "We're going to be
a very, very large company. The management of size is going to be a challenge
and everything that goes with that."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. The Liquid Handling Robotic Station in use at Amgen's labs in
California. The biotech giant will open offices in Cambridge. / GLOBE
PHOTOS/JENNIFER TAYLOR 2. The Cold Tube Store for Micro Tubes remains at
minus-20 degrees Celsius at Amgen Labs in Thousand Oaks, Calif. 3. Michael
Johnson, a research scientist, working in a lab at Amgen's California
headquarters. / GLOBE PHOTO / JENNIFER TAYLOR

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2001


                             1949 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            February 25, 2001 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 14WC; Column 2; Westchester Weekly Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1964 words

HEADLINE: From County Hospital To Regional Medical Center

BYLINE:   By CLAUDIA ROWE

BODY:

   BEFORE he left his last job in the fall, Dr. Laszlo Fuzesi, a 45-year-old
surgeon, had the surreal experience of being surrounded by 200 people who might
not have been alive without him. Yet there they were, giving him a goodbye party
at Beth Israel Medical Center in Newark, where Dr. Fuzesi had created the heart
transplant program.

        "It was quite emotional," he said, sitting cross-legged in his new
office at Westchester Medical Center in Valhalla, where he is leading the effort
to build another transplant program. "Heart patients are unique, I think. They
are always so appreciative and there are so many great stories, you really get
caught up in it. Besides, as their doctor you're allowed to do some pretty
dramatic things."

    His employers at Westchester Medical Center hope that Dr. Fuzesi, who has
performed more than 250 heart transplants, will bring dramatic new capabilities
to their facility, which they are trying to position as the region's premiere
hospital outside New York City.

   Hiring Dr. Fuzesi is only one step in that journey for the 1,000-bed medical
center. Its parent corporation has invested $6 million for heart transplant
start-up costs and Dr. Fuzesi, sometimes known to play classic rock 'n' roll
during the delicate operations, expects to perform 12 such procedures this year,
though none have been scheduled to date.

   "All he really needs is a cape and a big red S on his chest," said Frank
Maybry, 53, who underwent a quadruple bypass under Dr. Fuzesi's hands several
weeks ago. "You ought to see him leaping around, finding the time to come and
see everybody. They really brought in a world-class guy."

   Since Westchester Medical Center separated from the county government in
1997, it has undergone a stunning growth spurt, industry experts say, pushing
its pediatric, cardiac and cancer programs into high gear while expanding its
geographic reach with satellite offices around the Hudson Valley.

   In 1999, just two years out of its government management, the hospital became
the first in the region to offer gene therapy for inoperable heart disease, the
first and only hospital in the state recognized by the American College of
Surgeons as a top-level trauma center for children, and, according to the state
Department of Health, among the most successful programs in New York for
treating critically ill newborns.

   "They stand out in the sense that they have converted and converted so
successfully, quickly achieving success on their own, when mostly there are
outright closures of public hospitals," said Jeannie Cross, a spokeswoman for
the Health Care Association of New York in Albany, which represents 550
nonprofit and public health care facilities around the state. "They've also
broadened their scope and their geographic range more than any other public
hospital that's converted in recent years."

   Dr. Fuzesi's arrival last fall is the latest piece of this attempt at
transformation from county hospital to major player. But the 22-year-old cardiac
program he joined already had a strong track record. In 1999, an overwhelming
majority of 614 Westchester households surveyed by the National Research
Corporation chose Westchester Medical when asked, "Which hospital would you
prefer for heart care services?"

   The mission now is to extend that reputation and become the medical center of
choice for the 3.6 million residents of northen New Jersey, lower Connecticut,
and Westchester, Rockland, Putnam, Dutchess, Ulster, Orange and Sullivan
Counties.

   To that end, Westchester Medical spent $1.5 million to buy a foundering
community hospital in Ellenville, in Ulster County, saving the bankrupt facility
and linking its staff with the one on the Valhalla campus, the first time a
hospital with public ties had done such a thing in New York State.

   "I hope in time that we look at our service area as the whole northeastern
United States," Edward A. Stolzenberg, the hospital's president, said. "That may
sound presumptuous but that's what we're striving to do."

   In a large fish tank in the medical center's lobby, a harmonious-looking
cross section of the underwater world swims peacefully. Several yards away a
music therapist is playing a shiny grand piano around which families have
gathered to request old standards. An older man whose wife is being treated
upstairs asks to hear their wedding song; a young couple wonder if the pianist
might play their sick child's favorite tune.

   The tableau neither looks nor sounds like a county hospital -- or even what
one might imagine of a former county hospital -- which is just what Westchester
Medical's administration intends.

   Still, there are hints of the past everywhere: old signs imprinted with the
county logo dot the 92-acre campus. Handcuffed prisoners from the county prison
shuffle through the hallways with police officers at either elbow. Inside the
hospital's 20 operating rooms, the walls are an institutional green and the
lighting is harsh.

   The medical center, which traces its roots back to 1917 when the federal
government used the site during World War I, remained a strictly government
entity until 1997. And though its 15-member board is still appointed by the
county executive, the hospital is free of official government oversight.

   Nevertheless, Westchester County is still essential to the hospital's
survival, having guaranteed two loans through 2007 for a total of $95 million.
Now, as a public benefit corporation (similar to the Metropolitan Transportation
Authority -- independent but part of the public infrastructure) it has a $400
million annual budget and employs more than 4,000 people.

   "It would have been much more difficult to have gotten as far as we've gotten
in this relatively short time if we had remained a division of county
government," said Dr. Michael Gewitz, director of pediatrics, who is overseeing
the $145 million construction of a separate children's hospital on the site.
"The ability to have programs develop quickly without having to go back to
county authorities to get them accomplished has been a breath of new life,
frankly, to the medical center."

   But how much of the new space and technology is actually needed, and how much
is for prestige?

   Mr. Stolzenberg admitted: "Prestige, I won't lie to you, is an important
factor for us. We're always fighting for recognition. We're the new kid on the
block in a sense, with Columbia-Presbyterian and Mount Sinai and Albany Medical
Center and the other top-flight facilities around here. We're fighting a battle
that's not an easy one. They already have that name recognition."

   About 100 heart transplants, for instance, are performed each year in New
York State, the bulk of them in Manhattan. Westchester hopes to do about a dozen
in 2001. But Buffalo Medical Center, which obtained permission to do the
operations in 1998, closed its program last year for lack of patients.

   Westchester Medical is indeed competing for patients with other major medical
centers. But it appears to be gaining ground. There were nearly 24,000 visits to
its emergency room last year, an increase of about 3,000from 1999.

   The number of pediatric patients has tripled since 1996 and the neonatal
center now treats more than 700 sick newborns annually, performing more than 100
pediatric heart operations. Not to mention doing 17,000 pounds of laundry a day.

   "A few years ago none of this would have been possible to do under a county
government," said Arthur E. Weintraub, president of the Northern Metropolitan
Hospital Association, in Newburgh. "Westchester found that it was saddled with
typical government bureaucracy and it had to emerge from that in order to
compete effectively."

   One reason the medical center has been successful, Ms. Cross said, is simple
demographics. Situated in a concentrated, comparatively affluent region, the
hospital has been able to afford its ambitious expansion plans where others have
not.

   "The town of Corinth, for example, in Adirondack, is a logging and paper
town," Ms. Cross said. "They just didn't have the population or the wealth and
the level of insurance of a place like Westchester County." Like most of the
state's public and community hospitals, the 30-bed facility there was forced to
close.

   Meanwhile, Westchester has been able to raise $21 million through private
donations for its children's hospital, something that would also have been
impossible under the old county arrangement.

   "I have been at the medical center since 1983, and I have seen all of the
programs grow dramatically," Dr. Gewitz said. "Where people used to regard this
as a glorified community hospital, it is now truly an academic medical center."

   There are still plenty of rough edges to be smoothed. The heart transplant
program is behind schedule. Patients who praise the center's doctors and nurses
complain about its unappetizing food, uncomfortable beds and unpredictable
showers. Parking has been the No. 1 complaint of visitors for six years.

   Still, administrators are aggressively promoting their strong points. On a
recent Wednesday, Dr. Fuzesi was not taking patients, having devoted his entire
day to marketing and public relations.

   In addition, the television show "Doctors' Diaries," featuring Westchester
Medical Center physicians and patients, has been broadcast on the Cable Health
Network since January.

   The question is, who's watching? Are Westchester residents convinced that
their local medical center should be the first choice for advanced care, rather
than, say, New York Presbyterian in Manhattan?

   At first, Karen DePietro, a Mount Kisco resident, was not. When her
8-year-old son, Matthew, had persistent headaches and a high fever she was upset
that his pediatrician recommended she take him to Westchester Medical Center for
tests.

   "I was angry and frightened," Ms. DePietro said. "I'd had an awful experience
there myself years ago, during the 70's, so I was worried about his care.
Frankly, I didn't want him to go there. I think when it was with the county,
they sort of just let it go."

   But doctors at Westchester Medical diagnosed meningitis, a potentially deadly
brain disease in Matthew, and today after treatment he is a healthy 10-year-old.
Ms. DePietro, meanwhile, had such a change of heart that she has become one of
the hospital's leading fund-raisers.

   "The doctors who took care of Matthew were wonderful," she said. "And to go
into the city is a very big hassle. To have the medical center right here in our
backyard is such a comfort."

   In 1999, the most recent year for which figures are available, about 55
percent of the medical center's patients came from Westchester, 32 percent from
the larger Hudson Valley region and about 6 percent -- 1,450 people -- traveled
north from New York City. Others came from upstate, Long Island, New Jersey and
Connecticut.

   Brenda and John Fereri looked to Westchester Medical when their 13-year-old
daughter, Maria, began complaining of neck pain. Their community hospital in
Greenwich had no answers, and the idea of taking Maria to New York was
overwhelming.

   "The illness of a child is extremely traumatic, and being unfamiliar, going
into the city was kind of too much for me," Ms. Fereri said. "It's a whole other
world."

   Maria died from what doctors determined was rabies from a bat bite that had
gone undetected. Yet her parents were so impressed with Westchester Medical's
doctors and so dismayed by the shortcomings of the building that they have since
donated millions of dollars for the new children's hospital, which will be named
for their daughter.

   Ms. DePietro said: "I think more and more people are thinking of Westchester
Medical Center as a hospital they would go to themselves. They've brought in
much better doctors and to have such a high level of care right in our backyard,
why would I go to the city?"

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 4, 2001

CORRECTION:

   An article last Sunday about Westchester Medical Center referred incompletely
to the appointment process for its 15-member board. The governor and the County
Legislature make appointments; the county executive only recommends three
members. Ten are selected by the County Legislature, and one each by the State
Senate majority leader and the Assembly speaker.

   The article also misspelled the surnames of the child in whose memory a new
children's hospital was named, and of a Mount Kisco woman whose son was treated
at the hospital for meningitis. The child was Maria Fareri, not Fereri; the
Mount Kisco mother is Karen DiPietro, not DePietro.

GRAPHIC: Photos: A new operating room at Westchester Medical Center in Valhalla.
This year the hospital expects to begin performing heart transplants in its
quest to become the region's leading hospital outside New York City. Below, the
building's main entrance. (Photographs by Chris Maynard for The New York
Times)(pg. 1); From left, Kathy Brown, a transplant clinician; Jackie Caffrey, a
critical care nurse, and Dr. Laszlo Fuzesi in the postoperative intensive care
unit at Westchester Medical Center. Dr. Fuzesi is heading up the hospital's
heart transplant program. (Chris Maynard for The New York Times)(pg. 7)

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2001


                             1950 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 23, 2001, Friday

SECTION: ZONE;Pg. NC-4

LENGTH: 449 words

HEADLINE: Teen Leader; Girl honored for raising money for cancer research

BYLINE: Kelly O'Connor; COMMUNITY NEWS WRITER

BODY:
 CARMEL VALLEY -- When Carrie Hamerslag was younger, she would put her dollar
allowance in the charity tins at grocery-store checkouts.

   Now, at only 15 years old, she has helped raise $70,000 for cancer research.

   For her efforts, the sophomore at Torrey Pines High School has been chosen a
recipient of the KGTV/Channel 10 10Leadership Award.

   "If you had told me last year that I would be getting the 10Leadership Award,
I would have laughed," Carrie said.

   But her mother, Jean, wasn't surprised at all.  "She's always had good
ideas," she said.

   At the age of 12, Jean Hamerslag said, Carrie saved up her allowance for one
year and donated it to the Make-A-Wish Foundation.  "She was born with that
giving gene," Jean Hamerslag said.

   The selection committee at KGTV chooses one individual each week to receive
the 10Leadership Award.  Those chosen are community members who make a
difference in the lives of others.

   The day after Christmas two years ago, Carrie felt the reality of cancer when
her mom was diagnosed with ovarian cancer.

   Four months later, the Hamerslags found out she was misdiagnosed.

   But Carrie had been inspired by her family's trying time and decided to find
a way to help support cancer research.  She now has a fund in her name -- The
Carrie Hamerslag Cancer Research Fund at the Salk Institute in La Jolla has
raised $70,000 to date.

   "This was a really hard time for my family," Carrie said.  "I would like to
prevent other families from going through what we went through."

   In one evening last November, Carrie raised $43,000 through a silent auction
at the Salk Institute that featured her mother's ceramic artwork.  The proceeds
of the auction went to gene therapy cancer research being done by Dr. Inder
Verma at the institute.

   Anne Mound, director of fund-raising at the Salk Institute, said the
donations are still coming in.  "We just got one for $1,000 the other day," she
said.

   The money goes to support the post-doctoral fellows at the institute.  One
has already been hired to help Verma with his research.

   Carrie said the 10Leadership Award is a reminder to her of what she can
accomplish.

   "A lot of people my age don't think they can make a difference," she said.
"That's what I thought for a while.  Then I did it and proved I could."

   Carrie plans to continue to raise money for cancer research and explore new
fund-raising projects.  Now that she has one auction under her belt, she would
like to plan another that this time includes art work by local artists in
addition to her mother's work.

   Do you have a story idea for Carmel Valley?  Contact Kelly O'Connor at (760)
476-8221 or kelly.oconnor@uniontrib.com.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; Nelvin Cepeda / Union-Tribune; Carrie Hamerslag placed ceramic
boots created by her mother, Jean, on display for an auction at the Salk
Institute in La Jolla in November. Carrie has received the KGTV/Channel 10
10Leadership Award for her fundraising for cancer research.

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2001


                             1951 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            February 23, 2001 Friday

SECTION: ZONE ; Pg. NC-4

LENGTH: 438 words

HEADLINE: Teen Leader;
Girl honored for raising money for cancer research

BYLINE: Kelly O'Connor, COMMUNITY NEWS WRITER

DATELINE: CARMEL VALLEY

BODY:

   CARMEL VALLEY -- When Carrie Hamerslag was younger, she would put her dollar
allowance in the charity tins at grocery-store checkouts. Now, at only 15 years
old, she has helped raise $70,000 for cancer research. For her efforts, the
sophomore at Torrey Pines High School has been chosen a recipient of the
KGTV/Channel 10 10Leadership Award. "If you had told me last year that I would
be getting the 10Leadership Award, I would have laughed," Carrie said. But her
mother, Jean, wasn't surprised at all.

   "She's always had good ideas," she said. At the age of 12, Jean Hamerslag
said, Carrie saved up her allowance for one year and donated it to the
Make-A-Wish Foundation.

   "She was born with that giving gene," Jean Hamerslag said. The selection
committee at KGTV chooses one individual each week to receive the 10Leadership
Award.

   Those chosen are community members who make a difference in the lives of
others. The day after Christmas two years ago, Carrie felt the reality of cancer
when her mom was diagnosed with ovarian cancer. Four months later, the
Hamerslags found out she was misdiagnosed. But Carrie had been inspired by her
family's trying time and decided to find a way to help support cancer research.

   She now has a fund in her name -- The Carrie Hamerslag Cancer Research Fund
at the Salk Institute in La Jolla has raised $70,000 to date. "This was a really
hard time for my family," Carrie said.

   "I would like to prevent other families from going through what we went
through." In one evening last November, Carrie raised $43,000 through a silent
auction at the Salk Institute that featured her mother's ceramic artwork. The
proceeds of the auction went to gene therapy cancer research being done by Dr.
Inder Verma at the institute. Anne Mound, director of fund-raising at the Salk
Institute, said the donations are still coming in.

   "We just got one for $1,000 the other day," she said. The money goes to
support the post-doctoral fellows at the institute.

   One has already been hired to help Verma with his research. Carrie said the
10Leadership Award is a reminder to her of what she can accomplish. "A lot of
people my age don't think they can make a difference," she said. "That's what I
thought for a while.

   Then I did it and proved I could." Carrie plans to continue to raise money
for cancer research and explore new fund-raising projects.

   Now that she has one auction under her belt, she would like to plan another
that this time includes art work by local artists in addition to her mother's
work. Do you have a story idea for Carmel Valley?

   Contact Kelly O'Connor at (760) 476-8221 or kelly.oconnor@uniontrib.com.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Carrie Hamerslag placed ceramic boots created by her
mother, Jean, on display for an auction at the Salk Institute in La Jolla in
November. Carrie has received the KGTV/Channel 10 10Leadership Award for her
fundraising for cancer research.; PHOTOBY: Nelvin Cepeda / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1952 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                    February 22, 2001 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 427 words

HEADLINE: Networking on a new scale

BYLINE: FRANZEN

BODY:

   Science has reached the top of another hill that gives us a new and better
view of the world around us. But what the new view reveals more than anything
else is that there are lots more mountains to climb.

   The mapping of the human genome is an accomplishment in biology as
significant as anything that has come before it, and the people involved deserve
accolades as great as any ever given to Darwin or Mendel.

   But as stunning as this feat is, the surprise that accompanied it was just as
stunning: It turns out that humans have fewer genes than scientists imagined --
30,000 to 40,000, only twice as many as a worm.

   That fact implies that gene therapy may not be the cure-all for disease and
defects as was once thought. Because there are so few genes, manipulating one of
them to obtain a certain effect could have all sorts of unintended and unwelcome
consequences.

   It appears that the relationships between genes and proteins, which are
controlled by genes, may be the key to understanding human biology, just as they
are the key to understanding the environment of the larger world around us. And
it turns out that networking and relationships may be as important at the
molecular level as they are in, say, business and families.

   It also appears from the studies that the differences between any two people
are relatively small. That should -- but probably won't -- bury once and for all
the bad old idea that some people are genetically different from, and superior
to, others.

   Advanced research already has begun. Celera Genomics Inc., the private firm
that sequenced one version of the genome, is moving into the new science, called
proteomics, where it hopes to find new ways to fight cancer.

   And from that stems another lesson: the importance of private industry in the
advancement of science. Two groups of scientists accomplished the same thing,
but the scientists at the publicly funded Human Genome Project did it in 10
years while the scientists at Celera did it in three. At the very least, this
hints that entrepreneurship can be at least as important in stimulating genius
as government money.

   It also suggests that public-private partnerships might be able to accomplish
great things if given a chance (as one did last week when a private group's
space probe launched by NASA did the near impossible and landed on an asteroid).

   The mapping of the human gene has shown us that there are more mountains
ahead, but it also shows us that networking -- another term for working together
-- might be the best way to climb them.

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2001


                             1953 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    February 21, 2001 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 001

LENGTH: 735 words

HEADLINE: Gene discovery gives hope to asthmatics

BYLINE: By Jennifer Heldt Powell

BODY:

   NEW YORK - A research team led by a small Waltham biotech company has
discovered at least one gene that causes asthma, a finding that could lead to a
cure for millions who suffer from the deadly disease.

   Locating the gene is expected to help researchers figure out how it works and
how to stop it. The company, Genome Therapeutics Corp., plans to make public the
discovery today at an investment conference in New York.

   "If you could target this gene effectively, you could reduce the occurence of
asthma in 20 percent to 50 percent of the patients with the disease," said
Steven M. Rauscher, Genome's chief executive.

   About 17.3 million Americans suffer from asthma, including 5 million
children. Asthma kills an estimated 5,500 people each year, the American Lung
Association has estimated.

   Genome Therapeutics led the four-year effort to find the asthma gene along
with drug industry giant Schering-Plough Corp. of Kenilworth, N.J.

   There are treatments for asthma but no way to stop it. Since 1980, the number
of Americans with asthma has increased 154 percent, the U.S. Centers for Disease
Control has said, and the number is expected to nearly double in the next 20
years.

   "It's a very common disease," said Dr. Francis M. Cuss, Schering-Plough's
vice president of biological research. "It represents a very important economic
burden, as well as being quite unpleasant."

   Last year, costs associated with the disease topped $ 14.5 billion, the
company estimated.

   Asthma is also described as the leading cause of absenteeism in school,
responsible for some 10 million missed days in Amercian schools each year.

   "The discovery of this gene is an important advance in our understanding of
the genetic causes of asthma," said Dr. Stephen Holgate, a collaborator on the
project and a professor at the University of Southampton's medical school in
Britain. "The discovery of this gene provides an innovative target for
therapeutic intervention that has not been previously predicted or characterized
by the research community."

   Asthma attacks appear to be triggered by environmental causes in people who
are genetically susceptible. "There have been a number of genes linked to asthma
but this is the first (research) that identifies a susceptibility to it in a
large percentage of the population," Cuss said.

   "It gives us the opportunity to look at the underlying causes of asthma amd
it tells us something about the mechanism," he said.  "It should open up some
interesting avenues of research."

   It's not clear how the gene works, he said, but it is probably an interaction
of several genes.

   The search for genes has become more intense in recent years because
researchers believe understanding them will lead to targeting medicines with
fewer side effects. Technological advances are also making it easier to identify
genes.

   "By finding the gene we are better able to understand how the gene functions
and what makes it malfunction. Then hopefully we can find ways to turn it on or
turn it off," said Janice Bourque, president of the Massachusetts Biotechnology
Council.

   In general, gene therapy researchers can help develop tests to find if people
are susceptible to certain diseases, she said. This information can be used to
prevent a disease or discover it earlier.

   Genome Therapeutics' recent discovery is the first using a new method
developed by the company that involves analyzing information collected from
hundreds of families. Researchers compared genetic information from siblings who
had asthma to information from those who do not.

   "It really is a validation of our approach," said Genome's Rauscher.

   Researchers studied families from the United States and England's south
coast. Genome Therapeutics will continue to try to find other genes associated
with asthma, while Schering-Plough works on treatments.

   The companies are considering developing a clinical test that could be used
to identify individuals who are susceptible to asthma.

   The discovery also brings a financial gain for Genome Therapeutics in the
form of a milestone payment from Schering-Plough which could be as much as $ 76
million. That doesn't include potential royalties from future treatments.

   Photo Caption: Scientists Shawn Flynn and Katheryn Irenze work yesterday at
Genome Therapeutics Corp., in Waltham, which has discovered a gene that causes
asthma. Staff photo by Mark Garfinkel


LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2001


                             1954 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2001 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                   February 20, 2001 Tuesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: WEST ZONER; Pg. B02

LENGTH: 477 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH FACILITY MOVES TO HILLSBORO

SOURCE: NATHAN ISAACS - The Oregonian

DATELINE: HILLSBORO

BODY:

   Summary: An open house today at OHSU's West Campus shows off the Neurological
Sciences Institute's home

   The Oregon Health Sciences University officially opens a new
60,000-square-foot research facility today at its West Campus in Hillsboro,
which also houses the Oregon Regional Primate Research Center.

   The new and publically financed facility is for the Neurological Sciences
Institute, a team of scientists whose research of the brain ranges from the
molecular level to clinical studies in human patients. It is being relocated
from its leased space at Legacy Good Samaritan Hospital in Portland.

   Neurological sciences research includes studies of neurological disorders in
order to develop new treatments and cures, said Jim Newman, an OHSU spokesman.

   Scientists at the institute research Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease
and new methods to rehabilitate stroke victims. The institute also investigates
other afflictions, such as motion sickness, learning disorders, glaucoma,
communication disorders, hypertension and back pain.

   Sometime in the next two months, the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute will
open its door at an adjoining research building.

   A grand opening celebration for the Neurological Sciences Institute is
planned for 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. today at the building, 505 N.W. 185th Ave. OHSU
President Dr. Peter Kohler and U.S. Rep. David Wu, D-Ore. will attend the
festivities. Scientists will be available to demonstrate and explain their
research.

   Newman said the open house provides an opportunity to meet the scientists and
see how taxpayers' money is being spent at the institute.

   The $23 million building contains 23 laboratories, including a couple that
have movable floors to see how the body reacts to working off-kilter during
balance-disorder experiments.

   The institute was formally established in 1975, but dates to 1959. It joined
the Oregon Health Sciences University in 1998. Also that year, Hillsboro
approved a master plan for OHSU to expand its development of the West Campus to
include the two research facilities and a beefed-up regional primate research
center.

   The West Campus also is home to the primate research center, where medical
research on laboratory animals has drawn criticism from animal rights activists
and charges of animal cruelty by a former employee last summer. The U.S.
Department of Agriculture has cleared the center of any wrongdoing but mandated
the facility plan improvements on the housing, feeding and collection of monkeys
by March 1.

   OHSU is seeking to raise $500 million from private sources and the
Legislature, with about $6.4 million earmarked for the Neurological Sciences
Institute. The money would pay for the construction of research laboratories,
support recruitment of top-tier scientists and establish an endowment to help
support research.

GRAPHIC: Sidebar text -- GRAND OPENING

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2001


                             1955 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2001 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                   February 20, 2001 Tuesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; NORTH ZONER; Pg. B03, CITIES & SUBURBS Metro Area
Roundup

LENGTH: 621 words

HEADLINE: FOREST GROVE SCHOOL BOARD WILL BUY BUILDING FOR BUSES,ALTERNATIVE
SCHOOL

BODY:


   FOREST GROVE

   School board will buy building for buses, alternative school

   The Forest Grove School Board has agreed to spend $3.2 million to buy a
former steel truss plant that the district will convert into a bus barn,
warehouse and alternative school.

   School board members approved the purchase at a special meeting last week.

   The district will pay $2.2 million in cash and will trade $440,000 in land
for the 70,000-square-foot building, said Mike Schofield, the district's
business manager.

   The building, owned by Joe Chamberlain, is south of the city near the
National Guard Armory, 2701 Taylor Way.

   It will house the district's transportation fleet, maintenance operation,
grounds crews and supply warehouse, Schofield said. An alternative high school
will occupy 3,000 square feet of office space at the front of the building.

   The district also will lease about 10,000 square feet to a welding business.

   Schofield said the deal will cost the district about $3.2 million because of
city-required safety renovations, including two firewalls and an oil
drainage-and-collection system that he anticipates costing as much as $350,000.


   HILLSBORO

   Police union, city near deal on pay raise, health coverage

   The Hillsboro Police Officers' Association is expected to approve a proposed
wage increase today, after lawyers from the union and city agreed on how much
the 93 union members owed the city for health insurance.

   The union's three-year contract, which expires in June, allowed it to seek a
wage increase in the deal's last year. The city and union reached a tentative
agreement earlier this month on a one-year, 6.7 percent raise for sworn officers
and a one-year, 8.7 percent raise for nonsworn clerks, secretaries and parking
enforcement agents. The increase would be retroactive to July 1.

   But the city also sought $811 from each union employee, about $75,000, to pay
for benefits that exceeded what the city earlier agreed to pay.

   During a four-hour meeting Friday, the union objected to the city's figure
because it was too high, said union lawyer Mark Makler.

   The city later accepted as much as $250 from each union member, depending on
hire date, or about $23,000.

   As part of the agreement, the 66 sworn and 27 nonsworn union members will
receive their retroactive checks for the wage increase by March 30. In addition
to the raises, union members received a 2 percent cost-of-living adjustment July
1.


   Neurological institute opens site on OHSU West Campus

   The Oregon Health Sciences University officially opens a new
60,000-square-foot research facility today at its West Campus in Hillsboro,
which also houses the Oregon Regional Primate Research Center.

   The new facility is for the Neurological Sciences Institute, a team of
scientists whose research of the brain ranges from the molecular level to
clinical studies in human patients. It is being relocated from leased space at
Legacy Good Samaritan Hospital in Portland.

   Neurological sciences research includes studies of neurological disorders in
order to develop new treatments and cures, said Jim Newman, an OHSU spokesman.

   Scientists at the institute research Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease
and new methods to rehabilitate stroke victims. The institute also investigates
other afflictions, such as motion sickness, learning disorders, glaucoma,
communication disorders, hypertension and back pain.

   The neurological institute was formally established in 1975 but dates to
1959. It joined the Oregon Health Sciences University in 1998.

   Sometime in the next two months, the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute will
open its door at an adjoining research building.


LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2001


                             1956 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    FEBRUARY 20, 2001 Tuesday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1543 words

HEADLINE: AUTISM A TEST CASE FOR GENOME RESEARCH

BYLINE: Faye Flam INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   If all the hoopla is to be believed, the mapping of the human genome will
lead to cures for everything from cancer to heart disease, diabetes,
Alzheimer's, schizophrenia and autism.Indeed, the $3 billion Human Genome
Project was promoted to the public with the promise that it would eventually
help families like the Rizzos of Yardley.

   The Rizzos have three sons affected with relatively mild versions of autism.
John, 14, and 12-year-old twins Vincent and Danny all have experienced periods
of odd preoccupation and isolation.

   If the Human Genome Project (and its private competitor) is to fulfill the
promise to alleviate human suffering, autism could be a test case - it's a
disease that strikes children and robs them of much of an entire life, rather
than shaving a few years off the end.

   It won't be as easy as originally thought.

   That's because autism - like cancer, heart disease and most of the other big
killers - is a so-called complex disease. It is caused by a complicated mix of
multiple genes and environmental triggers.

   It is theorized that autism, for instance, may be triggered by a type of
food, a drug, exposure to a chemical, or an infection - all working in tandem
with various genes.

   Unlike single-gene diseases such as cystic fibrosis, hemophilia and
sickle-cell anemia, there may be hundreds of ways to become autistic.

   No cure has been found for even the simple genetic diseases. The challenges
for curing complex ones such as autism are far greater.

   Autism is a mysterious condition that many people first glimpsed in the movie
Rain Man. The character played by Dustin Hoffman - like the Rizzo boys - had a
level of autism that allowed him to function. Many others with the disease fare
much worse: They are locked in an isolated world, unable to speak, compelled to
flap their arms or endlessly repeat jingles from the radio.

   With her children facing an uncertain future, Regina Rizzo wonders whether
genetic research will eventually help - perhaps by leading to new drugs.

   "My hope is that they'll find something," she said.

   In fact, autism has attracted many researchers because it seems more clearly
genetic than, say, cancer or heart disease. It ravages families, often striking
two or three siblings.

   "Scientists are driven by what they think they can tackle," said Joseph
Buxbaum, a geneticist at New York's Mount Sinai School of Medicine who has moved
on from Alzheimer's to autism. Of the complex diseases, he said, "autism might
be the easiest one to address."

   *

   To connect genes to diseases, scientists undertake a kind of detective work,
rounding up hundreds of families, drawing their blood, and looking for patterns
of disease inheritance that match similarities they can read in DNA.

   The Rizzo family in Yardley is part of the investigation, having given blood
to a database of more than 300 families known as the Autism Genetic Resources
Exchange. Researchers use the database to try to determine which genes are
linked to autism.

   What the genome projects did was to spell out most of the three billion
characters of chemical code in the DNA of a small sample of humans.

   Monumental as those efforts were, they did not figure out what each gene
does. And because they analyzed the DNA of healthy people, the results by
themselves say nothing specific about disease.

   Autism runs in families, but not in the way it would if it were caused by a
single-gene defect such as cystic fibrosis. In identical twins, about 60 percent
share their autism, which scientists take as evidence of a genetic influence.
And yet, in about 40 percent of cases where one twin has autism, the other,
while sharing the exact same genetic blueprint, does not.

   It is striking proof that genes do not determine everything.

   *

   Mount Sinai's Buxbaum has scrutinized the DNA from members of several hundred
families with two or more siblings who have autism, trying to figure out what
genes the autistic children inherited that the others did not.

   The human genome is broken into 23 chromosomes, each identified by a number
except for the sex chromosomes, X and Y. Different researchers are focusing on
different chromosomes.

   Buxbaum is interested in a region on Chromosome 2. After a few years of
investigation, he has found a stretch of DNA that appears to be inherited by
autistic siblings more often than non-autistic ones.

   In Toronto, geneticist Steve Scherer at the Hospital for Sick Children has
identified another pattern on Chromosome 7.

   To figure out which chromosome to start with, Scherer decided to examine
unusual cases of autism - people who had a defect so obvious he could see it in
a microscope. In some, he saw a chunk of DNA from one chromosome stuck on
another.

   Studying such special cases led him to look for more subtle genetic
differences in that same region of DNA in other autistic people.

   With a more detailed look at the DNA in his database of families, Scherer has
narrowed the suspicious stretch on Chromosome 7 down to a region with 30 to 40
million characters of chemical code.

   That's where the genome projects come in. Only certain stretches of the huge
lengths of DNA contain genes, and the genome mapping shows where these are. So
Scherer can refer to a database to find which genes reside in his hot zone.

   Using the genome project's government database to supplement gene maps
developed in his own lab, he estimates there are between 10 and 50 genes in that
region.

   Some of these genes may have a known function, perhaps production of a brain
chemical. Others are unknown.

   The next step will be to tie a variant of one of the genes that Scherer
identifies to at least some cases of autism.

   It is clear there will not be just one autism gene.

   "Early estimates were that there were three or four genes involved with
autism," Buxbaum said. "If it were that few, we would have found them by now."

   Optimists say there are six to eight; pessimists, as many as 20.

   *

   Even if the scientists nab their autism genes, there is no certainty they can
turn that into a treatment.

   A genetic diagnosis at birth could, however, help children get special
therapy early.

   In one of the best-case scenarios, scientists could identify problem genes
and develop a reliable genetic test - and find key environmental triggers. Then,
babies testing positive could avoid whatever food, medicine, or other factors
are linked to the disease.

   But the real promise behind the genome is in new drugs, perhaps something
that could make it easier for autistic people to cope. If that's possible, it
could take years.

   Genes merely hold the code to make proteins. It is those proteins that
actually operate the body - digesting food, fighting infections, sending signals
through the brain.

   Gene-based drugs work, in theory, by imitating the normal version of an
abnormal protein. Gene therapy goes further, adding an engineered version of the
gene so the body can make the protein itself.

   In Bucks County, Regina Rizzo said that other parents of autistic children
consider her lucky because her boys are less severely handicapped than most.

   The oldest, John, now 14, was talkative and inquisitive at 9 months. He
seemed precocious at first but started falling behind in kindergarten, both
socially and academically. In grade school, he became so absorbed in various
interests - fish, oceanography, weather, the planets - that other children lost
patience with him. He is diagnosed with Asperger Syndrome, a mild version of
autism.

   The younger twins showed unusual symptoms earlier, especially Vincent, who
was withdrawn, distant, and preoccupied as an infant.

   Their academic performance has been spotty, although all three are now in
regular classes.

   Still, Rizzo is uncertain what the future will bring, and whether the genome
projects will make a difference.

   "If I peel away the layers between them and the world, there is some kind of
gift - John with his creativity and Danny with his sense of humor and physical
strength, and Vince has a way of bringing out the best in people," she said.

   "I don't know what they're going to do . . . but my hope is they'll be able
to take care of themselves, be happy and have someone to share life with."

   Faye Flam's e-mail address is fflam@phillynews.com.

   Autism is a developmental disability in which people are unable to form
relationships with others. It is diagnosed in about two to four of every 10,000
children, although some behaviors can be found in up to one in 500. The exact
cause of the neurological disorder is unknown.

   * Symptoms: Often, autistic children are normal for the first few months of
life before becoming increasingly unresponsive. The child is indifferent to
others, may be extremely resistant to change, and may become attached to unusual
objects or obsessed with a topic or idea. Robotic or immature speech is common,
and there may be other abnormal behaviors such as rocking or twiddling fingers
for hours on end.

   * Treatment: Treatment is limited. Behavior therapy may help certain
behaviors. Medication may be useful for specific problems. Most children need
special care, sometimes in an institution.

   * For more information: Contact the Autism Society of America at
1-800-328-8476 or www.autism-society.org.

GRAPHIC: JONATHAN WILSON, Inquirer Staff Photographer Geneticist Joseph Buxbaum,
in his lab at New York's Mount Sinai School of Medicine, has found a promising
stretch of DNA in his autism research.
LA SHINDA CLARK, Inquirer +
Suburban Staff Vincent Rizzo, 12, of Yardley, and his two brothers have autism.
His family has given blood to the effort to find a genetic link.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1957 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           February 20, 2001 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 1606 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy's Hot Seat;
Ignoring Skeptics, GenVec Forges Ahead With Drug Development

BYLINE: Terence Chea, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The death of an Arizona teenager during an experiment 17 months ago
intensified public scrutiny of gene therapy, prompting new questions about its
medical and commercial promise.

    Public confidence in gene therapy has been shaken. Federal regulators are
imposing stricter rules on experiments. And investors remain skeptical about a
much-hyped but largely unproven technique that has yet to produce a single
approved drug.

    These doubts have created additional challenges for several companies racing
to bring to market the first gene-therapy drugs, which are injected into
patients to treat disease with new genes.

    GenVec Inc., a Gaithersburg biotechnology company, is among those forging
ahead despite the gloomier environment. The company has started advanced human
testing of an experimental gene-based drug for heart disease, it recently raised
$ 38 million in an initial public offering of stock, and it has earned $ 54
million under a research agreement with New York pharmaceutical giant Pfizer
Inc. Last week, GenVec announced it will begin its first human tests of a
gene-therapy drug to treat cancer.

    GenVec is one of about a dozen biotech firms that hope to validate the field
of gene therapy -- and profit from it -- by bringing products to market. But the
company's success will depend on whether it can convince skeptical doctors,
patients, regulators and investors that its drugs work.

    "All of the trends are encouraging," said Paul Fischer, the company's
president and chief executive, about the progress of its most promising drug
candidate. "But the real evidence comes with larger scientific studies."

    Gene therapy is one experimental technique scientists are investigating as
they search for new ways to treat disease based on an increasingly detailed
knowledge of human genes. Since the first experiment was conducted 10 years ago,
the technique has been viewed as promising, but it has yet to live up to
expectations.

    "Gene therapy and gene-based medicine will revolutionize medicine over the
next 10 to 20 years," said French Anderson, director of gene therapy at the
University of Southern California's medical school, who conducted the first
gene-therapy experiment in 1990. "The big question is when."

    GenVec was founded in 1992, not long after the idea of gene therapy first
emerged in the 1980s. Its founders launched the company to develop a
gene-therapy treatment for cystic fibrosis, a hereditary lung disease. But after
running into technical hurdles, the company decided to harness the new
technology to fight heart disease, cancer and blindness, widespread ailments
that offer potentially vast markets.

    The company is in the early stages of testing gene-therapy treatments for
cancer and blindness, while its treatment for heart disease, BioBypass, has
moved the furthest in the development process.

    Last year, the company began advanced human testing of BioBypass, which aims
to treat coronary artery disease and peripheral vascular disease -- conditions
caused by clogged arteries that obstruct blood flow in the heart and legs,
respectively. The two diseases affect millions of Americans and can cause
problems ranging from chest pain to heart attacks.

    The treatment involves injecting patients with genes that direct the
production of proteins, which cause the body to grow new blood vessels. This
allows blood to bypass the clogged arteries. The drug, injected directly into
blocked areas, uses a disarmed cold virus known as an adenovirus to deliver the
new genes into the patient's cells.

    GenVec is developing the drug with Warner-Lambert Co., a Pfizer subsidiary,
which is sponsoring the costly human tests needed to win federal approval. The
companies have enrolled 70 patients to test the drug for coronary heart disease
and 105 patients for peripheral vascular disease. Under a 1997 agreement, GenVec
has earned $ 54 million out of a possible $ 100 million in milestone and
research payments from Pfizer.

    Craig D. West, a biotech analyst at A.G. Edwards in St. Louis, believes
BioBypass could generate $ 50 million to $ 250 million in annual revenue -- of
which GenVec would receive a percentage -- if it is approved for production. He
said results from current human tests, expected this fall, will be critical.

    "Their task is to prove that BioBypass works," West said. "If they can prove
that this stuff works, they can come back and get another round of financing."

    GenVec executives believe BioBypass could eventually replace heart surgery,
the most common treatment for heart disease. BioBypass could be one of the first
approved gene-therapy drugs, ushering in a new generation of genetic medicine.

    "It would begin to show a new approach to treating chronic diseases by using
the body's own natural mechanisms," Fischer said. "It could really improve the
quality of life for patients."

    But GenVec has a long way to go. It will be at least five years before
BioBypass reaches the market, and even then the company must sell it in a
climate changed by the death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger.

    Gelsinger's death dealt a serious blow to the emerging field of gene therapy
and to biotechnology companies. In September 1999, Gelsinger volunteered for an
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania to treat a rare genetic liver
disease. Although 17 patients underwent the same treatment without side effects,
Gelsinger suffered a severe immune reaction and died of liver and other organ
failure four days after receiving an injection of genes.

    The case spurred investigations into the monitoring and reporting practices
of gene-therapy researchers. It led to calls for stricter rules to govern
gene-therapy trials, including a proposal last month that would substantially
increase public disclosure of safety information related to such experiments.
And, at a time when gene therapy had yet to produce a single proven drug, the
case fueled doubts about the field's future.

    "It just caught everybody totally off-guard," said USC's Anderson. He said
the case hurt public trust, as well as investor confidence, in gene therapy. And
it made researchers realize gene therapy was not absolutely safe and its
development would take longer than expected, he said.

    "It's just a lot more complex than conducting a mouse experiment and setting
up a clinical trial," Anderson said.

    GenVec was not involved in Gelsinger's death, but it was particularly
troubling to the company because it involved the same type of virus GenVec uses
to deliver genes. The case triggered an investigation into the use of
adenoviruses, a common vehicle for gene therapy. Most scientists have since
concluded that adenoviruses are safe when used in low doses, but some doctors
and patients aren't convinced.

    GenVec executives say their gene therapy uses an extremely low dose of the
drug -- one-thousandth of the amount used in the Gelsinger case -- and delivers
it directly to the disease site, minimizing potential side effects.

    "When we've done our clinical studies, the drug has been extremely well
tolerated," Fischer said, pointing out that its lead product was approved for
advanced human testing after earlier tests showed the drug to be safe.

    Even if scientists are convinced that gene therapy is safe, it may be harder
to change public attitudes toward the new technology.

    "I don't think public perception has changed at all," said West, the
analyst, comparing attitudes toward gene therapy to those toward genetically
modified foods. He said gene therapy "will undoubtedly present some deeply
unsettling ethical concerns."

    Many investors are still skeptical of a concept that has yet to be
scientifically or commercially proven, a sentiment that may make it difficult
for companies like GenVec to raise money to fund their research.

    "I'm not saying progress hasn't been made, but I think we're still far from
the finish line," said Alidad Mireskandari, a portfolio manager at Monument
Medical Sciences Fund in Bethesda. "From an investor's perspective, I'd be
hesitant putting a majority of my assets into these companies."

    Meanwhile, GenVec faces competition from several firms seeking to develop
gene-therapy drugs to combat clogged arteries. Its two main rivals are
Collateral Therapeutics Inc. of San Diego and Vascular Genetics Inc. of Durham,
N.C. Vascular Genetics, which is working with Human Genome Sciences Inc. of
Rockville, delivers new genes by injecting raw DNA into the patient, bypassing
safety concerns over the use of adenoviruses.

    Despite the challenges, GenVec executives remain optimistic about the future
of gene therapy. Chief executive Fischer said Gelsinger's death ultimately
helped the emerging field by alerting scientists to potential risks.

    "As tragic as that event was, I think it helped people understand how to
move forward in the future safely and carefully," Fischer said. "It made people
double-check the safety issue."

    Fischer said the public must be educated about the benefits and risks of
gene therapy. He believes new rules and government oversight will help to
restore public confidence in the field.

    Although doubters abound, some investors are bullish about gene therapy's
prospects. Wei-Wu He, a venture capitalist at Emerging Technology Partners LLC
in Bethesda, said he believes the treatment, once technical issues are resolved,
will become a major force in the medical arsenal.

    "I think gene therapy is definitely the future," he said. "Right now there's
a lot of skepticism about gene therapy, but to me, that's the best to time
invest because you can get better deals."

    More stories on BIOTECH/MEDICAL online at Washtech.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2002


                             1958 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     FEBRUARY 19, 2001 Monday CWEST EDITION

SECTION: NEIGHBORS CHESTER & BRANDYWINE; Pg. B08

LENGTH: 1151 words

HEADLINE: STUDENTS ASKED TO TRAIN LENSES ON ENVIRONMENTAL THREATS

BYLINE: Susan Weidener, INQUIRER SUBURBAN STAFF

BODY:

   The Chester County Health Department is inviting fifth-grade classes in
public, private and parochial schools in the county to enter its second annual
environmental photo contest.

   The contest is designed to educate young people about environmental health
issues that affect their communities, and challenges classes to identify
environmental threats through the lens.

   In addition, each classroom must compile an essay that describes the threat
to the community and identifies solutions for its eradication. Roy F. Weston
Inc. of West Chester is again a cosponsor of the contest.

   This year, students are being asked to focus on environmental hazards that
have the potential to pollute streams and lakes in Chester County.

   Interested teachers and students may call 610-344-6233 to receive an entry
packet. Classroom prizes and ribbons will be awarded. Entries must be submitted
to the Health Department by March 23. Prizes will be awarded during Public
Health Week, April 2 to 8.

   COATESVILLE AREA

   The Coatesville Area spelling bee, sponsored by the Coatesville Parent
Council, was held last week at Benner Elementary School and North Brandywine
Middle School. The following are the names of winners and participants:

   Third grade: Lindsey Kibler of Kings Highway Elementary School, first; Meghan
Sullivan of Coatesville Catholic School, second; Christian Guest of Reeceville
Elementary School, third. Fourth grade: Elizabeth Shaw of Coatesville Catholic,
first; Katie Sisk of East Fallowfield Elementary School, second; Katheryn Fuchs
of Reeceville, third. Fifth grade: Kevin Ward of Coatesville Catholic, first;
Rochelle Colella of Reeceville, second; Michael Green of East Fallowfield,
third. The winners of the middle school spelling bee were sixth graders Andrew
Zaleski of Coatesville Catholic, first; Darrell Sobocski of Coatesville
Catholic, second; and Matthew Fisk of South Brandywine Middle School, third.

   DOWNINGTOWN AREA

   This week, eighth-grade history students at Lionville Middle School will
begin the road to the National History Day contest at the University of Maryland
in June. Tomorrow, the Lionville students will present 50 history projects
related to "Frontiers in History" at the school. The projects, which include
oral presentations, documentary films and plays, have been in the works since
December.

   On Thursday, the school will host a history evening for parents at the
school's cafeteria, where 15 winners will be chosen to compete in the district
history competition at West Chester University on March 31. From there, teams
can qualify to go to a state championship at Pennsylvania State University in
early May and then the national competition in June.

   "I have people who are doing projects on gene therapy, the history of the
American Red Cross, and Martin Luther King," said Terri Wilford, a teacher.
"There are a lot of different projects, as long as they fit under the theme of a
frontier in history."

   GREAT VALLEY

   Students and faculty at Sugartown Elementary School helped teenagers at the
Sleighton School in Glen Mills. On Feb. 8, teachers delivered 16 "birthday
boxes," which had been filled and decorated by Sugartown students, to the school
for youths placed there by the court system. The boxes contained enough birthday
party materials to host a party for 32 people - the number of students, ages 14
through 19, who live at Sleighton.

   OCTORARA

   The Octorara Area School Distict will hold a Family Storytelling Evening,
sponsored by the Octorara Arts Consortium, at 7 p.m. March 15. The event, which
costs $1 for children, will be at the Octorara Primary Learning Center. All
children must be accompanied by an adult, who will attend free. The guest will
be Jim Weiss, a storyteller who has appeared on 22 recordings.

   OWEN J. ROBERTS

   Owen J. Roberts Middle School will host a career seminar for its eighth
graders at 10 a.m. Thursday. Regional experts will give summations of the
engine-technology field and the health-care field, and discuss how students
might develop their skills and begin to get involved. The program is
underwritten by the Chester County Intermediate Unit. For more information,
contact guidance counselor Stephanie Hurley at Owen J. Roberts Middle School,
610-469-5102.

   PHOENIXVILLE AREA

   On Friday, the Phoenixville High School Band Boosters will hold a live and
silent auction at Columbia Station, 4 Bridge St., from 7 to 9 p.m., with music,
snacks and a cash bar. Tickets are $20 per person or $30 per couple.

   The money will help pay for the school's band and choral groups to go to
Dallas for the Heritage Festival of Gold in April.

   People will have the opportunity to bid on items such as opera tickets,
clothing and golf outings, and services such as snowplowing and spring cleaning.
For more information, call 610-948-9427.

   TREDYFFRIN/EASTTOWN

   The D.A.R.E. program at Valley Forge Middle School graduated 233 students in
a recent ceremony. Guests included Lt. Robert F. Lanyon of the Tredyffrin
Township Police Department, District Justice Jeremy Blackburn, and Dickie
Knowles, a former player with the Phillies.

   UNIONVILLE-CHADDS FORD

   Jason Trigg, a student at Patton Middle School, placed first as an individual
in the Chester County Chapter Mathcounts Competition held recently at Great
Valley High School.

   Mathcounts is a nationwide program for sixth, seventh and eighth graders
designed to promote mathematics through coaching and competitions. The program
builds skills, promotes strategic problem-solving, and drills students in
confronting complex problems.

   Thirty-two schools in the county participated in the competition. The
Tredyffrin/Easttown team took first place as a team. The first-place team and
the top four individuals, including Trigg, will advance to the state competition
in March in Harrisburg. Middle school students from all 50 states will compete
at the national level in May.

   WEST CHESTER

   William Kashatus, director of public programs for the Chester County
Historical Society, visited Howse Elementary School last week to give a living
history performance about Thomas Garrett and Chester County's Underground
Railroad. As a stationmaster on the Underground Railroad, Garrett provided food,
shelter and clothing to runaway slaves, at one point working with Harriet
Tubman.

   Third, fourth and fifth graders at Howse studied the society's "traveling
trunk" of artifacts related to the Underground Railroad before Kashatus' visit.
He then used costumes, everyday work tools, and a shipping trunk to show
students how runaway slaves were disguised.

   "Education Notes" features news and items of interest pertaining to Chester
County's public and private schools. All items must include a name and phone
number for verification of information. Items may be mailed to Susan Weidener,
Chester County Bureau, The Inquirer, 120 N. High St., West Chester, Pa. 19380.

NOTES: Education Notes

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Brenda Aslin, who teaches fourth and fifth graders at Glen Acres Elementary
School in West Chester, donned African garb like that favored by Maya Angelou
during a celebration of black writers, artists and scientists Friday. (LINDA
JOHNSON, Inquirer Suburban Staff)

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1959 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            February 19, 2001 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; WASHINGTON INVESTING JERRY KNIGHT; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 1522 words

HEADLINE: Biotech Stocks Tougher to Unravel Than Genome

BYLINE: Jerry Knight

BODY:

   In the hierarchy of high technology, genetic research is the Washington
region's most exalted industry.

    Genomics has the potential to change human life more than any -- perhaps all
-- of the other technologies that have transformed Washington from a government
town into a high-tech hotbed.

    Telecommunications, software, information services and even the Internet are
mature technologies compared with genomics, where the evolution from promising
concept to profitable corporation is only beginning.

    As the genomics industry emerges, two Rockville companies are at the top of
almost every list of leaders -- Human Genome Sciences Inc. and Celera Genomics
Group.

    Last week, when the official first draft of human DNA was published, Celera
President J. Craig Venter and HGS Chairman William Hazeltine were again the
media darlings du jour.

    In between exchanging snarls, the rival PhDs played roles most corporate
executives can only dream of -- not merely captains of industry but also
captains of the starships exploring the frontiers of genetic medicine.

    The message for investors was clear: If you want to put your money into
genomics, Celera and HGS are the stocks to buy.

    Well, if that's the case, why have both been such lousy investments?

    Celera stock, which closed Friday at $ 42.56, is down more than 71 percent
over the past year and is 85 percent below its peak of $ 276 a share. Celera is
actually a division of a Applera Corp., a New England life-sciences company that
issued a tracking stock for Celera in 1999.

    HGS, $ 42.44 at Friday's close, is down 55 percent from a year ago and is 62
percent below its $ 116.38 peak.

    Last week, both stocks repeated another trick for which they are infamous.
After weekend reports that researchers were about to publish data showing humans
have far fewer genes than scientists had thought, the stocks spiked on Monday
and then began to dive. By Friday, Celera had lost more than $ 5, and HGS was
down more than $ 11.

    That's the first lesson for Washington investors who are thinking of putting
money into the genomics giants: Never, ever buy these stocks after you've seen
Venter or Hazeltine on TV or read a story about some breakthrough in gene
research.

    It's hard to think of any other local stocks that are so often hoisted by
media hype and so predictably prone to giving back their gains immediately.

    The problem with genomics stocks, says analyst Robert Swift of C.E.
Unterberg Towbin, is that "the press has made it a hotter area than the savvier
investors believe it to be."

    Gene researchers have just now found out what's in human DNA. Next they have
to find out what they can do with that knowledge, how they can create new drugs
or genetic therapies and -- most important -- how they can make money.

    "The distance in time from genes to drugs is not short," cautioned Swift,
who was a drug researcher in the pharmaceutical industry before he became a
biotech analyst.

    Too many investors buy into the genomics hype without understanding either
the science or the business plan of companies they invest in, he added. And even
when the science and plan are solid, it's difficult to value genomics stocks
because it will be so long before they make money.

    Because the genomics stocks are so volatile, biotech analyst Meirav Chovav
of Credit Suisse First Boston says Celera and HGS are great examples of one of
Wall Street's unwritten rules: Never buy a stock on an up day.

    The stocks are particularly susceptible to buying stampedes once they start
rising, she said: "I think this is the only area in which people like something
more because it costs more."

    Chovav likes both stocks just fine at their current price levels. Last week
in an extensive report on investing opportunities in biotech, she rated both a
"buy."

    Chovav gave an even more positive "strong buy" rating to Montgomery County's
other big biotech, MedImmune Inc. Like Celera and HGS, MedImmune has had a rocky
ride the last couple of years. Biotech stocks are extremely volatile and
genomics stocks even more so, she noted.

    "Genomics right now is somewhat under pressure," Chovav said. "I don't think
the problem is specific to either of the stocks" -- HGS or Celera.

    "I don't think that in either case you have company-specific issues. Both
have delivered on their promises. You don't have a situation of anybody missing
expectations."

    The one expectation that's not been met is what scientists would find when
they unwound the double helix of human DNA.

    As Venter stressed in interview after interview last week, the uncovered
genetic code carried a surprising message: There aren't as many genes as
scientists expected. And the genes alone do not determine human destiny, the
researchers found; it's the proteins they produce in cells. The code was
cracked, only to reveal that the message is an even more puzzling riddle.

    Answering that riddle may stretch out the process of turning genetic
research into drugs even further, but analysts don't think that is why the
stocks of Celera and HGS dropped last week.

    The trading that drives the prices of genomics stocks isn't based on such
careful calculations, but more the predictable pattern of the stocks reacting to
short-run hype and longer-run fads in investing.

    "Both Celera and HGSI over the past 18 months have had periods of massive,
one might argue speculative, out-performance of the market," said analyst Emily
Hall of Morningstar Inc., the Chicago mutual fund and research firm.

    The genomics stocks peaked roughly 50 weeks ago -- along with the rest of
the techs -- and collapsed when the tech bubble broke.

    Genetic research stocks have gone through boom and bust cycles before, Hall
said. When the sector came back into favor in late 1999, "You saw people who
follow the sector arguing that it was different this time, based on
fundamentals." Companies such as Celera were making key discoveries and
companies such as HGS were actually testing drugs based on gene research.

    "There was a grain of truth in that," Hall said. "The sector does remain one
in which you've got a lot of momentum investing, based on the prospects of the
sector, rather than the realities."

    The realities are hard to assess. Many biotech analysts are -- like Swift --
scientists who can evaluate the projects companies are pursuing and make an
informed, independent assessment. Few biotech investors are that sophisticated.
And many traders have made money on biotech by ignoring the science and looking
only at the technical trading patterns in the stock.

    And the science is just the first layer of the DNA of genomics investing.
Like the proteins that underly human genes, the business strategies of genomics
companies are what ultimately determines their future.

    The differences in their business plans are what distinguish Celera and HGS,
all three analysts agree.

    HGS generates revenue by doing basic genetic research for customers, and it
has moved on to the next step: using the results of its research to put four
drugs into early trials. It's a relative old-timer in the field, founded in
1992.

    Celera makes money by selling its genetic knowledge. It cracked the DNA code
on its own, using innovative computer techniques to speed up the work done by
government and academic researchers working with HGS. Celera now says it will
move into drug development as well as research on the proteins that have been
found to be so important.

    Celera also argues that its version of the human genome is more accurate
than the one developed by the rival researchers working with HGS.

    That claim is what produced the sparks between Venter and Hazeltine, who
needled each other relentlessly last week. HGS and Celera are not merely
competitors but enemies. The animosity between Venter and Hazeltine is as nasty
as a World Wrestling Federation smackdown, only real.

    Understanding that, Washington investors should simply ignore everything
either company or executive has to say about the other.

    A case also can be made that Washington investors ought to simply ignore
both stocks. Their science is so complex, their business strategies so
unpredictable, their path to profitability so uncertain -- to say nothing of so
long -- that it's next to impossible to calculate what each stock is worth or
which is the better buy.

    "I don't think there are useful ways today to value it," says Swift.

    The stocks are 55 to 80 percent cheaper than they were only a few months
ago, and Chovav is not projecting either to return to its peaks soon. The Credit
Suisse First Boston price targets, a year from now, are $ 55 a share for Celera,
$ 70 for HGS.

    Morningstar analyst Hall said, "This is certainly a better time [to invest
in Celera and HGS] than it was six or seven months ago."

    "At this point, the stocks are only appropriate for extremely aggressive
investors with a very long time horizon," she said. "If you do invest in one of
these companies, you need to do everything you can to avoid the herd
mentalities. You need to be prepared for volatility. You need to be prepared to
wait."

   Jerry Knight's e-mail address is knightj@washpost.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2002


                             1960 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     February 18, 2001 Sunday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1335 words

HEADLINE: Genetic tinkering: progress or peril?;
 Ethics: Scientists and society struggle to understand and respond to the
difficult questions raised by genetic engineering.

BYLINE: Henry Silverman

BODY:

   A COUPLE IS asked by a futuristic fertility physician to decide which traits
they wish for their unborn child. From a menu not unlike one sees in a
restaurant, one can choose eye color, height, sex, musical talents, athletic
abilities and intelligence, to name just a few. The chosen genes are inserted
into the woman's egg, which is then fertilized and implanted in the woman's
uterus to achieve pregnancy.

   Too futuristic and far-fetched? Maybe. But then again, maybe not. Recently,
scientists presented their first interpretations of the human genome, part of an
ongoing process that is expected in time to revolutionize medicine by treating
disease at its genetic roots.

   Also, scientists in Portland reported they inserted a gene from a jellyfish
into a monkey egg, fertilized the egg, and produced a baby monkey with the added
gene in its cells. This work represents the first time the techniques of genetic
engineering were used to alter a primate, intending that the change would be
passed on to future generations.

   Can human genetic engineering be far behind? Is science once again rushing
ahead with a technique before we know how to understand and respond to the
ethical dilemmas engendered by it?

   Scientists, politicians and others believe that society needs to grapple with
two major controversial aspects of genetic engineering before these techniques
are made available to the public.

   One concern is whether genetic engineering should be limited to the treatment
of diseases or should include enhancement therapies that would boost traits such
as height, strength and intelligence. The other aspect involves the mechanisms
used to make any of these genetic alterations.

   On one hand, there is somatic gene therapy, where genetic techniques are used
to alter the genetic makeup of specific body cells, for example heart tissue or
brain cells.

   Alternatively, there is germ line gene therapy, where changes are made in the
genes of reproductive cells (the egg in the monkey experiment), thus allowing
changes to be passed on to future generations.

   The questions engendered by these specific aspects of genetic engineering are
as follows:

   Would genetic engineering lead to genetic determinism based on the premise
that biology and behavior are totally controlled by our genes?

   In the long run, a misplaced emphasis on the influence of our genes might be
the most negative consequence of genetic engineering. We must also consider the
social variables that allow genes to express themselves.

   For example, despite the incorporation of a "math" gene designed to eliminate
mathematical illiteracy, without good schools, teachers and parental support, it
is unlikely that genetically re-engineered children would live up to their
potential.

   The recent analysis of the human genome produced the unexpected result that
there are fewer human genes than expected -- approximately 30,000 instead of
120,000 -- and that the genome contains a huge repertoire of regulatory
mechanisms that can fine-tune the genes' activities.

   The discovery that environmental influences are involved with the workings of
these mechanisms confirms that we should always be mindful that a combination of
genetic and environmental/social variables will determine who we are as
individuals.

   Would enhancement therapies lead to a "super class" of privileged
individuals?

   To be sure, the possibility exists for the creation of genetic haves and
have-nots due to unequal access to genetic therapies. But the questions stemming
from equal access to enhancement genetic therapies are little different from
those governing equal access to medical care and educational opportunity, areas
where we've already created haves and have-nots. The real issue is how to
distribute genetic engineering techniques fairly.

   Would therapies aimed at enhancement usher in a new eugenics that will foster
abusive, discriminatory social practices and the arbitrary use of state power to
coerce treatment of specific racial groups?

   Enhancement therapies alone would not lead to abusive eugenic practices. The
abuse of any technology lies within the social context that the technology is
used. Instead of asking, "Should enhancement therapy be permitted?" the debate
should focus on "What changes are needed in the existing social and political
structure to implement successfully and fairly this revolutionary research?" The
constructive political task is to determine how safeguards can ensure that
genetic manipulation promotes, rather than limits, human liberties.

   Would we be "playing God" by changing the character of individuals through
the use of genetic engineering techniques that enhance existing traits, as
opposed to those that treat diseases?

   The charge of "playing God" is an unfounded concern. First, the distinction
between disease and enhancement is subject to political and social influences
and hence, tends to change with time.

   Twenty years ago, assisted reproductive techniques (for example, in-vitro
fertilization) were considered methods to enhance the reproductive capabilities
of women, but now they are viewed as treatment of the pathological process that
inhibits the achievement of pregnancy. Hence, the distinction between therapies
that treat diseases and those than enhance human capability can be quite
blurred.

   Second, enhancement genetic therapies are not any different from cultural
practices aimed at ensuring that our children have enhanced characteristics.

   Parenting is filled with hopes and decisions that "shape" the "creation" of
babies, choices that engineer children. Also, such changes enacted within a
culture can be just as "heritable" as genetic changes, as these changes are
passed on to future generations. Hence, making our children "better" is in many
ways similar to altering the genetic code, yet the former is not considered as
"playing God."

   Would germ line engineering lead to permanent changes in the gene pool and
frustrate the process of natural selection, which allows a species to adjust,
over time, to the endless perils of an ever-changing environment?

   The survival of the species depends on natural selection, which is fueled by
the existence of genetic differences among organisms in a population.
Accordingly, in response to a shift in environmental conditions, individuals
with the genetic composition that can withstand the altered conditions will
survive, whereas the others will be selected out. To be sure, an excessive use
of germ line therapy and the elimination of seemingly "useless" genes would
reduce the reservoir of genetic options that allows the human species to adapt
to alterations in the environment.

   But, the dependence on natural selection for the survival of the human
species is probably overemphasized, as the natural evolutionary forces may not
exist anymore to shape the human species.

   Technological advances have protected humans from the environmental stresses
that drive evolution. Also, a concern with the effects of germ line therapy on
natural evolution ignores that much of recent medicine and social programs have
obstructed natural selection by helping people to survive to reproductive age
and hence, perpetuate genes that would have been selected out.

   Due to the potential loss of natural evolutionary forces, the continued
survival of our species might very well depend on the conscious selection of our
genes, achieved via germ line enhancement.

   Would germ line engineering cause unforeseen DNA abnormalities leading to a
high rate of miscarriages, fetal abnormalities, and the birth of deformed and
maybe unwanted babies?

   The prospect of significant risks is a major concern, but such concerns are
always present when any new medical therapy is being developed. Such risks are
technical in nature and can be resolved with experimentation and testing in
animals prior to human use.

   Henry Silverman, MD, MA, is a physician-ethicist and chair of the ethics
committee at the University of Maryland Medical System.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2001


                             1961 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              February 18, 2001, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; TERRY SAVAGE TALKS MONEY WITH...; Pg. 54

LENGTH: 1821 words

HEADLINE: 'FLIP' FILIPOWSKI

COLUMN: LEXIS-NEXIS Related Topics Full Article  Related Topics Overview

This document contains no targeted Topics.

BYLINE: Terry Savage

BODY:


   It wasn't quite a year ago that I interviewed Andrew "Flip" Filipowski for
this column.  At the time he was flying high -- Chicago's point man in the
then-hot new world of dot-com mania. He was in the process of creating divine
interVentures, an Internet operating company or "zaibatsu" as he called it, of
dot-com companies that would leverage off each other to create value in a world
that would be dominated by the Internet.

   Barely 11 months later, Flip's wings have been clipped, as the Nasdaq stock
market collapsed, taking with it the prospect of initial public offerings that
made early investors wealthy.

   Though divine did pull off its own public offering July 11 at $ 9 a share,
many of its start-up subsidiaries have failed, while others have been merged,
diluting divine's ownership. And all have struggled through restructurings and
layoffs.

   Divine interVentures' stock closed Friday at $ 1.81, down 19 cents a share.
But it's not only Filipowski's wallet that has been diminished. His reputation
as a visionary, and leader of Chicago's technology sector, has been greatly
tarnished.

   Has the experience softened his outrageous attitude and bellicose
pronouncements about the death of the old economy?

   When I sat down with him, I found him slightly chastened -- but still
anticipating the creation of huge wealth through technology. This time, though,
he says it will be made on the downside of the bubble.

   On the meltdown

   I'm eager to ask the burning question: Are you humbled by the market's
reaction to your business plan this past year?

   "I have always been humbled by the cycles the world goes through, and the
laws of nature that work, and I don't think this is a new experience for me at
all."

   You didn't see this coming?

   "I absolutely did."

   Why didn't you tell me last year?

   "I always talk about the velocity and short inflection points, how high the
highs, how low the lows, and how quickly things die out. . . . Yeah, absolutely
I'm sensitive to how quickly things change. That was the whole point of the
message. Things change very quickly, they come and go. New things arrive, and
they obsolete old things."

   Did you know you'd be one of those "old things" that came and went?

   "I don't think I've gone yet!  If somebody counts me out, they don't know me!
Who says I'm out?  I can't argue with their perceptions, but they're not my
perceptions."

   On the new Divine

   Flip informs me that divine is no longer an "incubator" of companies that
included names like Parlano, Buzz, Oilspot, Dotspot, Farms.com, Pocketcard,
Mercantec, and many more. The new Divine Inc. is an "enterprise software"
company.

   "My perception going forward is that I'm going to erase from people's minds
the individual companies (that Divine nurtured).  They'll no longer think that
way, because it translates into keeping us in the category of an incubator, and
I'm going to erase that from people's perceptions. They're going to think of us
as a software company.

   "From Day One, we said our principal investment was in the enterprise
software space. And those investments we did in seeding and growing companies
have matured to the point where now they're real companies. . . . And now we are
adding acquisitions to the mix -- companies that others seeded and funded. Our
vertical investments were intended to be the test beds for our infrastructure
software, which we're now going to take to the marketplace."

   Wow, I think, this is truly what they mean by revisionist history. I remind
Flip that a year ago he was talking about going public with these companies.

   "I truly and earnestly do not think that what I'm talking about is
revisionist, other than the way one interprets what I say. The goal was always
the best way to create value. The difference between then and today is that back
then it was cheaper and more cost effective to build companies. Today it's more
cost effective to buy them. Times have changed, and we've adjusted."

   On doing deals

   There will be plenty of money to make acquisitions, it seems.  Flip reminds
me that he has a boatload of cash on hand.

   "We have over a quarter of a billion dollars, and that's just at the holding
company level. So we can take advantage of the fact that things today are in the
downside of the cycle, and very inexpensive to buy."

   But, I protest, that's even more than the $ 120 million raised in the public
offering. Is it fair to sit on that cash, or has he considered giving it back to
divine's public shareholders by buying back the stock?

   "It doesn't work that way, but it's nice to know we are solidly funded."

   I ask about the burn rate -- the rate at which they will use up the money.

   "We'll probably be going through -- in a combination of burn and expenses we
expect to incur -- we'll probably hit a low point of about $ 150 million before
we start generating cash, sometime next year."

   Filipowski won't break out which companies he expects to add to his cash
flow, reminding me to consider the whole company as Divine Inc.

   On duty to shareholders

   I ask what he'd like to say to his shareholders.

   "Hang on. You'll probably make a lot of money. And if you don't want to hang
on, sell, and I apologize for the fact that you lost money. I don't feel very
good about the fact that the stock is at a buck and a half now. But that's the
way life goes. Sometimes you only lose money, sometimes you lose your life.  You
go to sleep, and you don't wake up. That's the way life is."

   It's the only time during our conversation that Flip seems down -- and with
good reason.  He's just come from the funeral of one of his former top
employees, 41-year-old Dave Onak, who died in his sleep of a heart attack.

   I press on, asking about his own net worth.

   "I didn't do this for the net worth. And I expect that my efforts at Divine
will yield an increase in my net worth when the final tally is in. When?
Whenever I say so. Sometime in the future.  When I cash out, I expect, will be
when we have on a net-net basis made some money."

   On eating crow

   Do you still believe the old companies are dinosaurs?

   "Have you read about Montgomery Ward, Sears, Xerox?"

   So your theory of old dinosaurs has not changed?

   "Certainly not."

   But what about these baby dinosaurs -- all these Internet companies -- dying
off?

   "Of course they die off. I never said that's not the case. I said the
consolidation is merciless. I said it then, and I say it now.  The likelihood of
some company lasting five years, a company that started in the last few years,
is almost zero.  The casualty list is going to be enormous, the impact of the
downswing is going to be enormous.  On record, last year what did I say about
Amazon every time?  That it's just a lousy retail business with lower margins."

   So what will survive?

   "The Internet. It will be one of the most recognized inflection points of our
era. It will permeate all parts of our economy."

   On investment strategy

   "I have run into people lately that have given me sort of the full range of
those sad stories -- everything from blaming me for every last bit of it to
those who said they thought if they had their investments in Lucent and AT&T
they'd be secure, and they're just as broke as everyone else -- so there's no
escaping it. I think this market will not have a floor created until there's a
traditional capitulation -- and that means everybody runs for the exits.

   "At the wrong time, almost everyone will cash in everything they have, and
turn it into cash to create that bottom -- and regret it. What else is new?  Of
course it's going to happen. When you're 50 you know that. When you're 25 and
just got off Rush Street, you don't think that way.

   "It's not like this is going to be a lesson that will keep people from
investing in the next new thing. It'll just be the same thing again the next
time, because that's the way life is. It's just a cycle, and it's supposed to be
that way.  It's good that way. That's what makes it life. Otherwise we'd live
forever and always be 25."

   On the outlook

   "I think we're in for a very hard landing. I think it will get ugly.
Everywhere. I think we haven't experienced yet the full impact of the downward
spiral. (Not only is there) a negative impact of higher energy prices, but
there's been an intervention in the cycle to slow down a nonexistent inflation.
I'm sure that the cycle, before everybody capitulates and it forms a bottom, may
impact on all sectors, including real estate.  If it does, then people will
react to the fact that they feel less wealthy, become conservative because of
their pessimism, and stop upgrading houses, cars or whatever they spend money
on.  And that translates into a significant trickle down of bad news.

   "In short -- I think it's gonna get worse before it gets better."

   On Chicago

   "Chicago I've always felt is a wonderful city, with a diversified economy,
and it will have a wonderful opportunity to participate in coming hot spots,
including biotechnology."

   But as for the development of Goose Island into his corporate headquarters:
"It's history.  It would have been good for the city and the area. If we had $ 2
billion it would still be good for the city. But we don't have the money, and
therefore I can't do it. Just like a lot of other charitable things I would have
done."

   Charitable?

   "Well, at least corporate responsibility to a community.  Those things you do
when times are good, but cut out when you can't afford it any more."

   On lessons learned

   "I just lived through another cycle. I've said for over a year, that the next
boom is going to be involved with the human genome and gene therapy.  We'll
probably pay the guy that gives us 50 years extra life more than we end up
paying the guy who gave us Windows 98, and I suspect there will be a few more
gazillionaires formed out of that. But, as a cynic, if we get 50 more years of
life, we'll all just have an opportunity to go broke six more times."

   But Flip can't stay completely negative or cynical.

   "What you've got to say is no matter how bad any of this could hurt you, if
you've got the skill sets, the brains, you have the ability to come back. Wait
for the next cycle, or participate in the down cycle, making money on it. Hell,
most of the wealth in this world has been created by people who took advantage
of the downstrokes.

   "More money will be made on consolidation in the downside of this bubble than
on the upside.  We aren't finished yet.  Before it's over, before I call it
quits in this bubble, I believe I can get the stock value over 9. Let me finish
this bubble."

   Terry Savage is a registered investment adviser for stocks and commodities
and is on the board of directors of McDonald's Corp. and Pennzoil-Quaker State
Co. Send questions via e-mail at savage@sun

   times.com. Her third book, The Savage Truth on Money, recently was published
by John Wiley & Sons Inc.

GRAPHIC: Flip Filipowski says he still believes the old companies are dinosaurs,
pointing to troubles at Sears, Montgomery Ward and Xerox as evidence. And he
says that even with the dot-com downturn, one thing will survive: "The Internet.
It will permeate all parts of our economy." JIM FROST Flip Filipowski says he
wants to change the way people see the new Divine Inc.  "They're going to think
of us as a software company." See also related story page 54. ; JIM FROST

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2001


                             1962 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            February 18, 2001 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: OPINION; Part M; Opinion Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1448 words

HEADLINE: STUCK WITH FREEDOM;
COMPLETION OF THE HUMAN GENOME DEALS A BLOW TO BIOLOGICAL DETERMINISM

BYLINE: Gary Stix, Gary Stix is an editor at Scientific American magazine and,
coauthor, with Miriam Lacob, of "Who Gives a Gigabyte? A Survival Guide, for the
Technologically Perplexed."

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Last week, some of the world's leading molecular biologists gathered to
announce the first publication of the rough draft of the human genome, the
catalogue of our genetic code. The media framed the event as a sporting contest.
A biotechnology firm, Celera Genomics Corp., published one draft, a
government-funded public consortium another. The Republicans versus the
Democrats of biology. Whose rendering of the book of life was better? As with
the presidential race, the finish was more or less a dead heat, with a lot of
bickering afterward about the results.

   The event fostered the impression that the pace of biological advancement has
quickened dramatically. One headline even blared: "Gene Map May Be Secret of
Eternal Life."

   But, like everything else related to molecular biology and the biotechnology
industry, first impressions are deceptive. The quick and simple--find the gene,
cure the disease--often founders in the messy soup that is biology.

   In fact, leaders of the effort to decode the genome did not hold out hopes of
Methuselean life spans. They pointed instead to a more humbling implication from
their findings. The estimated number of genes, perhaps 30,000, was one-third to
one-fifth the expected number. Albert Einstein only had 1% more genes than a
mouse and 50% more than a roundworm. And we have a lot more in common
genetically with cats, dogs, monkeys and bacteria than some people might think.
J. Craig Venter, president of Celera, remarked that these discoveries put us in
our place in the same way as Copernicus deflated our egocentrism about having
reserved a spot at the epicenter of the universe.

   Completion of the human genome does not mark the capturing of the "biological
grail." Rather, it is just a peeling away of another of the layers of the
complex biological onion. Something else is needed to explain why one species
concocts a general theory of relativity, while the pinnacle of achievement for
another is running a maze or tunneling through dirt.

   The glib answer to this conundrum: It's the proteins, stupid. Individual
genes code for multiple proteins and the more complex the organism, the more
proteins are involved. A better understanding of the nature of disease will
require that we deduce the structure of proteins that the genes encode and the
way those proteins interact among themselves, an immensely more challenging task
than the just-finished sequencing of the genome.

   This lesson--that it's not all in the genes--is a cautionary tale that runs
as a theme throughout the 25-year history of the biotechnology industry. Time
and again, the industry has marshaled insights from genetics to devise elegant
but deceptively simple solutions for making new drugs, diagnostic devices and
gene-altering therapies. Some of its products, such as recombinant insulin, have
preserved health in countless patients.

   But, unlike the lightning pace of the genome project, the industry has been
frustrated in achieving its goals because scientists, business executives and
regulators have barged ahead, assuming that if you could just find the gene and
tinker with it, you could lick the disease. As with the genome announcement, the
biotechnologists have confronted the sobering reality that while a gene may be a
critical disease link, it is not the only one that must be accounted for in
biological systems.

   If the genome was thought of by some as the biological grail, gene therapy
--in which bad genes replace good ones--was to become the realization of that
vision in medical therapeutics. The organism would restore a function--blood
clotting in hemophiliacs, for instance--and that person would go about life
miraculously restored without the need for regular drug dosages. But scientists
have encountered great difficulty in delivering genes where they are needed in
the body and triggering their activation in cells. The gene-therapy field is
still recovering from the death in September of 1999 of a patient from an
apparent immune system reaction to the protein used to coat a virus that
delivered the replacement gene into the patient's liver.

   Following that tragedy, it was revealed that nearly 700 incidents of "serious
adverse events," including other deaths, had occurred during gene-based
treatments. Recent reports of success with gene therapies for hemophilia and
other disorders provide some grounds for optimism. But Harvard biologist Richard
Lewontin warns in his writings about gene-therapy trials: "Over and over,
reports of first isolated successes of some form of DNA therapy appears in
popular media, but the prudent reader should await the second report before
beginning to invest either psychic or material capital in the proposed
treatment."

   Using a pharmaceutical to shut down the activity of a gene seems a
marvelously simple and elegant way to treat a disease. Deploy a highly specific
stretch of DNA to bind and block the messenger RNA that carries instructions to
make a protein involved in a disease. The drug designer for this antisense
approach only needs to elicit the relevant gene sequence to devise a drug. But
researchers ran into difficulties because the drugs were broken down by enzymes
in the body and, in some cases, triggered unwanted immune responses. One
relatively minor antisense drug has reached the marketplace and more are in the
product pipeline. But Isis Pharmaceuticals, the leader in the field, had to lay
off workers about a year ago after a drug failure in clinical trials, and the
company is a long way from becoming the next Microsoft, as one business magazine
predicted in the mid-1990s.

   If many early expectations for straightforward genetic manipulation have been
dashed, one outcome of knowing the number of genes will have a lasting effect on
medical research. Fewer genes make it less likely that single genes can account
for the range of diseases that appear in the "Merck Manual of Medical
Information" on a physician's desk. "The notion that one gene equals one
disease, or that one gene produces one key protein, is flying out of the
window," noted Venter. That, in turn, should have a corollary benefit of
dampening the frustrated efforts of behavioral geneticists to seek out and
publicize genes that predispose people to alcoholism, pathological gambling and
impulsivity--and, who knows, perhaps one day even a liking for chocolate ice
cream. It has become axiomatic that every time a behavioral geneticist takes a
small sample and finds a link between disease and behavior, other research
groups cannot repeat the results.

   In principle, fewer genes might mean it's easier to find the ones tied to
disease. But if it's all in the proteins, life for molecular biologists gets
tough quickly. The estimates for the number of proteins range from a few hundred
thousand to a million (remember, these are the same folks who thought there were
about 150,000 genes). And, in the 100 billion human cells, proteins get
expressed in some cells but not in others, and at varying concentrations.
Sequencing genes, moreover, is a hack: gene sequencers chop up the DNA in the
chromosomes into pieces, read the letters and then reassemble the disparate
blocks. The tool set for proteins is much more rudimentary: No one has figured
out how a linear string of amino acids, the building blocks of proteins that DNA
encodes, can fold up into an intricate three-dimensional molecule. "The genome
project is in a sense a triumph of engineering," notes Robert Elliot Pollack, a
professor of biological sciences at Columbia University. "We're now back to very
primitive science. We have no algorithms for deducing protein structure nor for
protein-to-protein interactions."

   But, even if we do one day sequence the proteome, the protein equivalent of
the genome, there would be one more layer of the onion to strip away--one that
would prove both impenetrable and that would quash any lingering notions of
biological determinism. That layer is the corrugated surface of the organ that
defines who we are. There are approximately 1 million connections among brain
cells for each of the 3 billion units of DNA, and these linkages constantly
change, as we do things like butter toast or struggle through tensor calculus.
"When you have full knowledge through the proteome of how a brain assembles
itself from a fertilized egg, you still have no idea of what this learning
machine can learn," Pollack says.

   That means that neither the genome nor the proteome is a software program
that predetermines what happens in our lives: We will always have the capacity
for good or evil, altruism or apathy, chocolate or vanilla. "We're stuck with
freedom," Pollack says. "We can't push it off on the genome."

GRAPHIC:  The Music of Life: Celera President J. Craig Venter's shadow falls on
a map of human genes during press conference announcing completion of human
genome.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2001


                             1963 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 18, 2001, Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. H-2

LENGTH: 363 words

HEADLINE: It's a show of strength in biotechs

BYLINE: DON BAUDER

BODY:
 Peter F. Drake of Prudential Securities has strong buys on two biotechs in San
Diego.

   Arena Pharmaceuticals earned 5 cents a share in its fourth quarter for its
first profitable quarter.  "This is likely to be the first of consistently
profitable quarters going forward based on Arena's strong fundamentals," Drake
says.

   The company, which has a receptor-based screening assay, has a major project
with pharmaceutical Eli Lilly, and Drake expects more partnering arrangements.

   "The company can support the expansion of its screening capabilities and
product development without relying upon capital markets for additional
financing," the analyst says.

   He notes that the company has possibilities in the regulation of obesity and
in dealing with mood disorders, including depression.

   The company can earn 27 cents a share in fiscal 2001, and Drake's 12-month
price target on the stock is $45.

   Meanwhile, Collateral Therapeutics has received another key patent in the
field of gene therapy for cardiovascular diseases.

   The company does not have a lock on angiogenic gene therapy, Drake says, but
it has "the dominant position in the field, which creates sizable leverage as
the company continues its development programs."

   Drake's 12-month target for the stock is $90.

   Mitek Systems

   Mitek Systems, the producer of character recognition software, had a poor
second half in fiscal 2000, particularly the fourth quarter when revenues and
bookings slowed sharply, says Bryn Harman of the Red Chip Review in Portland.

   Mitek then followed with disappointing results for the first quarter of 2001.
Revenue was just above $2 million, lowest for almost every other quarter going
back to the fourth quarter of 1998, the analyst says.

   Mitek, which markets to financial services firms, had to take a big
write-down for bad debts.  That's indicative of problems in financial services,
Harman says.

   Mitek's shares bottomed at 50 cents in December, after a 97 percent decline.
The stock rose to the $2 range, then backed off to around $1.50.

   Harman's one-year target for the stock is $2, but he sees no particular
upside and gives it a "C" rating.


LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2001


                             1964 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            February 18, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. H-2

LENGTH: 354 words

HEADLINE: It's a show of strength in biotechs

BYLINE: DON BAUDER

BODY:

   Peter F. Drake of Prudential Securities has strong buys on two biotechs in
San Diego. Arena Pharmaceuticals earned 5 cents a share in its fourth quarter
for its first profitable quarter.

   "This is likely to be the first of consistently profitable quarters going
forward based on Arena's strong fundamentals," Drake says. The company, which
has a receptor-based screening assay, has a major project with pharmaceutical
Eli Lilly, and Drake expects more partnering arrangements. "The company can
support the expansion of its screening capabilities and product development
without relying upon capital markets for additional financing," the analyst
says. He notes that the company has possibilities in the regulation of obesity
and in dealing with mood disorders, including depression. The company can earn
27 cents a share in fiscal 2001, and Drake's 12-month price target on the stock
is $45. Meanwhile, Collateral Therapeutics has received another key patent in
the field of gene therapy for cardiovascular diseases. The company does not have
a lock on angiogenic gene therapy, Drake says, but it has "the dominant position
in the field, which creates sizable leverage as the company continues its
development programs." Drake's 12-month target for the stock is $90. Mitek
Systems Mitek Systems, the producer of character recognition software, had a
poor second half in fiscal 2000, particularly the fourth quarter when revenues
and bookings slowed sharply, says Bryn Harman of the Red Chip Review in
Portland. Mitek then followed with disappointing results for the first quarter
of 2001. Revenue was just above $2 million, lowest for almost every other
quarter going back to the fourth quarter of 1998, the analyst says. Mitek, which
markets to financial services firms, had to take a big write-down for bad debts.

   That's indicative of problems in financial services, Harman says. Mitek's
shares bottomed at 50 cents in December, after a 97 percent decline.

   The stock rose to the $2 range, then backed off to around $1.50. Harman's
one-year target for the stock is $2, but he sees no particular upside and gives
it a "C" rating.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1965 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               February 18, 2001, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. B3

LENGTH: 835 words

HEADLINE: THE FUTURE AT A GLANCE;
THIS IS JUST THE BEGINNING ...

BYLINE: Robert H. WaterstonSCIENCE; TECHNOLOGY; DNA; BIOGENETICS MEDICINE;
DISEASE; CURE; HEREDITY; RNA; ADENINE THYMINE CYTOSINE; GUANINE; PRIVACY RIGHTS;
INSURANCE HEALTH CARE

BODY:


   The publications on the human genome sequence in Nature and Science are major
milestones in the biomedical revolution begun in 1953 with the discovery of the
structure of DNA by Watson and Crick. Building on Mendel's findings that traits
were inherited as units called genes, Watson and Crick showed that genetic
information was stored in strings of chemical bases A, G, C and T in much the
same way that knowledge is stored in strings of letters.

   The papers describe the first overview of the human genome, our genetic
instruction book. Both are based on the same clone-by-clone strategy advocated
and pursued by the publicly funded International Human Genome Project (I-HGP),
despite assertions by the commercially funded project at Celera that such an
approach would be made obsolete by their "whole genome shotgun" strategy. In the
end, the whole genome shotgun method failed, and Celera retreated to the use of
the public clone-by-clone sequences and p ublic clone maps to produce a sequence
that differed only in minor ways from the sequence produced by the I-HGP.

   Although comparative sequencing with other genomes will be needed to further
explain the human sequence, and both sides agree that the present versions are
incomplete, these initial views of the genome provide some fascinating insights.
We have fewer genes than suspected -- just two to three times as many as the
much simpler worm and fly. We can begin to read our evolutionary history, as a
species and beyond. Most importantly for the general public, the human genome
sequence promises to accelerate the pa ce of discoveries of the genes behind
human health and the variant forms which lead to disease, to unfavorable drug
reactions and to variation in the population.

   Genes behind many diseases are already known -- for example, genes leading to
cystic fibrosis, to colon or breast cancer and to Alzheimer's. But hunts for new
disease genes will no longer be slowed by the search for the altered gene.
Further, the studies of sequence variation will allow the discovery of genes
behind complex diseases such as heart disease, diabetes, hypertension and
asthma. We will also learn about genes contributing to intelligence and
behavior. The possibilities are exhilarating and seemingly endless.

   This explosion of knowledge from genome research creates opportunities.
Already tests are available for genes behind diseases such as cystic fibrosis,
breast cancer and Huntington's disease. With cystic fibrosis, early diagnosis
can delay onset of the disease and slow its progression. Carriers of gene
variants that predispose to breast cancer face an agonizing decision of whether
to have a bilateral mastectomy in order to prevent it. Unfortunately with
Huntington's disease there is no ameliorative treatment available at present.
The long-term hope is that new therapies, drugs or even corrective genes can be
developed that will lead to cures.

   This gap between knowledge and treatment creates new problems. One only has
to look at the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway case, appearing in the press
in the same week as the genome papers, where genetic tests were to be used to
discriminate against those with predispositions to job-related disabilities, in
hopes of reducing costs. This case represents both bad science and bad ethics,
and vividly demonstrates the potential for abuse of genetic tests. Burlington
abandoned its plans in the face of public outcry, but we should expect other
cases to follow. To prevent the misuse of this powerful information, we must
stand up now and demand strong laws protecting our genetic privacy.

   The longer-term concerns center around whether and how this information might
be used to alter our genetic makeup. Almost everyone agrees that gene therapy
would be appropriate if it could rescue an infant from lifelong suffering. But
what about the use of such methods to promote "desirable" traits, such as
intelligence, athletic ability or even good looks? Will altered genes be passed
on to subsequent generations? These are questions that must be answered.

   These complex traits are likely to involve many genes (and the environment)
and require long-term study to understand them well enough to allow intelligent
intervention. But this lack of clear knowledge will not stop unscrupulous
practitioners in a free market from making promises to the contrary. Nor will it
stop vulnerable and credulous individuals from coming under their sway. We must
find ways of limiting the damage, while at the same time preventing government
from becoming involved in individuals' reproductive decisions.

   These publications represent a beginning, not an end. The potential benefits
are enormous; bringing benefits to all as quickly as possible requires making
the sequence available for all without constraint. The best way to ensure the
wise use of the sequence is to include all voices in the debate. The human
genome sequence is our shared inheritance. It belongs to all of us.

NOTES:
HUMAN GENOME PART ONE OF TWO Robert H. Waterston, M.D., Ph.D., is the James S.
McDonnell professor and head of Genetics at Washington University School of
Medicine in St. Louis. He also directs the medical school's Genome Sequencing
Center, which organized the genome map and contributed more than 20 percent of
the sequence data to the publicly funded International Human Genome Project.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (1) COLOR PHOTO by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Celera Genomics
President J. Craig Venter's shadow is cast against a map of human genes during a
Washington news conference Monday to discuss genome research.
 (2) COLOR PHOTO - Nature and Science magazines featured the human genome
sequence in recent issues.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2001


                             1966 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   February 17, 2001, Saturday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A23

LENGTH: 871 words

HEADLINE: JEROME P. KASSIRER Dr. Jerome P. Kassirer is a distinguished professor
at Tufts University School of Medicine and editor-in-chief emeritus of the New
England Journal of Medicine.;
MORE RESPONSIBLE MEDICAL LEADERSHIP

BYLINE: By Jerome P. Kassirer

BODY:

   TWO YEARS AGO THE UNEXPECTED DEATH OF A TEENAGER DURING THE COURSE OF A GENE
THERAPY EXPERIMENT INAUGURATED A PUBLIC DEMAND FOR BETTER SCRUTINY OF MEDICAL
RESEARCH. IN THE AFTERMATH OF THIS TRAGEDY, REVELATIONS SURFACED ABOUT
INAPPROPRIATE PRACTICES AT SEVERAL MEDICAL CENTERS, AND FOR A WHILE, THE
GOVERNMENT TEMPORARILY SHUT DOWN CLINICAL RESEARCH ACTIVITIES AT MANY CENTERS.

   One little known practice that received special and intense criticism was the
financial benefit that might have accrued to both the clinical investigators and
their institutions if their studies involving patients were successful in
yielding patents and, ultimately, marketable products. Some inventors were
developing products and testing them in their own institutions, even on their
own patients.

   For a while, these financial conflicts of interest captured headlines, and
the federal government warned academic medical centers to reform the current
system so as to guarantee protection for human subjects involved in research
projects. Chastened by the government's strong language, leaders of the academic
medicine community soon announced that they intend to comply with the
government's request.

      Their action seems timely and responsible, so what is the problem?

   Simply put, leaders of medical centers, namely deans of medical schools and
presidents of medical centers, have a vested interest in the success of their
staff and faculty in converting their scientific discoveries into profitable
inventions and products. Some institutions are already making millions of
dollars in licensing the patents from this research, and many others are
scrambling to cash in on research as income from their faculty practices and
other sources is declining.

   Adding inhibitions on the research of the faculty based on the need to avoid
financial conflict of interest, therefore, could be counterproductive. The
willingness of research professors, clinical investigators, and medical device
developers to spend their time in developing potentially marketable inventions
is likely to be greatly reduced if they cannot expect to profit substantially
themselves.

   Will the leaders of academic institutions develop sufficiently restrictive
self-regulations that protect the public on the one hand and at the same time
reduce investigators' financial incentives on the other? In essence, academic
leaders themselves have a financial conflict of interest: not a personal
financial one, but one that affects the fiscal stability of their own
institutions. I submit that despite the purest of motives, it will be tempting
for them to fall short of ideal approaches that prevent investigators from going
too far. To some extent, we are relying on the foxes to guard the chicken coop.

   Why my skepticism? Because, in medicine, our history of self-regulation is a
checkered one.

   On the positive side, we have done a fine job of self-regulating the quality
of medical education, and we have excelled at maintaining high standards in
certifying specialists, subspecialists, and allied health professionals.
Overall, our hospitals are superb and the envy of people all over the world. But
we have been inconsistent, especially when it came to policing our colleagues
and developing enforceable rules for profitable medical activities.

   We were not tough enough on colleagues who abused controlled substances or
alcohol or those who we knew were practicing substandard medicine. For a long
while we permitted kickbacks when we referred a patient to another doctor, and
the profession resisted efforts to eliminate the practice of referring patients
for tests to facilities in which we had a financial interest. Along the way, we
issued ethical guidelines for many of these activities but they were often lax,
they had no teeth, and, instead of real accountability, they were prime examples
of pseudo-accountability.

   I know many of the leaders of our academic medical centers personally. They
are a fine, honest, highly ethical lot. But they are human, and they want their
institutions to thrive - or at least survive - in these times of serious
financial stresses.

   I believe that they want to act in the public's best interests, but to
achieve the confidence and trust of the public, given their desire to encourage
profitable research, I believe that they will have to do more than decide
individually or even among themselves what their policies should be and how to
enforce them. When they convene their groups to discuss self-regulations, they
could invite a substantial (not just a token) membership of lay people.

   Alternatively, and preferably, they could set a potent example of
responsible, ethical leadership. They could acknowledge that because of their
vested interests, it would be inappropriate for them to formulate policies that
affect their own institutions. They could announce that they will recuse
themselves from establishing the rules and enforcement procedures governing
financial conflict of interest and that they will cede their autonomy on this
issue to an outside, independent group, perhaps retaining a minority membership.

   Such an unprecedented action would be an enduring model of integrity for the
entire profession.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2001


                             1967 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                          February 17, 2001, Saturday

SECTION: CITRUS TIMES; Pg. 5

DISTRIBUTION: CITRUS TIMES

LENGTH: 442 words

HEADLINE: Knack for science sends two to top competition

BYLINE: PAULETTE LASH RITCHIE

BODY:


   The Lecanto High juniors earn regional acclaim and are invited to state and
international science fairs.

   Samir Amin walked away from the Citrus County Regional Science and
Engineering Fair with a first place in microbiology, an invitation to the state
science and engineering fair and special awards from the Rotary Club of
Inverness and Yale Science & Engineering Association.

   Amit Patel received a first place in environmental sciences, an invitation to
the state fair and special awards from the Department of the Army, Intel
Excellence in Environmental Health and Safety and the United States Air Force.

   And both won the biggest plum of all. The two Lecanto High School juniors
were selected to represent Citrus County at the International Science Fair in
San Jose, Calif., in May.

   Samir, 16, did a project titled: The Application of a Hammerhead Ribozyme
Library for Cleavage of mRNA to Identify Mouse Tumor Suppressor Genes. He
explained that he used ribozyme, a kind of biological scissors, that can be
targeted at various mRNA (the substance that carries protein codes from DNA to
the sites of protein synthesis) to target mouse tumor suppressor genes. "I
identified various tumor suppressor genes and tried relating them to human
genes," he said.

   Samir did his research in Dr. Alfred Lewin's laboratory at the University of
Florida under the guidance of Lewin's assistant, Jennifer Bongorno.

   Samir is considering a career in medicine and is interested in gene therapy.
This will be his second competition in the International Science and Engineering
Fair. He is the son of Nila and Kamalesh Amin.

   Amit, 17, did a project called: Neutron Activation for Toxic Elements Found
in Fish Muscle Tissue in Coastal Waters: The Affects of Processing Trace
Elemental Concentrate Content. He said he used radiation to detect
concentrations of elements.

   "I process samples to reduce elemental content," he said. This was a second
year study.

   Amit would like to attend the University of Florida and is interested in
psychiatry. He is also a repeat competitor in an international fair, although he
and Samir attended different years. Amit is the son of Harshad and Jaya Patel.

   Samir says he will be doing some updating to his project before the May
competition and Amit says he plans to do more testing to prepare for the
international contest. On this return trip he says, "This is my time to go there
seriously and get the job done."

   That is not to say they both don't expect to have a good time as well. They
are looking forward to meeting new friends and they both wanted to be quoted as
saying, "There are hot people there."


GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, PAULETTE RITCHIE; Samir Amin and Amit Patel

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2001


                             1968 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     February 16, 2001 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2C BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 1315 words

BODY:

   In the Region

   Prime Retail REIT says it won't pay dividends this year

   Prime Retail Inc., the troubled owner and operator of outlet malls, said
yesterday that it does not expect to pay any dividends this year on either
common or preferred stock.

   The Baltimore-based real estate investment trust plans to use cash flow from
operations to reduce its short-term debt and pay for upkeep and marketing of its
outlet shopping centers, said Glenn D. Reschke, chairman. Last year, the company
had announced a policy of paying shareholder dividends only to the extent
necessary to keep its tax status as a REIT. That policy became part of the terms
of a loan of up to $71 million from a real estate fund of Fortress Investment
Fund LLC, an equity fund manager. The loan closed in December.

   Prime reported a net loss of $9.2 million, or 21 cents per common share for
the third quarter, which ended Sept. 30, and funds from operations of $13.9
million, or 15 cents per diluted share, down from $ 26.2 million, or 38 cents
per share, in the third quarter of 1999. The company has not said when it will
report its fourth-quarter earnings.

   Decision next month on F-22 contract

   The Pentagon will decide next month whether to award Lockheed Martin Corp. a
$2.1 billion contract to produce the first batch of F-22 jet fighters, David
Oliver, the Pentagon's top acquisition official, said yesterday.

   Investors have worried that the decision might be delayed as the Bush
administration studies U.S. tactical aircraft needs as part of a broader review
of military forces, strategy and spending.

   That review won't affect whether to build the first 10 production models of
the stealthy fighter jet, said Oliver, who is the Defense Department's principal
deputy for acquisition.

   MAMSI extending its stock buyback

   Mid Atlantic Medical Services Inc., the Rockville health insurer, said
yesterday that it is extending its stock buyback program.

   Its board of directors authorized another $13.9 million, bringing to $20
million the total authorized for buying shares.

   Last year, MAMSI bought back 2.8 million shares for $31.5 million. In
January, it bought 504,900 shares for $7.2 million.

   2ME2 going to Phase II of prostate cancer trials

   EntreMed Inc. said yesterday that it is moving its anti-cancer drug 2ME2 to a
second phase of testing in prostate patients and renaming it Panzem.

   The Phase II prostate cancer trials of Panzem, also formerly known as
2-methoxyestradiol, will take place at Indiana University and the University of
Wisconsin. The drug, which comes in the form of a capsule, also is being tested
alone and in combination with Taxotere in trials for breast cancer patients at
Indiana.

   In a separate pilot Phase II trial at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota, Panzem is
being tested in patients with multiple myeloma, an aggressive bone marrow
cancer. The drug is designed to both block the growth of tiny, tumor-feeding
blood vessels and to attack the tumors directly.

   GenVec now testing TNFerade with humans

   GenVec Inc. said yesterday that it has started human testing of TNFerade, a
gene therapy intended to be used in combination with radiation.

   TNFerade, which is injected directly into the tumor, uses a disabled virus to
carry the gene for a cancer-fighting protein into the tumor. The protein, known
as tumor necrosis factor alpha, or TNFa, has been found to both directly fight
cancer and increase the effectiveness of radiation. But its use has been limited
because of its toxic effects when delivered systemically.

   Patrick hired for key post at MedImmune Inc.

   MedImmune Inc., a Gaithersburg-based biopharmaceutical company, said
yesterday that it had hired Gregory S. Patrick as senior vice president and
chief financial officer.

   Patrick, 49, has more than 15 years of experience in the pharmaceutical
industry, the bulk of it at Merck & Co. Inc., where he was vice president and
controller of manufacturing, and as CFO for Ventiv Health Inc.

   The CFO position became available in the fall when David Mott, then vice
chairman and CFO, was promoted to chief executive officer. Mott remains vice
chairman.

   Gene Logic lands deal with Genentech Inc.

   Gene Logic Inc., a Gaithersburg-based company that supplies information about
genes and proteins to scientists researching new drugs, said yesterday that
Genentech Inc. has subscribed to one of its databases.

   Terms of the multiyear deal with the South San Francisco, Calif.,
biotechnology company were not disclosed.

   Elsewhere

   Union tells pilots to cease no-overtime campaign at Delta

   The union representing 9,800 Delta Air Lines pilots has directed its members
to comply with a federal court injunction halting a no-overtime work campaign, a
union spokesman said yesterday.

   The injunction, issued by a federal judge in Atlanta, prohibits Air Line
Pilots Association members from refusing to request or accept overtime flying
work, and from engaging in any other actions which interfere with Delta's
operations.

   In a posting on its Web site, ALPA told its pilots - who are demanding higher
wages and improved benefits in a new contract - to cease any unlawful activity,
including harassment of pilots who request overtime work. Delta sued the union
in December, accusing it of orchestrating a campaign to decline overtime flying
requests, in violation of the federal Railway Labor Act.

   Chrysler is readying buyout offer in Canada

   The Chrysler arm of Daimler- Chrysler AG said yesterday that it will offer
some of its Canadian hourly workers a retirement incentive package valued at
C$52,500, as it works to trim 20 percent of its worldwide work force.

   The incentives, aimed at trimming the payroll of hourly employees already
eligible for retirement, is part of the struggling automaker's drive to cut
26,000 jobs worldwide and restore profits. Chrysler lost roughly $1.7 billion in
the second half of 2000, and company sources have said Chrysler won't show a
profit until 2002.

   Chrysler spokeswoman Shawn Morgan said the automaker wasn't sure how many
workers were eligible for the program. When it announced the cuts two weeks ago,
it estimated that about 2,700 workers in Canada were eligible for retirement or
special programs.

   New jobless claims decline by 11,000

   New claims for state unemployment benefits declined last week for the first
time in four weeks, but were still in a range indicating that companies'
appetite for workers has diminished.

   The number of Americans filing new claims for jobless benefits fell by 11,000
to a seasonally adjusted 352,000 for the work week ending Feb. 10, the Labor
Department reported yesterday. It was the first decline since Jan. 13, when
claims dropped by 40,000.

   Stock-manipulation probe is widened by SEC

   Federal regulators are pressing on with their four-year pursuit of a complex
stock-manipulation scheme involving the defunct Systems of Excellence Inc.,
suing another four people yesterday and recovering about $ 400,000 in
settlements with three of them.

   The Systems of Excellence case was the first in which the Securities and
Exchange Commission alleged stock manipulation using the Internet. The company,
which made video teleconferencing equipment, eventually entered bankruptcy
liquidation proceedings. Its offices were in McLean, Va., and Coral Gables, Fla.

   The SEC alleged in its new civil lawsuit that the four - the company's
corporate secretary, an accountant, a medical doctor and a retired investor -
made $1.7 million in profits in 1996 by unlawfully selling Systems of Excellence
shares "into an artificially inflated market that was being manipulated by
others." The SEC has recovered nearly $15 million from defendants over the four
years of its investigation.

   This column was compiled from reports by Sun staff writers, the Associated
Press, Bloomberg News and Reuters.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2001


                             1969 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     February 16, 2001 Friday STATE EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 03B

LENGTH: 631 words

HEADLINE: UW to test new cancer drug;
It fights disease in prostate

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   The company that makes the experimental cancer drug en-do-statin announced
Thursday it will test a similar, promising drug at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison on patients with prostate cancer.

   UW and Indiana University will be the only two sites in the nation to test
Panzem, formerly known as 2ME2, against prostate cancer.

   Like endostatin, which caused a stampede of volunteers when UW began testing
it a year ago, Panzem was developed by Harvard researcher Judah Folkman, who has
led work on angiogenesis inhibitors. These are substances that attack cancer by
blocking the formation of blood vessels that nourish tumors. But Panzem also
does something endostatin doesn't: it kills cancer cells directly.

   "This is a one- two punch. By attacking the tumor and its blood supply,
Panzem represents the combination of chemotherapy and anti-angiogenesis at
work," said Edward Gubish, an executive with EntreMed Inc., the Rockville, Md.,
company that makes it.

   UW officials also announced they're about to start a gene therapy experiment
and are starting separate tests of the experimental drug Iressa against the
disease.

   "All those three are really sought-after drugs that we're really lucky to
have. Many medical centers have been trying to get these" for testing, said
George Wilding, the physician who heads the experiments at UW.

   Thousands of desperate cancer patients called UW a year ago, seeking to be
among the fewer than 30 patients chosen for the first endostatin experiment. UW
and cancer centers in Houston and Boston have done the only human tests on
endostatin.

   Wilding hopes the Panzem experiment will bring less hysteria because it's
open only to patients whose cancer has spread beyond the prostate despite
hormone treatment, radiation or surgery. Endostatin was tested on a wide variety
of cancers.

   Unlike endostatin, which so far has only been given intravenously, Panzem
comes as a capsule that patients can take at home.

   "That's one of the main advantages. They don't have to be here every day to
get injections," Wilding said.

   Interest in angiogenesis inhibitors soared after Folkman reported a couple
years ago that endostatin shrank and in some cases, eliminated tumors in mice
without the side effects that limit chemotherapy. They "have emerged as a new
class of drugs" that are being tested at more than 100 medical centers in the
United States, Folkman said at a recent appearance at UW.

   Encouraged by early tests on Panzem, EntreMed in December started testing it
at the Mayo Clinic against multiple myeloma, an aggressive cancer of the bone
marrow. At Indiana University, it is being tested singly and in combination with
a conventional chemotherapy drug, taxotere, against breast cancer.

   Besides endostatin and Panzem, UW is testing three other anti-angiogenesis
drugs or substances against various cancers: marimastat, thalidomide and
interferon.

   The gene therapy experiment is being done with Johns Hopkins University and
the University of California at San Francisco. It will use a modified version of
the common cold virus, anadenovirus, as a means of targeting cells that are
producing PSA, a substance made by prostate cells that's elevated when cancer is
present.

   ------------

   Anyone interested in the new studies at UW should call (800) 622-8922 (in
Madison, call 262-5223). To find other experiments, call the National Cancer
Institute's Cancer Information Service, (800) 422- 6237, and ask about
anti-angiogenesis clinical trials.

   Information also is available at a UW Web site, www.cancer.wisc.edu. The
National Cancer Institute has angiogenesis information on the Web at
cancertrials.nci.nih. gov/news/angio and
rex.nci.nih.gov/behindthenews/uangio/uangioframe.htm. EntreMed Inc. also has a
Web site, www.entremed.com

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2001


                             1970 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 16, 2001, Friday

SECTION: OPINION;Pg. B-9

LENGTH: 1034 words

HEADLINE: Ethical challenges rise for genomics

BYLINE: Gerard Magill; Magill, a health ethicist, is executive director and
department chair of the Center for Health Care Ethics at Saint Louis University.

BODY:
 The official publication of the map of the human genome has taken our breath
away.  The Human Genome Sequencing Consortium (funded substantially by the
National Institutes of Health and the Wellcome Trust of London) and the private
corporation Celera Genomics jointly announced their analysis of the human
genome, less than a year after rolling out an early draft.

   This assembly and analysis of the human genome -- so tiny in size yet almost
limitless in its potential for health -- constitutes an astonishing breakthrough
in modern science and technology.  It certainly equals the marvel of harnessing
atomic energy or landing on the moon.

   It is almost impossible to grasp the significance of this virtual blueprint
of the human condition that we can now see, read, study and apply.  Some have
referred to this map as the so-called book of life, or the "holy grail" of
molecular medicine, that will enable us to develop treatments for a vast array
of diseases at their genetic roots -- cancers, mental diseases, multiple
sclerosis, diabetes, etc.  Few doubt that we will have effective genetic
therapies within a few years.

   So, it is no wonder that society applauds this remarkable accomplishment.
Hopes are high and anticipation abounds.  Naturally, modesty must also prevail
at such an exciting moment.  After all, it is somewhat humbling to be informed
that the human species possesses only 30,000 or so genes (not the 100,000 that
many projected), just 11,000 more than a worm!  But the real cause for modesty
lies in the complexity of the task ahead as we use the map of the human genome
to develop reliable therapies for so many diseases and disabilities.

   However, we must temper this legitimate anticipation with a healthy dose of
apprehension.  Midst the euphoria of such "eureka" moments we also need to
recognize potential problems and difficulties.

   If we are not cautious, our genome map is capable of leading some astray on
the ethical landscape of genetic manipulation.  Of course, no one wants to yell
"fire" in a movie theater without cause.  But already we have encountered
sufficient predicaments in genetic science as to warrant hesitancy as we begin
to explore this exciting landscape of the human genome.

   So why should we have apprehension regarding what seems to be such good news
about using molecular medicine for the treatment of disease at its genetic
roots?  Well, caution makes most sense when we can identify particular events
that genuinely illustrate serious underlying ethical concerns.  Here are a few
such situations.

   First, we will have to monitor privacy, consent, confidentiality and
discrimination issues in the new genetic landscape of medicine.  Naturally,
there will be many new tests and screening opportunities to diagnose molecular
predispositions and risks for gene-related diseases.  That scenario can be good
news insofar as it will encourage a helpful shift to preventive care.

   But it also may be bad news if we invade privacy, compromise consent or
confidentiality, or foster discrimination (even unwittingly). For example, some
employers or insurers may be inclined to obtain genetic information to decline
coverage or claims.  Just last Friday the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) filed a lawsuit in U.S. District Court for the Northern
District of Iowa in Sioux City.

   The lawsuit claimed a company violated its employees' privacy rights by
requiring genetic tests.  The company had a nationwide policy requiring some
employees who filed claims of a specific work-related injury to provide blood
samples for genetic tests.  Interestingly, within a matter of days after the
lawsuit was filed, the company discontinued its policy requiring genetic tests!
Congress has yet to pass regulation in this controversial arena -- but it needs
to do so urgently.

   Second, we need to ensure that our scientists, hospitals and genomics
corporations do not place any patient in jeopardy in the race to file patents
and develop highly profitable new genetic therapies.  There are strict protocol
requirements for medical research that must be followed to ensure the safety of
human research subjects.

   Sadly, the avoidable death of the first reported gene therapy patient, Jesse
Gelsinger, in fall 1999 illustrates the need for such caution.  The teen-ager
died with severe immune reaction to an experimental genetic therapy virus for an
inherited liver disease.  Subsequently, the family filed a lawsuit, alleging
fraudulence and negligence in recruiting their son as a patient and eventually
settled out of court.

   Third, we need to be aware that genetic intervention may hold terrible
surprises for the human species, especially from the perspective of safety.  In
January an Australian research team reported that an apparently harmless animal
experiment had disastrous consequences.  The team inserted into the mouse pox
virus (a cousin of the human smallpox virus) a mouse gene to trigger the mouse
immune system as a means of controlling fertility -- but the virus crippled the
immune system and killed the mice population.

   This unforeseen but disastrous result simply illustrates the difficulty of
navigating our genetic terrain.  That difficulty will not be removed even with a
reliable map of the human genome.

   Of course, there will be many future issues that may cause us pause as we
explore the human genome.  Two obvious questions about future interventions
already are being asked.  May science play God in its control of the human
genome by enabling couples to have so-called "designer babies" -- not just to
avoid diseased genes, but also to select preferred traits such as skin color and
intelligence?  How will science assess the relative risks of germ-line genetic
manipulation that will alter the progeny of the patient and subsequent
offspring?

   In sum, we might ponder this point: if evolution has enabled the human
species to flourish in its biological diversity over a period of 500 million
years, it should be with great modesty that we celebrate our astounding
accomplishments in mapping the human genome and with even greater fear and
trepidation that we use this map to manipulate our genetic makeup.


GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; Igor Kopelnitsky

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2001


                             1971 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            February 16, 2001 Friday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. B-9

LENGTH: 1020 words

HEADLINE: Ethical challenges rise for genomics

BYLINE: Gerard Magill, Magill, a health ethicist, is executive director and
department chair of the Center for Health Care Ethics at Saint Louis University.

BODY:

   The official publication of the map of the human genome has taken our breath
away.

   The Human Genome Sequencing Consortium (funded substantially by the National
Institutes of Health and the Wellcome Trust of London) and the private
corporation Celera Genomics jointly announced their analysis of the human
genome, less than a year after rolling out an early draft. This assembly and
analysis of the human genome -- so tiny in size yet almost limitless in its
potential for health -- constitutes an astonishing breakthrough in modern
science and technology.

   It certainly equals the marvel of harnessing atomic energy or landing on the
moon. It is almost impossible to grasp the significance of this virtual
blueprint of the human condition that we can now see, read, study and apply.

   Some have referred to this map as the so-called book of life, or the "holy
grail" of molecular medicine, that will enable us to develop treatments for a
vast array of diseases at their genetic roots -- cancers, mental diseases,
multiple sclerosis, diabetes, etc.

   Few doubt that we will have effective genetic therapies within a few years.
So, it is no wonder that society applauds this remarkable accomplishment. Hopes
are high and anticipation abounds.

   Naturally, modesty must also prevail at such an exciting moment.

   After all, it is somewhat humbling to be informed that the human species
possesses only 30,000 or so genes (not the 100,000 that many projected), just
11,000 more than a worm!

   But the real cause for modesty lies in the complexity of the task ahead as we
use the map of the human genome to develop reliable therapies for so many
diseases and disabilities. However, we must temper this legitimate anticipation
with a healthy dose of apprehension.

   Midst the euphoria of such "eureka" moments we also need to recognize
potential problems and difficulties. If we are not cautious, our genome map is
capable of leading some astray on the ethical landscape of genetic manipulation.

   Of course, no one wants to yell "fire" in a movie theater without cause.

   But already we have encountered sufficient predicaments in genetic science as
to warrant hesitancy as we begin to explore this exciting landscape of the human
genome. So why should we have apprehension regarding what seems to be such good
news about using molecular medicine for the treatment of disease at its genetic
roots?

   Well, caution makes most sense when we can identify particular events that
genuinely illustrate serious underlying ethical concerns.

   Here are a few such situations. First, we will have to monitor privacy,
consent, confidentiality and discrimination issues in the new genetic landscape
of medicine.

   Naturally, there will be many new tests and screening opportunities to
diagnose molecular predispositions and risks for gene-related diseases.

   That scenario can be good news insofar as it will encourage a helpful shift
to preventive care. But it also may be bad news if we invade privacy, compromise
consent or confidentiality, or foster discrimination (even unwittingly). For
example, some employers or insurers may be inclined to obtain genetic
information to decline coverage or claims.

   Just last Friday the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) filed a
lawsuit in U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Iowa in Sioux City.
The lawsuit claimed a company violated its employees' privacy rights by
requiring genetic tests.

   The company had a nationwide policy requiring some employees who filed claims
of a specific work-related injury to provide blood samples for genetic tests.

   Interestingly, within a matter of days after the lawsuit was filed, the
company discontinued its policy requiring genetic tests!

   Congress has yet to pass regulation in this controversial arena -- but it
needs to do so urgently. Second, we need to ensure that our scientists,
hospitals and genomics corporations do not place any patient in jeopardy in the
race to file patents and develop highly profitable new genetic therapies.

   There are strict protocol requirements for medical research that must be
followed to ensure the safety of human research subjects. Sadly, the avoidable
death of the first reported gene therapy patient, Jesse Gelsinger, in fall 1999
illustrates the need for such caution.

   The teen-ager died with severe immune reaction to an experimental genetic
therapy virus for an inherited liver disease.

   Subsequently, the family filed a lawsuit, alleging fraudulence and negligence
in recruiting their son as a patient and eventually settled out of court. Third,
we need to be aware that genetic intervention may hold terrible surprises for
the human species, especially from the perspective of safety. In January an
Australian research team reported that an apparently harmless animal experiment
had disastrous consequences.

   The team inserted into the mouse pox virus (a cousin of the human smallpox
virus) a mouse gene to trigger the mouse immune system as a means of controlling
fertility -- but the virus crippled the immune system and killed the mice
population. This unforeseen but disastrous result simply illustrates the
difficulty of navigating our genetic terrain.

   That difficulty will not be removed even with a reliable map of the human
genome. Of course, there will be many future issues that may cause us pause as
we explore the human genome.

   Two obvious questions about future interventions already are being asked.

   May science play God in its control of the human genome by enabling couples
to have so-called "designer babies" -- not just to avoid diseased genes, but
also to select preferred traits such as skin color and intelligence?

   How will science assess the relative risks of germ-line genetic manipulation
that will alter the progeny of the patient and subsequent offspring? In sum, we
might ponder this point: if evolution has enabled the human species to flourish
in its biological diversity over a period of 500 million years, it should be
with great modesty that we celebrate our astounding accomplishments in mapping
the human genome and with even greater fear and trepidation that we use this map
to manipulate our genetic makeup.

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; PHOTOBY: Igor Kopelnitsky

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1972 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            February 16, 2001 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 383 words

HEADLINE: GenVec, EntreMed To Test Cancer Drugs

BYLINE: Terence Chea, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    Two Maryland biotechnology companies announced plans to launch human tests
of experimental drugs to treat cancer.

    GenVec Inc. of Gaithersburg is developing TNFerade, a gene-therapy drug
intended for use with radiation therapy. For the studies, to be conducted at
several U.S. sites, patients will be enrolled who have failed to respond to
standard treatment and are receiving radiation to control tumors.

    EntreMed Inc. of Rockville, meanwhile, will begin advanced human tests of
Panzem, formerly known as 2ME2, on about 32 prostate cancer patients at study
centers at Indiana University and the University of Wisconsin.

    These tests represent the fifth set of studies on Panzem, which is taken
orally in capsules. The potential drug is being studied as a treatment for
prostate cancer, breast cancer and multiple myeloma, which causes tumors in bone
marrow.

    GenVec's TNFerade is a gene that stimulates the production of a protein
called TNFa, which has been shown to directly fight tumors and improve the
effectiveness of radiation therapy.

    GenVec officials said that although radiation treatment has improved, side
effects caused by the treatment continue to limit its effectiveness. They hope
TNFerade will help increase radiation's effectiveness and reduce its side
effects.

    Like GenVec's other gene-therapy drugs, TNFerade uses a deactivated cold
virus known as an adenovirus to deliver the genes, company officials said. The
genes are delivered locally to improve the drug's safety and effectiveness.

    TNFerade is the second drug candidate that GenVec has started testing in
human patients. In a partnership with New York pharmaceutical company Pfizer
Inc., GenVec is conducting advanced human tests of Biobypass, a gene-therapy
drug being studied to treat two forms of heart disease -- coronary artery
disease and peripheral vascular disease.

    Panzem is one of several anti-cancer drugs EntreMed is testing in human
patients. EntreMed's drug candidates, which include Endostatin and Angiostatin,
attack tumors by stopping the growth of blood vessels that provide them
nutrients.

    The company said CaP Cure, an organization that provides funding for
prostate-cancer research, is supporting the research at the University of
Wisconsin.

   More stories on BIOTECH/MEDICAL online at Washtech.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2002


                             1973 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  February 15, 2001, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. C-7, NEWS BRIEFS

LENGTH: 561 words

HEADLINE: NO HEADLINE

BYLINE: THIS COLUMN CONTAINS INFORMATION FROM LOCAL AND WIRE; DISPATCHES,
INCLUDING THE ASSOCIATED PRESS, BLOOMBERG NEWS AND REUTERS

BODY:


   Some admired more than others

   A handful of Pittsburgh companies popped up on Fortune magazine's list of
America's Most Admired Companies, but not all of them have something to crow
about. Overall, General Electric, Cisco Systems and Wal-Mart Stores were the top
vote-getters, chosen from the 1,000 largest U.S. companies based on revenues. By
industry, the top performer locally was Alcoa, which placed No. 1 among the 10
largest metals firms. Bayer and PPG ranked third and fourth, respectively, in
the chemicals sector. Among super-regional banks, PNC was No. 5 and National
City was No. 7. Heinz placed No. 8 in the consumer food products group,
USX-Marathon came in at No. 9 among the largest petroleum refiners, while US
Airways ranked last among airlines.

   McDonald in new venture

Sean McDonald, founder of Automated Healthcare and a former senior executive
with McKesson HBOC, has found his next venture. Since mid January, McDonald has
been leading the charge at local start-up Precision Therapeutics as its
chairman, president and chief executive. He has already pieced together a
multimillion-dollar venture capital round for the gene therapy company from
local financiers Birchmere Ventures and Draper Triangle Ventures, and expects
more money to come in soon. McDonald, who also chairs the Pittsburgh Technology
Council, took over the reins from Precision founder Paul Kornblith, a
neurosurgeon and former University of Pittsburgh professor.

   Local home sales up

Home sales in the six-county Pittsburgh region rose 4.7 percent last month, to
1,512 from 1,444 a year ago, according to West Penn Multi-List. Washington
County scored the biggest gain with a 39.6 percent increase in sales, as
measured by homes under agreement, followed by Beaver County's 29.9 percent
increase. Sales fell 35.3 percent in Fayette County and 6.4 percent in
Westmoreland County.

   Penn may loosen health links

The University of Pennsylvania Health System will undergo some kind of
fundamental management change, but no decision has been made on the future of
the financially troubled health-care network, officials said. University
President Judith Rodin was to make presentations to the school's board of
trustees today and tomorrow on how to insulate the university from the financial
troubles of the health system. The health system -- a network of four hospitals,
several walk-in treatment centers, and hundreds of doctors' practices -- lost
more than $ 400 million between 1996 and the middle of 2000. It posted a small
profit in the last half of 2000 after cutting spending and reducing its work
force by 20 percent.

   Also in business

   Duties on an imported steel product used in the energy industry should
continue, the U.S. International Trade Commission has ruled. Grain-oriented
silicon electrical steel is manufactured in the United States by Ohio-based AK
Steel Corp. in Butler and Pittsburgh-based Allegheny Ludlum Corp. ... National
Steel said it is eliminating 200 salaried workers as part of a drive to cut
costs by nearly $ 100 million annually. The troubled steelmaker said it will try
to accomplish the cuts through attrition. National previously announced it would
eliminate 400 hourly positions...US Airways plans to resume flights from
Philadelphia to Amsterdam on April 11, and to begin service to Brussels on May
9.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, PHOTO: Sean McDonald

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2001


                             1974 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  February 14, 2001, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 436 words

HEADLINE: JUST ENOUGH GENES

BODY:

   The simultaneous publication this week of two mappings of the human genome is
both a triumphant and a humbling moment for homo sapiens. Triumphant because of
the advance this represents in our knowledge of the building blocks of life.
Humbling, though, because scientists realize how much more there is to learn and
also because a human being's chromosomes turn out to be home to only half again
as many genes as a worm's. Moreover, one of the two mapping teams has also
sketched out the mouse's genome and discovered that a human has only 300 genes
that a mouse lacks.

   The sheer number of human genes calculated by two teams of scientists from
the privately financed Celera Genomics and the publicly funded Human Genome
Project is in the neighborhood of 30,000, substantially fewer than the 100,000
or so that geneticists had estimated. Other new findings are that the so-called
"junk" DNA of chromosomal material that is not coded into genes is more common
than had been thought and that some or much of it is not really junk after all
but appears to play a role in gene expression.

      Exploring the activity of "alleged junk," in the phrase of Eric Lander,
head of genome sequencing at the Whitehead Institute in Cambridge and one of the
participants in the Human Genome Project, will likely help explain how human
beings can be as complex as they are with just 11,000 more genes than the lowly
roundworm. But progress here will move one experiment at a time - science has
known the basic rules of gene expression for decades now but is just starting to
learn whatever rules are at work in the way the uncoded DNA "junk" affects gene
expression.

   It is also evident that much of humankind's complexity lies not just in the
ways genes "express" or control proteins - with one gene being capable of
controlling more than one protein - but also in the interactions of proteins. If
the "The Graduate" were to be remade tomorrow, the career tip for the
protagonist might be uncoded DNA and proteomics (the study of proteins) rather
than plastics.

   For some time scientists have warned us that knowing the genetic code would
not lead immediately to therapies for the many diseases with a strong genetic
component. After all, they reminded us, the gene that causes cystic fibrosis was
identified years ago, and there is no proven genetic therapy for it. The papers
published this week only reinforce that message - medicine is still far from a
one-gene, one-therapy world. But in spelling out what we do know and helping us
to know what we don't, the gene mappers can take pride in a remarkable
achievement.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2001


                             1975 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                FEBRUARY 14, 2001 Wednesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 567 words

HEADLINE: DRUG HUNTS DOWN AND BURSTS CANCER CELLS BRAIN SURGERY PATIENT KEPT
AWAKE, TALKING

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT FREE PRESS MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   For eight hours, while doctors performed sophisticated surgery on his brain,
a 34-year-old Dearborn Heights man lay awake so he could respond to doctors'
questions.

   His speech let them know that during Monday's surgery they could remove more
of the finger-like extensions of his recurrent brain tumor without destroying
the area in his brain that controls speech.

    Then, using an approach for the first time in Michigan, doctors squirted the
area around Jerry Chaffin's tumor with a genetically engineered drug that hunts
down and bursts cancer cells.

   "I hope it works," said Chaffin, a vinyl siding worker. He was joined at a
Henry Ford Hospital news conference Tuesday by his wife, Lori Chaffin, and sons
Daniel Chaffin, 14, and Billy Chaffin, 13.

   The drug, under study at 12 U.S. medical centers, is a good illustration of
how this week's news of the mapping of the human genetic code will be of
benefit. The drug is also a new vista in cancer care that promises fewer side
effects.

   The new drug, made by Onyx Pharmaceuticals, is made up of splices of gene
products wrapped inside a common cold virus. Its unique promise is its
selectivity. Findings like these are the kind more likely to be coming now that
scientists have defined the entire human genome. The drug only goes after cells
that lack an important gene, called p53, that works like a set of brakes on
cancer cells. Without the gene, tumor cells multiply.

   If the drug works, it promises to give doctors who treat cancer an option
that destroys tumor cells without the harmful side effects of chemotherapy.

   For now, doctors are going slowly, using gene therapy only for certain
tumors. In this study, only people with a precise type of recurrent brain tumor,
called astrocytoma, are eligible.

   About 20,000 U.S. patients are diagnosed each year with these tumors. Most
undergo surgery, radiation and chemotherapy, only to develop recurrences in two
to four years, said Dr. Tom Mikkelsen, codirector of the Hermelin Brain Tumor
Center at Henry Ford Hospital.

   Chaffin fits the profile exactly. Driving home on July 10, 1998, from a
siding job, he had a seizure and crashed into a highway railing. While
hospitalized for 18 days, doctors diagnosed his brain tumor.

   Dr. Kost Elisevich, a senior neurosurgeon at the hospital, said he could not
fully remove all of Chaffin's tumor during his first surgery in 1998 because it
most likely would have left him with major language deficits. He then underwent
extensive radiation and chemotherapy, all of which took a toll on his health.

   Chaffin stopped working. He said he couldn't hunt, fish or "relax and goof
around" the way he liked. "He's had billions of ups and downs," his wife added.

   Earlier this month, he learned his tumor had recurred.

   By Monday, Chaffin was eager to try the new approach. He had to lay awake so
the surgical team could ask him to say simple words like "box." The team also
used a device that helps surgeons find tumor traces not visible by the eye,
Mikkelsen said.

   Chaffin slept most of the day after his surgery. When he talked, he stuttered
a lot, a side effect of the operation. He spoke clearly Tuesday: "We have
faith."

   Chaffin expects to be discharged today. "Pretty amazing," he said.

   * The Web site of Onyx Pharmaceuticals, maker of the new drug, is
www.onyx-pharm.com.

   Contact PATRICIA ANSTETT at 313-222-5021 or anstett@freepress.com.

GRAPHIC: Photo;
"I hope it works," says Jerry Chaffin, 34, of the new cancer treatment.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2001


                             1976 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    February 13, 2001 Tuesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2C BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 1269 words

BODY:

   In the Region

   Williams extends Corvis contract amid record transmission

   Corvis Corp. is expected to announce today that it - along with Tulsa-based
nationwide fiber-optic network provider Williams Communications Group, Inc. -
has achieved a record-breaking transmission over a fiber-optic network.

   Columbia-based Corvis, which makes equipment for fiber-optic networks, was
able to successfully transmit light signals about 3,968 miles along a network
without having to recharge them. That means a beam of light carrying information
could travel farther than from Boston to San Diego without getting a boost along
the way.

   With the successful completion of this transmission, Williams has extended
its contract with Corvis from a $200 million contract to a $300 million,
multiyear contract.

   Profit, revenue decline at Integral Systems

   Integral Systems Inc., a developer of satellite software for ground systems,
reported net income of $1.1 million for its fiscal first quarter, which ended
Dec. 31 - a 29 percent decrease from the $1.5 million it booked a year earlier.
On a diluted per share basis, net income declined to 11 cents from 17 cents.

   The Lanham company's revenue fell 32 percent, to $8.5 million in the first
quarter of fiscal 2001, compared with $12.5 million in the year-earlier quarter.

   Integral's operating income fell to $640,000 in the quarter from $2 million
in the 2000 quarter.

   Choice Hotels' quarter comes in at 28 cents a share

   Choice Hotels International Inc., a Silver Spring-based hotel franchiser,
yesterday reported net income of $14.78 million, or 28 cents per diluted share,
for its fourth quarter, which ended Dec. 31, compared with $14.84 million, or 27
cents per diluted share, posted for the final quarter of 1999.

   Royalty revenue was up 6 percent, to $ 35.1 million, compared with $33.1
million in the 1999 quarter. The company recorded charges in the latest quarter
for acquisition and corporate restructuring costs, as well as investments made
in Friendly Hotels.

   GenVec licenses drug to combat blindness

   GenVec Inc. said yesterday that it has licensed a drug candidate from
Northwestern University that could help prevent blindness in certain patients.

   The Gaithersburg-based gene-therapy company said it intends to use Pigment
Epithelium-Derived Factor, which it licensed from Northwestern, to block
abnormal growth of blood vessels in the eyes of patients with macular
degeneration and diabetic retinopathy. The growth of such blood vessels can
cause blindness.

   Noble Steed adds 3 health care clients

   Noble Steed Associates Inc., a Hunt Valley advertising and marketing agency,
has taken on three new health care clients with combined annual billings
estimated at more than $6 million.

   The company has been hired to help launch a new product for Capital Blue
Cross of Central Pennsylvania - the largest health care insurer in central
Pennsylvania - and to bring a new look to the brand campaign. Other projects
include campaigns for Christiana Care Corp., a health care system based in
Wilmington, Del.

   Noble Steed also will work on branding for DC Chartered Health Plan, a
Washington-based managed care insurer that specializes in health care coverage
for Medicaid recipients.

   Elsewhere

   Credit ratings of Lucent are cut nearly to junk status

   Lucent Technologies Inc.'s credit ratings were cut to within a notch of junk
status by Standard & Poor's Corp. and Moody's Investors Service yesterday, after
revenue at the biggest maker of phone equipment fell in the fiscal first
quarter.

   The two credit-rating companies also said the outlook for Lucent's debt is
"negative." The cuts add to a slide that's taken the company close to below
investment grade from among the highest-rated borrowers just a few months ago.
Lucent can now no longer sell commercial paper, a type of short-term debt that
companies use to ensure that they have enough cash day to day.

   The cuts follow Lucent's first drop in sales and operating loss in its
five-year history as an independent company from former parent AT&T Corp. Lucent
had a loss from operations of $1.58 billion in the quarter that ended Dec. 31 as
revenue tumbled 26 percent. Its shares have plunged 69 percent in the past year.

   Delta's pilots vote to authorize a strike

   Pilots at Delta Air Lines Inc. have voted overwhelmingly to approve a strike
against the No. 3 U.S. airline if negotiations fail to produce a contract.

   The Air Line Pilots Association said that ballots were cast by 99 percent of
pilots eligible to vote, with 97 percent voting to authorize a walkout.

   Delta and ALPA began contract talks in September 1999 and have been
negotiating with federal mediators since December. The union has sought wage
increases, job security and other improved benefits for about 9,800 pilots. The
two sides have set a Feb. 28 deadline to reach a mediated settlement. A strike
could occur as early as April 1.

   Schlumberger buying Britain's Sema PLC

   U.S. energy services company Schlumberger Ltd. is buying the British
information technology services concern Sema PLC for $ 5.2 billion.

   The acquisition would help New York-based Schlumberger enlarge its growing
systems integration business, particularly in the development of smart cards, or
wallet-size devices embedded with microchips.

   Oil demand eases; prices yet to follow

   The growth of world oil demand has slowed faster than expected in pace with a
cooling global economy, but has yet to push prices lower, a respected industry
survey said yesterday.

   World oil demand growth has fallen by 140,000 barrels per day to 1.5 million
barrels per day, the Paris-based International Energy Agency said in its monthly
report.

   It predicted continuing volatility in oil markets because of moves by the
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries to cut production to keep
prices high, and the consequent reduction in oil inventories.

   Burlington Northern stops genetic testing

   Burlington Northern Santa Fe Corp., the No. 2 U.S. railroad, said yesterday
that it ended genetic tests of workers who claimed carpal tunnel syndrome
disability, after the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission sued Friday
to halt the practice.

   The EEOC filed its first-ever lawsuit on the issue to stop the testing,
claiming the practice violated the Americans With Disabilities Act.

   The railroad said it voluntarily agreed to an order in U.S. District Court in
Sioux City, Iowa, to stop the testing.

   Office furniture maker to cut jobs, earn less

   Steelcase Inc., the largest U.S maker of office furniture, said it's cutting
up to 1,200 jobs and will earn perhaps 11 percent less than forecast in fiscal
2001 because of the slowing U.S. economy.

   The Grand Rapids, Mich.-based company said it will fire about 5 percent of
its work force: 700 temporary employees, 215 hourly workers and 200 to 300
salaried staff.

   The reductions are in Athens, Ala.; Colorado Springs, Colo.; Grand Rapids;
Tustin, Calif.; and Solon, Ohio. Steelcase will close factories in Colorado
Springs and Solon, leaving it with about 21,000 workers at 33 plants.

   Anadarko is buying Berkley Petroleum

   Anadarko Petroleum Corp. says it will buy Berkley Petroleum Corp. of Canada
for $777 million, enlarging its natural gas business.

   Houston-based Anadarko will pay about $ 7.60 for each share of Berkley and
assume about $250 million in debt. The boards of both companies approved the
deal.

   This column was compiled from reports by Sun staff writers, the Associated
Press, Bloomberg News and Reuters.

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2001


                             1977 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    February 13, 2001 Tuesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 836 words

HEADLINE: Gene medicine must be for all

BYLINE: Ralph Brave

BODY:

   THE SCIENTISTS who are mapping the human genome are telling us not to get our
hopes up for genetic cures for disease anytime soon. And even when they will be
available, good luck getting yours.

   Amid the recent exciting news of successful research on the human genome,
these scientists are signaling that as advances in genetics accelerate, the
scientific and medical communities have failed to secure some of the most
rudimentary protections that they consider essential to prevent the misuse of
genetic information.

   "We must set realistic expectations that the most important benefits will not
be reaped overnight," wrote the researchers who led the Human Genome Project.
"Moreover," they warned, "understanding and wisdom will be required to ensure
that these benefits are implemented broadly and equitably."

   The scientists are acknowledging that, despite their breathtaking advances in
their knowledge of the molecular chemistry of human life, they have only the
most limited powers to assure these advances are used to the benefit of all.

   Implicit in their call for "understanding and wisdom" is the scientists'
increasingly expressed fears that these genetic discoveries will exacerbate
social inequities.

   This will be the case even though all Americans as taxpayers financed the $3
billion effort to decode the human genome. It includes nearly $100 million in
research into the "ethical, legal and social implications."

   The incalculable lag time between the discovery of disease-related genes and
genetic therapies may very well contribute to the breaching of our social
fabric. "DNA chips" for diagnosing an individual's genetic profile will move
rapidly into medical clinical usage. Some now speak of a patient's genetic
profile being taken as part of general practice occurring within the next five
years.

   While there may be some inherent advantages to knowing more about one's
genes, such as altering diet, direct genetic therapy or cures are considered by
all experts in the field to be a couple of decades or more in the future.

   Currently, there are reports of successful gene therapy trials for only two
single-gene disorders. But these are the exceptions. How to deliver corrective
genes to the right location in the body so that they will function remains a
complex biochemical puzzle.

   This "therapeutic gap" will necessarily open the door to multiple levels of
social discrimination.

   Federal law now protects only those in group health insurance plans from
being dropped due to genetic findings, leaving out tens of millions of
individually insured and uninsured persons. Federal law does nothing to prevent
the increase of premiums based on genetic information. Thirty-seven states,
including Maryland, have enacted their own health insurance laws, but they are a
patchwork of uneven protections.

   Congress has done nothing to protect workers from genetic discrimination by
their employers. Employer groups claim they don't discriminate and that the
Americans with Disabilities Act already provides such protection -- an untested
assertion now headed for the courts. Employers argue such discrimination would
protect the employee with genetic vulnerabilities from harmful conditions.

   Almost no research has been conducted to explore how genetic information
might come to influence other institutional settings. For example, will schools
be required to consider genetic information in managing their students? Will
schools be liable if they do not? No one yet knows what the answers might be,
much less what they should be.

   But what happens when genetic therapy becomes viable? Who will have access to
these costly genetic therapies? Who will be left to live out their inherited
genetic fates?

   Of growing concern is the reality that a technology which can alter a gene
for health purposes may also be used for genetic enhancement, whether for
physical attributes or for more complex traits such as those contributing to
what we measure as intelligence.

   Some bio-ethicists have called for societal guarantees that everyone be
assured access to genetic enhancement to a baseline for such traits. Other
scholars fear that any such program launches us onto the road of a societally
defined eugenics program.

   For now, the problems that will surface are extensions of those that already
exist. The most immediate result from the "understanding and wisdom" urged by
the scientists might be the recognition that genetics fundamentally undermines a
system of health care based on actuarial underwriting by insurance companies.

   We all are carriers of three to 10 genetic mutations that may threaten our
lives. As that information becomes accessible, only guaranteed access to health
care for all will permit the benefits of medical genetics to flourish.

   But that is just one example of why the genomic researchers are telling us
that "science is only part of the challenge."

   Ralph Brave is a free-lance science writer who has been covering the
HumanGenome Project since 1995.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2001


                             1978 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                          February 13, 2001, Tuesday,
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 1170 words

HEADLINE: OHIO SCIENTISTS EXCITED BY PROMISE OF GENOME MAP

BYLINE: David Lore and Misti Crane, Dispatch Staff Reporters

BODY:


   The human genome is not just a blueprint, but rather a window now being
thrown wide open on both the evolution and biology of the human body, Ohio
researchers said yesterday.

   With the ordering of 95 percent of the genome -- a full set of chromosomes -
- now complete, the first resulting findings were announced in Washington, D. C.

   These included that the probable number of human genes is about 30,000 and
that no significant genetic disparity exists among racial groups.

   Scientists are thrilled at the opportunities they see in the fast-
approaching completion of the genetic map. There also is excitement in clinics
and hospitals, where doctors for decades have eagerly awaited the long-promised
boons in gene therapy.

   Most estimates say the widespread use of genetic information to prevent or
treat disease is a decade away, but at least one Ohio doctor thinks that's
conservative.

   "I say 2005, because of the things that we already know and the things we've
accomplished in the past year,'' said Dr. Stephen Liggett, director of pulmonary
and critical-care medicine and professor of medicine and molecular genetics at
the University of Cincinnati.

   Liggett said he's excited about upcoming advances in treating asthma, high
blood pressure and diabetes -- areas where scientists already have identified
genetic components.

   "I think that this will rank as either the No. 1 or No. 2 greatest
achievement of mankind,'' Liggett said.

   Dr. Albert de la Chapelle, director of the human cancer genetics program at
Ohio State University, said the progress being made today is historically
significant but is just the precursor to much more work.

   "It is absolutely true that when you hear about the new gene in a given
disorder, you start thinking about cures, and patients with this disorder think
about that. But the road is long,'' he said.

   Discoveries such as STI571, a leukemia drug in trials here and across the
country, offer promise.

   Some chronic myelogenous leukemia patients have enjoyed long-term remission
thanks to the genetically driven drug.

   "It looks like it's probably going to be a cure,'' de la Chapelle said.

   Much work remains before such benefits will be widespread.

   For example, even with two national groups settled on a range of 26,000 to
39,000 genes in the human body, a group at Ohio State maintains the human gene
count is at 65,000 to 75,000.

   "This is an honest disagreement,'' said Fred Wright of the division of human
cancer genetics at OSU.

   "We find the same complement of 30,000 genes, but in addition we see an
additional 35,000 or so stretched across the DNA that look like they might be
genes. So closing the door will be an important emphasis over the next year or
so.''

   The OSU study, only the third completed on the human genome, is being
published this week in Genome Biology.

   Dr. Bo Yuan, leader of OSU's bioinformatics group and a co-author of the
report, said the genome project has now moved to a new stage.

   As a graduate student, he recalled, he spent six years pursuing one gene
thought to be involved in the development of lung cancer. Now genes can be
located in a matter of weeks. The challenge is to understand how they function,
both individually and in groups.

   At the University of Cincinnati, Sandra Degen, professor of pediatrics and
associate vice president for health affairs, also recalls the tedium she
experienced as a graduate student in the 1970s, sequencing genes by hand rather
than by computer.

   "I work in blood clotting and cancer,'' she said. "For a long time, we didn't
even know where the important genes were located on the human chromosome. To
find their location would take months, and sequencing them would take years.''

   The whole pace of medical research is about to speed up tremendously, Degen
said. "You always want to be first, but now the size and capacity of your lab
will determine how fast you can jump into these things.''

   Ohio is well-situated to exploit this gene revolution, with major programs at
Cincinnati, Ohio State and Case Western Reserve University, she said.

   New discoveries also will put pressure on the government to regulate how
genetic information is used, the scientists say.

   "I think it will bring things to a head more quickly, although it will still
be a year or two to develop it enough to misuse it,'' Wright said.

   "There will be more focus on the ethics of this now,'' predicted Degen.

   "The insurance aspects, prenatal diagnosis -- there's so much that needs to
be done in these areas, and I'd like to see the scientific community get into
that.''

   dlore@dispatch.com

   mcrane@dispatch.com

CORRECTION:

   CORRECTION PUBLISHED 02/15/01 - Bo Yuan, aresearcher at the Arthur G. James
Cancer Hospital, is senior author andprincipal investigator for the team that
reported this week in Genome Biologyon the human genome. Because of a reporting
error, his role was misstated inan article on Page A4 of Tuesday's Dispatch.

GRAPHIC: Phot, Neal C. Lauron / Dispatch Fred Wright of the division of human
cancer genetics at Ohio State University, left, and Dr. Bo Yuan, leader of OSU's
bioinformatics group, say the human genome count is 65,000 to 75,000, not 26,000
to 39,000, as two national groups say

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2001


                             1979 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 13, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 672 words

HEADLINE: Maxwell Technologies reports $8,000 earned during fourth quarter

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:
 Maxwell Technologies Inc. of San Diego announced yesterday that it earned
$8,000 during its fourth quarter ended Dec. 31, compared with a loss of $11.4
million a year ago.

   The company also said it's seeking to shed its PurePulse division to focus on
its power and computer operations.  PurePulse uses high-intensity light to
purify blood plasma products, biopharmaceutical products and vaccines.

   The announcement comes a month after Maxwell, formed at the height of the
Cold War as a laboratory doing research for the Pentagon, said it would sell its
defense contracting operations.

   For its fourth quarter, Maxwell reported revenue from continuing operations
of $27.4 million, up 28 percent from the prior year.  The company calculated its
results to remove PurePulse and its defense contracting business from continuing
operations.  Consequently, Maxwell booked about $908,000 in income from
discontinued operations, which helped offset a $900,000 loss from its ongoing
businesses.

   Without income from discontinued operations, the company would have reported
a loss of 9 cents a share.  Analysts had predicted a loss of 5 cents a share,
according to First Call/Thomson Financial.

   For the year, income from continuing operations was $102.3 million, down from
$103.6 million the prior year.  The loss from continuing operations, before
restructuring and other charges, was $8.1 million, or 83 cents a share.  That
compares with a loss of $2.8 million, or 28 cents a share, for the same period
the prior year.

   Maxwell released results after the markets closed.  Its shares dropped $1.06
yesterday to close at $19.94.

   In other local earnings news:

   Advanced Tissue Sciences Inc. reported a loss of $3.3 million in the fourth
quarter, compared with an $8.2 million loss in the same period a year ago.  For
the year 2000, the company's loss grew to $24.6 million from $21.3 million.

   The San Diego tissue engineering company posted fourth-quarter revenues of
$5.8 million, down 35 percent from the same period a year ago.  Revenues for the
year fell 41 percent to $25.3 million.

   As of December, the company had cash, cash equivalents and short-term
investments of approximately $31 million.

   Vical Inc.'s fourth-quarter loss grew to $2 million from $200,000 a year
earlier.  For the year, the company lost $8.5 million, compared with a $6.9
million loss in 1999.

   The San Diego gene-therapy-vaccine company reported that revenues fell 61
percent in the fourth quarter to $1.9 million.  For the year, revenues fell 29
percent to $7.6 million.

   As of December, the company had cash, cash equivalents and marketable
securities of $148.1 million.

   In other earnings news:

   Drug maker Pharmacia Corp. reported its fourth-quarter income jumped 32
percent, excluding merger and restructuring charges, amid higher sales of
agricultural products and a 20 percent increase in U.S. sales of its
prescription drugs.

   The maker of Rogaine and Nicorette smoking-cessation products earned $417
million, or 32 cents a share, if onetime charges are excluded.  That matched the
forecasts of industry analysts.

   The company earned $316 million, or 24 cents per share, excluding charges in
the same period a year ago.

   Pharmacia, which merged last April with Monsanto Corp. of St. Louis, posted
fourth-quarter sales of $4.5 billion, up 6 percent.

   Sales of pharmaceutical products were $3.3 billion, led by strong sales of
its arthritis drug Celebrex, and Camptosar, for colorectal cancer that has
spread; sales of agricultural products totaled $1.2 billion.

   Pharmacia shares fell 23 cents to close at $54.23 yesterday on the New York
Stock Exchange.

   "Our strong results in the quarter and for the full year validate our
original rationale for the merger," said Fred Hassan, Pharmacia's chief
executive officer.  He said the company's 33 percent increase in earnings per
share leads the pharmaceutical industry.


LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2001


                             1980 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 13, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 506 words

HEADLINE: UCSD to start Alzheimer's treatment on humans; Genetically altered
cells helped aging monkeys

BYLINE: Susan Duerksen; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 In the first experimental gene therapy for Alzheimer's disease, doctors at UCSD
Medical Center expect to implant genetically altered cells into a patient's
brain next month.

   The UCSD neurologists are publishing a report today that the procedure
reversed neuron deterioration similar to Alzheimer's in aging rhesus monkeys.

   "This is the start of something that, if it is successful, could literally
prevent or at least slow down the progression of the disease," said Dr. Mark
Tuszynski, a neurologist heading the research.

   Other prominent Alzheimer's researchers said the experimental gene therapy is
an important step toward a new kind of treatment, but its ultimate impact on the
disease isn't clear.

   "It is extremely exciting," said Dr. Jeffrey Cummings, director of the UCLA
Alzheimer's Disease Center.  "This will be the first time genetically altered
material has been introduced into the brain so the cells themselves can be
somewhat restored.  No one expects the first step to be the last step."

   But other scientists said restoring the nerve fibers may not be enough to
reverse Alzheimer's disease, which also involves other types of brain cell
damage and deposits of amyloid plaques.  Or, they said, rebuilding the nerve
connections may help solve those other problems as well.

   "We don't know enough to say how useful rescuing these neurons will be," said
Dr. Michael Selzer, a University of Pennsylvania neurologist studying nervous
system regeneration.  "It's a worthwhile thing to try.  It's possible you would
still develop dementia but maybe the memory problem would not be as severe."

   If nothing else, the research probably will help scientists better understand
the sequence of biologic events that causes Alzheimer's, which afflicts one in
10 people over age 65.

   The new technique uses a patient's own skin cells, altering them genetically
so that they produce a chemical called nerve growth factor, which is known to
stimulate growth of adult neurons.

   The altered skin cells are injected into a small area in the brain where
crucial nerve-connection fibers have atrophied.

   In five elderly monkeys given the treatment, the connection fibers, called
axons, grew back to levels found in young monkeys, Tuszynski and neuroscientist
James Conner report in today's edition of the journal Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences.

   Human testing of the technique got a federal green light a year ago.  But the
doctors have found only two appropriate patients after evaluating 500
applicants.

   To be eligible, Alzheimer's patients must be in early enough stages of the
disease to be able to understand the risks of experimental treatment and must
have no other medical problems.

   The researchers need eight patients for the first phase of the testing.

   At the patient's request, Tuszynski said he could not release information
about the first patient scheduled to receive the therapy next month.  He said he
will wait three months before trying a second human implant, to watch for
adverse reactions.


LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2001


                             1981 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 13, 2001 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 641 words

HEADLINE: Maxwell Technologies reports $8,000 earned during fourth quarter

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   Maxwell Technologies Inc. of San Diego announced yesterday that it earned
$8,000 during its fourth quarter ended Dec. 31, compared with a loss of $11.4
million a year ago. The company also said it's seeking to shed its PurePulse
division to focus on its power and computer operations.

   PurePulse uses high-intensity light to purify blood plasma products,
biopharmaceutical products and vaccines. The announcement comes a month after
Maxwell, formed at the height of the Cold War as a laboratory doing research for
the Pentagon, said it would sell its defense contracting operations. For its
fourth quarter, Maxwell reported revenue from continuing operations of $27.4
million, up 28 percent from the prior year.

   The company calculated its results to remove PurePulse and its defense
contracting business from continuing operations.

   Consequently, Maxwell booked about $908,000 in income from discontinued
operations, which helped offset a $900,000 loss from its ongoing businesses.
Without income from discontinued operations, the company would have reported a
loss of 9 cents a share.

   Analysts had predicted a loss of 5 cents a share, according to First
Call/Thomson Financial. For the year, income from continuing operations was
$102.3 million, down from $103.6 million the prior year.

   The loss from continuing operations, before restructuring and other charges,
was $8.1 million, or 83 cents a share.

   That compares with a loss of $2.8 million, or 28 cents a share, for the same
period the prior year. Maxwell released results after the markets closed.

   Its shares dropped $1.06 yesterday to close at $19.94. In other local
earnings news: Advanced Tissue Sciences Inc. reported a loss of $3.3 million in
the fourth quarter, compared with an $8.2 million loss in the same period a year
ago. For the year 2000, the company's loss grew to $24.6 million from $21.3
million. The San Diego tissue engineering company posted fourth-quarter revenues
of $5.8 million, down 35 percent from the same period a year ago.

   Revenues for the year fell 41 percent to $25.3 million. As of December, the
company had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of approximately
$31 million. Vical Inc.'s fourth-quarter loss grew to $2 million from $200,000 a
year earlier.

   For the year, the company lost $8.5 million, compared with a $6.9 million
loss in 1999. The San Diego gene-therapy-vaccine company reported that revenues
fell 61 percent in the fourth quarter to $1.9 million.

   For the year, revenues fell 29 percent to $7.6 million. As of December, the
company had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $148.1 million.
In other earnings news: Drug maker Pharmacia Corp. reported its fourth-quarter
income jumped 32 percent, excluding merger and restructuring charges, amid
higher sales of agricultural products and a 20 percent increase in U.S. sales of
its prescription drugs. The maker of Rogaine and Nicorette smoking-cessation
products earned $417 million, or 32 cents a share, if onetime charges are
excluded.

   That matched the forecasts of industry analysts. The company earned $316
million, or 24 cents per share, excluding charges in the same period a year ago.
Pharmacia, which merged last April with Monsanto Corp. of St. Louis, posted
fourth-quarter sales of $4.5 billion, up 6 percent. Sales of pharmaceutical
products were $3.3 billion, led by strong sales of its arthritis drug Celebrex,
and Camptosar, for colorectal cancer that has spread; sales of agricultural
products totaled $1.2 billion. Pharmacia shares fell 23 cents to close at $54.23
yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange. "Our strong results in the quarter and
for the full year validate our original rationale for the merger," said Fred
Hassan, Pharmacia's chief executive officer.

   He said the company's 33 percent increase in earnings per share leads the
pharmaceutical industry.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1982 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 13, 2001 Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 499 words

HEADLINE: UCSD to start Alzheimer's treatment on humans;
Genetically altered cells helped aging monkeys

BYLINE: Susan Duerksen, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In the first experimental gene therapy for Alzheimer's disease, doctors at
UCSD Medical Center expect to implant genetically altered cells into a patient's
brain next month. The UCSD neurologists are publishing a report today that the
procedure reversed neuron deterioration similar to Alzheimer's in aging rhesus
monkeys. "This is the start of something that, if it is successful, could
literally prevent or at least slow down the progression of the disease," said
Dr. Mark Tuszynski, a neurologist heading the research. Other prominent
Alzheimer's researchers said the experimental gene therapy is an important step
toward a new kind of treatment, but its ultimate impact on the disease isn't
clear. "It is extremely exciting," said Dr. Jeffrey Cummings, director of the
UCLA Alzheimer's Disease Center.

   "This will be the first time genetically altered material has been introduced
into the brain so the cells themselves can be somewhat restored.

   No one expects the first step to be the last step." But other scientists said
restoring the nerve fibers may not be enough to reverse Alzheimer's disease,
which also involves other types of brain cell damage and deposits of amyloid
plaques.

   Or, they said, rebuilding the nerve connections may help solve those other
problems as well. "We don't know enough to say how useful rescuing these neurons
will be," said Dr. Michael Selzer, a University of Pennsylvania neurologist
studying nervous system regeneration.

   "It's a worthwhile thing to try.

   It's possible you would still develop dementia but maybe the memory problem
would not be as severe." If nothing else, the research probably will help
scientists better understand the sequence of biologic events that causes
Alzheimer's, which afflicts one in 10 people over age 65. The new technique uses
a patient's own skin cells, altering them genetically so that they produce a
chemical called nerve growth factor, which is known to stimulate growth of adult
neurons. The altered skin cells are injected into a small area in the brain
where crucial nerve-connection fibers have atrophied. In five elderly monkeys
given the treatment, the connection fibers, called axons, grew back to levels
found in young monkeys, Tuszynski and neuroscientist James Conner report in
today's edition of the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Human testing of the technique got a federal green light a year ago.

   But the doctors have found only two appropriate patients after evaluating 500
applicants. To be eligible, Alzheimer's patients must be in early enough stages
of the disease to be able to understand the risks of experimental treatment and
must have no other medical problems. The researchers need eight patients for the
first phase of the testing. At the patient's request, Tuszynski said he could
not release information about the first patient scheduled to receive the therapy
next month.

   He said he will wait three months before trying a second human implant, to
watch for adverse reactions.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1983 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           February 13, 2001 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 702 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF

BODY:

   * H-Quotient, a Vienna medical-software firm, withdrew its offer to acquire a
controlling interest in Apache Medical Systems of McLean, according to a filing
yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission. The company gave no
reason for withdrawing its offer to exchange one of its shares for every five
Apache shares. In a statement released yesterday, Apache executives said they
believed the deal was not in the best interest of the company and asked
shareholders not to tender their shares until the offer could be reviewed
thoroughly. Apache, which faces a Nasdaq delisting, recently signed a nonbinding
agreement to sell certain assets, including its flagship software for hospital
intensive-care units, for an undisclosed sum to Cerner, a large medical-software
firm based in Kansas City, Mo.

   * GenVec, a Gaithersburg biotechnology company, said it has obtained an
exclusive license from Northwestern University for the use of a particular gene
in fighting blindness. The license covers methods Northwestern researchers
invented to inhibit the abnormal blood-vessel formation that leads to blindness
in patients with macular degeneration and diabetic retinopathy, two eye diseases
that affect about 8 million Americans. GenVec is developing gene-therapy drugs
to treat heart disease, cancer and blindness.

   * BET.com changed its name to BET Interactive in an attempt to reflect the
company's expanding portfolio of online holdings, including the recently
acquired 360HipHop.com site. Washington-based BET Interactive is the online
affiliate of Black Entertainment Television, which is being acquired by Viacom.

   * Manugistics, the Rockville-based software firm, plans to announce today a
partnership with KPMG Consulting of McLean and Microsoft, in which its
supply-chain management software will be incorporated into Microsoft's
forthcoming Microsoft.net initiative.

   * Worldweb.net, the Alexandria-based management-software firm, was acquired
by Starbase, a Santa Ana, Calif., company that produces Web content and
software. The mostly stock deal will pay Worldweb shareholders $ 560,000 in cash
plus 8.3 million shares of Starbase common stock, worth about $ 25.6 million at
yesterday's closing price of $ 3.09 per share. Starbase will continue to operate
out of Worldweb's office in Alexandria.

   * Virtual Compliance of Arlington, a provider of regulatory compliance
services over the Internet, has been awarded a $ 70,000 contract by the National
Lumber and Building Material Dealers Association to train its members to use
Virtual Compliance's Internet-based regulatory compliance software. The contract
will be funded with a grant from the Occupational Safety & Health
Administration. Virtual Compliance has also agreed to provide the members of the
Builder Marts of America with access to its online compliance services.

   * Cyon Research of Bethesda, an engineering-software consulting company, said
it is acquiring CADWire, a Toronto developer of information-management software,
for an undisclosed sum.

    * Micros Systems, a Columbia company that sells technology to the
hospitality industry, signed on two new customers last week, Starhotels of
Florence, Italy, and El Torito Restaurants, a chain of Mexican restaurants.
Micros will provide Starhotels with software designed to help the Italian firm
coordinate its systems in properties in Italy and New York to handle
reservations, customer information collection, sales and catering. Starhotels,
founded in 1980, owns 21 hotels, including 20 hotels in Italy and a deluxe
hotel, the Michelangelo, in New York. El Torito will use Micros
restaurant-management software and services in its 95 locations, including El
Torito Grill, Casa Gallardo, Tequila Willies, Las Brisas and Keystone Grill. The
software streamlines the chains' food and bar operations and simplifies its
back-office management. El Torito, owned and operated by Acapulco Acquisition,
has locations throughout the western United States. Financial terms of the two
agreements were undisclosed, though Micros software typically costs $ 7,000 to $
10,000 per location, and most customers spend between $ 75,000 to $ 1 million
for a complete system, according to a company spokeswoman.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2002


                             1984 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           February 13, 2001 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. T17

LENGTH: 925 words

HEADLINE: The Author's Story: Two Battles Won, a Third Begun

BODY:

   Idoubt oncologists ever become accustomed to telling relative strangers that
they have a potentially lethal disease. In December, during what should have
been a routine follow-up visit, my oncologist took one look at me and said, "You
look ugly."

    I protested that I was feeling quite well. But I have learned not to argue
with this highly intuitive man, who in the previous year had saved my life and
-- perhaps because we had waged war together -- had become a good friend.

    He stepped out of the room to look at my CT (computed tomography) scan. Then
he came back and told me that I have lung cancer, probably from all the
radiation I had more than a quarter-century ago for Hodgkin's disease. I am sure
he knew that, for me, bad news should be given crisply. The previous year, when
I was the only person who did not realize that I was extremely sick, he got my
attention by placing me in a wheelchair, pressing the elevator button and
pushing me into my new hospital room. Other people may be better off backing
into such news. I need to be hit over the head.

    So now I've entered my third fight against cancer. And while no one who did
not have his back against the wall would join such a battle, now that I'm in it,
I'm determined to wage it with the same optimism that has sustained me through
previous battles.

    The last one, a year ago, was against Burkitt's lymphoma -- a form of cancer
that is rare in the United States. Although I did not realize its seriousness,
this time I knew I had a problem before the doctor did, when I abruptly went
from being a robust middle-aged man who ran three slow miles a day to being
unable to stand up. Burkitt's sometimes shares a common virus with Hodgkin's
disease -- the cancer with which I had gone 15 rounds in the 1970s. The same
virus also causes infectious mononucleosis.

    I had had mononucleosis when I was 15. At 32 I came down with Hodgkin's
disease, classified as 10 out of 10 on the Richter scale of Hodgkin's severity
(which is to say Stage IV-B). I received aggressive radiation and chemotherapy
for two years to show it the door. So when I found myself with a new cancer, I
knew that with a past like mine there were only limited treatment options. At
60, the odds were against me.

    In the end, I underwent extensive chemotherapy, a bone marrow transplant and
having one of the anti-cancer medications poured directly into my cerebrospinal
fluid through a spinal tap (a procedure I sometimes liken to having Drano poured
directly into my brain).

    There are big differences in the way various cancers are treated, and
important differences between the way my Hodgkin's was treated 27 years ago and
how my Burkitt's was treated last year. One of the most gratifying differences
was that good medications are available today to prevent the nausea and vomiting
that were the worst part of my earlier chemotherapy.

    After the initial chemotherapy for the Burkitt's lymphoma, I faced the bone
marrow transplant. My bone marrow was first stimulated to make stem cells, which
when returned to me would make red blood cells, platelets and white cells. Stem
cells were then taken from my blood (in a procedure charmingly known as
"harvesting") by a noisy machine draped with an impressive array of plastic
tubes in all sizes and colors.

    As I lay there, watching my blood being pumped in and out of the machine --
in and out of me -- I found I was in fact waiting for one of the tubes to break.
I imagined my blood splattering all over the room. Some of it, I imagined in my
worst moments, would end up painting the nice lady in the next cubicle
undergoing the same procedure. In the end nothing broke, and the technicians
took away five plastic bags loaded with my stem cells,which were stored in the
recesses of Johns Hopkins Hospital, where I was being treated. I resisted the
urge to beg the technicians not to misplace the bags.

    I next went through eight days of high-dose chemotherapy to destroy any
lingering miscreant cells of Burkitt's lymphoma. Out went the Burkitt's cells --
along with my red cells, white cells, platelets and gastrointestinal tract.
Without red blood cells, oxygen does not get to the organs. Without platelets,
bleeding starts. Without white cells, infection rules. I required transfusions
of red cells and platelets and all sorts of antibiotics. One day I found my gut
had shed like the skin of snake.

    Finally the day came when my stem cells were to be returned. In just 45
minutes they were dripped back into me, where they belonged. I was told they
would quickly find their way into my bone marrow, and once there, they would
"stick." The nurses taught me how to give myself injections of a growth factor
designed to turn the stem cells into white cells. Most of the nurses did not
seem to know I was a doctor, and I did not tell them I had learned to give shots
as a medical student in the same hospital, before any of them had been born.

    For about a year after the treatment, my health seemed on the rebound. Then
I got the news in December. Since then, I've been on mild chemotherapy -- enough
to tire me a little but not keep me off my treadmill -- and, with friends,
investigating potential treatments, including still-experimental regimens from
vaccines to gene therapy.

    There are no certainties, but I remain confident in the skill of my doctor,
the support of my family and friends, and the knowledge drawn from past
experience. Incidentally, real lymphoma oncologists do not do lung cancer, so I
have had to move on to a new expert.

    -- R.J.W.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2002


                             1985 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            February 12, 2001 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part S; View Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 741 words

HEADLINE: SAY 'AAAH';
MEDIA MIX;
GENE THERAPY RACE IS JUST BARELY OUT OF THE STARTING BLOCKS;
CRACKING THE GENOME: INSIDE THE RACE TO UNLOCK HUMAN DNA; BY KEVIN DAVIES; FREE
PRESS; 310 PAGES; $25

BYLINE: NICK OWCHAR

BODY:

   If you think about the genetics of cancer, it's no wonder that chemotherapy
doesn't always work. Recent books show how, when a therapeutic chemical hits and
damages malignant cells, the cells often ignore their own self-destruct
mechanism because of a genetic mutation that has made them "deaf" to this
command. That's why some scientists have placed their hopes on creating viral
"smart bombs" to open their ears.

   And this is also why the fires under such efforts burned brighter after last
year's announcement at the White House that the human genome--all 3 billion
letters of human DNA--had been figured out. Now, scientists possessed the
"language of God" to treat disease. It was "one of those achievements of the
human spirit that makes me proud to be human," declared evolutionary biologist
Richard Dawkins.

   But as Kevin Davies shows in "Cracking the Genome: Inside the Race to Unlock
Human DNA," new disease therapies are still a good ways off. And Davies has done
a superb job of creating a sizable book out of what's still a work in progress:
The mapping wasn't quite complete by the time of the June 26 ceremony (even
today, now that the "rough draft" is done, work continues to understand what it
means). That premature announcement, he says, helped the U.S. government-backed
Human Genome Project save face after lagging behind Celera, its private
competitor. The book's contents seem less a form of padding than an interesting
survey of the young science of genetics, the basics of DNA structure and a
tantalizing glimpse of the ethical perils and technological possibilities
awaiting humanity.

   Davies unravels the double strands of the DNA's helix for readers, giving us
as dizzying--and humbling--a view of the micro-world as the Hubble telescope did
of deep space. "The total amount of DNA in the 100 trillion cells in the human
body," he writes, "laid end to end would run to the sun and back about twenty
times." Just four chemical "bases"--referred to as A,C,G and T--run along the
helix in various triplets and combinations, which, when "read" like the 1's and
0's of a DOS program, give instructions for making the thousands of proteins
that sustain our bodies.

   Every historical breakthrough, this book clearly shows, rests on many
shoulders. We learn about the 1920s experiments in which "something" changed
nonvirulent bacteria into virulent strains, killing lab mice; a New York
immunologist's successful identification of that "something" as DNA in 1943;
X-ray images in 1953 of a dark cross-like shape, confirming James Watson and
Francis Crick's Nobel Prize-winning model of the double helix; and the push in
the following decades to map the human genome.

   In 1990, the Human Genome Project started slowly, only picking up speed after
J. Craig Venter, a bold bridge-burning scientist, took on the project in 1998
using private funds and untested computational strategies. Davies recounts it
all, including the wars waged over gene patents and the feuding between the
project's Francis Collins and Venter up to, and since, the White House ceremony.

   The book's second half shows that we're not at the brave new world just yet.
Davies writes that therapies to "fix" scrambled letters in the DNA
sequence--which can create the wrong protein and give rise to disease--haven't
yet been successful. But geneticists are more confident that personal DNA
profiles will one day be available from your family doctor. And screening for
breast cancer genes is already helping many families with a history of the
illness.

   Davies poses ethical issues, rather than wrestling with them, leaving readers
often on their own to wonder about the future. How, for instance, will we create
new bacteria to eat toxic waste spills but resist the temptation to create
healthier human beings? He describes one geneticist who offers couples a chance
to select disease-free embryos and quotes another who speculates that, in
another 1,000 years, the human race could be split into two groups: the GenRich
and the Naturals.

   It's a chilling section, told with a neutral tone, that may cause readers'
hearts and minds to clash: If you were presented with a chance to spare your
unborn child disease, wouldn't you take it? How will our study of the genome
affect arguments about the roots of criminal behavior or sexuality? The final
irony is that we entrust the answers to these questions to the same human nature
that may be affected by our decisions.

GRAPHIC:  (no caption)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2001


                             1986 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     February 12, 2001 Monday STATE EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 03A

LENGTH: 577 words

HEADLINE: Breakthrough offers hope of cures;
Genes may hold key to better treatments for addiction, mental illness

BYLINE: PAUL RECER Associated Press

BODY:

   Washington -- The genetic revolution made possible by mapping the human
genome may include new cures for drug addictions and restoring health to the
mentally ill, experts say.

   "Ultimately, the human genome sequence will revolutionize psychology and
psychiatry," said Peter McGuffin, co-author of an analysis in the upcoming
edition of the journal Science.

   McGuffin, a researcher at the Institute of Psychiatry, Kings College London,
England, and other experts believe that finding genes that influence behavior
may lead to drugs that treat or prevent some of the major problems that confront
society.

   "The sequencing of the human genome will improve our ability to identify the
genetic risk factors genes for a whole variety of conditions, from addiction to
criminality to anti-social personality," said Eric J. Nestler, chairman of the
department of psychiatry, University of Texas, Southwest Medical Center in
Dallas. "This is going to be an enormous advance for this field."

   McGuffin said many forms of mental illness are only poorly controlled with
current medications, many of which have side effects that limit their
usefulness.

   "When we treat depression, for instance, we have only a limited number of
medications, and these have uneven results," he said.  "We can probably get
resolution of symptoms in perhaps 70 percent of the cases of depression."

   The variability of results is even worse for some other forms of mental
illness, say experts. Some patients enjoy perfect control, while others, taking
the same medication, have repeated and often unmanageable relapses. The
different reaction to the drugs could be caused by the difference in genes.

   Identifying the genes that put people at risk of mental illness, said
McGuffin, "would be a big advance in understanding things like personality and
what makes us susceptible to depression and schizophrenia and so on."

   Once those differences -- the genetic twists and turns unique in each person
-- are understood, "pharmaceutical companies could use this information to find
novel drugs to alter behaviors."

   It is possible, McGuffin said, that drugs could be specifically tailored to
fit the unique pattern of genes in an individual patient instead of the current
one- size-for-all pharmaceuticals.

   Nestler, co-author of an analysis in the journal Nature, said genetic therapy
could be a key advance in treating drug addiction, a complex syndrome that is a
mix of social and biological factors.

   "At its core, addiction involves a biological process," said Nestler. "The
ability of a drug to change the brain and cause addiction is, in part,
determined by genetic factors."

   Mapping the human genome may enable researchers to identify genes that
predispose some people to quickly become alcoholics or cocaine or heroin
addicts.

   "There is very good evidence that about 50 percent of a person's risk to
become addicted is genetic," said Nestler. "Finding those genes means we will be
able to identify people who are at risk of addiction and target them for more
intensive prevention intervention."

   Finding genes for addiction is unlikely to be the final answer for the use of
illegal drugs, he said. But it could make the difference between a cure and a
failure.

   "When a person with an addiction is recovering, he is struggling to combat
incredibly strong biological factors," said Nestler. Medication that blocks
genes that promote addiction "could make therapy more effective."

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2001


                             1987 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                  FEBRUARY 11, 2001 Sunday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: CHOICES; Pg. 5E

LENGTH: 355 words

HEADLINE: CONSUMER BRIEFS

BYLINE: Free Press news services

BODY:

   NEWS & UPDATES Medical school guidelines

   Representatives from the nation's top medical schools have drafted tough
conflict-of-interest guidelines requiring researchers to

    own up to any financial ties they have to studies involving patients when
they attempt to publish their findings.

   Drug companies routinely pay medical school doctors to conduct human studies
on the safety and effectiveness of new drugs and equipment. But growing concern
about the effect this financial link can have on patients' health has led to a
push for guidelines.

   Those concerns were heightened in 1999, when the Food and Drug Administration
found that University of Pennsylvania researchers did not properly report the
side effects a patient suffered during a gene therapy experiment. Jesse
Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died.

   RECALLS Playskool school bus toy

   About 12,500 Playskool Busy School Bus toys have been recalled because some
have a yellow awning piece that can break loose and pose a choking hazard to
young children.

   The Busy School Bus toy is 8 1/2 inches long, has a carry handle and blue
wheels. The toys being recalled have the item number 5527 and date codes 91671
through 91883 on the bottom. A yellow Playskool logo is on one side.

   They were sold from June 1999 through January of this year at mass
merchandise and toy stores nationwide for about $10.

   Call Playskool at 888-510-1561 to receive a free toy of equal value.
Information about the recall also is available at www.hasbro.com.

   Jumpsuits for infants

   About 600,000 Carter's infant jumpsuits have been recalled because a ribbon
through the zipper pull tab can detach, posing a choking hazard.

   The recalled jumpsuits have a 6-inch-long satin ribbon tied through the
zipper pull tab. The ribbons are in solid colors or have "Carter's" printed on
them. The jumpsuits, sold in sizes up to 6-9 months, have a teddy bear or puppy
embroidered on the front.

   They were sold from May through December at department stores nationwide for
$14-$20.

   For information, call Carter's at 888-339-2129 or go to www.carters.com.

   Free Press news services

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2001


                             1988 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

              February 11, 2001, Sunday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; BREATHING LESSONS: LEARNING TO LIVE WITH ASTHMA; Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 778 words

HEADLINE: USF research shows promise for asthma vaccine

BYLINE: WES ALLISON

DATELINE: TAMPA

BODY:


   The college's team is breaking down the factors that contribute to the
condition.

   In a sprawling lab just down the hall from his office, Dr. Shyam S. Mohapatra
and his team tweak tiny genes in hopes of making big changes.

   With asthma cases spiking since 1980 and no end in sight, many researchers
believe their best chance for stemming the disease is a vaccine based on gene
therapy.

   Asthma and allergies are caused by immune system disorders. At the University
of South Florida in Tampa, Mohapatra and other researchers are trying to devise
a vaccine that would force the body's immune system to cope properly when faced
with allergens or respiratory infections.

   A marketable human vaccine is probably five to 10 years away, but USF
researchers have successfully used a vaccine in mice to stop lung inflammation
from an illness called respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV.

   RSV mimics asthma in the lungs and can cause asthma to develop over time in
some people. Photos from a national research article the USF team published
attest to the outstanding difference: In the untreated mouse, the airways of the
lungs are nearly swollen shut. In the treated mouse, they are clear.

   The same concept should work for people, too.

   "We think it can be very effective for children who are going to develop
allergies and asthma, and it may work for people who already have allergies and
asthma," said Mohapatra, a professor of medical microbiology and immunology and
director of basic research at the Joy McCann Culverhouse Airway Disease Center
at USF.

   Asthma is a complex disease that can be caused by mutations of many genes,
but researchers believe just a few are responsible in the early stages. At USF,
scientists are searching for those genes by comparing the genes of asthmatics
with the genes of other people. It is tedious and time-consuming.

   They also are focusing on one apparent culprit, an immune system gene that
thwarts the production of interferon, a key immune cell. When the body doesn't
make enough interferon, the immune system overcompensates. Through a series of
steps, it produces an excess of an antibody called IgE.

   IgE is found in large quantities in the lungs of asthmatics and apparently
contributes to the inflammation caused by asthma and RSV. Stop the
overproduction of IgE, some researchers believe, and they will ease the asthma.

   Future asthmatics could be identified through genetic testing and treated in
infancy with a vaccine.

   "The best way to treat asthma is to prevent it, like hypertension or
diabetes," said Dr. Richard F. Lockey, director of USF's division of allergy and
immunology. "Most people chase it: attack, then treat, attack, then treat."

   Asthmatics can expect to hear more about IgE in the near future. Genentech
Inc., a California biotech firm, and pharmaceutical giant Novartis hope to win
federal approval this summer for a drug called Xolair, designed to treat asthma
and seasonal allergies by reducing levels of IgE.

   Last year, the company reported that results from its clinical trials were
promising.

   "It's very different because other therapies often target symptoms,"
spokeswoman Wendy Emanuel said. "Xolair is designed to act much earlier in the
chain of allergic events."

   Any effective treatment could be a gold mine: Sales of asthma-related
prescription medications surpassed $ 6-billion last year, a 17 percent increase
over the year before, according to IMS Health, which tracks prescription sales.

   Asthmatics and their doctors rely on a large stable of highly effective daily
and emergency medications.

   Most people with moderate or severe asthma take an inhaled steroid once or
twice a day to reduce the underlying inflammation of their lungs, then use a
fast-acting inhaler, such as albuterol, to ease attacks.

   Because these work so well, pharmaceutical firms are seeking easier ways for
people to take them, which they hope will make their drugs more appealing, said
Alisa Diecidue, administrator of the Asthma, Allergy and Immunology Clinical
Research Unit at USF, which tests asthma medications.

   "They want the best delivery system with the least side effects. They want
the most convenience," she said. "If your child has asthma, it's easier to take
a pill . . . than to use an inhaler."

   The newest drugs on the market are leukotriene inhibitors, such as Singular
and Accolate, that ease inflammation by blocking a step in the asthma process.
They're designed as alternatives to steroids and are taken by pill, and they are
proving popular: Use more than doubled last year, to $ 791-million in sales.

   CHART TEXT NOT PROVIDED FOR ELECTRONIC LIBRARY, PLEASE SEE MICROFILM


GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE CHART; Comparison by county, cases of asthma in Florida
schools for school years 1996-1997 and 1999-2000

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2001


                             1989 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2001 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            February 11, 2001 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1425 words

HEADLINE: Human DNA: Few genes do all the work

BYLINE: KITTA MacPHERSON, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   Scientists have taken their first good look at the human genome - mankind's
genetic blueprint - and found in it an ancient script that's strikingly common
across all ethnic groups and only about twice as large as the genetic code for a
fruit fly.

    The new findings come from the first detailed analyses of the human genetic
code by scientists working for the publicly funded Human Genome Project and
Celera Genomics Inc., a Rockville, Md., gene sequencing company. Seven months
ago, leaders of the competing public and private teams announced at a White
House ceremony that they each had cracked the genetic code that contains the
directions for creating and sustaining life.

    The findings offer great promise for curing diseases such as cancer,
treating addiction and understanding evolution. They provide a window onto early
human history and even have implications for race relations.

    "We're amazed. The genome is loaded with surprises," said Celera's Craig
Venter, who invented many of the techniques that made the research possible.

    For one thing, the human genetic code contains only about 30,000 genes; many
scientists had predicted they would find 100,000. The lowly fruit fly has 13,600
genes.

    Another finding: Every person on earth shares 99.99 percent of the genetic
code with all other people. In fact, the studies show people from different
racial groups can be more genetically similar than individuals within the same
group. Individual variations represent just 1,250 different "letters" in the
entire sequence of 3 billion.

    More than merely a sequence of code written on a twisted piece of DNA, the
genome, scientists have found, also contains microscopic bits of foreign genetic
matter that co-exist with human DNA, contributing to a complex microscopic
ecosystem rivaling anything in Whoville dreamed up by Dr. Seuss.

    "It's a lot more complicated than we thought," Venter said.

    The findings are contained in two sets of papers to be published later this
week in two scientific journals: Nature, which will cover the government-funded
research, and Science, which will contain the Celera work. Scientists from the
teams had planned a Washington news conference tomorrow to detail the insights
gleaned from their first forages into the thicket of genome data. But journal
editors released details last night after a British newspaper reported on them
for its Sunday edition.

    The publication of the 95-percent-complete human genome sequence, along with
dozens of papers representing scientists' first analyses of the DNA sequences,
represents one of the great moments of scientific history, researchers said.

    "This stunning accomplishment, representing the most accurate genome
sequence ever completed, offers new and exciting prospects for targeting new
medical improvements," said Donald Kennedy, editor-in-chief of Science. "It can
tell us much about our place in the diverse panorama of life."

    The genetic instructions for building and running the human body are all
found within 46 DNA-containing molecules called chromosomes - 23 from each
parent. Along the chromosomes lie the chemical bases of genes: A, C, G and T
(adenine, cytosine, guanine, and thymine). Paired together, these letters form
the "steps" within DNA's ladder- like structure. They also carry the code for
synthesizing proteins, the building blocks of life.

    The studies reveal vast stretches of desert-like regions along the DNA
strand, with relatively few or no protein-coding genes. About one-fourth of the
genome could be considered desert, with lengthy gene-free segments. Chromosomes
17, 19, and 22 are jammed with genes. Chromosomes X, 4, 18, 13 and Y are
relatively barren. (X and Y are the chromosomes that determine gender, X for
female and Y for male.)

    "The challenge now will be to stop thinking about one gene at a time and
start trying to understand the whole set at once as a complex system - to think
about how such a small number of genes can generate a fly or a person," said
Barbara Jasny, a senior editor at Science who handled the Celera manuscript.

    The notion that one gene equals one disease or that one gene produces one
key protein has been thrown out the window by the new evidence, she said.

    The Celera team sets the total number of human genes at somewhere between
26,383 and 39,114. The government consortium reported the number at between
30,000 and 40,000.

    The new estimates aren't too much higher than the 25,000 genes in the wild
mustard plant Arabidopsis thaliana, the 19,000 genes in the tiny worm C. elegan,
or the 13,600 genes in the fruit fly Drosophila.

    More than a third of the genome contains repetitive sequences, suggesting
that this so-called "junk DNA" deserves further study. In fact, Chromosome 19 is
57 percent repetitive.

    In addition to repeated segments, one Science paper identifies 2.1 million
genetic sequence oddities or variations. Known as single nucleotide
polymorphisms, or "SNPs" (pronounced "snips"), these differences from person to
person are usually harmless; fewer than 1 percent produce potentially flawed
proteins that could in turn produce disease.

    "Now we've created a whole huge data set that people can mine from multiple
perspectives," said Michael Boyce-Jacino, chief technology officer at Orchid
Bioscience in Princeton, who coined the term SNPs in the early 1990s. "It's
clearly a milestone in science. This is a time when we actually have a chance to
really understand all the genetic components - those that make us human and
those that make us different."

    The Celera team - including some 282 investigators from institutions based
in the United States, Australia and Spain - obtained DNA samples from five
people: three women and two men. The group included one African- American, one
Chinese, one Hispanic-Mexican and two Caucasians. Scientists analyzed chunks of
genetic code from these people using the "shotgun" strategy pioneered by Venter
that allowed Celera to complete the genome sequence for the fruit fly last year
with 99 percent accuracy.

    The data are also expected to help scientists resolve academic questions
about humanity's common ancestry, as well as the movement of people and cultures
around the world.

    "The genome is a fantastic compendium, not only in the amounts of general
information but in what it offers up in insights about evolu- tion," said Aaron
Shatkin, a molec- ular biologist and director of the Center for Advanced
Biotechno logy and Medicine in Piscataway. "I think this is quite fantastic."

    Teams of researchers known as evolutionary biologists are examin- ing the
desert-like stretches of the genome where the DNA does not appear to contain
coded messages to make anything for the human body. Many of these segments, the
biologists report in the journals, are remnants of prehistoric viruses. They can
be compared with gen- omes of other species to determine their age, giving
scientists the first clues into the course of evolution and what led to the
mutations that produced mankind.

    Another interesting finding Men are twice as likely to pass on a genetic
mutation as women are. This suggests that men are the major source of genetic
in offspring, but also the major source of evolutionary innovation.

    The completed human genome sequence is expected to promote medical advances
such as diagnos tic tests, drugs that reflect individ- ual genetic variations,
treatments for addiction and perhaps gene therapies targeting segments of code
responsible for disease. In sift ing through the newly unveiled genome,
scientists using computer- ized search engines have discov- ered more than 40
new disease genes. Some are for varying forms of epilepsy, deafness,
colorblindness and muscular dystrophy.

    Scientists believe they will be able to pinpoint many more dis- eases,
providing targets for new treatments.

    "This is where the future of sci- ence and medicine will be," said William
Hait, the physician and re- searcher who heads the Cancer In- stitute of New
Jersey in New Brunswick.

    The pharmaceutical industry is well-positioned to take advantage of the
genome data, designing whole new "genomics" research di visions to take
advantage of the new insights.

    "This will change the way that drugs are developed," said John Houston, an
executive with Bristol- Myers Squibb, which has extensive research facilities in
Princeton.

    Until now, the drug industry has had only about 500 genetic targets to
design drugs around. The gen- omics data provide a dazzling array of information
that industry is sure to maximize, Houston said. "Now it's a race," he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                             1990 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2001 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            February 11, 2001 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 570 words

HEADLINE: Genetic revolution holds promise of cures

BYLINE: PAUL RECER, ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   The genetic revolution made possible by mapping the human genome may include
new cures for drug addictions, restoring health to the mentally ill and,
perhaps, one day replacing prisons with pills, experts say.

   "Ultimately, the human genome sequence will revolutionize psychology and
psychiatry," says Peter McGuffin, co-author of an analysis in the upcoming
edition of the journal Science.

    McGuffin, a researcher at the Institute of Psychiatry, Kings College London,
England, and other experts believe that finding genes which influence behavior
may lead to drugs that treat or prevent some of the major problems that confront
society.

    "The sequencing of the human genome will improve our ability to identify the
genetic risk factors genes for a whole variety of conditions, from addiction to
criminality to anti-social personality," said Eric J. Nestler, chairman of the
department of psychiatry, University of Texas, Southwest Medical Center in
Dallas. "This is going to be an enormous advance for this field."

    McGuffin said that many forms of mental illness are only poorly controlled
with the current medications, many of which have side effects that limit their
usefulness.

    "When we treat depression, for instance, we have only a limited number of
medications and these have uneven results," he said. "We can probably get
resolution of symptoms in perhaps 70 percent of the cases of depression."

    The variability of results are even worse for some other forms of mental
illness, experts say. Some patients enjoy perfect control, while others, taking
the same medication, have repeated and often unmanageable relapses. The
different reaction to the drugs could be caused by the difference in genes.

    Identifying the genes that put people at risk of mental illness, said
McGuffin, "would be a big advance in understanding things like personality and
what makes us susceptible to depression and schizophrenia and so on."

    Once those differences - the genetic twists and turns unique in each person
- are understood, "pharmaceutical companies could use this information to find
novel drugs to alter behaviors."

    It is possible, McGuffin said, that drugs could be specifically tailored to
fit the unique pattern of genes in an individual patient instead of the current
one-size-for-all pharmaceuticals.

    Nestler, co-author of an analysis in the journal Nature, said genetic
therapy could be a key advance in treating drug addiction, a complex syndrome
that is a mix of social and biological factors.

    "At its core, addiction involves a biological process," said Nestler. "The
ability of a drug to change the brain and cause addiction is, in part,
determined by genetic factors."

    Mapping the human genome may enable researchers to identify genes that
predispose some people to quickly become alcoholics or cocaine or heroin
addicts.

    "There is very good evidence that about 50 percent of a person's risk to
become addicted is genetic," said Nestler. "Finding those genes means we will be
able to identify people who are at risk of addiction and target them for more
intensive prevention intervention."

    Finding genes for addiction is unlikely to be the final answer for the use
of illegal drugs, he added. Genes may be only half the problem.

    But it could make the difference between a cure and a failure.

    "When a person with an addiction is recovering, he is struggling to combat
incredibly strong biological factors," said Nestler.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                             1991 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    February 09, 2001, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 406 words

HEADLINE: Med schools draft conflict-of-interest rules

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   BOSTON - Representatives from the nation's top medical schools have drafted a
set of tough conflict-of-interest guidelines requiring researchers to disclose
any financial interest they have in studies involving patients.

   The recommendations address inconsistencies and gaps in policies at medical
schools throughout the country that were criticized in medical journals last
year.

   Guidelines would also require researchers to own up to any financial ties
they have to a study when they attempt to publish the findings in a medical
journal.

   "The perception is that patients may be at risk," said Harvard Medical School
Dean Joseph B. Martin, who convened the meeting of schools. "We need to do
everything we can to remove even the perception of a conflict that would in any
way endanger the health of our patients."

   The recommendations are being considered by the Association of American
Medical Colleges to be used as suggested guidelines for all medical schools and
teaching hospitals.

   "Given the importance of ensuring public trust in the integrity of clinical
research, we felt it was urgent to address these issues," said AAMC President
Dr. Jordan Cohen.

   In addition to Harvard, the schools involved are Baylor College of Medicine,
Columbia University, Johns Hopkins University, the University of Pennsylvania,
the University of Washington, Washington University, Yale University and the
University of California at San Francisco and Los Angeles.

   Drug companies routinely pay medical school doctors to conduct human studies
on the safety and effectiveness of new drugs and medical equipment.

   But growing concern over the effect this financial link can have on patients'
health has led to a push for national guidelines.

   Those concerns were heightened in 1999, when the Food and Drug Administration
found that University of Pennsylvania researchers did not properly report a
patient's side effects in a gene therapy experiment.

   The patient, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson, Ariz., died.

   The university's gene therapy institute and its director were barred from
conducting experiments on humans after more safety violations and possible
financial conflicts of interest were revealed.

   A report in the New England Journal of Medicine in November found Harvard was
the country's only top medical school to prohibit scientists from holding any
stock in companies that could be affected by their research results.


TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2001


                             1992 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     February 9, 2001 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 01D

LENGTH: 796 words

HEADLINE: Biotech IPO likely today;
Third Wave's decision tough due to fragile market

BYLINE: JOE MANNING of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   Third Wave Technologies Inc. is expected to begin trading shares of its stock
today on the Nasdaq market.

   As of Thursday night, the initial price had not been set, but there were
strong indications that the offering would take place today, said sources
familiar with the deal.

   It is also possible that in today's fragile market for initial public
offerings, the deal could be delayed again. Third Wave, a Madison company that
designs genetic tests, said last August it intended to sell stock to the public
in the fall. But citing the swooning market for technology stocks and the
unfriendly IPO market, the company put off the deal.

   In an amended prospectus filed with federal securities regulators Thursday,
the company said it expects to receive net proceeds of about $93.4 million when
it does sell its common stock, assuming the stock is priced at $12 a share. In
previous filings, Third Wave has said it intends to sell 8.5 million new shares
at $11 to $13 each.

   Third Wave produces the kinds of essential tools with which researchers will
build a health care system once only envisioned by science fiction writers.

   The company, which does not expect to make a profit for several years, hopes
its IPO will allow it to cash in on the scientific revolution brought on by the
mapping of the human genome.

   It's not certain whether the company is picking the right time to wade into a
troubled IPO sea, although biotechnology companies fared relatively well last
year, according to analysts.

   Last year, Third Wave generated revenue of $14.4 million with operating
expenses of $48 million, according to the company. It recorded a loss for the
year of $53 million. With an accumulated deficit of $58 million, the young
company has total assets of $72 million.

   The company's strategy is to capitalize on the growing market opportunity for
genetic analysis products.

   Third Wave produces genetic tests that can detect variations in genes
contributing to or causing diseases. As more and more genetic markers are
identified, the company will be able to produce genetic tests to find those
defects in patients.

   Its test kits can be used to determine which medications are best for
individual patients, introducing what health care experts call "the age of
personalized medicine."

   Third Wave is now marketing three products for determining genetic
predisposition for blood clotting and plans to introduce products for other
clinical applications, including detection of infectious diseases and diagnosis
of inherited diseases. The company also serves clinical reference laboratories.

   Such testing methods as Third Wave's will play a major role in new treatments
in which medications are engineered to meet genetic profiles of patients, said
Maureen Sullivan, senior vice president of strategic services at the Blue Cross
and Blue Shield Association in Chicago.

   She predicted genetic testing and screening of patients will become a major
part of health care as the unraveling of the human genome drives demand for
testing for troublesome genes.

   "People are interested in how they can prevent illnesses through awareness of
their genetic makeup," Sullivan said. Eventually, genetic tests will be used in
the ultimate medical treatment -- gene therapy, in which faulty genes are
replaced.

   Despite Third Wave's hot potential, Friday's stock sale comes as the 2001 IPO
market is off to one of the slowest starts in years, analysts said.

   For each four companies that have gone forward with a stock sale, nearly
seven have pulled back.

   Market observers offered several possibilities why Third Wave executives
decided to go forward with the IPO.

   "They probably need the money, very simply," said Richard Peterson, an
analyst with Thomson Financial Securities Data of Boston. However, he added that
prospects for Third Wave were not gloomy.

   Third Wave is not desperate for money, said Roger Wyse, managing director of
Burrill & Co., San Francisco, an early investor.

   "You want to finance before you run out of money. You want to go to the
market while you have strength. This is a tough time (for IPOs). We'd love to
have it be a hot market with things ramping up real fast," he said.

   ------------

   Jason Gertzen of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.

   THIRD WAVE

   Business: Test kits, for research and treatment, to find genetic
abnormalities.

   Products: Three products for finding genetic predisposition for blood
clotting. In future, products to detect infectious diseases, diagnose inherited
diseases.

   Founded: 1993 in Madison, where it has offices and factory. Recently built
$30 million plant in Sun Prairie.

   Would trade on: Nasdaq, as TWTI.

   Offering: 8.5 million shares.

   Employees: 177.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2001


                             1993 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       FEBRUARY 9, 2001 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 444 words

HEADLINE: DISCLOSURE RULES DRAFTED FOR RESEARCHERS WITH FINANCIAL STAKE

BYLINE: Heidi B. Perlman, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   Representatives from the nation's top medical schools have drafted a set of
tough conflict-of-interest guidelines requiring researchers to disclose any
financial interest they have in studies involving patients.

   The recommendations address inconsistencies and gaps in policies at medical
schools around the country that were criticized in medical journals last year.

   The guidelines would also require researchers to divulge any financial ties
they have to a study when they attempt to publish their findings in a medical
journal.

   "The perception is that patients may be at risk," said Harvard Medical School
Dean Joseph B. Martin, who convened the meeting of schools. "We need to do
everything we can to remove even the perception of a conflict that would in any
way endanger the health of our patients."

   The recommendations are being considered now by the Association of American
Medical Colleges to be used as suggested guidelines for medical schools and
teaching hospitals.

   "Given the importance of ensuring public trust in the integrity of clinical
research, we felt it was urgent to address these issues," said AAMC president
Jordan Cohen.

   In addition to Harvard, the schools involved are the University of
Pennsylvania, Baylor College of Medicine, Columbia University, Johns Hopkins
University, the University of Washington, Washington University, Yale
University, and the University of California at San Francisco and Los Angeles.

   Drug companies routinely pay medical-school doctors to conduct human studies
on the safety and effectiveness of new drugs and medical equipment. Growing
concern over the effect this financial link can have on patients' health has led
to a push for national guidelines.

   Those concerns were heightened in 1999, when the Food and Drug Administration
found that University of Pennsylvania researchers did not properly report side
effects suffered by a patient during a gene-therapy experiment. The patient,
18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson, Ariz., died.

   The university's Institute for Human Gene Therapy and its director, James M.
Wilson, were barred from conducting experiments on humans after more safety
violations and possible financial conflicts of interest were revealed.

   A report in the New England Journal of Medicine in November found that
Harvard was the country's only top medical school to prohibit scientists from
holding any stock in companies that could be affected by their research results.

   After the report was published, Martin gathered representatives from the
country's top 10 schools to discuss the issue.

   Martin said he was confident the AAMC would adopt the proposed guidelines.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1994 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   February 06, 2001, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 28 Medicine

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: OF NOTE

SOURCE: Staff, wire reports

BODY:

   Medical center offers free heart screenings


   Bayou City Medical Center is offering free coronary heart disease screenings
every Wednesday in February from 7:30 to 10 a.m.

   These screenings - held at the north campus, 4200 Portsmouth - include blood
cholesterol, glucose analysis, blood pressure analysis and consultation with a
registered nurse.

   Reservations are required. Call 877-725-1444.





   Local orthopedic surgeon to lead national society


   Dr. Gary Gartsman, a board certified orthopedic surgeon with Houston's
Fondren Orthopedic Group, has been selected president-elect of the American
Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons Society. Organized in 1982, the society's mission is
to advance the science and knowledge of shoulder and elbow surgery in
affiliation with the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons.

   Gartsman, affiliated with Texas Orthopedic Hospital, is recognized for his
teaching and research in arthoscopic shoulder surgery.





   Arthritis sufferers invited to take exercise courses


   The Arthritis Foundation sponsors ongoing arthritis exercise courses at
Memorial Hermann Northwest Hospital every Tuesday and Friday from 9:30 to 10:30
a.m.

   The Patients with Arthritis Can Exercise, or PACE, course is certified
through the Arthritis Foundation and includes exercises to increase flexibility,
balance, strength and cardiovascular fitness.

   The cost is $ 5 per session or $ 25 per month.

   Memorial Hermann Northwest is at 1635 North Loop West. For more information
call 713-222-2273.





   Hypoglycemia work wins award for Baylor team


   Dr. F. Charles Brunicardi, professor and chairman of the Michael E. DeBakey
Department of Surgery at Baylor College of Medicine, and his research team have
been recognized for their research on gene therapy for pancreatic tumors.

   The team received the Shipley Award, presented annually by the Southern
Surgical Association, which has more than 600 members representing all areas of
surgery.

   Patients with insulin-producing tumors, found in the islet cells of the
pancreas, can suffer from severe episodes of hypoglycemia, or low blood sugar.

   The condition can induce a coma or lead to death.

   At the association meeting, Brunicardi presented his research on a
tumor-specific gene therapy for hypoglycemia.

   The study indicated that hypoglycemia and subsequent death were prevented by
targeting tumor cells with insulin-promoter gene therapy.

   Both normal islet cells and tumors were targeted by the genes, however, only
the tumors were destroyed. Treated mice survived eight months with normal
glucose levels.





   Harvard hospital seeks donations of brain tissue


   Harvard's McLean Hospital now has 5,000 donated brain specimens, which are
helping researchers worldwide to unravel some of the most devastating diseases
of the brain and the mind.

   Anyone can register for future donation; especially useful is tissue from
individuals with severe psychiatric illnesses.

   For more information, call 800-272-4622 or go to www.brainbank.org on the
Internet and follow the link to McLean Hospital under "Brain Banks."


GRAPHIC: Mug: Dr. Gary Gartsman

TYPE: -LINKS-

NOTES: CONTACT US
Mail information with a contact name and phone number to: Medicine Page, Houston
Chronicle, P.O. Box 4260, Houston, Texas 77210. Call 713-220-2550 or fax to
713-220-6806. Send electronic mail to medicine@chron.com and please include your
e-mail address in the message.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2001


                             1995 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      FEBRUARY 6, 2001 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 839 words

HEADLINE: NEW PENN INSTITUTE TO FOCUS ON GENES' TIES TO SICKNESS, HEALTH

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Drawing on burgeoning new knowledge about the genetic code of humans and
other organisms, the University of Pennsylvania plans to establish a $75 million
institute to study how the 60,000 or so genes that make up a human being
interact to cause illness or maintain health.

   The university's new Genomics Institute, announced yesterday, will also study
the genes that make up viruses and other microbes, with the aim of finding new
targets for drugs to combat infectious disease.

   While scientists have long studied individual genes, especially for inherited
illnesses, the relatively new field of genomics allows scientists to study tens
of thousands of genes at once.

   In cancer research, genomics will be used to address such questions as what
causes human cells to become cancerous, what prompts cancer cells to spread, and
why some people respond to certain chemotherapies while others do not.

   The findings, scientists say, are likely to lead to new diagnostic tests and
an array of new drug treatments.

   Penn President Judith Rodin said the new institute "demonstrates once again
that the university is committed to playing a key role in the development of new
fields of knowledge for the 21st century."

   Its establishment comes a year after Penn's reputation as a leader in the
biomedical field was tarnished by the death of a teenager during a gene-therapy
experiment. Following an investigation, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
shut down all human gene-therapy trials under the sponsorship of Penn's
once-renowned Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

   Penn officials said yesterday that the gene-therapy institute - which
continues to conduct basic science and animal studies - was not part of the new
genome institute, though scientists affiliated with the gene-therapy program
will undoubtedly make use of genomic research.

   Despite the publicity it received, the Institute for Human Gene Therapy is a
small part of the university's biomedical research effort. Overall, Penn gets
$350 million in outside grants for biomedical research and has about 500
clinical trials under way. By comparison, the gene-therapy institute got $25
million a year at its height and conducted only a handful of human trials.

   The Genomics Institute is to be university-wide, cutting across various
schools and disciplines from biology to computer science. It will be headed by
David S. Roos, a Penn biology professor since 1989 who holds an undergraduate
degree in biology from Harvard and a Ph.D. in virology from Rockefeller
University.

   Roos' own work to decipher the genetic code of the parasite that causes
malaria has led to potential new approaches to combating the disease.

   Roos likened the genomics revolution that has hit medicine and other life
sciences to the invention of the microscope. "It's a whole different way of
looking at an organism," he said. "In the past, we could work on tiny little
problems. Now, we can get a big-picture view."

   For the first time, for instance, scientists will be able to look at what's
happening with all the genes in people suffering from a particular disease. They
will be able to study which genes are "turned on," ordering up the production of
certain proteins, and which are "turned off."

   The clues to the cause of disease - as well as potential treatment - are
likely to lie in the patterns that scientists uncover.

   A key component of the Genomics Institute will be a focus on four types of
cancer - melanoma, breast, colon and prostate. That effort will be housed at
Penn's Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute and headed by Barbara Weber, a
noted breast-cancer researcher.

   The cancer program is to collaborate with the SangreCenter in Cambridge,
England, which has the largest human gene sequencing program in the world.

   Penn Provost Robert L. Barchi said the university had already committed $38
million to house the genomics program in 13,000 square feet of a four-story Life
Sciences Building that will soon be under construction near Hamilton Walk and
University Avenue.

   The money will also be used to recruit new faculty and to renovate Blockley
Hall and establish a bio-infomatics laboratory where hundreds of small computers
will be put to work on different aspects of the same problem. The additional
funds, Barchi said, would be raised over the next five years from private
foundations, the federal government and private industry, including the
pharmaceutical industry.

   Penn's program is one of several being established at major research
universities across the country as academic scientists race to make use of the
vast array of new knowledge spilling out of the federally funded Human Genome
Project and related efforts to sequence the human genome as well as plants' and
animals'.

   While the sequencing projects tell scientists the order of the chemicals that
make up genetic material, they do not elucidate the function of various genes.
That's what genomics aims to do.

   Huntly Collins' e-mail address is hcollins@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1996 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     February 6, 2001 Tuesday, Final / All

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 600 words

HEADLINE: UH joins nationwide bipolar study

BYLINE: ROGER MEZGER, PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   University Hospitals will play a leading role in a nationwide $22 million
study to quickly find better ways to treat the extreme mood swings known as
bipolar disorder.

   Researchers will announce the study today at the National Institutes of
Health in Maryland. The study is the largest ever using money from the NIH to
focus on bipolar disorder, a brain dysfunction that used to be called
manic-depressive illness.

   Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston is coordinating the extensive study
for the National Institute of Mental Health, a branch of the NIH. Investigators
at 18 sites nationwide, including University Hospitals of Cleveland, will take
part in the five-year study.

   "We believe this approach will triple the rate at which science advances" in
treating bipolar disorder, said Dr. Joseph Calabrese, director of UH's Mood
Disorders Program and a professor of psychiatry at Case Western Reserve
University. Calabrese is the study's principal investigator in Cleveland.

   The bipolar study - called STEP-BD, for Systematic Treatment Enhancement
Program for Bipolar Disorder - actually began quietly last fall. So far, about
700 patients have enrolled nationally, and the number is expected to reach 5,000
as the study progresses.

   In Cleveland, 100 patients have signed up, more than at any other site.
Calabrese said he anticipates maintaining that lead by eventually enrolling as
many as 500.

   "We would really like to finish at the top of the list in this," Calabrese
said.

   Cleveland has an edge on other sites, Calabrese said, because he has
conducted prior bipolar research under NIH grants received through the CWRU
School of Medicine. "We have a very large clinical infrastructure in place," he
said.

   Bipolar disorder afflicts about three people out of 100 to various degrees,
Calabrese said, causing them to experience periods of hopeless depression
alternating with euphoric highs. About one of every three sufferers has symptoms
severe enough to require hospitalization.

   But fewer than half of bipolar people are correctly diagnosed initially,
Calabrese said. As a result, "The majority of people with this illness in
Cleveland are living miserable lives because they don't know there's a treatment
for what they have."

   That feeling of helplessness leads to a grim statistic: About 15 percent of
bipolar sufferers eventually commit suicide.

   Patients who qualify to enroll in the NIH study receive standard clinical
care for bipolar disorder, including traditional medication and psychotherapy.
When patients enter periods of extreme highs or lows, they have the option of
receiving other treatments, among them nontraditional approaches including other
types of medications and psychotherapy, and nutritional supplements believed to
affect mood. Researchers will see which combinations of treatments, called
"pathways," work best.

   "The whole idea here is to systematically discard pathways or nutritional
substances or therapy that doesn't work," Calabrese said.

   Calabrese expects gene therapy to become available for bipolar disorder
during the course of the research, which could extend beyond five years if the
NIH chooses. At that time, gene therapy would be another option for patients in
the study.

   The study is open to people 15 and older who have been diagnosed with bipolar
disorder. Calabrese provides a free screening to determine eligibility for the
study. After that, the study pays all medical and drug costs not covered by
private health insurance.

   (For further information, call 216-844-2850.)

   E-mail: rmezger@plaind.com

   Phone: 216-999-4446

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2001


                             1997 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                  February 6, 2001 Tuesday, Sports Final / All

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 2360 words

HEADLINE: Path to biotech success;
Region faces obstacles to reaching critical mass for fast growth

BYLINE: ZACH SCHILLER AND JOHN MANGELS, PLAIN DEALER REPORTERS

BODY:

   Vinodh N. Rajapakse found his future employer while surfing the Web. At
first, he didn't even realize that NetGenics Inc. was based in Cleveland, his
hometown. Yet here was a cutting-edge software company in the midst of the
revolution in biology.

   It was a perfect fit for the biology major turned computer science junkie and
graduate student at Rutgers University in New Jersey.

   "I never expected to be able to come to Cleveland and find something like
this," said Rajapakse, 29, who joined the company last May.

   NetGenics is indeed one of a rare breed: a Northeast Ohio biotech software
company with a national reputation in a region that hardly makes it onto the
national map of the biomedical industry.

   In mid-January, though, Rajapakse was surprised along with his colleagues to
learn that NetGenics was dismissing nearly 30 of its 100 employees. NetGenics
had been counting on selling shares to the public to raise money for operating
expenses. But the market for initial stock offerings soured, so the company had
to forgo the stock sale and chop costs, officials said.

   Rajapakse is still on the payroll, waiting to see how the company's plan
unfolds. He hasn't lost his enthusiasm for working with NetGenics scientists or
dusted off his resume. "I obviously think things will turn around. . . . I still
think NetGenics is a gem in Cleveland."

   However, the cutback was a rude reminder that obstacles litter the path from
initial innovation to successful, full-grown business. Besides money and a good
product, fledgling companies must find leaders with the verve and savvy to adapt
quickly to change, hurdle regulatory and legal barriers to prove their products
are safe and useful, convince customers of the worth of their new technologies,
and recruit employees with the skills to remain on the cutting edge.

   "It's not enough to have the best gizmo out there," said Clifford Goodman, a
senior scientist at the Lewin Group, a health-care policy and management
consulting firm in Falls Church, Va. "In addition, you need a certain amount of
savvy in order to be able to navigate the regulatory, reimbursement and other
processes."

   A few medical-device makers - Invacare Corp., Steris Corp. and Marconi
Medical Systems - account for much of the biomedical employment in Northeast
Ohio now. Though some dominate their fields, none is a giant. Experts agree that
the area needs more success stories if it is to build a significant biomedical
industry.

   "If one [company] takes off here, you have a basis for a dozen more," said
Farah M. Walters, president and chief executive officer of University Hospitals
Health System. "What we just need right now is to commit to have two, three of
these take off, and then there can be exponential growth in future ones. The
hardest thing is getting started."

   Big contenders

   That's why backers of the region's attempt to develop its biomedical industry
have been paying particular attention to NetGenics and Athersys Inc., a
drug-development company that also has filed plans to go public.

   Victims of poor timing, both are waiting for market conditions to improve.
And Wall Street can be fickle. Last August alone, noted Scott Morrison, national
leader of life sciences at Ernst & Young, 19 biotech companies went public. Yet
in the "biotech winter" of just a few years ago, "if we had 12 companies do IPOs
(initial public offerings) a year, that would really be a stretch," Morrison
said.

   Biotech financing is so volatile because investors are looking to promises
and potential, not real sales and earnings. At least through last June, Athersys
had no revenue except for a 1997 settlement of a technology dispute with Case
Western Reserve University for $980,000. The company had lost $13.2 million from
operations since its founding, and expects losses through 2004. Yet investors
tantalized by its technology poured in $47.5 million last spring in the firm's
most recent round of private financing.

   Athersys got its start in late 1995 when two native Californians, Gil Van
Bokkelen and John J. Harrington, moved to Cleveland so they could continue
developing an artificial-chromosome technology at the lab of CWRU Genetics
Department Chairman Huntington F. Willard.

   "Their idea needed to be incubated in my lab," said Willard, who noted that
the two could have raised more money from investors staying in California. "The
price of my cooperation was to have things go on in Cleveland."

   Though its chromosome technology could well have long-term potential,
Athersys now is concentrating on a shortcut for linking specific proteins with
genes in order to develop drugs.

   Athersys also has been cutting deals to share some of the gene technology
with well-regarded companies, including pharmaceutical giant Bristol-Myers
Squibb Co.

   Such partnerships, along with the tens of millions it has raised from eager
investors, have made Athersys the closest thing Northeast Ohio has to a biotech
star. The company last year moved out of an incubator for small firms and has
grown to 86 employees.

   "They have the potential to be a very, very powerful company," said Chris
Baker, chief financial officer of Winfield Associates, a Cleveland
money-management firm that has invested in Athersys for some of its clients.

   However, in the developing biotech world, courts are still deciding crucial
issues that could block such companies from becoming full-scale players. A
federal judge in Boston ruled last month that another biotech company with a
similar genetic strategy, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., had infringed patents of
giant Amgen Inc.

   And, like other start-ups, Athersys is dependent on continued financing to
grow. But because of its big private financing last spring, it doesn't
desperately need to raise money by selling stock.

   NetGenics, by contrast, had been counting on taking that route. Without a
stock sale to offset expected losses, the company had to cut employment and
focus on short-term projects.

   "They staffed up in anticipation of an event that didn't occur," said
director Alan G. Walton, whose Oxford Bioscience Partners has invested in
NetGenics.

   The dismissals aren't a sign of problems with the business, said NetGenics
President and CEO Manuel J. Glynias, a Fairview Park native.

   NetGenics' software allows drug companies to put together the information
gushing out of biology labs. The company uses Internet technology and builds a
unique product for each customer by snapping together different combinations of
software parts that NetGenics can use again.

   "The story on us," Glynias said, ". . . is great technology, less than great
sales and marketing, to put it politely."

   Convincing big pharmaceutical companies to spend millions of dollars at a
time for software systems that would span the full range of their needs proved
to be a difficult trick. The company is now on its third sales chief since its
founding five years ago.

   NetGenics shifted its strategy. Last year, it formed a consulting group to
help its customers solve smaller problems and then win more business.

   Others to watch

   Though not as visible, a number of other local biomedical companies are also
trying to grow into larger players.

   Gebauer Co., which for decades has sold a skin-numbing agent it bottles at a
plant on Cleveland's East Side, has upgraded the product and is beefing up its
marketing efforts.

   Datatrak International Inc. of Shaker Heights is trying to sell its software
for electronically capturing results of clinical trials of new drugs to big
pharmaceutical companies.

   Similarly, Analiza Inc. in Warrensville Heights has developed technology to
aid drug companies in narrowing the compounds they investigate for development.

   And Biomec Inc. is commercializing a variety of technologies ranging from a
mechanical arm that can be used during surgery to a software program that
analyzes brain atrophy in multiple sclerosis patients. It could go public in the
next year or two.

   Facing challenges

   But long before they try to sell stock publicly, biomedical start-ups depend
on money from private sources. That's been a struggle for Copernicus
Therapeutics Inc. in Cleveland, a company spun off from technologies developed
at CWRU and Ohio University for delivering gene therapy.

   Dr. Robert C. Moen, Copernicus president, complained that investors were
entranced by the Internet when the company badly needed funds in 1999. "It's a
lot like 6-year-olds playing soccer. The ball is here, that's where they all
are. If the ball moves, they're all over there."

   Copernicus had to nearly halve its staff as a result of its failure to
attract investors. But fascination with the Internet wasn't the only drag.
Interest in such companies cooled after the death of a patient in a gene-therapy
test in 1999.

   More broadly, the biotechnology industry must confront public concerns that
tampering with genetic codes is dangerous or immoral. Getting regulatory
approval for a new drug or medical device usually takes years of tests. And
reaching that coveted goal only opens a new round of challenges for young
companies.

   That became painfully clear at NeuroControl Corp. after the company won Food
and Drug Administration approval in 1997 for its Freehand System, a surgical
implant that restores hand function to quadriplegics with spinal-cord injuries.

   The company grew out of more than 20 years of research at CWRU, MetroHealth
Medical Center and the Stokes Cleveland VA Medical Center on using low-level
electrical stimulation to restore movement or strengthen weakened muscles.

   NeuroControl fell far short of its sales goals. Private investors cite
everything from manufacturing ills and broadening the distribution too quickly
to previous poor management.

   "We were ahead of the market," said Donna Richardson, who became president in
1999 and CEO last year. "The technique was new to technicians, and they didn't
know how to use it." Doctors also had to learn where to refer patients, and
insurers had to be persuaded to pay for the expensive treatment.

   The Valley View company was able to stay independent despite its
disappointing results because it is backed by a who's who of Cleveland venture
capitalists and entrepreneurs, including Invacare and its chief executive, A.
Malachi Mixon III.

   Now, they are encouraged with the company's progress. "We're now poised for
that rapid growth," said Richardson. The company is ramping up its sales effort,
and revenues are on the upswing. And Richardson hopes that NeuroControl can
start selling a new product in the United States this year that helps with
rehabilitation after a stroke.

   Quite often, though, medical-device companies sell out to the big companies
that hold sway in that business.

   For instance, Athersys now occupies a building on Carnegie Ave. in Cleveland
that once housed AcroMed Corp., a maker of spinal implants. It was taken over
and moved to Massachusetts.

   Selling out doesn't always mean moving out. Ben Venue Laboratories Inc. has
been expanding since it was acquired in 1997 by German drug giant Boehringer
Ingelheim. The Bedford company makes injectable drugs under contract for
pharmaceutical companies, and generic injectables, such as anti-cancer drugs and
antibiotics, under its own label.

   The local biomedical industry is still waiting for critical mass to build,
however. As UH's Walters pointed out, one or two big successes can be the
impetus.

   Minneapolis became a center of the medical-device business after Medtronic
Inc. developed the first cardiac pacemaker there in the 1950s and some of the
employees later left to start their own firms. The same thing happened in
Warsaw, Ind., the hip- and knee-implant capital of the nation.

   In Northeast Ohio, one of the largest, fastest-growing young biomedical
companies is the creation of a former senior scientist at Marconi Medical
Systems in Highland Heights.

   Mark Xueming Zou, a Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
worked for 2@ years at Marconi designing coils, or antennae, for its magnetic
resonance imaging systems. The coils capture the signals that such systems
process to produce pictures of the body's tissues.

   Eight years ago, he left to start his own business. Now called USA
Instruments Inc., it has grown to 210 employees and $21 million in annual sales.
In part, the Aurora company has been able to grow because the industry was so
hot. But its top-notch design of new coils is crucial.

   "These guys, they do it for a living, and they do a very good job of it,"
said Mark Grabowski, global product manager for MR surface coils at GE Medical
Systems, a major customer and industry leader.

   "We have better thinking because everyone is from the top of the technology,"
said Zou.

   He has built the largest team of engineers in his industry. But USA
Instruments and other companies find they have to look beyond the Cleveland area
for some of their technical experts.

   Many say they run up against the proverbial chicken-or-egg dilemma. "It's
tougher to recruit people from out of state if there are few employment
opportunities at other biotechnology companies in the region just in case things
don't work out," points out Athersys CEO Van Bokkelen, an enthusiastic backer of
building biotech in Cleveland.

   Mixon, another biotech booster, said Invacare has a chance to be a major
player in the health-care field. "It's within our power if we execute to build a
much bigger company," he said.

   The Elyria company, which makes wheelchairs and other home health-care
equipment, employs 1,735 locally, compared to 350 when Mixon bought it more than
20 years ago. It has an annual payroll of $75 million and just topped $1 billion
in sales.

   Mixon also backed Steris, which grew from a concept for a new kind of
sterilization equipment to the biggest company in that industry. The company's
growth, said Bill R. Sanford, retired Steris chairman and CEO, "shows one can
start with an idea and become a very large company, headquartered in what was
then called the rust belt."

   E-mail: zschiller@plaind.com Phone: 216-999-4138

   E-mail: jmangels@plaind.com Phone: 216-999-4842

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2001


                             1998 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      February 5, 2001 Monday, Final / All

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 1503 words

HEADLINE: Some of Cleveland's 'brightest' stars;
POSTIONING CLEVELAND FOR THE NEW ECONOMY

BYLINE: JOHN MANGELS, PLAIN DEALER SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   By any number of measures, Cleveland comes up short in how well it
commercializes the discoveries from the labs of its research institutions. That,
in part, is because there aren't enough "star" researchers - those who win
federal funds and generate money from their scientific breakthroughs. Those who
do qualify as stars are doing such things as seeking new ways to diagnose and
treat cancer and unravel the mysteries of the immune system. Here are five
leading researchers and a summary of their work.

                  Joseph Nadeau

   Geneticist, CWRU School of Medicine and University Hospitals 1999 NIH funding
- $1.7 million

              Nadeau is an international expert at tinkering with the genes of
research mice so that they mimic human diseases. Having a mouse model means
researchers can study human diseases in substantial detail and in ways that
aren't possible with human patients.

   In 1999, for example, Nadeau and colleagues figured out a way to swap
chromosomes between different types of mice. A chromosome is the structure that
holds thousands of genes.

   Nadeau's team found that putting a substitute Chromosome 19 into a type of
mice already prone to testicular cancer greatly increased the number that
developed tumors - strong evidence that there's a cancer-promoting gene or genes
somewhere on the chromosome. Pinpointing the location boosts the chances for a
diagnostic test and possible genetic treatments to prevent cancer from
developing.

   Nadeau is also trying to unravel the genetic tools a healthy body uses to
ward off disease. For example, if you feed two different strains of mice a
high-fat diet, one barely gains weight and stays healthy while the other doubles
or triples in size in a few months. The slim mouse has some kind of genetic
protection against getting fat.

   By selectively altering the fat mouse's genes, Nadeau hopes to find one or
more that stops the weight gain. "Would those be of interest to a drug company?"
he asks. "You bet." In essence, Nadeau is looking for ways to fix the body's own
self-regulating systems, an approach that he believes would work with most
diseases.

   Dr. Sanford Markowitz

   Cancer geneticist, CWRU School of Medicine and University Hospitals 1999
National Institutes of Health funding - $2.4 million.

   The entire lining of the large intestine does away with itself every five
days. It's nature's primitive but effective way of protecting the colon, by
wiping out old cells that might have been damaged by the bad things we sometimes
eat, then growing new ones.

   Hormones carrying the self-destruct signal circulate in the colon, but cells
in the lining have to have the right antennae to pick up the message. In a 1995
breakthrough, Markowitz and colleagues found that in families with a certain
inherited kind of colon cancer, the cells' antennae are bad. Instead of
sloughing off, the cells remain and grow unchecked, sometimes into polyps or
tumors.

   What causes faulty cellular antennae? Markowitz has found a chain of errors.
It turns out that the genetic instructions to assemble a cell's antenna are
complicated and prone to copying mistakes when cells reproduce. Cells have a
kind of spell-checker to catch and correct such blunders. But in some colon
cancer patients, the spell-checker itself is flawed, so the errors in the
antenna instruction manual, along with other mistakes, slip through.

          Markowitz's labs are working on a way to detect the deactivated
spell-checker with a blood test - a possible cancer predictor - and on finding
drugs that might kill cells that don't have the spell-checking function. He also
is looking for genes that cause a cancer cell to spread and that determine
whether the cancer is a lethal kind.

                              Yan Xu

   Cancer biologist, Cleveland Clinic 1999 NIH funding - $111,000

   Ovarian cancer is an especially stealthy and deadly disease. Its early
symptoms - bloating and pain - aren't specific enough to set off alarms. Most
cases are spontaneous, so there's no family history to serve as a warning. By
the time ovarian cancer typically is found, it has spread to the abdomen and
elsewhere. Women diagnosed in the latest stage have less than a 25 percent
chance of living another five years.

   That's why an early, accurate diagnostic test is desperately needed. The only
existing test, developed in the early 1980s, misses at least half of early-stage
cancers while sometimes also falsely indicating cancer in women with
non-cancerous conditions.

   Xu and colleagues have developed an experimental test that looks to be much
more effective. It measures the blood level of a fat molecule called LPA that
ovarian cancer cells churn out to function as a kind of traffic cop. LPA
molecules float around until they're snared by anther cancer cell, which has
thousands of docking sites on its surface. Once attached, LPA can direct the
cancer cell to grow or to move to a different place and begin forming a new
tumor.

   Xu was able to isolate LPA. In a 1998 study of 48 women with ovarian cancer,
elevated LPA levels were used to correctly identify nine of 10 cases of
early-stage cancer, and all 38 cases of later-stage or recurring cancer.

   A larger study to compare the LPA test to the earlier test and to examine LPA
levels in women with other types of cancer is under way. Xu is working with a
California biotech company, Atairgin Technologies, to develop a commercial blood
test for LPA. Xu said the Food and Drug Administration may approve the test
later this year.

   Huntington F. Willard

   Chairman of CWRU genetics department, director of University Hospitals
Research Institute

   1999 NIH funding - $690,031.

   Your car has a misfiring spark plug. Imagine trying to fix it by taping a new
plug to an arrow, standing 20 paces from the vehicle, and shooting into the
engine compartment in hopes the plug lands intact, in the right place, and
starts working.

   That's a rough analogy of the problems doctors have faced in gene therapy -
the highly experimental field in which defective, disease-causing genes are
replaced with healthy ones.

   In order to work, corrective genes have to be plugged into the right place in
a cell's DNA, rather than just plopped in at random (like our spark plug ending
up in the radiator). Also, the delivery vehicle - the arrow - has to be big
enough to carry a gene and all its on-off switches, while not doing damage
itself. Researchers have tried toned-down viruses, which are good at sneaking
into cells. But they can't carry big genes, tend to unpredictably dump their
cargo in bad places, and can provoke the body's immune system to attack.

   In 1997, Willard and colleagues at CWRU and the Cleveland biotech firm
Athersys Inc. were the first to make an artificial chromosome, the packaging
that holds thousands of genes in proper order and keeps them working properly.

   Willard's team selected the fewest basic parts that a chromosome would need
to function, then injected them into human cells in a lab dish. The cells'
repair machinery assembled the parts into a working chromosome.

   In theory, the artificial chromosome should be able to deliver a corrective
gene into a cell, make sure it works properly once it's there, and pass the gene
along when the cell divides into offspring. Willard's lab is continuing to probe
the workings of parts of human chromosomes and how they control the activities
of genes.

   Robert Fairchild

   Transplant immunologist, Cleveland Clinic

   1999 NIH funding - $595,422

   A transplanted heart or liver has spared many a patient's life. But in the
cruelest of ironies, the body sometimes repays this lifesaving foreigner by
trying to kill it.

   Fairchild is working to understand acute organ rejection, the immune system's
protective but ultimately suicidal attack on what it sees as an invader. Using
mice that have had heart transplants, Fairchild's lab has found that the organ
itself starts a cellular chain reaction of events that can lead to its demise.

   A key element in this cascade is the organ's production of signaling proteins
called chemokines. Prompted by stress or injury, they recruit and switch on
cells from elsewhere in the body that help wounds heal. Later, other chemokines
flag down increasingly armed immune system soldiers, such as roving all-purpose
"natural killer" cells, and specialized T-cells trained to target the donor
organ for assault.

   Fairchild has found that blunting the first chemokines delays the arrival of
the immune system's deadliest troops and prolongs the donor organ's survival by
up to two weeks. More sophisticated ways of putting off the invasion and toning
down inflammation might reduce the likelihood the body will reject its
benefactor.

   Fairchild also is looking for a blood-borne hint that chemokine production
has begun. Such a marker would allow doctors to use a simple blood test to
diagnose heart transplant rejection, rather than the current surgical method of
snaking a tool through arteries and into the heart to snip a tissue sample for
analysis.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2002


                             1999 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                    FEBRUARY 5, 2001, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B1; BIOSCOPE

LENGTH: 1037 words

HEADLINE: Biotech Is Pushing the Possibilities Past the Breaking Point;

Society will soon need to decide when to stop

BYLINE: Tom Abate

BODY:
A brochure landed on my desk last week, depicting a bio-engineered mouse with a
human ear growing out of its back.

    The brochure was promoting a teach-in that will be held at New York's Hunter
College the last weekend in February. Some 40 speakers will discuss the links
between industrial science and global trade. The caption beneath the mouse asked
the question: "Do we know what we're doing?"

    That's a question I find myself asking more and more these days, whether
prompted by press releases at work or stories I read at home. It was a question
I asked last weekend, when my Sunday Chronicle informed me that a physiologist
at the University of Kentucky and a fertility expert in Italy planned to clone a
human being.

    Although others have announced similar plans in the past, this was the first
time credible researchers had made such a public assertion.

    Panayiotis Zavos of the University of Kentucky is an expert on male
infertility. Italian gynecologist Severino Antinori has a string of reproductive
firsts to his credit. He has helped a 63-year-old woman bear a child, enabled a
59-year-old woman to bear twins, and repaired the sperm of infertile men using
bits of tissue taken from rat testicles.

    So when this pair said that six infertile couples had volunteered for their
experiment, I assumed they would eventually succeed in producing another
headline.

    I'm not really as interested in this potential clone, however, as I am in
the larger issue: Do we know what we're doing?

    Many people are asking such questions about biotechnology these days. But
they generally question bits of the technology. They don't look at things in a
comprehensive way.

    Some people question the ethics of stem cell research. Stem cells come from
human embryos a few days after conception. Left to nature, these cells would
develop into a whole person. Captured and tamed in petri dishes, however,
experimental stem cells could one day be used to grow organs to replace worn-out
body parts. Because stem cell research fiddles with human embryos, however,
anti-abortion forces oppose it.

    I'd guess such concerns don't resonate too widely in the Bay Area. But let
some biotech firm splice an alien gene into a corn or soybean plant, and you've
raised an issue that can arouse thousands of Northern Californians to stand up
and start asking questions.

    And so it is with the use of animals in medical experiments, or the
disparities between medical haves and have-nots.

    Different constituencies take one aspect of the biomedical complex and ask,
"Do we know what we're doing?"

    The answer is no, we never have, and in any case it's not the





    sort of question that generally gets asked in Western civilization. Our
culture is based on an implicit faith in technology. And so far it's paid off:
Whether we're talking about navigation, electricity, computing or biotechnology
-- advances in technology have tended to improve life spans and prosperity.

    Given its track record, Western culture has let technology evolve at its own
pace, trusting that the process would yield more blessings than drawbacks.

    This is not to say that technology is or ever was entirely unfettered. In
the biotech context, for instance, government agencies oversee medical and
agricultural experiments by company scientists. At universities, institutional
review boards peek over the shoulders of researchers, asking questions like how
many animals will be consumed in an experiment and whether there is an
alternative.

    Yet I see two trends forcing us to question our blind faith in technology.

    The first trend is suspicion that our watchdog institutions are unable to
ride herd on change. Such cynicism isn't new. But the explosion of knowledge and
the accelerating pace of innovation would stress even a perfect regulatory
system, and we know our system isn't perfect. Not long ago, for instance, a
young man died during a gene therapy experiment because a professor with a
financial stake in the outcome was a bit too aggressive in administering a
potent medicine.

    The second and newer trend, which comes through in the cloning story, is
that technologies that seemed like science fiction a few years ago are now
within the reach of small teams of experts. The February edition of Wired
magazine, for instance, carried a cover story on cloning which boasted that a
good cell biologist could produce a human clone for $50,000.

    Maybe that's an exaggeration. But the article argued that reproductive
technology and animal cloning techniques are so widespread that it has become
almost inevitable that someone would try to publicly clone a human being.

    After 1997, when Dolly the sheep made headlines, California and a few other
states passed laws against human cloning. The federal government has banned the
use of federal funds for human cloning experiments but has placed no
restrictions on what private entities can do. (See BioScope, Jan. 24, 2000.)

    Should there be a law against human cloning? I don't have a firm opinion.
What I do worry about, however, is whether the law could ever keep pace with
biotech, because at some point I'm certain I'll want to outlaw something.

    Which brings me back to the mouse with the ear on its back, and the
question, "Do we know what we're doing?" At this point that heretical query is
being spread by critics of technology, people such as biotechnology foe Jeremy
Rifkin, Northern California food activists Frances Moore Lappe and Anuradha
Mittal, and culture critic Jerry Mander, who -- gimme a break -- is even against
television!

    But these critics are laying the groundwork for a needed culture change. We
must learn to control the inexorable growth of technology. Biotechnology will be
at the crux of this change, because I am sure that science will make it possible
to do things with life that our moral sensibilities will not allow.

    It is time for us to define civilization not by the things which our
technology makes possible, but by which possibilities we choose.

    ,abateLook for BioScope every Monday in the Business section. Send your
bio-feedback to Tom Abate by e-mail, tabate@sfchronicle.com; fax, (415)
543-2482; or phone, (415) 777-6213.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Tissue engineering produced this laboratory-grown ear, which was
grafted onto a mouse in 1995. The BBC's Vivienne Perry had a look.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2001


                             2000 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 The Sunday Oregonian
                              The Sunday Oregonian

                    February 4, 2001 Sunday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1669 words

HEADLINE: CALM LEADER HAS OHSU AIMING HIGHER

SOURCE: JOE ROJAS-BURKE of the Oregonian Staff

BODY:

   Dr. Peter Kohler comes across so mild-mannered that it's easier to picture
him leading a troop of Boy Scouts than commanding Oregon Health Sciences
University -- one of Oregon's largest employers -- through a high-stakes
transition.

   He listens more than he talks. Though he stands over 6 feet, he somehow
doesn't seem tall. He introduces himself simply as "Pete Kohler." His
35-year-old son said he never has heard his father yell.

   "He's a rational man, I can tell you," said Todd Kohler, a former publisher
who is pursuing a second career in nursing at OHSU's school at Eastern Oregon
University in La Grande. "He's not somebody who is going to blow up, get
excited. He's going to make you think through things."

   But Kohler also is a strong-willed man who knows how to use his soft-spoken
charm to get his way. At this, he seldom fails.

   At times, critics argue that Kohler has put the interests of OHSU ahead of
the broader interests of Portland by failing to collaborate with other health
systems to avoid wasteful duplication of efforts. But few would dispute that
Kohler's calm, thoughtful leadership has elevated Oregon Health Sciences
University while other medical schools were losing their bearings in a storm of
change.

   With cuts in federal support and losses due to managed care, bottom lines at
teaching hospitals nationwide began to plunge in 1997. OHSU has managed to
increase income over that period.

   Acting largely outside of the limelight, Kohler has methodically transformed
OHSU into a medical school and teaching hospital that is nationally recognized
for its research programs and its outreach to underserved rural communities
since he became president in 1988. Kohler now has been at OHSU longer than all
but three other heads of medical schools in the country, an achievement you
would never guess from his modest office.

   "He is one of the most effective leaders in academic medicine," said Dr.
Roger Meyer, senior consultant on clinical research for the Association of
American Medical Colleges in Washington, D.C.

   "He has crafted a vision for an academic medical center, and he has kept that
vision on track."

   It was Kohler's idea in 1995 to split the university from the state's system
of higher education and make it an independent public corporation. OHSU is the
first and only academic health center in the country to attempt such a
restructuring.

   So far, the plan appears successful.

   OHSU's net income climbed from $4.6 million in 1998 to $11.2 million in 1999,
to $12.5 million last year. The university has leapfrogged up the ranks of
research centers competing for federal grants.

   The university hospital cared for more than 23,000 patients last year, up
from 18,000 in 1995. The university and its hospital and clinics employ more
than 10,000 people, not counting those who will be added in a merger with the
Oregon Graduate Institute of Science and Technology later this year.

   Competitive drive

   Those who know Kohler best, from family members to his oldest associates, say
he is driven by a genuine desire to help people -- and a fiercely competitive
nature that lies beneath his calm exterior.

   Peter Kohler was born in 1938 in Brooklyn, N.Y., the son of a college English
professor, who soon moved his family to Blacksburg, Va. Kohler started out
majoring in English at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville before
deciding on medicine, which he considered a more direct way to improve life for
others.

   During medical school at Duke University, from 1959 to 1963, he met his wife,
Judy, who was in nursing school. They raised three sons and a daughter and are
still married.

   Kohler exemplified the "triple threat" generation of academic physicians who
were expected to care for patients, teach medical students and lead scientific
research. He didn't stop publishing scientific papers until he took the
president's job at OHSU. For the first few years in Portland, he continued doing
hospital rounds.

   Dr. Bert O'Malley, the chairman of molecular and cellular biology at Baylor
College of Medicine in Houston, said Kohler easily could have made science the
focus of his career. The two met at the National Cancer Institute in 1965 and
worked together at Baylor in the '70s.

   Kohler, an endocrinologist, produced a stream of papers on hormone
regulation, thyroid disease and cancer. He developed a novel system for growing
human cells in the laboratory.

   In 1967, within two years of completing his training in endocrinology, Kohler
landed a senior investigator job at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda,
Md.

   While at Baylor in 1976, Kohler became one of the nation's select few Howard
Hughes Medical Institute investigators. The distinction comes with some of the
largest cash support for research a scientist can hope to achieve.

   Applying a vision

   In Texas, Kohler began shifting his focus toward administration, drawn, he
said, by the thrill of making sweeping plans and seeing things come together on
a time scale faster than the pace of scientific experiments. He left Baylor and
held administrative posts at university medical centers in Little Rock, Ark.,
and San Antonio before coming to Portland.

   In Texas, he also took up deer hunting. His son Todd recalls his father and
his hunting buddies spending more time debating obscure molecular biology
discoveries than stalking game.

   The younger Kohler says his father is most proud of his efforts to extend
health services to rural Oregon. The opportunity to do that, he says, was among
the reasons Kohler took the job at OHSU.

   It was Kohler who brought the Area Health Education Centers program to
Oregon. With federal assistance, the program lines up technical support and
health professionals for small towns, and it provides medical career
opportunities to young people in those towns.

   Under Kohler, the medical school revamped its curriculum to boost the output
of primary care doctors for underserved areas. Students must now complete
rotations in rural clinics or in poor urban neighborhoods.

   The president deflects all the credit to others. "Getting good people and
letting them do their thing well, that's the key to whatever success we've had,"
he said.

   Others say Kohler has carefully developed a plan for the university, building
on its "He's said, if you want to have a great institution, great teaching and
great clinical care, you have to build up your research," said Jim Walker, OHSU
executive vice president. He said becoming a stand-alone public corporation was
a shrewd move. It has freed the university from having to pass building requests
through the higher-education system, he said, and has given OHSU better access
to capital markets.

   Among other projects, the university erected the $70 million Doernbecher
Children's Hospital in 1998 and is just now finishing a $40 million laboratory
complex at its campus in Hillsboro.

   Jay Nelson, director of the university's Vaccine & Gene Therapy Institute,
left the prestigious Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif., eight years
ago to get in on the action Kohler was creating in Portland. Kohler, he said,
offered "opportunities I wouldn't have had down at Scripps."

   Nelson and his fellow researchers will occupy several floors of the new lab
in Hillsboro.

   Comfortable with crisis

   Some of Kohler's actions have provoked conflict inside and outside the
university.

   Doernbecher remains a sore point for some in the medical community. Kohler,
in 1990, spoke publicly of the need to consolidate specialized care for children
in a single hospital with Legacy Emanuel Children's Hospital. Talks with rival
Legacy Health System broke down.

   "Various parties should have risen above competitive self-interest and found
a way to make that work," said Robert Pallari, Legacy president and chief
executive officer. "I thought it was in the best interest of the community."

   Kohler and others at OHSU say Legacy would collaborate only if the new
building were built on the Emanuel campus. OHSU argued that it made more sense
to locate it near the laboratories and faculty of the university.

   From within the OHSU ranks, two distinguished professors who led the division
of nephrology for more than a decade are suing Kohler and the university. Dr.
David McCarron, who is seeking damages and to keep his tenured professorship,
claims that OHSU tried to discredit his reputation and breached a contract with
him. Dr. William Bennett alleges that university officials harassed and
intimidated him into retiring from his tenured professorship in 1999.

   Lawyers representing Kohler and OHSU have denied these allegations. They
accuse Bennett, now medical director for kidney transplantation at Legacy Good
Samaritan Hospital, of developing the competing transplant center while he was
still drawing a salary from OHSU. The university alleges that McCarron ran up
deficits in his division and violated his contract by underreporting income and
failing to resolve conflicts of interest.

   Kohler accepts the controversies as part of the job.

   "I sort of like spear catching and crisis management," he says.

   Finishing a job

   Academic health leaders beyond Portland say Kohler could easily move on to a
more prestigious institution or a more lucrative private corporation.

   "It's a credit to Peter that he has stayed the course," said Meyer, the
Washington consultant.

   O'Malley, his old Baylor colleague, said Kohler is not the type to kick back.
He said Kohler relishes the challenges posed by Oregon's largely rural economy,
limited tax base and almost nonexistent biotechnology sector.

   "When funds are limited, you have to make precisely the right moves, be much
more strategic," O'Malley said. "I think he gets a kick out of that."

   Kohler simply said he has more work to do.

   "I want OHSU to be one of the premier research universities in the country,"
he said. "We're not there yet."

   You can reach Joe Rojas-Burke at 503-412-7073 or by e-mail at
joerojas@news.oregonian.com.

GRAPHIC: Photo by Joel Davis - The Oregonian; Sidebar - Peter Ogden Kohler Born:

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2001
