
                             2001 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 The Sunday Oregonian
                              The Sunday Oregonian

                    February 4, 2001 Sunday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: PICTURE CAPTION; Pg. B01

HEADLINE: OREGON HEALTH SCIENCES UNIVERSITY

SOURCE: Color photo by ROGER JENSEN/The Oregonian

GRAPHIC: Jay Nelson, director of OHSU's Vaccine & Gene Therapy Institute, checks
the progress on new laboratories in Hillsboro, which will be equipped to safely
handle the AIDS virus, the tuberculosis pathogen and other infectious organisms
for which there are no effective vaccines.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2001


                             2002 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2001 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       February 2, 2001 Friday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-01

LENGTH: 1059 words

HEADLINE: Hopes high as CU gets set to test HIV vaccine

BYLINE: By Ann Schrader, Denver Post Science Writer,

BODY:

   A new generation of vaccines set to begin testing this spring  in Colorado
and five other states has boosted researchers' hopes  that they are closing in
on ways to prevent or control HIV, the  virus that causes AIDS.

   About 30 vaccines have been tested in humans since the first  AIDS case was
diagnosed about two decades ago, with nearly all of  the attempts falling short.

   This spring, hope returns when an advanced version of a  vaccine that uses
nonlethal bits of HIV's genetic code, or DNA,  will be tested in studies at the
University of Colorado Health  Sciences Center and five other U.S. research
centers.

   The aim is to introduce the virus to a person's immune  system so the body
can respond quickly and more naturally to the  infection if it encounters it
later.

   'This is the first vaccine that I'm pumped about,' said  Robert 'Chip'
Schooley, CU's chief of infectious disease and head  of the AIDS Clinical Trials
Group. The group includes about 35  U.S. centers studying AIDS therapies.

   The upcoming studies won't be the first involving a DNA  vaccine, but they
will be among the first to use an advanced  version of vaccine. The substance is
called an HIV gag vaccine,  with 'gag' being the small bit of HIV genetic
material used.

   The small piece of the virus' DNA is placed in a molecule and  is injected
into a person, causing the body to produce the  proteins that make the immune
system respond.

   Schooley said that since the whole virus isn't injected,  'there is no danger
of anyone getting infected.'

   What has the internationally known AIDS researcher excited  are the results
from tests in primates. 'There was a fairly  impressive effect on virus
replication,' Schooley said.

   In October, researchers from Harvard University and the  pharmaceutical giant
Merck & Co. reported in the journal Science  that they protected all the rhesus
macaques that had been  vaccinated from getting sick from an HIV-like virus. The
monkeys  in the control group that were given a placebo vaccine died of the
infection within four months of being injected with the whole virus.

   The DNA vaccine used certain proteins from the HIV-like  virus. All of the
monkeys became infected, whether they were  vaccinated or not. But the immune
systems of the monkeys that had  been vaccinated made the infection less severe,
and in some cases,  it couldn't be detected.

   The first study, which could begin in early March, involves  uninfected,
low-risk volunteers who probably will be friends and  family of AIDS patients.
About 130 uninfected people, including  about 20 from Colorado, will be enrolled
in the study.

   The second study, which may begin in April or May, will  involve about 85
HIV-infected people whose immune systems are  relatively intact.

   Careful monitoring planned

   Both groups will be injected with the DNA gag vaccine three  times and then
once with another vaccine that has the same bit of  DNA contained in a different
molecule.

   In between injections, the volunteers will have blood drawn  to ensure the
vaccine is safe and to look for the immune response,  which could begin showing
up in the first six to eight months. The  volunteers will be followed for years.

   'We want to see if we can develop a type of immune response  in people as we
have seen in primates,' he said.

   For those in the midst of the AIDS maelstrom, vaccine  studies are viewed
with caution.

   Fear of false hope

   'At first mention (of an AIDS vaccine), people got real  excited     then
everybody got disappointed to a certain extent,'  said Michael Dorosch, who
heads CU's HIV research community  advisory board.

   'The biggest thing, the biggest danger with what is going on  now, is that
things get miscommunicated. People think there is a  cure out there,' Dorosch
said.

   A similar misunderstanding happened several years ago when a  cocktail of
three drugs boosted the health and life spans of  HIV-infected people. 'Young
people became more lackadaisical about  safe sex, saying, 'There is a therapy
out there for me,'' Dorosch  said.

   But the effects of the drug cocktails haven't continued for  many people with
AIDS.

   Since the first AIDS case was identified, 21 million people  have been
diagnosed and an estimated 36 million others are  infected. In Colorado, as of
Sept. 30 - the latest figures  available - 6,985 people had been diagnosed with
AIDS and 5,640 as  HIV positive.

   The hunt for AIDS vaccine has been full of pitfalls. As  viruses are wont to
do, HIV mutates. Not as fast as influenza -  which changes its structure so
quickly that flu shots have to be  given annually to combat each year's dominant
strains - but fast  enough to make a vaccine based on just one type of virus
useless.  The theory is that the DNA vaccine will be more effective because  it
involves a more basic portion of the virus.

   After some attempts in the early 1990s fell short, HIV  vaccine research
slowed. Federal support of vaccine work increased  in the mid-1990s, and in
1997, President Bill Clinton set a  national goal of developing an AIDS vaccine
within the next decade.

   'In the last three years, a lot of new concepts are just  moving to phase-one
clinical trials,' said Jorge Flores, chief of  vaccine clinical research at the
National Institutes of Health's  AIDS division. 'Finally, there is more interest
to support the  research.'

   Several sessions on AIDS vaccines are planned during the  Foundation for
Human Retroviruses and Human Health conference that  starts Sunday in Chicago.
It's the largest meeting of AIDS  researchers in the nation.

   More review pending

   The study proposal involving uninfected people has been  reviewed by the
Colorado Multiple Institutional Review Board, the  entity at the health sciences
center that examines human clinical  trials.

   The board has sent the study back 'with some reasonable  questions,' Schooley
said, such as being confused that the study  involved gene therapy - in which
genes are inserted into a  person's genetic code - which it doesn't.

   The second study hasn't been reviewed yet. Other research  centers include
New York, UCLA, Seattle, the University of  Maryland and Harvard.


GRAPHIC:  The Denver Post/Peter Pauley Battling AIDS

LOAD-DATE: February 02, 2001


                             2003 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    February 1, 2001, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Rockdale Extra; Pg. 4JR

LENGTH: 761 words

HEADLINE: Peace of mind, at a higher price;
 Treating hemophilia: New products have made infusions safer for patients than
ever before.

BYLINE: Mark Niesse, For the Journal-Constitution

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:
Recent medical advancements in treating hemophilia don't mean much to Billy
Stonecipher, a bright, blue-eyed 7-year-old.

   After all, Billy's lived a nearly normal life for as long as he's been alive,
even though he was born with the disease, which can sometimes turn a child's
ordinary bumps and sprains into serious medical problems.

   That's because the new hemophilia treatment products that have entered the
Atlanta area market have made infusions safer than ever before.

   "They bring a great deal of mental release to people, if you think about
parents with young children who have watched their brothers and fathers die of
hepatitis or HIV," said Trish Dominic, executive director of Hemophilia of
Georgia. "But the cost has risen as the products have improved --- each time a
new product comes out, the price goes up."

   Treatments are safer because doctors and researchers have removed the need
for human blood in transfusions, nearly eliminating the risk of HIV and
hepatitis, Dominic said. But at the same time, the cost of medical care
continues to rise, largely because of the high-tech gene splicing used to make
"pure" treatments.

   For now, though, Billy doesn't have to worry about life-threatening viruses
or getting a job that pays him enough so he can afford quality medications. He
can run down the hall, make snow angels in his gravel driveway, play baseball at
his Decatur home and jump up on the doctor's table at an Emory University
hemophilia treatment clinic.

   During a recent trip to the Emory clinic, Billy wore a blue jacket with
soccer balls, footballs and basketballs on it, even though he's not allowed to
play football or soccer for fear of injury.

   "Sometimes I do something and it gets twisted," Billy said, referring to the
bumps that can cause bleeding in his joints. "I feel like I can't walk or
something. I can just tell."

   Most of the time, however, normal boyhood nicks and cuts don't cause a
problem. Dr. Thomas Abshire said that's a result of the new hemophilia
medications.

   "There's that peace of mind --- they (hemophilia patients) know they're
getting the best possible product," said Abshire, director of Emory University's
hemophilia program. "It certainly has a theoretical benefit."

   An estimated 500 hemophiliacs live in Georgia, and 18,000 in the United
States, Dominic said. In addition to being careful not to injure themselves,
hemophiliacs in the past had to be careful to make sure their doctors were
cognizant of blood supplies. In the early 1980s, when HIV --- the virus that
causes AIDS --- struck the United States, it took many thousands of human blood
donors to make one batch of the protein hemophiliacs need to prevent internal
bleeding, Dominic said. Because even one blood donor with HIV could contaminate
the entire batch, hemophilia patients ran a high risk of catching the deadly
virus.

   Since then, blood supplies have become safer because scientists have
eliminated most of the human blood used in treatments. Instead, they use cells
from hamsters that have been injected with Factor VIII, a human protein that
stops internal bleeding.

   But hemophiliacs still face obstacles.

   Older and cheaper medications are being phased out from pharmacies, requiring
patients to buy the new products, which can be far more expensive.

   Without insurance, a hemophiliac who needs frequent treatments could spend
between $ 70,000 and $ 100,000 a year, Dominic said. For someone like Billy, who
has a somewhat mild case of hemophilia, a single joint bleed could cost about $
1,600.

   "The cost has risen as the products have improved," Dominic said. Because of
this, she said, hemophiliacs need to have good, reliable insurance.

   Since fall, older, cheaper medications (brand names Bioclate, Recombinate and
Kogenate) have been getting phased out. One of the new treatments on the market
is Helixate FS, which theoretically is safer, but is also more expensive. A
competitor product, Refacto, was released in the Atlanta area Monday.

   Eventually, drug companies and researchers hope to find a genetic cure for
hemophilia, said Joseph Pugliese, general manager of a medication distribution
company.

   "The ideal end point from a patient perspective is successful implementation
of gene therapy that would cure you of hemophilia," Pugliese said. "Clearly, if
you could just go in and have a gene injected into your body that would produce
enough Factor VIII . . . and never have to worry about it again, that would be
ideal. We're probably some ways away from that, but we're making progress."

GRAPHIC: Photo
Dr. Thomas Abshire, director of Emory University's hemophilia program, examines
7-year-old Billy Stonecipher, who was born with the disease.   / CURTIS COMPTON
/ Staff

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2001


                             2004 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           February 1, 2001 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: METRO; Part B; Metro Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1200 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE FILE / AN EXPLORATION OF ISSUES AND TRENDS AFFECTING SCIENCE,
MEDICINE AND THE ENVIRONMENT;
A FIGHT WITH MANY WINNERS;
WHEN THEIR CHILD WAS DIAGNOSED WITH A GENETIC ILLNESS, MARK AND JEANNE DANT
RAISED MORE THAN $1 MILLION FOR RESEARCH. ONE OF THE SCIENTISTS THEY FUNDED
DEVELOPED AN ENZYME REPLACEMENT THAT HAS DRAMATICALLY HELPED THEIR SON.

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   How much difference can one set of parents make when their child is diagnosed
with a fatal genetic illness? In the case of Ryan Dant, all the difference in
the world.

   Ryan was an apparently healthy 4-year-old undergoing a preschool physical
when his doctor noticed that his liver was enlarged. A trip to Children's
Medical Center in Dallas revealed that the boy had Hurler/Scheie syndrome, a
devastating disease in which his body was missing a crucial enzyme for
processing sugar polymers. Physicians said Ryan would be lucky to survive until
age 10.

   Initially, Ryan's course was all downhill. Although he loved baseball, by age
5 he had difficulty holding a bat. His father gave him a bat and gloves equipped
with Velcro. When Ryan got a hit, he would race to first base with the bat still
stuck to his gloves.

   By age 9, his hands were too stiff to swing a bat and he couldn't fully
extend his arms. His father would drive out of his way to avoid parks, so Ryan
wouldn't see other children playing ball. Ryan would get severe headaches, vomit
and pass out, sleeping for 18 hours or longer.

   But while Ryan was deteriorating, his parents--police detective Mark and
airline reservationist Jeanne--were energized, as was the small town of
Carrollton, Texas, where they lived.

   Working late into the night, the Dants organized golf tournaments, bake sales
and fund-raising drives that ultimately raised more than $ 1 million for
research into the disorder.

   That's not unusual. Many parents of afflicted children undertake similar
efforts. But what sets the Dants apart is that their efforts had an immediate
effect--and that Ryan was one of the first to benefit from their hard work.

   For while they were raising money, a young researcher at Harbor/UCLA Medical
Center, Dr. Emil Kakkis, had encountered a funding crisis in his efforts to
develop a therapy for the disorder. His goal was to artificially replace the
enzyme that children like Ryan were missing. "We had a lot of information that
this would work, but we couldn't move much further ahead for lack of money,"
Kakkis said.

   Mark Dant eventually heard about Kakkis' research and began supporting it.
"They funded us and got us moving in the direction of making it work," Kakkis
said.

   Two weeks ago, Kakkis and his colleagues reported in the New England Journal
of Medicine that the replacement therapy was highly successful in 10 children
and young adults with Hurler/Scheie. The Food and Drug Administration is
requiring a clinical trial of the treatment against a placebo before it will
approve the therapy. That trial is underway and the enzymes could be approved as
soon as next year.

   Ryan was one of the 10 treated, and his improvement has been remarkable, his
father says.

   "Ryan is now a normal, active sixth-grader," Dant said in a telephone
interview. "To look at him, you would have no idea that he has such a serious
genetic disease."

   Disorder Affects 1 in 25,000

   Hurler/Scheie, also called mucopolysaccharidosis-1 or MPS-1, is a disorder of
the metabolism of mucopolysaccharides, long chains of sugar molecules used in
building connective tissues in the body. Children with the disorder--about one
in every 25,000 born in the United States--are missing an enzyme called
alpha-L-iduronidase that breaks down mucopolysaccharides.

   The improperly cleaved sugar polymers build up in tissues throughout the
body, enlarging and producing severe damage in the kidneys, liver, brain and
heart. Connective tissue is also damaged, making movement difficult.

   MPS-1 is divided into three broad groups, depending on the severity of the
symptoms. Children who are severely disabled, both mentally and physically, have
Hurler syndrome, named after Dr. Gertrud Hurler, who first described it in 1919.
Those who have normal intelligence and mild symptoms and who live into adulthood
have Scheie syndrome, first observed by ophthalmologist Hank Scheie (pronounced
Shay) in 1962. "It took a while to realize that they were actually forms of the
same disease," said Dr. Elizabeth Neufeld of UCLA.

   And those like Ryan, who have normal or near-normal intelligence, but more
severe symptoms, are said to have Hurler/Scheie syndrome.

   The only current treatment for MPS-1 is a bone marrow transplant, and that is
used primarily for Hurler patients younger than 2 when the disease is diagnosed,
said Dr. Chester Whitley of the University of Minnesota. If the transplant is
delayed until after brain damage has occurred, he said, there is little point in
performing it.

   Transplants are rarely performed in patients with Hurler/Scheie or Scheie
because the side effects and the relatively high mortality rate outweigh the
benefits, he added.

   The idea of using enzyme replacement therapy for genetic diseases such as
Hurler/Scheie has been around for a long time, "but we despaired of ever going
to clinical trials because it costs a lot of money," said Neufeld, who
discovered the mutated gene that causes MPS-1.

   Money from the Ryan Dant Foundation got Kakkis through some key early
testing. At that point, BioMarin Pharmaceuticals of Novato stepped in to provide
the additional $ 6 million needed for further testing.

   BioMarin thinks it can make a small profit on the enzyme, even though the
potential number of patients is small and the cost will be about $ 100,000 per
patient per year, said Kakkis, who is now a BioMarin vice president.

   Perhaps more important, MPS-1 represents a demonstration of the feasibility
of treating a variety of genetic diseases in which patients are missing key
enzymes. "The model is there now," Neufeld said. "Enzyme replacement can work.
These rare diseases are now going to be treated."

   Other researchers, meanwhile, are looking at alternative approaches to
therapy, many of them using a mouse model of MPS-1 developed by Neufeld.
Whitley, for example, is attempting to develop gene therapy that would allow the
victim's body to manufacture its own alpha-L-iduronidase. But that effort has
been plagued by the same problem that has afflicted gene therapy for a variety
of diseases--the inability to get sufficient copies of the gene into the patient
to produce enough enzyme to be useful.

   Dr. Pat Chang at McMaster University in Canada has genetically engineered a
line of laboratory-grown cells to produce the enzyme. The capsule protects the
cells from the recipient's immune system, so that any type of cell can be used.

   Chang has successfully treated MPS-1 in mice and dogs by implanting the
capsules in muscle, and may begin studies in humans this year.

   Ryan Dant, meanwhile, has undergone a marked change since he started the
weekly infusions of alpha-L-iduronidase three years ago. After the second
treatment, "he was standing naked in front of a mirror and was able to tell that
his stomach had gotten flatter," Mark Dant said. After eight weeks, his liver
and spleen were back to normal size.

   Today, Ryan has grown four inches and gained 30 pounds. "He has started
talking again about getting a driver's license, getting dates, and what college
he will attend," Dant said. "He has the same dreams as people without the
illness, and now he has a chance to realize them."

   *

   Maugh can be reached at thomas.maugh@latimes.com.

GRAPHIC:  (2 photos) Ryan and Mark Dant enjoy a basketball game and Ryan stands
and applauds, right. Ryan, 12, who has Hurler/Scheie syndrome, has thrived since
getting enzyme replacement therapy.  PHOTOGRAPHER: JOHN FREILICH / For the Times

 Dr. Elizabeth Neufeld of UCLA discovered mutated gene that causes Hurler/Scheie
syndrome and other MPS-1 disorders.  PHOTOGRAPHER: KEN HIVELY / Los Angeles
Times

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2001


                             2005 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   January 31, 2001, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 856 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY;
COMPANIES QUESTION FDA DISCLOSURE RULES CHANGE WOULD OPEN DATA ON GENE THERAPY,
TRANSPLANTS

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Biotechnology companies planning to conduct gene therapy and animal-to-human
transplants are questioning new regulations that require them to provide more
details about their tests and immediate public notification of side effects.

   The proposed regulations from the US Food and Drug Administration are
designed to balance patient advocates' call for more public disclosure of
controversial gene therapy trials with biotech companies' desire to keeping data
confidential for competitive reasons.

      The FDA said the new rules will provide public access, through the
Internet, to a gene therapy clinical trial's design and safety parameters but
without confidential personal information about the participants.

   In a gene therapy trial, where copies of normal genes are used to replace or
offset malfunctioning genes in a patient, researchers would have to publish the
criteria for choosing participants, precisely what is being tested, and any
serious side effects.

   The same rules apply to xenotransplantation, the use of live cells, tissues,
or organs from animals that are transplanted into humans.

   The public has 90 days to submit comments on the proposed new rules. After
that, the FDA will issue the final regulations. But companies have already begun
expressing their opposition.

   "There seems to be a lot more politics than science in these rules," said
Michael Astrue, chairman of the Massachusetts Biotechnology Council and general
counsel at Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., both in Cambridge. Astrue called the
rules "horribly unfair."

   But consumer advocates praise the FDA change as a necessary and long-overdue
way to help ailing Amercians make better decisions before participating in
medical experiments like controversial gene therapy clinical trials.

   "The real fact about gene therapy is that scientists and the companies
sponsoring these studies know no one is being cured, yet the public is clamoring
to become involved," said Abby Myers, executive director of the National
Organization for Rare Diseases in New Fairfield, Conn. "But new technologies are
evolving, so to earn the public's trust will require more reassurance and
disclosure."

   Released earlier this month, the new FDA rules were sparked by the 1999 death
of Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year old from Tucson.

   His death from a liver disorder stemming from the failed gene therapy
treatment led to the discovery that many researchers were not following
guidelines by the National Institutes of Health. The government funding agency
requires scientists to immediately report so-called adverse events, such as
deaths, life-threatening episodes by participants, and significant changes in
patients' health.

   Last February, gene therapy programs at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in
Brighton were abruptly halted after federal regulators charged Dr. Jeffrey M.
Isner with lapses in reporting two patient deaths and using medically ineligible
patients.

   These incidents prompted an outcry for more public disclosure to the National
Institutes of Health. The agency oversees gene therapy and xenotransplantation
studies conducted with federal funds.

   And while the FDA decides whether scientists can try experimental therapies,
participants are supposed to receive consent forms detailing all the potential
risks. However, until now, the FDA rules permit companies to withhold details of
gene therapy trials because they are considered commercially important trade
secrets.

   The new FDA rules will require more public access to ongoing gene therapy and
xenotransplantation clinical results.

   "Both of the technologies hold great promise, but they may also pose a remote
but unique risk to the individuals who have volunteered to participate in these
types of studies," FDA commissioner Jane E. Henney said in a statement. "Our
proposal will ensure that the public is fully informed as we investigate these
new public health opportunities and challenges."

   Not everyone agrees. Some biotech companies maintain the new rules will lead
to confusion over whether a study is truly unsafe and potential misunderstanding
of whether a participant's side effects were due to the underlying diseases or
the gene therapy.

   And some companies maintain the rules will impact their businesses unfairly.

   "If our entire clinical design is out in the public domain, along with
individual results, it means that competitors can watch what we are doing,
design their own systems, and get around what we have worked so hard for," said
Julia Greenstein, president of Imerge BioTherapeutics Inc. of Charlestown, a
recently formed joint venture between her former employer, BioTransplant Inc.,
and Novartis Pharma AG.

   Imerge is focused on providing swine-based cell tissues and organs that can
be transplanted into humans and provide a lifeline for people waiting for organ
transplants. And while initial clinical trials are still several years away,
Greenstein said she understands the need for public debate as well as business
confidentiality.

   "Frankly, the new rules are not very clear," she added.

   Ronald Rosenberg can be reached by e-mail at rosenberg@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2001


                             2006 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                    JANUARY 29, 2001, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 639 words

HEADLINE: Demand Outpaces Drug Development;

Pharmaceutical firms race to catch up

SOURCE: Boston Globe

BYLINE: Naomi Aoki

BODY:
First, the good news: Scientific advances and regulatory changes in recent years
have created an environment of innovation in the pharmaceutical and biotech
industries that is "nothing short of remarkable," according to an annual report
released by the Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development.

    Drugs for devastating illnesses such as AIDS, cancer, and respiratory
disease are reaching patients much faster than was possible a decade ago. In
some cases, companies and regulators have shaved years off the development and
approval of breakthrough treatments.

    Now, the bad news: The pace of innovation -- remarkable though it may be --
still can't keep up with the increasingly demanding business of drug discovery
and development, the report said.

    While treatments for some illnesses reached the market faster, drugs for
heart disease, diabetes and chronic pain, among others, did not. Research and
development costs increased. Biotech products, once considered quicker to
develop than traditional pharmaceuticals, are no longer winning the race to
market.

    And, Kenneth Kaitin, the Tufts center's director, said lawmakers are likely
to reverse some of the regulatory changes that helped speed drug approvals in
the face of growing public concern over the safety of rapidly approved drugs and
rushed clinical trials.

    To make matters worse, all this is happening at a time when pharmaceutical
companies are coming under increasing pressure from the public to produce lower
priced drugs and from investors to turn out an ever-steadier stream of
blockbuster drugs.

    "The pharmaceutical and biotech industries realize they are heading into
difficult territory," Kaitin said. "They are trying to achieve efficiency
through better technologies, improved recruiting of patients for clinical
trials, and by streamlining research. But the overall time it takes to get
products to market is somewhat out of the industry's control."

    Before 1992, when Congress passed an act allowing the US Food and Drug
Administration to charge companies an application fee to help fund additional
resources, it could take three or four years for the agency to complete a review
of a new drug.

    Drugs developed by American companies were often approved for use in Europe
and Asia before passing regulatory muster in the United States, Kaitin said. But
faced with the AIDS epidemic and other serious medical conditions, public
perception of what constituted an acceptable amount of risk shifted.

    With the regulatory changes in 1992 and subsequent changes in 1997, the FDA
pledged to decrease the review process from three or four years to a single year
for standard applications and to six months for applications given priority
status.

    The changes encouraged more FDA involvement in the designing of clinical
studies to help companies shorten the time it takes to develop a drug and help
the agency learn about the drug before the formal review process began.

    Kaitin said the changes were enormously successful in speeding review times.
But he believes that the public is beginning to question whether safety is being
jeopardized in the rush to get drugs to market.

    Some complications are inevitable even under stringent review, Kaitin said.
But events such as the recall of the diabetes drug Rezulin due to unforeseen
side effects and the death of a young man participating in a gene-therapy trial
contributed to the changing perception, he said.

    "Certainly, the shift is going to put additional pressure on industry,"
Kaitin said. "If it goes back to the old days in early 1980s, when we were the
last industrialized country to get new medicines, that would be a mistake. But
it's up to the public to determine where the balance should be set."

    And the drug industry will have to adjust to meet those demands, Kaitin
said.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2001


                             2007 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2001 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                            January 28, 2001, Sunday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 036

LENGTH: 275 words

HEADLINE: GENE FIND IS RAY OF HOPE FOR KIDS WITH RARE ILLNESS

BYLINE: JESSICA GRAHAM

BODY:

   New York families with children afflicted with a rare genetic disease are
cheering the discovery of the gene that causes the illness.

   Scientists say one in 30 Ashkenazi Jews carries the gene for familial
dysautonomia, a disorder that strikes the autonomic and nervous systems,
impairing swallowing, breathing, heart beat and sensations.

   For Steve Kietz, 42, the scientific breakthrough - announced last week by
researchers at Massachusetts General Hospital - means his son Josh, 9, who
suffers from FD, might one day be cured.

   "For Josh, we all dream of genetic therapy," said Kietz, who lives in
Syosset, L.I.

   "Finding the gene was our only hope."

   Josh cannot swallow food and must receive all his nutrients through a feeding
tube connected directly to his stomach.

   Children with the disease struggle with a variety of physical disorders which
can also cause social and learning problems.

   Many also suffer from chronic respiratory infections that can cause death.

   When the disease was discovered in the 1950s, only 50 percent of those with
FD lived past the age of five. In recent years, early diagnoses and medical
advances have improved the quality of life of children afflicted, with half
living past the age of 30.

   Though only 500 people worldwide suffer from FD, a small group of families
has galvanized much of the genetic research and innovations in treatment,
through fund raising and advocacy.

   "I think this is going to open up new ways of approaching treatment and give
new hope to the individuals who are affected," said Dr. Felicia Axelrod,
director of the Dysautonomia Treatment and Evaluation Center at NYU.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2001


                             2008 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 The Sunday Oregonian
                              The Sunday Oregonian

                    January 28, 2001 Sunday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. D03, Community Voices

LENGTH: 1262 words

HEADLINE: GET ECOTEAMS BACK ON TRACK

BODY:

   A slew of recent articles in The Oregonian points to an impending energy
crisis in the Northwest.

   Perhaps it's time to resurrect Portland's Sustainable Lifestyle Campaign.
This effort, through its EcoTeam Program, helped thousands of Portland residents
make environmentally friendly changes, including energy conservation in their
homes.

   Nationwide, EcoTeam participants report cutting their energy consumption by
up to 17 percent, using up to a third less water, sending up to 51 percent less
garbage to landfills and using up to 20 percent less fuel for transportation.

   Funding for Portland's Sustainable Lifestyle Campaign was cut last year.
Mayor Vera Katz and the City Council should take a farsighted and proactive step
and bring back the EcoTeam program.

   MARIE SHERLOCK

   Northeast Portland

   Open minds to biomedical study

   I read the letters in The Sunday Oregonian Jan. 21 from various people about
genetic and other animal research and found myself becoming angered at the
closed-mindedness. I admit that 10 years ago, as a member of PETA, I would have
written one of those letters. But after watching my father, a vibrant, strong
and wonderful 62-year-old man, die from brain cancer in less than nine months,
my views radically changed. I have asked myself, "Is there a cure to this
devastating form of cancer?"

   I agree that vivisection and unnecessary animal research is wrong, but gene
mapping, genetic engineering and gene therapy hold great promise for many body
and mind disorders. It is time to put aside political agendas and
self-righteousness and open our minds to the fact that biomedical research is
for the greater good of humankind.

   DAVID JOCZ

   Lake Oswego

   Make slow lane for bikes, cars

   Robert Balmer's excellent commentary ["The three transportation me's -- or
how I rule the road," Jan. 23] illustrates what all of us who bicycle know: We
don't mix well with either pedestrians or cars. Of course, cars and pedestrians
don't mix well with each other either, but the city infrastructure is designed
to accommodate that. Pedestrians have their sidewalks, and cars have the
streets.

   The city is making a valiant effort to fit us late-coming bicyclists into the
mix with bike lanes and trails. However, completely separating us from the other
users will probably never be feasible.

   My modest proposal would be to dispense with all the effort of carving out
bike lanes. Simply designate the rightmost lane of every multilane street as a
low-speed travel lane -- happily shared by bicyclists, electric wheelchairs,
skateboarders and the occasional car driver searching for a parking space or
trying to read street signs. That and separated low-speed freeway lanes would
accommodate any possible future transport mix.

   BRENT BOLTON

   Southeast Portland

   Killing is either wrong, or not

   In regard to the recent quote in the Metro section ["Oregon abortion
opponents rally," Jan. 22], Ken Wilson is wrong in saying, "Today we have a
president who understands that killing a living human being is wrong."

   President Bush, it seems, is quite fond of killing. Look at his history of
state-sanctioned murder in Texas. If killing is wrong, then killing is wrong.
Logically it cannot be unacceptable to kill babies and acceptable to kill
criminals, because they are both "living human beings."

   JERED BOGLI

   Northeast Portland

   Jackson no longer fit to lead

   When Jim Bakker and Jimmy Swaggert committed their wrongdoing, it was on the
front page of many newspapers. They were held accountable for their actions, as
well they should have been.

   Should we forgive both of these people? Of course, but most of us will never
forget what they have done or look to them for moral leadership again.

   By the same token, Jesse Jackson should relinquish any leadership positions
that he holds at this time ["Jesse Jackson admits affair, child," Jan. 18]. He
has wronged not only his family and the woman who had his child, but many
millions of people who trusted him. I no longer believe that he should preach to
anyone but instead should bow his head and ask forgiveness from all who followed
him and most importantly from God.

   BOB BUMPAS

   Beaverton

   Proven ability deserves chance

   A lot of time and money is well-spent helping the disabled to find a
productive place in life and to help them take pride in their accomplishments.
What if the disabled were all given a limit to which they could succeed because
of a law? What makes someone with all limbs intact decide what can or cannot be
done by someone they do not know?

   Every disability and every person is unique. Since Scott Cook lost his arm at
the age of five, he has had more than 35 years to prove his abilities and has
had an "impeccable driving record" for at least 18 years ["One-armed truck
driver fights federal rule that takes him off the road," Jan. 20]. Why don't the
authorities make exceptions for such people?

   BRENDA GOODALL

   Northeast Portland

   Closed minds threaten schools

   In your editorial "Progressive policing" [Jan. 18], you point out several
benefits of a college education, including "widened horizons" and "a degree of
open-mindedness."

   Those virtues are under attack in the Oregon Legislature. Rep. Betsy Close,
R-Albany, has sponsored HB2478, which would "prohibit state universities from
requiring students to complete courses not related to the degrees they seek," as
well as HB2480, which forces the schools "to give options to students who want
an alternative to required courses because of moral beliefs" ["Bill Watch," The
Oregonian, Jan. 17].

   Distribution requirements have been part of higher education from its
inception. Allowing students to shy away from challenges to their moral beliefs
is contrary to the most basic notion of education. We must defend ourselves
against such blatant, closed-minded attacks on our already beleaguered state
schools.

   JEFFERSON RANCK

   Northeast Portland Bush vs. African Americans

   To convince young black men that they should support George Bush, Deroy
Murdock cites Bush's Social Security privatization plan ["What Bush should do to
win over black voters," Jan. 5]. Murdock says a black man born in 1990 is
expected to live 64 years, so he will not benefit from Social Security payments
that start at age 67.

   A compassionate conservative would view this as a health care problem, not a
retirement problem. Efforts could then be made to provide equal health care for
all ethnic groups and for people of all income levels.

   A compassionate conservative president who recognizes and tries to help
fulfill basic needs of all Americans would be enthusiastically supported by
people of all colors.

   BARBARA SKORNEY

   Southeast Portland

   Coverage of protests poor

   I was deeply disappointed and mildly outraged at two headlines in your Jan.
21 inauguration section: "Protesters hurl insults, bottles at Bush" and "None
injured in explosion close to Portland protests." Both titles reduce major
newsworthy events of active, thoughtful citizens engaging in deeply meaningful
and largely peaceful protests to seemingly random, chaotic and meaningless
phenomena.

   In your article on the Washington, D.C., protests you twice mention the eggs
and bottles thrown at the presidential motorcade. In the sidebar article on the
Portland protest you go into details of a plastic-bottle explosion not clearly
linked to the protests.

   Is this what you, The Oregonian's staff, feel is significant in the largest
inaugural protests in 30 years?

   You show your biases too clearly!

   SHAMU FENYVESI

   Southeast Portland

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2001


                             2009 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            January 28, 2001 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: BOOK WORLD; Pg. T7

LENGTH: 831 words

HEADLINE: The Codebreakers

BYLINE: Reviewed by Robin Marantz Henig

BODY:

   CRACKING THE GENOME

   Inside the Race to Unlock Human DNA

   By Kevin Davies

   Free Press. 288 pp. $ 25

   All the year-end lists agree that the biggest scientific event of 2000 was
the sequencing of the human genome. When President Bill Clinton announced last
June that scientists had succeeded in "learning the language in which God
created life," the discovery was hailed as the most significant achievement
since the Apollo moon landing -- or, in more lyrical accounts, a Bach sonata, a
Shakespearean sonnet or the invention of the wheel.

    But despite the high-minded language that characterized the White House
press conference, the two scientists who stood up with the president that
morning had spent the previous few years embroiled in a public feud based not
only on a hearty dislike for each other, but also on an honest disagreement
about the best way to uncover the chemical libretto for all the DNA in every
human being. The "race" that ensued between these men and the two perspectives
they represented -- Francis Collins of the National Institutes of Health in
Bethesda, Md., on the government side, Craig Venter of Celera Genomics in
Rockville, Md., on the side of the entrepreneur -- almost overshadowed the
science itself. But it sure made for some good reading.

    Now it's time to get behind the headlines about races and feuds. As with so
many subjects, the quick version in newspaper stories will include at least a
few inevitable mistakes, caused by deadline pressures and reporters' tendency to
depend on their favorite sources. And so it remains for book authors --
journalists with the luxury of time -- to offer readers a more measured and (one
hopes) a more accurate account. This is especially important when the subject is
human genes, because our ability to understand and manipulate them can change
our very definition of who we are.

    This context-setting is the best part of Cracking the Code. Kevin Davies, a
PhD geneticist and founding editor of Nature Genetics, gives a clear summary of
the first 150 years of genetics, and of how our emerging understanding of the
human genome will affect such disparate fields as evolutionary biology, cancer
prevention, gene therapy and anthropology. He also shows how the animosity
between Collins and Venter boils down to a scientific disagreement about how
genome sequencing should be done, as well as a cultural disagreement about how
the information should be dispersed. Thus a juicy quote from Venter, who calls
the NIH approach "putting humanity in a Waring blender and coming up with a
patchwork quilt"; and a juicier quote from Collins, who derides Celera's speedy
output as the "Cliffs Notes version of the genome."

    But Davies has higher aspirations than mere explication; he wants to
generate a few fireworks of his own. He says his goal in writing this book --
the first one out of the gate in what is certain to be a slew of them on this
sexy topic -- is "to capture the excitement, intrigue, mystery and majesty of
the quest for biology's holy grail." In this, he is much less successful. In his
drive to get his book out before the others, Davies has apparently chosen a
shortcut: rewriting what has already been written, rather than spending time
observing and interviewing the scientists themselves. He is, sad to say, not the
first journalist to do so. Interviews require a lot of wasted and redundant
effort: travel to places you've already been, questions whose answers you
already know. It's far more efficient, when you're facing a six-month book
deadline, to collect masses of information from the pages of newspapers,
Science, Nature, Discover and a few popular books, and to use quotes from them
as though they were perfectly true.

    But by restating these accounts as gospel -- even with his careful
footnotes, 46 pages' worth, giving citations for every single fact, quote and
opinion -- Davies is doing little more than repeating easy stereotypes and
shallow explanations. Journalism has been called the first, rough draft of
history, and it does not serve history well to take those first drafts and
enshrine them between hard covers.

    In addition, the sense of excitement is dissipated in a book that gets its
heart and soul from papers instead of people. Davies did interview a few
scientists, according to his footnotes -- a total of 10 by my count, mostly last
June and July -- but they were only those on the periphery, not the major
players with the most to win and lose. Perhaps the major players denied him
interviews, hoping to tell the real inside story in books of their own. But
whatever the explanation, the result is a well-written but bloodless book about
a lively and passionate scientific romp, with little of the sense of immediacy
that such a narrative demands. *

   Robin Marantz Henig is the author of "The Monk in the Garden: The Lost and
Found Genius of Gregor Mendel." She has a fellowship from the Alicia Patterson
Foundation to study the history of American science writing.

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2001


                             2010 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    January 26, 2001, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 431 words

HEADLINE: COUPLE DONATE $1M TO GENE THERAPY PROGRAM THEY BACK DOCTOR AT ST.
ELIZABETH'S PENALIZED BY FDA

BYLINE: By Anne Barnard, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   A Milton couple has donated $1 million to support gene therapy programs at
St. Elizabeth's Medical Center, nearly a year after federal regulators shut down
Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner's experiments at the Brighton hospital amid allegations
that he failed to protect patients adequately.

   The hospital hopes that the gift from Jack and Mary Shaughnessy, longtime
friends of Isner's, will help it rebound from the controversy and signal
confidence in gene therapy, a field shaken by investigations into deaths at St.
Elizabeth's and the University of Pennsylvania.

      "It comes at a really critical time, allowing us to move forward in this
field that shows so much promise," said Maria E. Foley, a hospital spokeswoman.

   In a statement released by the hospital, Isner called the donation "an
outstanding endorsement of clinical research in gene transfer in general, and at
St. Elizabeth's in particular."

   But Susan Darke, whose husband Roger, 59, died while participating in one of
the trials, reacted with mixed feelings, saying, "My only concern is that the
FDA makes sure there are better guidelines" to protect patients.

   She said that she would like to see future clinical trials explained to
patients by a third party "with nothing to gain," adding, "I'm not pooh-poohing
something that could help people eventually."

   Last February, the Food and Drug Administration accused Isner of lapses in
reporting patient deaths and admitting medically ineligible patients to the
trials. Isner disputed most of the allegations and argued that his record, two
deaths out of 45 chronically ill patients, was sound.

   In November, the FDA allowed him to resume one study, funded by Genzyme
Corp., to regrow blood vessels in the legs of patients with arterial disease.
The rest remain suspended.

   Foley said the hospital hopes to reach agreement with the FDA soon on a
suspended study, which involves replacing coronary vessels.

   But the controversy is beside the point for Mary Shaughnessy, 68, who made
the donation with her husband, Jack.

   "He would rebound no matter what, he's so intelligent," she said of Isner,
who trained as a resident with her doctor. "I've got my own opinion about the
FDA."

   She said she learned of Isner's work because they have been friends "for
years."

   As a retired physical therapist, she said, "I find [gene therapy] very
fascinating."

   Her husband is president of Shaughnessy & Ahern Co. of South Boston, a
transportation company. The couple have also been regular donors to Carney
Hospital, where he is a trustee, and other Catholic institutions.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2001


                             2011 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2001 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       January 26, 2001 Friday 2D EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. D-16

LENGTH: 851 words

HEADLINE: Groups join forces to battle gene-therapy cheats

BYLINE: By Stephen Wilson, The Associated Press,

BODY:

   LONDON - In today's high-tech world of doping, the drug  cheaters usually are
a step ahead of the drug testers. This time,  the testers are determined to
seize the upper hand.

   World doping experts and Olympic officials are joining forces  with the
scientific community to stay ahead in what many believe  will be the next
frontier in performance-enhancement - genetic  manipulation.

   A special conference on the potential misuse of gene therapy  by athletes
will be held Sept. 23-26 in Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.,  officials told The
Associated Press on Thursday.

   About 30 sports administrators, drug testers, geneticists and  other experts
will meet in private workshops to consider ways of  heading off the use of gene
transfers for improving strength and  endurance.

   The initiative is spearheaded by the World Anti-Doping  Agency, a 2-year-old
body coordinating a global campaign against  the use of banned drugs in sports.

   The International Olympic Committee, which also has been  monitoring
developments in gene therapy, had planned to organize  its own conference on the
issue this year. But with WADA taking  the lead, the IOC is looking to merge
efforts with the agency.

   'The geneticist doesn't know a lot about the world of  athletics, and the
world of athletics doesn't know what is  happening in the gene therapy world,'
said Theodore Friedmann, one  of the world's leading experts on gene therapy and
a member of  WADA's medical research committee.

   'This is an opportunity for both camps to bring themselves up  to date on the
state of the art and what the potential dangers are  in athletics through
genetic manipulation.'

   Major advancements have been made recently in the field of  gene therapy,
which involves injecting the body with new genes  that produce therapeutic
proteins meant to block disease.

   The technique - still in the experimental stage - is designed  to treat, cure
or prevent disease. But, in this win-at-all-cost  age, authorities fear some
people will try to use gene therapy for  securing a competitive edge on the
playing field.

   'There was always a concern that techniques for introducing  genes to correct
disease might also be techniques to manipulate  other human traits,' said
Friedmann, director of the gene therapy  program at the University of
California-San Diego. 'It finally  dawned on a lot of people that the technique
was maturing rapidly  that might allow the introduction of genes to enhance
athletic  ability.'

   Two of the most commonly used banned drugs in sport are  erythropoietin, or
EPO, a synthetic hormone that stimulates  production of oxygen-carrying red
blood cells, and human growth  hormone, which builds muscle and strength.

   A combined blood-urine test for EPO was introduced at the  Sydney Olympics,
but researchers are still trying to develop a  foolproof stand-alone test. No
test for growth hormone has been  approved.

   Experts believe EPO and growth hormone could be targets for  gene-therapy
misuse.

   Athletes and their doctors have exploited medicine and  science to improve
performance and beat drug testing for decades.  So officials assume that
cheaters are at work trying to take  advantage of genetic research.

   'I am pretty sure that just as the case with steroids and  other therapies
when they came along, there are groups looking for  new ways to enhance
performance,' said Arne Ljungqvist, track's  doping chief and head of WADA's
research panel. 'We can't be  naive. We must be realistic.'

   The IOC and other sports bodies have often been criticized  for being slow or
reluctant to fight doping. By moving now on gene  therapy, Olympic officials
believe they can gain the advantage.

   'We have to be ahead for once, rather than trying to catch up  when it's too
late,' Ljungqvist said.

   Johann Olav Koss, a former Norwegian speedskater who serves  as an athletes'
representative on the IOC and WADA, said there is  no time to lose.

   'We should be very aggressive to prevent any form of genetic  enhancement,'
he said. 'We have to do this in the early stages  before any athlete starts
using this. We need to act quickly to  define the rules. I don't think sport has
anything to benefit from  having genetically enhanced athletes. This is not only
an issue  for sport, it's a broad ethical issue for human beings.'

   IOC medical director Patrick Schamasch said the sports  movement must
collaborate with pharmaceutical manufacturers  involved in gene therapy to stay
ahead of the game.

   'As soon as a new technology is introduced, I'm sure people  think about how
it can be misused,' he said. 'I'm confident there  are people working on this
bad aspect.'

   As modern science develops, including the possibility of  human cloning,
virtually nothing can be ruled out in the race to  produce the perfect athlete.

   'This is what was described by Orwell,' Schamasch said,  referring to '1984,'
a book by George Orwell. 'We really are now  in the age of Big Brother.'

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2001


                             2012 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            January 26, 2001 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Part D; Sports Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 656 words

HEADLINE: NEWSWIRE;
FRENCH REPORT LINKS CREATINE TO CANCER

BYLINE: From Staff and Wire Reports

BODY:

   Officials with France's Food Safety Agency linked the sports supplement
creatine to a potential risk of cancer and urged it be listed as a banned
substance.

   The report on the agency's Web site said that potential risks associated with
taking creatine were "currently insufficiently evaluated," and that the product
was of little benefit to athletes hoping to improve their performance.

   Creatine is an amino acid produced naturally by the liver and kidneys and
stored in muscles. Athletes take creatine supplements to gain extra energy,
train longer and bulk up.

   *

   World doping experts and Olympic officials will hold a special conference on
the potential misuse of gene therapy by athletes Sept. 23-26 in Cold Spring
Harbor, N.Y., officials said.

   Colleges

   The State Gaming Commission lifted a long-standing ban on gambling on Nevada
college sports teams Thursday.

   The move was criticized immediately by an official with the NCAA.

   "They've expanded college sports wagering," said Bill Saum, director of the
NCAA's agent and gambling activities office in Indianapolis. "They actually went
the opposite direction we were hoping for."

   The Gaming Commission's new rules mean that for the first time since the
1950s betting will be allowed on games played by Nevada Las Vegas and the
University of Nevada, and on games played by other college teams in Nevada.

   The commission also added a new category, illegal sports bettors, to the
"notorious or unsavory" section of the gambling industry's "black book" of
people banned in Nevada casinos.

   It didn't limit the size of bets that a bettor can place on college games,
but set a $ 3,000 reporting threshold and ordered casinos to identify and report
any unusual wagers by individuals or groups.

   Florida State Coach Bobby Bowden wants to promote his youngest son, Jeff, to
offensive coordinator, but the school's president says it could violate the
university's nepotism rule. Sandy D'Alemberte never has waived the policy since
becoming president in January 1994. . . . Youngstown State picked defensive
coordinator Jon Heacock to take over as coach after Jim Tressel's departure to
coach Ohio State.

   Jurisprudence

   Mark Ingram, the former NFL receiver who was arrested carrying $ 3,290 in
counterfeit money, recently brought $ 11,000 in fake bills from New York and
needed help passing it, said a car theft suspect arrested with him in Miami.

   Miami-Dade County Judge Murray Klein set $ 10,000 bond but ordered Ingram,
who played for four NFL teams from 1987 to 1996, to be detained for an initial
court appearance today on the federal charge.

   The teenager who accused Mark Chmura of assaulting her at a party later told
a friend she had sex against her will with the former NFL player, the friend
said Thursday. "She said it was not consensual in any way. She said it hurt,"
the 18-year-old woman said during the first day of testimony in Chmura's sexual
assault trial in Waukesha, Wis. Chmura, 31, has pleaded not guilty to
third-degree sexual assault and child enticement, both felonies.

   Miscellany

   Defender Mike Petke, a Major League Soccer all-star last season, signed a
multiyear contract with the league and will remain with the New York-New Jersey
MetroStars.

   MLS signed two 16-year-olds for its Project-40 player development program,
Edward Johnson of Palm Coast, Fla., and Santino Quaranta, of Baltimore, who at
16 years, four months, is the youngest ever to join the league.

   Former World Boxing Council heavyweight champion Tim Witherspoon, 43, has
been scratched from a 10-round fight Saturday after being injured in a traffic
accident.

   Yevgeny Plushchenko of Russia hit his unique quad-triple-double combination
and another quad toe to defend his European Figure Skating title at Bratislava,
Slovakia.

   Sweden's Anna-Karin Kammerling lowered her world record in the women's
50-meter butterfly short-course event with a winning time of 25.36 seconds at a
FINA World Cup meet at Stockholm.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2001


                             2013 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            January 26, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 995 words

HEADLINE: Charles Merieux, 94, Vaccine Producer, Dies

BYLINE:  By SAVANNAH WARING WALKER

BODY:

   Charles Merieux, a virologist whose visionary understanding of mass vaccine
cultivation and disease-fighting logistics turned a relatively modest family
microbiology laboratory into an international engine for public health, died
Saturday in Lyon, France, his hometown. He was 94.

        Among the immunizations Dr. Merieux's company mass-produced, beginning
in the late 1950's, were two used to fight polio around the world: Jonas Salk's
injectable vaccine of denatured virus and Albert Sabin's oral one of weakened
live virus. The Institut Merieux, allying itself with various scientific
partners over the years, refined and cultivated vaccines against rabies,
rubella, diphtheria, tetanus and other diseases, becoming a powerhouse in
preventive medicine for humans.

    But the doctor had his first success in cows, just after World War II,
working on an inoculation against foot-and-mouth disease and understanding that
the key was to grow it in vitro rather than in vivo -- that is, in a glass
container rather than in a live animal.

   "He had seen the light," said Dr. Marc Girard, scientific director of the
Lyon-based European Center for Immunovirological Research, a new branch of the
Merieux organization similar to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
in the United States. "He knew success was in industrialization," Dr. Girard
added.

   That knowledge led to huge victories in battles against viral epidemics --
notably a 1974 meningitis outbreak in Brazil that killed 4,000 people in its
first few weeks. The Merieux laboratory had previously isolated the relevant
meningitis strain in Africa, but vaccine had yet to be created in quantity when
the Brazilian health minister called Dr. Merieux for help.

   "This was in July," said Dr. Girard, 64, "and all of France goes on vacation
in August. But he told his staff, no vacation this year, you stay, we're
building a factory to inoculate all of Brazil."

   "They produced 100 million doses, inoculating 90 million people in six
months," Dr. Girard said, adding that the epidemic was brought under control.

   Charles Merieux studied medicine in Lyon but never intended a career in the
family laboratory. It was his elder brother, Jean, who joined forces with their
father, Marcel, and who was meant to succeed him in the business, founded in
1897. But Jean died from a meningitis infection contracted in the laboratory,
Dr. Girard said, and "Charles was faithful to his father."

   Like his father, who had studied under Emile Roux, a scientific collaborator
of Louis Pasteur, Charles enrolled at the Institut Pasteur. Wartime work at a
blood transfusion center for the Resistance focused him on building France's
blood product industry. He would have pursued that interest, said Dr. Girard,
but after being granted a visa to the United States to observe its blood product
system he found himself thwarted back in France.

   "Politicians forbade profit from human blood," said Dr. Girard. The state
claimed control over the developing industry.

   Veterinary medicine -- specifically a foot-and-mouth vaccine -- came to
absorb Dr. Merieux instead. The early method of cultivating the foot-and-mouth
virus was to apply it to the tongue of a live cow and harvest the multiplied
cells from the resulting virus pustules. But the work was laborious and produced
only small amounts of usable virus. So Dr. Merieux found a more efficient way:
harvesting the cow tongues and mincing them to create a growth medium that could
produce virus on an industrial scale.

   The next step was to apply the technique to human health. The Salk vaccine,
cultivated in minced kidney tissue taken from monkeys, provided the perfect
opportunity.

   Dr. Merieux went on to collaborate on vaccine projects with scientists
including Dr. Hilary Koprowski, a virologist with whom he introduced a new
rabies vaccine for humans.

   Dr. Koprowski, now a professor of microbiology and immunology at Thomas
Jefferson University in Philadelphia, explained that Pasteur's original vaccine
was cultivated in animal brain tissue, which is less safe as a medium than other
organ tissues. It also required 14 injections in the skin of the belly.

   "At one point in the United States," Dr. Koprowski said, "there was no human
vaccine for rabies because they had stopped producing it."

   The two men avoided brain tissue and ended up with a purified, safer virus
and a more efficient, less painful inoculation procedure.

   "He had an uncanny feeling of what is important in vaccination science," Dr.
Koprowski said of his colleague, "in both human and animal medicine."

   That feeling was what led Dr. Merieux beyond the vaccines themselves, into
the complex mechanisms for delivering them to large numbers of people. He was
fascinated with what Dr. Girard called vaccinology: "that it is not enough to
manufacture the vaccine, without addressing all the logistical problems
surrounding vaccination."

   To that end, in the early 1980's, he started a training organization,
Bioforce Developpement, to prepare professionals for public health emergencies,
especially in third world countries.

   Around the same time, a family property near Annecy called Pensieres was
turned into an epidemiological teaching center -- to inculcate an understanding
of vaccinology in doctors and researchers, Dr. Girard said. The center's first
annual course was carried out in collaboration with the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention.

   By then the French pharmaceuticals giant Rhone-Poulenc had a controlling
interest in the Merieux vaccine production company; in 1994 the acquisition was
completed. In addition to the teaching, training, vaccine making and high-risk
virus research performed at Dr. Girard's center, the Merieux name has moved into
gene therapy through Dr. Merieux's son Alain, the chairman of Transgene, based
in Strasbourg.

   Dr. Merieux is also survived by his daughter, Nicole de Beublain; 11
grandchildren and 18 great-grandchildren. A second son, Jean, died in a car
crash three years ago.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Charles Merieux in 1970. (Camera Press)

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2001


                             2014 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JANUARY 26, 2001 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1119 words

HEADLINE: PENN TEAM FINDS CLUE TO GENE-DRUG DEATH MONKEY TESTS SHOW THE PROTEIN
COAT OF A DISARMED VIRUS MAY BE WHAT LED TO THE DEATH OF JESSE GELSINGER IN
1999.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Scientists at the University of Pennsylvania believe they have discovered
what triggered the massive immune-system response that killed Jesse Gelsinger,
18, in a gene-therapy experiment at Penn in 1999.

   The culprit, the Penn team has found, appears to be the protein coat of the
disarmed cold virus, known as adenovirus, that was used to shuttle new genes
into Gelsinger's liver.

   James M. Wilson, director of Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy,
declined comment on the studies, based on recent experiments with monkeys, until
they are published in a medical journal.

   But the findings were confirmed by scientists who heard Wilson present them
at the Keystone Symposium, a closed-door medical meeting Jan. 6-12 in Snowbird,
Utah, that drew several hundred gene-therapy researchers.

   "He did a nice piece of detective work and made an extremely important
observation," said Jeffrey S. Chamberlain, a gene-therapy researcher at the
University of Washington. "It's a safety feature that we now have to look at."

   Alan Milstein, an attorney representing Gelsinger's family, lamented that it
took someone's death to determine the safety issues involved in Wilson's human
trial.

   "What Dr. Wilson also seems to have confirmed is that this clinical trial
should never have been approved [by government and university officials] and
started," he said.

   Another scientist, who declined to be identified by name, described Wilson's
explanation as intelligent, but said it begged the question of why his team did
not conduct similar tests to determine what killed two monkeys injected with a
related gene drug before Gelsinger's death.

   "Did we need this death [Gelsinger's] to figure out this hypersensitivity?"
the university researcher asked. "If you had a dose that killed a monkey, would
you still have a human trial unless you understood what killed the monkey?"

   In November, Penn agreed to pay an undisclosed sum to settle a suit brought
by Gelsinger's family. After the death, the Food and Drug Administration shut
down other human gene-therapy trials sponsored by Wilson's institute. Wilson
himself is now confronting an FDA threat to prohibit him from ever conducting
another human trial in the United States.

   One key piece of the government's case against Wilson is that he waited
nearly a year to inform the FDA about the deaths of two monkeys given a gene
drug similar to the one that Gelsinger got. Had the agency known of those
deaths, its officials say, they likely would have stopped the human trial.

   Wilson, who remains head of Penn's once-prestigious institute, is challenging
the FDA's latest charges against him.

   In previous statements, he has argued that the 1998 monkey deaths occurred as
part of a different trial than the one in which Gelsinger was enrolled and that
the gene drug used in humans was different from the one used in the monkeys.

   Gelsinger, who suffered from a mild form of an inherited liver disorder, died
four days after getting high doses of the experimental gene drug injected
directly into his liver.

   Preliminary tests conducted by the Penn scientists last year showed that
Gelsinger had a massive immune-system reaction to the gene drug, which caused a
blood-clotting problem and led to organ failure.

   But exactly what started that fatal chain of events was never clear.

   To find out, Wilson, in his latest experiments, injected mice and monkeys
with high doses of a gene medicine similar to the one given Gelsinger. He tagged
the medicine with a fluorescent dye so he could follow where the adenovirus went
in the animals' bodies.

   Most of it, he found, was quickly soaked up by macrophages, the immune-system
cells that form the body's first line of defense against foreign invaders such
as viruses. The macrophages, in turn, set off signaling proteins that activate
the entire immune system.

   Mice showed no ill effects in the experiments, according to scientists who
heard Wilson's presentation.

   But within 24 hours, Wilson's team found, monkeys injected with high doses of
the adenoviral vector began bleeding into their skin - a sign that their immune
systems had begun to destroy the factors that cause blood to clot.

   That was the same blood-coagulation problem that had been identified in
Gelsinger after he got the gene drug.

   Even when Wilson's team killed the adenovirus, thus destroying its genes, the
virus still set off an immediate and massive immune response in the monkeys.
Because of that, the Penn scientists believe that it is the surface proteins of
the virus, rather than the genes inside, that triggered the immune reaction.

   If so, that may raise questions about the safety of a new generation of
adenoviral vectors being developed after the Gelsinger death as a safer
alternative.

   In the new approach, adenoviruses are stripped of their viral genes, but the
gene product to be delivered by the adenovirus is still encapsulated in coat
protein from the virus. These are called "gutted" adenoviruses.

   "If you give huge amounts [of gutted adenoviral vector], it may be a
problem," said Donald Kohn, a pediatrician and gene-therapy researcher at the
University of Southern California.

   So far, no gutted adenoviral vectors have gone into humans.

   But GenStar Therapeutics, a San Diego biotech company, will soon begin using
gutted adenovirus in a human gene-therapy trial for people suffering from severe
hemophilia A.

   The trial, to begin in a few weeks, will enroll nine patients who will get
intravenous doses of the gene drug, said Robert Sobol, chief executive officer.

   Sobol said yesterday that trial had been reviewed by the federal government's
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, an arm of the National Institutes of Health,
and by the FDA.

   "In our own studies, in nonhuman primates, there were no ill effects seen of
any kind," Sobol said. "The gutted adenovirus vectors can be safely administered
at the doses we plan to use in the clinic."

   The doses used in Wilson's experiment were much higher than those to be used
in the hemophilia experiment.

   Despite Wilson's latest findings, there is still a key unanswered question
about Gelsinger's death: why he died, when the patient who preceded him - who
also got the same high dose of gene drug - did not. Scientists said the Penn
team was still investigating that question.

   Several scientists applauded Wilson for his "courage" in presenting his
latest data.

   "He has an amazing ability to compartmentalize this and remain objective
about it and emphasize what we can learn from it," said Joseph Glorioso,
chairman of the department of molecular genetics and biochemistry at the
University of Pittsburgh.

   Huntly Collins' e-mail address is hcollins@phillynews.com

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             2015 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    January 26, 2001, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. B-8

LENGTH: 1044 words

HEADLINE: U PENN SCIENTISTS DISCOVER REASON FOR DEATH OF GENE-THERAPY TEEN

BYLINE: HUNTLY COLLINS, KNIGHT RIDDER NEWSPAPERS

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA --

BODY:


   Scientists at the University of Pennsylvania believe they have discovered
what triggered the massive immune-system response that killed Jesse Gelsinger,
18, in a gene-therapy experiment at Penn in 1999.

   The culprit, the Penn team has found, appears to be the protein coat of the
disarmed cold virus, known as adenovirus, that was used to shuttle new genes
into Gelsinger's liver.

   The findings identify a previously unrecognized problem that scientists say
may help ensure the safety of future gene-therapy experiments. They are based on
recent experiments with monkeys.

   James M. Wilson, director of Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy,
declined comment on the results of his new monkey studies until they are
published in a medical journal.

   But the findings were confirmed by other scientists who heard Wilson present
them at the Keystone Symposium, a closed-door medical meeting held Jan. 6-12 in
Snowbird, Utah, that drew several hundred gene therapy researchers.

   "He did a nice piece of detective work and made an extremely important
observation," said Jeffrey S. Chamberlain, a gene-therapy researcher and
neurology professor at the University of Washington. "It's a safety feature that
we now have to look at."

   Another scientist, who declined to be named, described Wilson's explanation
as intelligent, but said it begged the question of why his team didn't conduct
similar animal tests to determine what killed two monkeys injected with a
similar gene-drug prior to Gelsinger's death.

   "Did we need this death [Gelsinger's] to figure out this hypersensivity?" the
university researcher asked. "If you had a dose that killed a monkey, would you
still have a human trial unless you understood what killed the monkey?"

   Alan Milstein, an attorney representing Gelsinger's family, also lamented
that it took a boy's death to determine the safety issues involved in Wilson's
human trial.

   "What Dr. Wilson also seems to have confirmed is that this clinical trial
should never have been approved [by government and university officials] and
started," Milstein said.

   In November, Penn agreed to pay an undisclosed sum to settle a suit brought
by Gelsinger's family. In the wake of the death, the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration shut down other human gene therapy trials sponsored by Wilson's
institute. Wilson himself is now confronting an FDA threat to prohibit him from
ever conducting another human trial in the United States.

   One key piece of the government's case against Wilson is that he waited
nearly a year to inform the FDA about the deaths of two monkeys given a gene
drug similar to the one that Gelsinger got. Had the agency known of those
deaths, its officials say, they likely would have stopped the human trial.

   Wilson, who remains as head of Penn's once prestigious institute, is
challenging the FDA's latest charges against him.

   In previous statements, he has argued that the 1998 monkey deaths occurred as
part of a different trial than the one in which Gelsinger was enrolled and that
the gene-drug used in humans was different from the one used in the monkeys.

   Gelsinger, who suffered from a mild form of an inherited liver disorder, died
four days after getting high doses of the experimental gene drug injected
directly into his liver.

   Preliminary tests conducted by the Penn scientists last year showed that
Gelsinger had a massive immune-system reaction to the gene drug, which caused a
blood clotting problem and led to organ failure.

   But exactly what started that fatal chain of events was never clear.

   To find out, Wilson, in his latest experiments, injected mice and monkeys
with high doses of a gene medicine similar to the one given Gelsinger. He tagged
the medicine with a fluorescent dye so he could follow where the adenovirus went
in the animals' bodies.

   Most of it, he found, was quickly soaked up by macrophages, the immune-system
cells that form the body's first line of defense against foreign invaders such
as viruses. The macrophages, in turn, set off signaling proteins that turn on
the entire immune system.

   Mice showed no ill effects in the experiments, according to scientists who
heard Wilson's presentation.

   But within 24 hours, Wilson's team found, monkeys injected with high doses of
the adenoviral vector began bleeding into their skin -- a sign that their immune
systems had begun to destroy the factors that cause blood to clot.

   That was the same blood coagulation problem that had been identified in
Gelsinger after he got the gene drug.

   Even when Wilson's team killed the adenovirus, thus destroying its genes, the
virus still set off an immediate and massive immune response in the monkeys.
Because of that, the Penn scientists believe that it's the surface proteins of
the virus, rather than the genes inside, that triggered the immune reaction.

   If so, that may raise questions about the safety of a new generation of
adenoviral vectors being developed in the wake of the Gelsinger death as a safer
alternative.

   In the new approach, adenoviruses are stripped of their viral genes, but the
gene product to be delivered by the adenovirus is still encapsulated in coat
protein from the virus. These are called "gutted" adeno viruses.

   "If you give huge amounts [of gutted adenoviral vector], it may be a
problem," said Donald Kohn, a pediatrician and gene-therapy researcher at the
University of Southern California.

   So far, no gutted adenoviral vectors have gone into humans.

   The doses used in Wilson's experiment were much higher than those to be used
in a hemophilia experiment to be conducted by GenStar Therapeutics, a San Diego
biotech company, in the next few weeks. GenStar will soon begin using gutted
adenovirus in a human gene-therapy trial for people suffering from severe
hemophilia A.

   Despite Wilson's latest findings, there is still one key unanswered question
about Gelsinger's death. Why did he die, but not the patient who preceded him --
who also got the same high dose of gene drug. Scientists said the Penn team is
still investigating that question.

   Several scientists applauded Wilson for his "courage" in presenting his
latest data despite widespread criticism over the trial in which Gelsinger was
enrolled.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2001


                             2016 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 26, 2001, Friday

SECTION: OPINION;Pg. B-7

LENGTH: 1060 words

HEADLINE: Human genome; Promises and pitfalls of the eighth wonder of the world

BYLINE: Ethan Bier; Bier is professor of biology at the University of California
San Diego and author of "The Coiled Spring: How Life Begins." (Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press, 2000).

BODY:
 In the next few weeks, two scientific journals will announce the publication of
two historic papers that mark the beginning of the age of the genome.  It is a
singularly important time in the history of the biological sciences, because the
two papers outline for the first time the complete sequence of the human genome
-- what I call the Eighth Wonder of the World.

   The genome sequences of several other experimentally important organisms such
as fruit flies, worms, and -- last month, that of the mustard plant Arabidopsis
-- have also been completed and that of the mouse is not far behind.

   Comparing the completed genome sequence to one of the Seven Wonders of the
World is justified in two respects.

   First, deciphering the 3 billion units -- or bases -- of heredity making up
the human genetic blueprint, which amounts to a book 12 stories high, required a
monumental amount of organized hard work, as did building the pyramids of Egypt
or the Great Wall of China.

   Second, because of its intrinsic lasting importance in unlocking many secrets
about human biology, the genome sequence is destined to be the most enduring of
the human wonders.

   The human genome DNA sequence data represents an elaborate code consisting of
about 40,000 words -- or genes.  Until recently, biologists have tended to study
one gene at a time, since identifying them and determining how they interact
with a small number of other genes has been a challenge.  These small groups of
genes often are involved in a common biological process and carry out a sequence
of linear steps in the synthesis of small molecules like those involved in
energy production or in transmission of signals between cells.

   Now that the entire human genome is sequenced, it has become possible, at
least in principle, to study the interactions of all genes with each other at
once.  This dramatic expansion of experimental horizons opens up an entirely new
era of biological science and also opens a Pandora's box of new ethical
concerns.

   For example, it will be possible in the relatively near future to perform
prenatal genetic screens that test for the more than 5,000 human disorders known
to have a genetic basis.  On the surface, this seems like a good thing.
However, it is not too difficult to imagine where such a technology might lead.
As an example of what is currently possible, consider a recent case involving
two parents who are carriers for Marfan's syndrome, a genetic disorder that
affects the body's connective tissues resulting in excessive bone elongation,
which recent forensics indicate afflicted Abraham Lincoln.

   The couple used in vitro fertilization to generate eight embryos.  These
embryos were then individually tested to find out whether they had two bad
copies of the Marfan's gene and have the disease, one bad copy and one good copy
of the gene (that is, be carriers of the disease, like the parents), or two good
copies of the gene (be free of the disease).

   The tests determined that three embryos were entirely free of the bad copy of
the gene.  These embryos were then implanted into the mother and two of them
took and developed successfully.  The couple has permanently eliminated this
disease from their lineage.  The age of eugenics has dawned.

   In principle, as we learn more and more about how genes control various human
traits, it should be possible to hand select embryos for in vitro fertilization
with genes endowing offspring with prime health, longevity, physical prowess and
low risk for substance-abuse problems.

   If you are still OK with this, how about controlling other characteristics
such as appearance, intelligence, aggression or docility, and other aspects of
personality?  Sooner or later, these types of eugenics questions will make
nearly everyone uncomfortable or apoplectic.

   Consider also a related question: Should your insurance company or your
employer have access to your DNA sequence?  Where should lines be drawn to limit
potential excesses and who should we entrust to draw them?

   Consider also the questions that will be raised by another important emerging
health technology: gene-replacement therapy.  The great promise of this
technology has recently been realized by successfully curing "bubble babies" of
their severe form of immune deficiency.

   While some misuses of this nascent technology have had devastating
consequences, it is clear that with proper regulation gene therapy will become
one of the most powerful tools of future medicine.  But there also are some very
disturbing eugenics issues surrounding gene-replacement technology.  The key
technical elements now exist for changing any human gene at will in an embryonic
human cell line and making cloned humans from that altered cell.  This type of
genetic manipulation is done routinely in mice today and only ethical barriers
stand in the way of applying this technology to humans.  Will these barriers
erode with time?

   In spite of these ethical challenges, the avalanche of genome data will
clearly provide scientists and society with a plethora of benefits.  Many
technical possibilities which are now in the realm of science fiction will very
likely become realities within the next 50 years.  It will become routine to
prescreen human embryos for all genetically based diseases, select for various
other desired traits, and ultimately to alter the human genetic makeup.

   If we go down this inevitable road, there will be many other important
ethical and social issues to consider along the way.  In addition, there is the
greater question we must consider if we are to use genomic information to screen
embryos for "desirable" traits.

   If a consensus view develops regarding the optimal human genome and if
eugenics-based efforts to eliminate undesirable traits become common, what will
happen to human biodiversity?

   Loss of biodiversity not only would be a tragedy to our multiple faces as a
people, but also just as great a risk as a genetically homogenous strain of
crops, vulnerable to the spread of deadly infectious agents.  At the moment, one
of the greatest brakes on the spread of contagious diseases is our genetic
diversity.  Whatever path we take, this must not be lost.

   Now that we are in possession of the complete human genome sequence, we hold
the blueprint to our future.  The question is: What do we want it to be?


GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; TIM FOLEY

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2001


                             2017 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 26, 2001 Friday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. B-7

LENGTH: 1047 words

HEADLINE: Human genome;
Promises and pitfalls of the eighth wonder of the world

BYLINE: Ethan Bier, Bier is professor of biology at the University of California
San Diego and author of "The Coiled Spring: How Life Begins." (Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press, 2000).

BODY:

   In the next few weeks, two scientific journals will announce the publication
of two historic papers that mark the beginning of the age of the genome.

   It is a singularly important time in the history of the biological sciences,
because the two papers outline for the first time the complete sequence of the
human genome -- what I call the Eighth Wonder of the World. The genome sequences
of several other experimentally important organisms such as fruit flies, worms,
and -- last month, that of the mustard plant Arabidopsis -- have also been
completed and that of the mouse is not far behind. Comparing the completed
genome sequence to one of the Seven Wonders of the World is justified in two
respects. First, deciphering the 3 billion units -- or bases -- of heredity
making up the human genetic blueprint, which amounts to a book 12 stories high,
required a monumental amount of organized hard work, as did building the
pyramids of Egypt or the Great Wall of China. Second, because of its intrinsic
lasting importance in unlocking many secrets about human biology, the genome
sequence is destined to be the most enduring of the human wonders. The human
genome DNA sequence data represents an elaborate code consisting of about 40,000
words -- or genes.

   Until recently, biologists have tended to study one gene at a time, since
identifying them and determining how they interact with a small number of other
genes has been a challenge. These small groups of genes often are involved in a
common biological process and carry out a sequence of linear steps in the
synthesis of small molecules like those involved in energy production or in
transmission of signals between cells. Now that the entire human genome is
sequenced, it has become possible, at least in principle, to study the
interactions of all genes with each other at once.

   This dramatic expansion of experimental horizons opens up an entirely new era
of biological science and also opens a Pandora's box of new ethical concerns.
For example, it will be possible in the relatively near future to perform
prenatal genetic screens that test for the more than 5,000 human disorders known
to have a genetic basis.

   On the surface, this seems like a good thing.

   However, it is not too difficult to imagine where such a technology might
lead.

   As an example of what is currently possible, consider a recent case involving
two parents who are carriers for Marfan's syndrome, a genetic disorder that
affects the body's connective tissues resulting in excessive bone elongation,
which recent forensics indicate afflicted Abraham Lincoln. The couple used in
vitro fertilization to generate eight embryos.

   These embryos were then individually tested to find out whether they had two
bad copies of the Marfan's gene and have the disease, one bad copy and one good
copy of the gene (that is, be carriers of the disease, like the parents), or two
good copies of the gene (be free of the disease). The tests determined that
three embryos were entirely free of the bad copy of the gene.

   These embryos were then implanted into the mother and two of them took and
developed successfully.

   The couple has permanently eliminated this disease from their lineage.

   The age of eugenics has dawned. In principle, as we learn more and more about
how genes control various human traits, it should be possible to hand select
embryos for in vitro fertilization with genes endowing offspring with prime
health, longevity, physical prowess and low risk for substance-abuse problems.
If you are still OK with this, how about controlling other characteristics such
as appearance, intelligence, aggression or docility, and other aspects of
personality?

   Sooner or later, these types of eugenics questions will make nearly everyone
uncomfortable or apoplectic. Consider also a related question: Should your
insurance company or your employer have access to your DNA sequence?

   Where should lines be drawn to limit potential excesses and who should we
entrust to draw them? Consider also the questions that will be raised by another
important emerging health technology: gene-replacement therapy.

   The great promise of this technology has recently been realized by
successfully curing "bubble babies" of their severe form of immune deficiency.
While some misuses of this nascent technology have had devastating consequences,
it is clear that with proper regulation gene therapy will become one of the most
powerful tools of future medicine.

   But there also are some very disturbing eugenics issues surrounding
gene-replacement technology.

   The key technical elements now exist for changing any human gene at will in
an embryonic human cell line and making cloned humans from that altered cell.

   This type of genetic manipulation is done routinely in mice today and only
ethical barriers stand in the way of applying this technology to humans.

   Will these barriers erode with time? In spite of these ethical challenges,
the avalanche of genome data will clearly provide scientists and society with a
plethora of benefits.

   Many technical possibilities which are now in the realm of science fiction
will very likely become realities within the next 50 years.

   It will become routine to prescreen human embryos for all genetically based
diseases, select for various other desired traits, and ultimately to alter the
human genetic makeup. If we go down this inevitable road, there will be many
other important ethical and social issues to consider along the way.

   In addition, there is the greater question we must consider if we are to use
genomic information to screen embryos for "desirable" traits. If a consensus
view develops regarding the optimal human genome and if eugenics-based efforts
to eliminate undesirable traits become common, what will happen to human
biodiversity? Loss of biodiversity not only would be a tragedy to our multiple
faces as a people, but also just as great a risk as a genetically homogenous
strain of crops, vulnerable to the spread of deadly infectious agents.

   At the moment, one of the greatest brakes on the spread of contagious
diseases is our genetic diversity.

   Whatever path we take, this must not be lost. Now that we are in possession
of the complete human genome sequence, we hold the blueprint to our future.

   The question is: What do we want it to be?

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; PHOTOBY: TIM FOLEY

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             2018 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                January 26, 2001, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A11

LENGTH: 838 words

HEADLINE: ALTERING ANDI: GENETIC ENGINEERING GETS A (SMALL) STEP CLOSER TO
HUMANS

BYLINE: George JohnsonRESEARCH; DNA; GENETICS; BIOENGINEERING

BODY:


   Two weeks ago in the journal Science, Dr. Gerald Schatten and a team of
researchers at Oregon Health Sciences University reported the first successful
genetic engineering of a primate, a baby rhesus monkey whose name - ANDi -
stands for "inserted DNA" spelled backwards.

   ANDi received worldwide attention, with stories in all major newspapers. I
suspect a lot of the attention had to do with the fact that we humans are also
primates. Apes and monkeys like ANDi are our close cousins. If their genes are
now being successfully engineered, then human genetic engineering is likely not
far off.

   For this reason, the creation of the world's first genetically-modified
primate seems a key scientific advance. Lest anyone miss the point, Schatten was
quoted by The Associated Press as saying, "I think we're at an extraordinary
moment in the history of humans."

Are we? I don't buy it.

   The approach used to introduce a novel gene into ANDi's chromosomes was
developed over a quarter century ago by researchers studying mice. The gene to
be transferred is first introduced into a noninfectious virus that will serve as
a piggyback carrier - sort of like putting a package in a mail truck.

   Using a very fine needle, a solution containing the engineered virus is
carefully injected into an unfertilized egg. The virus moves through the
interior of the egg cell into the nucleus, where it inserts itself - and the
gene it carries - into one of the chromosomes.

   The gene is now part of the egg's genetic endowment. When the egg is
fertilized by a sperm, divides to form an embryo, and eventually gives rise to
an adult, every cell of that adult will possess the introduced gene.

   As a simple and sexy way to demonstrate that the procedure has worked,
researchers often select for the experiment a jellyfish gene that makes a
protein that glows under a fluorescent light. However, several decades of using
this approach with mice and rabbits has revealed two serious drawbacks:

   * It isn't safe. The virus enters the host chromosome just any old place, and
the gene into which it inserts itself is usually damaged. Imagine inserting a
phrase from Shakespeare into a line of code in a computer program. Said simply,
the approach causes mutations, and so almost certainly could cause cancer.

   * The introduced genes don't work. While the genes do get into egg DNA, they
are usually silenced and inactive. The cells contain the new gene but do not use
it to make proteins.

   Schatten used this traditional approach in his successful attempt to ge
netically modify a rhesus monkey.

   First, 224 monkey eggs were mixed with a virus carrying a jellyfish gene. The
eggs were then fertilized. From them, the researchers were eventually able to
obtain 126 embryos. They selected 40 of these, and implanted them in females.
This resulted in five pregnancies and three live births. One of these, ANDi, had
the added jellyfish gene, a permanent change in his hereditary information that
will be passed down to future generations.

   Did ANDi's tissues glow in fluorescent light? Nope. As a mouse researcher
might have predicted, the added jellyfish gene didn't work. The only way
Schatten knew he had succeeded in adding a gene to ANDi's chromosomes was by
using a very sensitive method called the polymerase chain reaction to detect the
jellyfish gene's presence in cheek, hair, urine, placenta and blood. He seems
not to have checked sperm.

   So a critic might argue with some force that all Schatten has done is to show
that a traditional approach that is unsatisfactory in mice is also
unsatisfactory in monkeys.

   Make no mistake: This sort of experiment will eventually be made to work.  It
presents many of the same challenges as gene therapy, only targeted at
reproductive tissue. The new kinds of gene-carrying viruses being used in gene
therapy today, targeted to safe places on the chromosome, seem a promising bet.

   But even if we can modify the genes of primates, should we? The only
justification I can imagine is that it will allow researchers to study human
diseases in a way that otherwise would not be possible.

   However, I am not at all sure that introducing a human "disease" gene into a
monkey in this way will improve the study of the disease. The method only leads
to animals with added genes, while most human hereditary diseases result from
missing or mutated genes. There are other ways to disable specific genes in
monkeys, if researchers want to study disease-causing genes.

   I find the ethical issues associated with animal research particularly
difficult in this case. Absent a clear advantage to using primates, by what
right do we condemn ANDi or any other primate to a life of disease?

   I cannot get from my mind the film of Jane Goodall's chimps, "Children of the
Forest." These wild African apes are not "just another animal." They are our
biological cousins, living a rich family life, supporting and loving each other
much as we do. It is a close kinship I feel uncomfortable ignoring.

NOTES:
George Johnson is a biology professor at Washington University.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2001


                             2019 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            January 26, 2001 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E4

LENGTH: 471 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF

BODY:

   * Varsity Group, the Washington-based seller of textbooks online formerly
known as VarsityBooks.com, will appeal its impending delisting from the Nasdaq
National Market. The company's stock has traded below $ 1 a share since
mid-September. It was to be delisted on Monday but said yesterday that it will
appeal, automatically forestalling its removal. Varsity said that it had closed
out a relationship with Sallie Mae, the education financing corporation, through
which Varsity marketed Sallie Mae services to college students.

   * Vastera, a Dulles-based provider of software to help companies manage
international trade, reported a fourth-quarter loss of $ 11.5 million (12 cents
a share), compared with a loss of $ 21.7 million (28 cents) in the year-earlier
period. For the year, the company recorded a loss of $ 9.8 million (60 cents),
compared with a loss of $ 71.7 million in 1999 (78 cents). The company reported
revenue of $ 11 million in the fourth quarter, compared with $ 4.6 million for
the 1999 fourth quarter.

   * GenVec, a Gaithersburg biotechnology firm, said it is ending in July the
research portion of a collaborative agreement with Warner-Lambert, a subsidiary
of New York pharmaceutical giant Pfizer. The companies will continue the
development portion of the agreement, under which Pfizer will continue advanced
human testing of a potential gene-therapy drug to treat two heart conditions.

   * Metrocall, a Alexandria wireless data and messaging company, signed a deal
with InPhonic, a D.C.-based provider of mobile phones and wireless services.
Under the agreement, InPhonic will use Metrocall's wireless network to allow its
enterprise clients to connect with databases and computer systems through
InPhonic-supplied phones.

   * John Buckley was named a corporate vice president for communications at AOL
Time Warner, effective March 12. In this newly created position, Buckley will be
based in the District and act as an adviser to senior management on corporate
positioning and public policy. Buckley, 43, is currently senior vice president
for communications at Fannie Mae.

   * DataZen, a firm that markets business software to communications firms, has
cut 20 workers, or almost one-fourth of its workforce, a dozen of which were
based at the company's Herndon headquarters.

   * OTG Software of Bethesda said its earnings rose to $ 1.6 million (5 cents a
share) in the three months ended Dec. 31, 2000, compared with a profit of $
330,000 (2 cents) in the year-earlier period. The supplier of data-storage
software said revenue for the quarter rose to $ 13.8 million, up 77 percent from
$ 7.8 million for the same period a year earlier.

   * Commerce One last week laid off roughly 150 workers, including about 75 who
were employees of Bethesda-based AppNet, before Commerce One acquired the
company last fall.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2001


                             2020 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

              January 25, 2001, Thursday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 775 words

HEADLINE: Radiation reduces risk of arteries reclogging

BYLINE: WES ALLISON

BODY:


   Two new studies find that radiation fights balloon angioplasty's frustrating
complication.


   Using radiation on the arteries of angioplasty patients can significantly cut
the chances their arteries will clog again, a technique that could vastly
improve the outcomes for thousands of people with heart disease.

   Two studies published in today's New England Journal of Medicine say that
radiation therapy can prevent the buildup of fibrous tissue and muscle in
arteries that have been cleaned by balloon angioplasty.

   Angioplasty to open clogged arteries is performed on some 750,000 Americans
every year, and for some the reclogging of arteries in the months after surgery
is a common and confounding problem.

   "Obviously, it's not going to take care of everybody, but it's going to take
care of a good segment of the population we're having trouble with at this
time," said Dr. Michael D. Williamson, medical director of Morton Plant
Hospital's cardiac catheterization lab, which does about 3,500 angioplasties a
year.

   Next month, Morton Plant aims to become the first hospital in Pinellas
County, and possibly in the Tampa Bay area, to offer the procedure, recently
approved by the Food and Drug Administration for certain cases.

   But experts stressed they also don't know if using radiation may cause cancer
years later, and some patients in one study suffered dangerous blood clots.

   In an editorial accompanying the studies, the FDA urged more research but
said the procedure, called brachytherapy, appears to be "an effective
intervention for reducing the recurrence of obstruction."

   The reclogging of an artery after angioplasty, called restenosis, is like
sand in the gears for cardiac surgeons. For all the advances made in plumbing
and rerouting clogged arteries, restenosis is a common problem with few good
treatments. It typically occurs within the first six months of surgery and
usually is caused by the stretched artery collapsing back on itself, or by a
buildup of fibrous tissue and muscle that form as part of healing.

   Implanting a tiny metal stent, which serves as scaffolding for the artery,
prevents the elastic effect. Stents are used in at least 60 percent of
angioplasties nationally, although local doctors say they use them even more.
Stents do not protect against fibrous buildup in the artery; in fact, they
encourage it. Some 15 percent to 25 percent of angioplasty patients with stents
suffer in-stent restenosis.

   Doctors can reopen the stent with balloons or augers, but if it clogs up
once, there's a 50 percent chance it will clog again. Of more than 20 drugs
tested to treat this problem, not one has worked, the FDA says, so patients must
endure repeated angioplasties or dangerous bypass surgery.

   If not properly treated, clogged arteries or stents can lead to heart attacks
and blood clots.

   In their study, researchers at 12 sites from New York to Cleveland to
California inserted a ribbon of radioactive material into the arteries of 131
patients with recurring in-stent restenosis, then removed the ribbon. An
additional 121 patients were given a placebo.

   Among those treated with radiation, restenosis reoccurred in 28 percent,
compared with 44 percent in the placebo group. The study tested a system made by
Cordis, a Johnson & Johnson subsidiary that paid for the research.

   In the second study, Swiss researchers treated 181 patients who were
undergoing angioplasty for the first time. Once the artery was cleared, a
radioactive coil was inserted for a few minutes, then removed. Just less
one-third of the patients also got stents.

   Six months later, restenosis was found in 15 percent to 29 percent of
patients, depending on the dose of radiation. Among patients who did not have a
stent implanted, just 4 percent at the highest radiation dose suffered a
reclogged artery.

   However, local cardiologists had less praise Wednesday for those findings,
because stents typically work well enough that radiation therapy would not be
worth the expense or the potential risk.

   New treatments, including medicated stents and gene therapy, are expected in
the future and should further lower the chances of restenosis, said Dr. John C.
Dormois, a cardiologist at St. Joseph's Hospital in Tampa and a member of the
board of directors of the American Heart Association.

   "If a procedure can be accomplished that well most of the time, it's hard for
me to imagine . . . this much-more-expensive, much-more-complex,
much-more-extensive procedure at the time of the original angioplasty will be
something we ever do much," he said.

   - Information from the Associated Press was used in this report.


LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2001


                             2021 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   January 24, 2001, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 714 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY / IN THE PIPELINE;
NASDAQ REVISES INDEX, TRIMS NUMBER OF FIRMS

BYLINE: BY NAOMI AOKI and RONALD ROSENBERG

BODY:

   The Nasdaq Biotechnology index, which included more than 200 biomedical
companies, was revised yesterday with stricter rules and less than half the
number of companies.

   Although still an index weighted by market capitalization, representing the
largest and most actively traded biotech stocks on the Nasdaq exchange, it now
consists of only 76 companies. These businesses conduct biomedical research to
find and develop new therapeutics and cures for human diseases, Nasdaq noted.

      Under the revised criteria, all the participating companies' securities
must be listed on the Nasdaq National Market and have a minimum daily stock
price of $10 per share, a market value of at least $200 million, and average
daily trading volume of not less than 100,000 shares.

   The companies' ability to meet these requirements will be reviewed twice a
year.

   Launched in November 1993, the Nasdaq Biotech index has been a bellwether of
biotech stock performance. Last year, it rose 23 percent.

   Of the 76 companies that are part of the revised index, 29 are based in
California and 11 in Massachusetts. Together, they account for about 53 percent
of the biotech stocks in the index.

   Ten of the 11 Bay State companies are in Cambridge: Alkermes Inc., Arqule
Corp., Biogen Inc., Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc., Genzyme Corp., ImmunoGen Corp.,
Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc., Praecis Pharmaceuticals Inc., Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc., and Vertex Pharmaceuticals Inc. The 11th is DUSA Pharmaceuticals
Inc. of Wilmington.

   Two Connecticut companies, Alexion Pharmaceuticals and CuraGen Corp., both of
New Haven, are also part of the index.

   Testing advances for Biogen's MS drug

   Biogen Inc. said its drug Antegren,

   aimed at treating multiple sclerosis and Crohn's disease, passed early-stage
trials and is ready for the final phase of testing generally required before
seeking regulatory approval.

   Antegren, a drug that stalls immune reactions harmful to the body, was
invented by Ireland's Elan Corp. Elan is codeveloping the drug with Biogen.

   The Cambridge company is under pressure to develop new drugs since its
flagship multiple sclerosis medication, Avonex, will be vulnerable to further
competition when it loses US Orphan Drug Act protection in 2003.

   In a six-month trial of 213 multiple sclerosis patients, treatment with
Antegren significantly reduced the flare-ups characteristic of multiple
sclerosis as well as the brain-damaging lesions it causes, the company said.

   Since the drug works by a different mechanism than Avonex, it could be used
either alone or as a combination therapy.

   In a separate trial of 240 patients with moderate to severe Crohn's disease,
an illness that affects the intestinal tract, patients on Antegren showed
improvement in bowel function as compared to those on placebo, or a dummy drug.

   About 1 million people worldwide suffer from MS, and about 300,000 people in
the United States and Europe suffer from moderate to severe Crohn's disease.

   Distributor named for Matritech test

   Matritech Inc. said it struck a $23 million deal that names Timm Medical
Technologies of Minnesota the sole distributor of an office-based version of
Matritech's bladder cancer test.

   Matritech, a Newton company, is developing the urine test for use in a
doctor's office. The version is based on the company's approved laboratory test
for bladder cancer, and will measure a type of protein that is specific to the
cancer.

   The deal hinges on gaining regulatory approval for the new version of the
test. The company said it plans to apply this year to the US Food and Drug
Administration for approval and hopes to begin marketing the test by early 2002.

   Matritech said more than 6,000 of the nation's 8,000 urologists use products
sold by Timm Medical Technologies, making it an ideal distributor for the new
test.

   Studies have shown the approved laboratory version of the test is twice as
accurate in detecting low-grade bladder cancer tumors as conventional screening,
the company said.

   The American Cancer Society estimates that about 54,300 new cases of bladder
cancer will be diagnosed this year in the United States.

   The Newton company is also developing blood and urine tests to detect
prostate, breast, cervical, and colon cancers.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2001


                             2022 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   January 24, 2001, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 731 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY;
INDUSTRY LAGS DRUG DEVELOPMENT DEMAND DESPITE ADVANCES, FIRMS UNDER THE GUN
INDUSTRY STILL LAGS DEMAND FOR DRUG DEVELOPMENT

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   First, the good news: Scientific advances and regulatory changes in recent
years have created an environment of innovation in the pharmaceutical and
biotech industries that is "nothing short of remarkable," according to an annual
report released by the Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development.

   Drugs for devastating illnesses such as AIDS, cancer, and respiratory disease
are reaching patients much faster than was possible a decade ago. In some cases,
companies and regulators have shaved years off the development and approval of
breakthrough treatments.

      Now, the bad news: The pace of innovation - remarkable though it may be -
still can't keep up with the increasingly demanding business of drug discovery
and development, the report said.

   While treatments for some illnesses reached the market faster, drugs for
heart disease, diabetes and chronic pain, among others, did not. Research and
development costs increased. Biotech products, once considered quicker to
develop than traditional pharmaceuticals, are no longer winning the race to
market.

   And, Kenneth Kaitin, the Tufts center's director, said lawmakers are likely
to reverse some of the regulatory changes that helped speed drug approvals in
the face of growing public concern over the safety of rapidly approved drugs and
rushed clinical trials.

   To make matters worse, all this is happening at a time when pharmaceutical
companies are coming under increasing pressure from the public and from
investors to produce lower priced drugs and turn out an ever-steadier stream of
blockbuster drugs.

   "The pharmaceutical and biotech industries realize they are heading into
difficult territory," Kaitin said. "They are trying to achieve efficiency
through better technologies, improved recruiting of patients for clinical
trials, and by streamlining research. But the overall time it takes to get
products to market is somewhat out of the industry's control."

   Before 1992, when Congress passed an act allowing the US Food and Drug
Administration to charge companies an application fee to help fund additional
resources, it could take three or four years for the agency to complete a review
of a new drug.

   Drugs developed by American companies were often approved for use in Europe
and Asia before passing regulatory muster in the United States, Kaitin said. But
faced with the AIDS epidemic and other serious medical conditions, public
perception of what constituted an acceptable amount of risk shifted.

   With the regulatory changes in 1992 and subsequent changes in 1997, the FDA
pledged to decrease the review process from three or four years to a single year
for standard applications and to six months for applications given priority
status.

   The changes encouraged more FDA involvement in the designing of clinical
studies to help companies shorten the time it takes to develop a drug and help
the agency learn about the drug before the formal review process began.

   Kaitin said the changes were enormously successful in speeding review times.
But he believes that the public is beginning to question whether safety is being
jeopardized in the rush to get drugs to market.

   Some complications are inevitable even under stringent review, Kaitin said.
But events such as the recall of the diabetes drug Rezulin due to unforeseen
side effects and the death of a young man participating in a gene-therapy trial
contributed to the changing perception, he said.

   "Certainly, the shift is going to put additional pressure on industry,"
Kaitin said. "If it goes back to the old days in early 1980s, when we were the
last industrialized country to get new medicines, that would be a mistake. But
it's up to the public to determine where the balance should be set."

   And the drug industry will have to adjust to meet those demands, Kaitin said.
Companies will have to continue decreasing the time it takes to develop new
drugs. They will have to weed out failures, far more common than successes,
earlier in the process. They will have to cut costs while increasing the number
of products they bring to market.

   "The industry is going to be changing - through mergers, licensing deals, new
technologies," Kaitin said. "Biotechnology will help open doors to potentially
huge markets for new products. What we're seeing now is an industry in flux."

   Naomi Aoki can be reached by e-mail at naoki@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2001


                             2023 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2001 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                   January 24, 2001 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B01, Medical Research January 2001

LENGTH: 796 words

HEADLINE: OHSU GENE STUDY RAISES SCIENTIFIC, ETHICAL QUESTIONS

SOURCE: OZ HOPKINS KOGLIN of the Oregonian Staff

BODY:

   Summary: The creation of Andi, a genetically modified monkey, has led many
people to ponder the effect it will have on humans

   If scientists can create a genetically modified monkey, how long before they
genetically alter a person?

   That question naturally follows a recent report that scientists at Oregon
Health Sciences University have successfully inserted a green fluorescent
jellyfish gene into the genetic blueprint of a rhesus monkey.

   The primate's genetic proximity to humans and the fact that the scientists
used some reproductive techniques already common in human fertility clinics
raises concerns that introducing various genes into the human genome may not be
far away.

   Furthermore, the OHSU research is a reminder that scientific as well as
serious ethical issues about human genetic manipulation are far from being
resolved, said Courtney Campbell, director of the program for ethics and science
at Oregon State University. And although the OHSU scientists say their technique
should not be used in humans, some people may be interested in modifying eggs
with characteristics that would be passed on from generation to generation, he
said.

   Already babies are being conceived to provide life-saving stem cells for a
sick sibling. In addition, some fertility clinics will allow parents to pick a
baby's gender, and there are techniques for selecting embryos free of a number
of genetic diseases.

   "What's science fiction yesterday is scientific reality today," Campbell
said.

   In the future, scientists may be faced with demands for genetic modification
in humans to cure or prevent disease, but for now, the OHSU technique is seen as
a primitive first step.

   Dr. Gerald Schatten and his colleagues broke new ground when they used a
neutralized virus to transport the foreign jellyfish gene into a monkey egg.
They then fertilized the egg with monkey sperm and implanted it into a surrogate
monkey who gave birth to the monkey named Andi [for injected DNA spelled
backwards] last October.

   In monkeys, the feat was no snap. So at this point, it is unfathomable in
humans. The OHSU scientists started with 224 fertilized monkey eggs. Of the 126
resulting embryos that developed beyond the four-cell stage, 40 were implanted
and five pregnancies developed. Three healthy monkeys were born, but Andi was
the only one to carry the foreign gene.

   The goal of the OHSU experiment was to test a technique that would be an
early step toward breeding monkeys to be used for developing new treatments for
human genetic diseases, such as breast cancer and Alzheimer's disease.

   The OHSU scientists reasoned that given the primate's close kinship to
humans, monkey models could speed up medical advances.

   However, in this experiment, the fluorescent gene was a just a marker to
determine if the OHSU method was effective. As it turned out, the OHSU
scientists confirmed that the foreign gene was incorporated into Andi's DNA, but
the monkey's cells did not have the green glow that would have confirmed that
the gene was functioning. For that reason, some scientists have questioned the
value of the work.

   When the OHSU team's report appeared in the Jan. 12 issue of the journal
Science, an accompanying commentary described the effort as "not quite a glowing
success" and not likely to lead to human models.

   Nevertheless, federal authorities and ethicists are thinking about the
regulatory and ethical issues that would be involved if and when the technique
crosses over to humans.

   Lenore Gelb, a spokeswoman for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, which
now regulates gene therapy, said the agency would not approve any research
involving human sperm or eggs without extensive public discussions. [Gene
therapy attempts to introduce genetic material into the nonreproductive cells of
fully formed people.]

   Campbell said many people are concerned that the OHSU technique might be used
for genetic enhancements -- producing children of a desired height, build,
intelligence or immunity to disease, for example.

   "We just don't know what the impact is going to be of modifying a particular
gene," he said. For example, if scientists had eradicated the sickle cell anemia
gene before they learned that the same gene confers an immunity from malaria for
people of African decent, it might have been a medical disaster.

   Therefore, scientists should not be relied on to solve all the problems
associated with human genetic modification, Campbell said.

   "It is ultimately an ethical question, and we have to decide on which side we
are willing to make an error: the side of caution and not go that direction, or
on the side of let's take our chances," he said.

   You can reach Oz Hopkins Koglin at 503-221-8376 or by e-mail at
ozkoglin@news.oregonian.com.

GRAPHIC: Color photo courtesy of Oregon Health Sciences University

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2001


                             2024 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    January 23, 2001, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 686 words

HEADLINE: RULING ON PATENT INFRINGEMENT CASE SENDS TRANSKARYOTIC'S STOCK
SPIRALING DRUG FIRM TO APPEAL DECISION FOR AMGEN

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   TKTX Transkaryotic Therapies $23.13 -$10.88 $87 $22.50

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.'s shares plunged 32 percent yesterday following
Friday's federal court decision that said its anemia-fighting drug infringed on
three of five patents for Epogen, the top-selling biotech drug from Amgen Inc.

   TKT said it will appeal US District Court Judge William Young's ruling to the
US Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in Washington, D.C. The Appeals
Court is expected to take a year to 18 months to issue its decision.

      "The battle is far, far from over," Richard Selden, TKT's cofounder and
chief executive, said in a conference call with analysts and investors, noting
that half the patent infringement decisions are overturned on appeal. "We are
disappointed by this opinion, but this is only an interim decision."

   The decision prevents Cambridge-based TKT and its partner Aventis SA, the
large French pharmaceutical company, from selling their drug, called Dynepo.

   Victorious Amgen saw its shares rise nearly 13 percent yesterday. Its drug
Epogen, which is used by kidney cancer patients undergoing dialysis, had $4
billion in worldwide revenues last year for Amgen and its licensee, Johnson &
Johnson.

   Shares of Amgen and TKT were very heavily traded yesterday on the Nasdaq
market. TKT, whose stock closed Friday at $34 a share, plunged to half its value
in early trading yesterday, reaching a 52-week low before climbing in the
afternoon. It closed at $23.13 on volume of 6.66 million shares - 30 times the
three-month daily average.

   Amgen, based in Thousand Oaks, Calif., closed at $67.63, up $7.63. With
nearly 55 million shares traded, it was the fourth most active stock on US
markets. However, while TKT shares did not trade Friday evening after the court
decision, Amgen's stock rose as high as $72.75 in after-hours trading before
closing at $60.

   "TKT may appeal, but it doesn't look good for them," said Dennis Harp,
biotech analyst at Deutsche Bank, who along with many Wall Street analysts
forecasted that Amgen would prevail after a four-month trial that ended in
September.

   For Amgen, Young's ruling eliminates the near-term competitive threat to
Epogen. It's also an opportunity to command a price premium on Aranesp, a
second-generation Epogen drug nearing FDA approval, said Alex To, biotech
analyst at Credit Suisse First Boston.

   "We believe this ruling has industrywide implications as it removes a
psychological overhang on biotech stocks and creates a positive near-term
trading psychology," To added.

   But Jonas Alsenas, a general partner at Ing Furman Selz Asset Management in
New York, disagreed. He described Young's decision as "just the end of the first
half of a football game - not the beginning of the fourth quarter."

   "I think Judge Young was overwhelmed by the science, the detail and
complexity and knew the final determination will come from the Federal Circuit
Court," said Alsenas, a TKT supporter.

   Alsenas and some patent attorneys said TKT's appeal could cite a November
ruling by the US Court of Appeals. The ruling narrowed the previously broad
interpretation of patent claims. Amgen's case was based on broad interpretation
of its patents.

   TKT still faces another patent infringement suit, from Genzyme Corp., in US
District Court in Delaware. Both companies are trying to get FDA approval and
Orphan Drug designation for their respective drugs to treat Fabry's disease, a
rare genetic disorder that affects young men.

   Genzyme claims TKT is violating a key patent on Fabry's disease, even though
TKT has never disclosed how it makes its drug, called Replagal.

   While elated over most of Young's decision, Thomas J. DesRosier, Genzyme
senior vice president and chief patent counsel, expressed concern over a portion
of Young's 234-page decision.

   "Judge Young did not go through the traditional and legally required
element-by-element analysis in comparing some of the process claims," DesRosier
said. "He just did a plain reading. I think he wanted to give something to TKT
in a Solomon-like way."

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2001


                             2025 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     January 23, 2001 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 028

LENGTH: 250 words

HEADLINE: Transkaryotic shares tumble 32 percent

BYLINE: By JENNIFER HELDT POWELL

BODY:

   A court ruling that Transkaryotic Therapies infringed on patents held by
biotech giant Amgen Inc. could have positive implications for other large
biotech firms, analysts said yesterday. But it's not clear how it will affect
the sector.

   Transkaryotic shares plunged nearly 32 percent, ending the day at $ 23.13,
down $ 10.88. Amgen shares rose 12.71 percent, ending the day $ 67.63, up $
7.63.

   Shares of other biotechnology companies, including Genzyme Corp., Biogen and
Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc., also rose as the decision bolstered the
confidence in patent protection for some of the industry's most profitable
stocks.

   Transkaryotic, based in Cambridge, planned to market the same protein as
Amgen, but used a different method to produce it. Some feel the decision
indicates that Transkaryotic and others will have a hard time legally trying to
replicate other proteins.

   "If you look at the companies likely to benefit, it's the larger ones like
Biogen and Genzyme," said analyst Bill Tanner, of SG Cowen Securities Corp., in
Boston.

   But the effect on the industry will be minimal, he said. "This removes a
negative perception, but it's not a positive in our opinion."

   Others disagree.

   "Amgen is the bellwether and this (decision) is bullish for the industry in
general," John Borzilleri, manager of the State Street Research Health Sciences
fund told Bloomberg news. "It bodes well for other biotechnology companies
because it will be harder to make generic biotech drugs."

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2001


                             2026 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                 January 23, 2001, Tuesday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 402 words

HEADLINE: THE TICKER STOCKS FALL ON PROFIT-TAKING AND DELL WARNING

BODY:
Profit-taking sent stocks modestly lower yesterday as Wall Street rested after
three weeks of healthy gains in the high-tech sector. An earnings warning from
Dell Computer had little effect on the markets.

   "We've had a pretty fabulous run since the Fed initially lowered rates on
Jan. 2. Stock prices have done well," said Steven Goldman, market strategist at
Weeden & Co. "There was some bad news today, but investors appear to be looking
ahead, instead of focusing on the rear-view mirror and bad earnings news for
this last quarter." The Dow Jones industrial average closed down 9.35 at
10,578.24.

   The Nasdaq slipped 12.47 to 2,757.91, while the S&P rose 0.36 to 1,342.90.

   Dell, which fell 13 cents to $25.50, became the latest high-profile
technology company to lower its earnings forecast because of the slowing economy
and slumping consumer confidence.

   So far this year, the market has had little reaction to similar warnings,
reflecting many investors' belief that weak earnings were already priced into
stocks, and Monday's trading continued that trend. The Federal Reserve's
decision to lower interest rates earlier this month - and expectations that it
will lower rates again next week - have made investors more confident even as
companies release disappointing earnings outlooks.AP

   Gillette tabs ex-Nabisco boss

   Gillette named James M. Kilts chairman and chief executive officer yesterday,
turning to the man who engineered a dramatic turnaround at Nabisco to revive the
struggling shaving products company.

   Kilts, 52, becomes Gillette's fourth CEO in two years and its first ever
pulled from outside the company. He rejuvenated Nabisco, the maker of Ritz
crackers and Oreo cookies, paving the way for its $14.9 billion acquisition by
Kraft Foods.

   Gillette shares were up 56 cents to close at $34.25.Bloomberg

   Amgen rises on court win

   Amgen shares rose $7.63 or 13%   following a court victory blocking
Transkaryotic Therapies from selling a competing version of its top-selling
Epogen drug. While Transkaryotic shares plunged $10.88 or 32%.

   In a 234-page ruling on Friday, Transkaryotic had been judged to have
infringed Amgen's patents covering Epogen. The decision effectively blocks
Cambridge, Massachusetts-based Transkaryotic and its partner, French drugmaker
Aventis SA, from selling their version of the drug, called Dynepo.The Associated
Press

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2001


                             2027 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            January 23, 2001 Tuesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part C; Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1841 words

HEADLINE: TECH, TELECOM SECTORS LEAD NEW YEAR'S MARKET RALLY;
WALL ST.: DESPITE MIXED SHOWING ON MONDAY, GAINS IN FIRST THREE WEEKS SURPRISE
SOME PROS. THE ISSUE NOW IS STAYING POWER.

BYLINE: JOSH FRIEDMAN, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   It's a new stock market for a new year: Investors have rushed back into many
downtrodden technology and telecom stocks this year, while taking profits in
many of last year's market leaders such as utilities and drug stocks.

   The turnabout has lifted some tech and telecom shares 20% or more in three
weeks, though the market took a breather Monday with major indexes closing
little changed. The Nasdaq composite eased 0.5% to 2,757.91, though it's still
up 11.6% year to date.

   Could the early action mean that stocks have finally hit bottom--and that
old-style "momentum" investing may be staging a comeback on Wall Street?

   "The laggard issues tend to rally most after a market bottom, and this is the
kind of sector rotation typical of a bottom," said Gary Anderson of Eugene,
Ore., an advisor to portfolio managers and a follower of technical market
trends.

   "But who knows whether this is a genuine bull move? For one thing, there is a
lot of 'overhead' supply from people locked in with losses," he said.

   Overhead supply refers to shares bought at higher prices that investors may
be waiting to sell as stocks rebound. Such supply can thwart a rally as sellers
overwhelm new buyers.

   The threat of heavy selling by tech investors who are underwater is a key
reason most analysts aren't looking for a return to the go-go momentum market
that ended with spring's Nasdaq crash.

   Analysts also note that abrupt sector shifts early in any year aren't
necessarily reliable clues about the longer-term trend.

   "January is often the most confusing period because there are all kinds of
crosscurrents going on," said Bob Doll, portfolio manager at Merrill Lynch,
pointing to bargain-hunting in the previous year's downtrodden sectors and the
aftereffects of fourth-quarter tax-related selling.

   Analysts say whatever momentum the market musters this year is likely to be
far more subdued than the tech surge of 1999 and early 2000.

   "Investors learned a lesson from last year's difficulties," said Al Goldman,
chief market strategist at brokerage A.G. Edwards. "They're going to be more
selective, more value-conscious."

   Still, market bulls say classic growth sectors such as tech could have a
strong 2001, in large measure because of lower interest rates. Historically,
tech does well when rates are falling.

   Indeed, much of the market's trend this year can be traced to the Jan. 3
surprise move by the Federal Reserve to cut its key short-term interest rate
half a point to 6%, analysts say.

   "People started saying, 'Maybe the bottom is here. Maybe it's time to jump
into the interest-rate-sensitive stocks,' " said Sam Stovall, a strategist at
Standard & Poor's Corp. in New York.

   With the rate cut, communications and technology shares and consumer
"cyclical" companies (such as auto makers) started to move higher at the expense
of utilities, energy and health care--sectors that had surged in 2000 in part
because investors were looking for safer havens.

   "Those sectors that did well after Labor Day are now a source of funds for
those that did poorly," Goldman said.

   Some experts say last year's winners might have sold off early in 2001 even
without a rate cut as investors simply opted to take profits.

   After all, "when was the last time you heard utilities went up 53%, as they
did last year?" Stovall said.

   But many investors may just be following historical precedent: Since 1971,
the tech-heavy Nasdaq composite index has on average outperformed the blue-chip
Standard & Poor's 500 index in the first six months after the Fed has begun to
cut rates.

   On average, the Nasdaq has been up 15.7% six months after the first rate cut,
while the S&P has gained 12.3%, according to Stovall's research.

   Stock sectors within the S&P 500 that have done best after a Fed
credit-easing cycle has begun have been consumer "staples" companies (such as
makers of household products) and tech, with average gains of 16.2% and 15.2%,
respectively, for those groups.

   So far this year, the S&P 500 tech sector already is up 17.8%, though the
consumer staples sector is down 0.4%. The S&P as a whole is up 1.7%.

   Meanwhile, the utility and energy sectors have risen the least historically
in times of falling interest rates. Their six-month average gains in
falling-rate environments have been 9.1% and 9%, respectively.

   So far this year the utility and energy sectors within the S&P are down 13%
and 6.4%, respectively, after hefty gains last year.

   Surprisingly, the financial stock sector in the S&P 500 is down 3.3% year to
date.

   Although financial stocks might seem ideal investments in a credit-easing
environment, Stovall said they typically "move early," running up in advance of
rate cuts--just as they did in last year's fourth quarter--then basically track
the broad market.

   During the last 30 years, the strongest individual industry groups in times
of falling rates have been waste management (average six-month gain after the
first rate cut: 31.4%), drugstores (26.5%) and broadcasting (24.7%).

   The weakest performers have been can and bottle makers (up 3.8%), electric
utilities (4.9%) and domestic oil exploration and production companies (5.8%).

   Of course, every market cycle is different in some ways, and there's no
guarantee that the past will predict the future.

   Stovall said that though consumer staples companies--those that sell "eat
'em, smoke 'em, drink 'em" products--often are considered "defensive" stocks,
they tend to fare well in a credit-easing environment because of initially
fragile market psychology.

   "Of the two emotions investors have, fear is more of a motivator than greed,"
he said. "So if investors have just been pounded for the last six months, they
may not be willing to dive in with both feet and buy the most aggressive stocks"
but rather will look for somewhat safer ideas early on.

   Partly for that reason, Stovall said S&P continues to favor defensive stocks
for the first part of this year. He said the tech sector may see its best gains
later in the year, as the Fed's rate-cutting medicine starts to perk up the
economy.

   Goldman of A.G. Edwards said he looks favorably on tech, including some
stocks in the Internet group, but he also favors such traditionally defensive
sectors as insurance and drugs. With the declines in those sectors this year,
investors who like them for the long term are getting an opportunity to buy in
cheaper, analysts note.

   Despite the historical numbers during periods of credit easing, some analysts
also see a bright 2001 for energy stocks, thanks in part to a business-friendly
Bush administration.

   Stovall prefers smaller and medium-sized energy firms to the bigger names.
His picks include energy services firms such as BJ Services (BJS) and UTI Energy
(UTI).

   Meanwhile, some analysts expect smaller stocks in general to continue to
outperform larger stocks this year, as they did in 1999 and 2000.

   Prudential Securities analyst Steven G. DeSanctis noted in a recent report
that cycles of small-cap stock dominance have lasted nearly six years on
average, starting with the 1932-37 period. He also said relative valuations
still make smaller stocks look attractive.

   So far this year, the S&P small-cap 600 index is up just 0.7%, trailing the
S&P 500. The S&P mid-cap 400 index is down 2%.

   Air freight and telephone companies have been the strongest groups in the S&P
small-cap index this year, with gains of 93.8% and 92.7%, respectively. But
those small-cap sectors contain just one stock each.

   Particularly strong small-cap stocks have included home builder Champion
Enterprises (ticker symbol: CHB), up 136% this year; gene therapy specialist
Advanced Tissue Sciences (ATIS), up 110%; and computer equipment maker Sonicblue
(SBLU), up 97%.

   Health care dominates the list of worst-performing sectors among small-stock
groups this year, as investors have cashed in profits from last year.

   In the S&P mid-cap 400 index, strong groups this year include electronic
component makers, up 18.3%, and apparel producers, up 18.1%. Leading mid-cap
stocks include Internet security specialist Network Associates (NETA), up 97%;
network software maker Legato Systems (LGTO), up 92%; and data-processing
manager Informix (IFMX), up 72%.

   Laggard mid-cap groups include makers of automated transaction systems, down
19.7%, and health services firms, off 18.9%. Weak mid-cap stocks include Web
design specialist Macromedia (MACR), down 44.6%; data-processing firm SEI
Investments (SEIC), off 34.9%; and in the volatile biotech area, Protein Design
Labs (PDLI), down 33%.

   Among blue-chip stocks, long-distance telecom leads the S&P industry groups
with a gain of 42% so far this year after last year's crash. AT&T and WorldCom
both have resurged, though they remain far below their peak prices.

   The second-biggest sector winner in the S&P 500: entertainment, up 31.5%.

   Electric utilities and defense electronics firms are the weakest groups in
the S&P 500 so far, each with losses of 14.8%. Not surprisingly, laggards
include two companies ravaged by the California energy crisis: PG&E (PCG), down
51.3%, and Edison International (EIX), off 42%.

   *

   Times staff writer Josh Friedman can be reached at josh.friedman@latimes.com.

   *

   More Inside

   Sector Shifts: Best and worst industry groups year to date in key S&P
indexes, C6

   Stock Sector Trends, by S&P Index

   Here are the 10 best- and 10 worst-performing stock industry groups so far
this year within each of three key market indexes: the blue-chip Standard &
Poor's 500, the mid-cap S&P 400 and the small-cap S&P 600. Performance is
measured through Monday's market close. In general, last year's losers have been
this year's leaders, at least so far. The leading market groups are dominated by
tech and telecom. On the flip side, the losers so far this year are many of the
sectors that were hot last year, especially in the health-care, energy and
utility areas.

   *

   Source: Bloomberg News

   Wall Street, 2001: The Big Picture

   Here's a look at the winners and losers so far this year among the 11 broad
stock groups in the blue-chip Standard & Poor's 500 index. Technology and
telecom sectors are leading after plummeting in 2000. Meanwhile, investors have
been taking profits in some of last year's hottest sectors, including utilities
and health care.  S&P 500 sector           YTD pctg. change (through Monday)
Technology                                           +17.8% Communications
services                              +14.7% Consumer cyclicals
+3.7% Consumer staples                                      -0.4% Transportation
-0.7% Capital goods                                         -2.6% Financials
-3.3% Energy                                                -6.4% Basic
materials                                       -7.8% Health care
-9.2% Utilities                                            -13.0% S&P 500 index
+1.7%

   Source: Bloomberg News

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC: Stock Sector Trends, by S&P Index, Los Angeles Times GRAPHIC:
Wall Street, 2001: The Big Picture, Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2001


                             2028 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            January 23, 2001 Tuesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part C; Financial Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 403 words

HEADLINE: MARKETS;
AMGEN PATENT VICTORY SPARKS BIOTECH RALLY, ETHICS DEBATE

BYLINE: From Times Wire Services, Reuters

BODY:

   A federal court ruling preserving Amgen's patent on its blockbuster
anemia-fighting drug Epogen sparked a rally among biotech stocks Monday--as well
as a debate about patents and the ethics of drug pricing.

   The debate is not new, and this decision will not end it, but the resounding
victory by Amgen (ticker symbol: AMGN) in the case starkly spotlights the power
of biotech patents and raises anew questions about whether strong patent
protection is a net good for medical research and society at large, observers
said.

   A federal judge ruled Friday that Transkaryotic Therapies (TKTX) had
infringed on three of Amgen's patents on Epogen, a drug that uses the protein
erythropoietin to boost red blood cells and offset anemia's debilitating
symptoms. Two other patents, covering processes, were not infringed upon, the
court found.

   Thanks to a series of patents, the most recent of which was granted in 1999,
Amgen's monopoly on Epogen will extend to nearly 30 years if the decision is
upheld on appeal. The drug's monopoly already has paid for the cost of its
research, experts said.

   The ruling was cheered Monday on Wall Street, where Amgen, up $ 7.63 to $
67.63, led a strong rally among biotechnology shares. The Nasdaq biotech index
spiked up 4.6%, and other big winners included Applera-Celera Genomics (CRA), up
$ 2.81 to $ 43.88, Protein Design (PDLI), up $ 3.63 to $ 58.25 and Millennium
Pharmaceuticals (MLNM), up $ 2.81 to $ 48.

   Investors' verdict was just as clear on Transkaryotic Therapies, which
plunged $ 10.88 to $ 23.13.

   Some argue that the monopolies granted by patents--until 2015 in the case of
Epogen--are too extensive and end up raising prices for consumers and stifling
competition.

   However, others contend that without strong patents, investors would not be
willing to pay for drug development.

   But even advocates of strong patents concede that Amgen's array of
protections was unusual and exceptionally strong.

   In 1999 alone, the drug pulled in $ 1.8 billion in sales for Amgen, a figure
that rises to $ 4 billion including sales through Amgen's licensing partner
Johnson & Johnson (JNJ).

   Financial analysts said the decision was good news for biotech companies,
with the obvious exception of Transkaryotic, because it reaffirmed the strength
of patents in an industry that depends heavily on the monopolies they grant to
recoup the often astronomical cost of bringing a new drug to market.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2001


                             2029 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 68 words

HEADLINE: TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING: BIOTECH;
AMGENSHARES RISE ON RULINGS

BYLINE:  NYT

BODY:

        Shares of Amgen, the world's largest biotechnology company, surged
yesterday after a federal judge ruled that its rival, Transkaryotic Therapies,
had infringed on three Amgen patents on its anemia drug, Epogen.

   Amgen sold about $4 billion of the drug worldwide in 1999. The company's
stock rose $7.63, to $67.63. Transkaryotic Therapies shares tumbled $10.88, to
$23.13, making it the day's worst performer.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Graph tracks Amgen share price.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2001


                             2030 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2001 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                    January 22, 2001, Monday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1408 words

HEADLINE: Science races ahead of ethics;
Unfettered DNA research renews calls to close gap between ethics and science.

BYLINE: Sharon Schmickle; Staff Writer

BODY:

   From cows in Wisconsin's research barns to pigs used for organ studies at the
Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., to mice in medical experiments at the
University of Minnesota, animals with inserted genes are becoming commonplace.

        Still, the report this month that a monkey had been born with jellyfish
genes seemed novel in that it moved genetic engineering so close to the human
level.

        Technically, it could be done in humans as easily as in the many other
animals born with foreign DNA in every cell of their bodies, said Dr. Frank
Burton, who works with transgenic mice at the University of Minnesota in a
search for more effective treatments of tumors and neurological disorders.

        "The problem is that it's just not ethical," Burton said.

        The barriers to changing genes in people _ especially when the changes
could be passed to future generations _ should be very high, said Burton and
other scientists who have altered animals' genes. But they also said that the
United States is long overdue for a wide-ranging discussion of the technology.

        Since as early as 1972, scientists have been warning that we've opened
the door to altering the biological inheritance of future generations. But their
call for serious deliberation has been largely ignored.

        Thus the science, and little else, has raced forward, according to a
report issued in September by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science.

        That leaves a serious gap in the general understanding of the ethical,
religious and policy implications, the report said.

        "Typically our society proceeds in a 'reactionary mode,' scrambling to
match our values and policy to scientific developments," the report said. "But
with a scientific advance that raises profound issues related to the
possibilities of modifying our genetic futures, it is important to plan ahead,
to decide whether and how to proceed with its development, and to give direction
to this technology through rigorous analysis and public dialogue."

   .

   A shot in the dark

        The arguments against creating transgenic humans begin with the
techniques that created the monkey _ called ANDi (a backwards acronym for
"inserted DNA") _ and other animals born with foreign genes. This is
state-of-the-art science, to be sure, but it also is crude. To say that it would
work in humans is not to say that it would work at a reasonably acceptable
level.

        For starters, getting genes into cells is a shot in the dark.

        ANDi's creators at the Oregon Regional Primate Research Center in
Beaverton reported in the journal Science that they did it by loading the gene
on a specialized virus and injecting it into monkey eggs. Such viruses _ called
retroviral vectors _ have been powerful tools for genetic engineers because they
have a natural ability to find a strand of DNA inside a cell and stitch their
genetic payload into it.

        The fact that it's a virus shouldn't necessarily scare people, Burton
said, because efforts are made to strip it of infectious material. "We basically
take out all of the guts and leave the packaging parts," he said.

        The greater problem is that the virus follows its own instincts once it
is inside a cell's nucleus, and scientists have no way of controlling where it
will land.

        "It can go just about anywhere," Burton said.

        It could, for example, break into a string of DNA that spells out a
gene, thus disrupting a code that a body needs to grow or fight disease. Among
other problems, that could make a person more prone to cancer, Burton said.

        Viruses aren't the only tools for slipping genes into cells. Companies
that inserted human genes in pigs for research at the Mayo Clinic and in dairy
animals for pharmaceutical studies in Wisconsin used different techniques. But
they also live with the same guesswork.

        "We have no control over where a gene goes," said John Logan, vice
president for research at Nextran, the New Jersey-based unit of Baxter
Healthcare Corp., which created the transgenic pigs that Mayo Clinic scientists
use as potential sources of organs for human transplant.

        Nextran and other companies are racing to develop more precise
techniques. But there are other reasons to restrict the process to animals,
Logan said.

        One of them is a low success rate. In ANDi's case, the scientists
inserted genes into 224 eggs, fertilized the eggs and got 126 embryos. From
those, they chose 40 that looked promising and implanted them in the wombs of 20
monkeys. Five pregnancies resulted, but only three healthy males were born. ANDi
was the only one to show the gene.

        Further, if the gene worked as it should, ANDi's cells would make a
protein that glows under fluorescent lighting. But he doesn't glow, the
scientists reported. And they don't know why, much less whether that will change
as he matures.

        Nature itself makes many a mistake between the creation of an egg and
the birth of a child. But we aren't morally responsible for those slip-ups. When
it is a mistake of our own making, though, how could we correct it? What would
become, for example, of a baby born with severe deformities because an inserted
gene interfered with normal development?

        Indeed, many animal rights activists argue, for the same reasons, that
it shouldn't be done with animals either.

        The technical challenges alone prompted the scientists and ethicists who
compiled the report for the American Association for the Advancement of Science
to conclude that such genetic modification "cannot presently be carried out
safely and responsibly on humans."

        The panel was speaking to permanent genetic changes that could be passed
to future generations, not to gene therapy, which seeks to correct genetic
problems in people who already exist. Although gene-therapy experiments were
plagued with mistakes and setbacks last year, they are considered worth pursuing
when done carefully.

   .

   For the children?

        In one respect, human medicine already has crossed the line from therapy
on existing people to permanently changing the genetic makeup of generations to
come. Some couples now screen embryos to weed out genes that underlie dreaded
inherited diseases.

        It would be a huge next step, however, to actually insert genes in order
to add traits.

        And the association's report said that such a step shouldn't be taken at
this time for reasons that go far beyond technical risks. If some families have
the will and the means to correct disabilities and others don't, for example,
prejudice against those who are disabled could grow.

        Another concern raised in the report is that efforts to create "perfect"
children could have the perverse effect of turning children into commodities.

        The more limited gene therapy experiments currently underway are
regulated by local review boards, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
and the National Institutes of Health. The FDA requires researchers to submit
proposals for experiments on humans, and it can suspend trials that pose risks
to the human subjects. The agency came under fire last year after a patient died
in a gene-therapy trial, and last week it proposed rules that would make public
more details about the studies.

       However, the government may never be able to reconcile conflicting views
over the more ambitious and controversial prospects for manipulating human
genes. Some religious groups flatly oppose any research that could harm a human
embryo. By contrast, other faiths endorse medicine as a highly valued human
action and see genetic engineering as eventually offering a chance to attack
some inherited diseases.

        "Like anything else, these techniques could be used in ways that we
could cheer and in ways we would find unacceptable," said Jeffrey Kahn, who
directs the Center for Bioethics at the University of Minnesota. "It's all in
the application."

        Most people would welcome the chance, he said, to manipulate genes to
prevent horrible diseases in their children. But they have a much greater
problem when it comes to "enhancing" a child's traits.

        "The difficulty has always been drawing a line between those two," Kahn
said. "And I don't know that we are any closer today in making that distinction
than we were 15 years ago."

   .

        Sharon Schmickle can be contacted at sschmickle@startribune.com.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2001


                             2031 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     January 21, 2001 Sunday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 8P

LENGTH: 1231 words

HEADLINE: Biotech watched for signs of maturity;
 Next step: The human genome has been sequenced, and now the companies turn to
the hard part.

BYLINE: Julie Bell

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   The biotechnology industry raked in billions of dollars from investors last
year as it basked in the spotlight of one of science's great achievements, the
sequencing of the human genome. This year, investors will expect the industry to
show what can be done with both the genome and the money.

    It is in one sense an artificial turning point, given that many companies
already were making tools to manipulate databases of genomic information,
allowing them to find genes important in regulating disease. Some, such as
MedImmune Inc., already manufacture and sell proteins that are used as drugs.

    But this year, experts say, there is no question that investors are
expecting more signs of maturity from biotech companies. Established companies
such as Baltimore's Guilford Pharmaceuticals Inc. plan to push more therapies
into human testing, broadening their drug portfolios and lessening their
dependence on the success of any single therapy. Big companies flush with cash
will find ways to spend it, in some cases acquiring products or buying other
companies.

    Companies that make tools used by scientists studying the gene-based engines
of living things, such as Rockville software maker InforMax Inc., will look to
refine and expand their offerings. And little companies such as
Gaithersburg-based Avalon Pharmaceuticals, a cancer-therapy researcher bolstered
by private capital raised in 2000, will begin to show whether their big ideas
about how to use genomic information hold enough promise to pay off.

    "This $40 billion is going to change the way the industry behaves and put
some life back in the survivors," Kenneth B. Lee Jr., an Ernst & Young managing
director for corporate finance and a leader of its health sciences group, said
of the money he estimated was raised by biotech companies last year. To be sure,
there are some among Maryland's 250 biotech companies that headed for year's end
in dire need of cash. EntreMed Inc., a developer of anti-tumor drugs, had six to
eight months worth left as it scouted for the right deal to make with a larger
pharmaceutical company. Osiris Therapeutics Inc., a Baltimore-based developer of
therapies to regenerate human tissue using adult stem cells, said it had about
six months worth of money left as the year drew to a close. And GenVec Inc., a
developer of gene therapies, had to settle for tens of millions of dollars less
than it had planned in a year-end stock offering, thanks to a down market.

    If the stock market doesn't improve, some cash-strapped companies may be
forced into licensing products to pharmaceutical companies at unfavorable terms
- or even selling the company altogether.

    But plenty of other companies seemed to be bulging with cash as the year
drew to a close. Human Genome Sciences Inc. headed into the final three months
of the calendar year armed with more than $840 million. MedImmune had more than
$450 million heading into the end of 2000, and Celera Genomics Group listed $567
million. Guilford had $117 million at the end of September and filed in November
to issue as many as 3.5 million shares to raise tens of millions more, though a
continuing down market could make additional fund-raising difficult.

    Human Genome plans to use its money, in part, to push several more drugs
into human testing this year. The Rockville company already has four drugs in
clinical trials and has applied for a fifth, a product picked up along with
Human Genome's 2000 acquisition of Principia Pharmaceutical Co., to begin human
testing. At Celera, also in Rockville, company executives are busy expanding the
focus from providing online genomic information for scientists. Celera now wants
to use its own databases to discover genes and proteins useful in making new
drugs, and Legg Mason Wood Walker analyst Stefan D. Loren said he wouldn't be
surprised to see Celera make acquisitions to help do it.

    "A company like Gene Logic would make a logical acquisition for Celera,"
Loren said of Gene Logic, a Gaithersburg-based company that builds databases
showing what genes and proteins are active in a range of diseased and normal
tissues. Gene Logic also sells subscriptions to its databases to pharmaceutical
companies and scientists.

    Job growth could result from the amount of money raised last year in
biotech, though potential acquisitions and a slowing overall economy cloud the
picture. Biotech companies now employ up to 16,000 in Maryland, according to the
nonprofit industry promotion group MdBio Inc., but several large company
expansions are planned or ongoing.

    Qiagen Sciences Inc., a subsidiary of a Dutch biotech company, expects to
employ 200 people in manufacturing and 100 in research and development by 2002
at North American headquarters now under construction in Germantown.

    Human Genome Sciences has just finished expanding its Rockville
manufacturing facility and is planning to complete a 51,000-square-foot quality
control facility in the spring. And Gaithersburg-based biopharmaceutical company
MedImmune, which employs about 450 in Maryland and makes the highly successful
drug Synagis at its Frederick plant, is scouting Montgomery County for a new
headquarters location.

    In exchange for a $2.5 million grant from the state's Sunny Day fund, the
company has pledged - among other things - to create at least 400 more jobs in
the state by the end of 2008.

    MedImmune and Guilford are the kinds of companies Loren expects to be in
favor this year - those focused on making and selling drugs. Guilford, which
already sells an implantable chemotherapy treatment for recurring brain cancer,
is applying to expand the use of that product and plans to have at least four
other products in various stages of human testing this year.

    Rather than buy stock in companies with sexy new genome-mapping technology,
Loren said, investors will want to buy companies using that technology to get
products on the market.

    Investors, he said, are asking "Who's going to be making money and who's
going to be a profitable company over the next three to five years?"

    G. Steven Burrill, chief executive officer of life sciences-focused merchant
bank Burrill & Co., said he expects about 100 publicly traded biotech companies
to become profitable this year, up from the 50 or so profitable firms in 2000.
But Burrill said biopharmaceutical companies don't have to be the only biotech
companies in vogue.

    "You don't have to create the next Merck to be a great business," Burrill
said.

    Daniel P. Healey, director of investment financing for the Maryland
Department of Business and Economic Development, said the increasing number of
companies using gene-based methods to identify therapies is reflected in recent
venture-capital funding handed out by the state.

    A state venture fund focused on early-stage high-tech companies made
commitments to invest $ 3.2 million in eight biotech companies in the latter
half of last year, including Avalon and Psychiatric Genomics Inc. of
Gaithersburg. Both companies use technology that helps them analyze what genes
and proteins are at work in disease.

    "The genome is just a big database," said Standish M. Fleming, a managing
member of venture capital firm Forward Ventures, which invested in Avalon. The
new generation of companies, he said, is attempting to "turn the data into
knowledge."


GRAPHIC: Photo(s), Naaladase: This neuro-protectant drug from Baltimore's,
Guilford Pharmaceuticals Inc. is used for diabetic neuropathy., AMY DAVIS : SUN
STAFF

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2001


                             2032 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            January 21, 2001 Sunday
                                Bulldog Edition

SECTION: PART A; Part 1; Advance Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 702 words

HEADLINE: MAZE AND A MOLECULE SEEM TO HELP MICE LEARN;
HEALTH: RESEARCHERS PINPOINT A PROTEIN THAT GIVES GENETICALLY ENGINEERED ANIMALS
A BOOST WHEN TACKLING NEW CHALLENGES. STUDY HOLDS PROMISE FOR TREATING
ALZHEIMER'S.

BYLINE: BEN DOBBIN, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: ROCHESTER, N.Y.

BODY:

   In a laboratory study that could help in deciphering Alzheimer's disease,
scientists found that genetically engineered mice learned and remembered better
if subjected to tricky maze exercises.

   The research, in which mice were boosted with a neuron-nourishing protein
called nerve growth factor, marks the first time a specific molecule has been
pinpointed to assist the brain in rewiring itself to tackle new challenges, the
University of Rochester said.

   "The genetically engineered mice not only learned better than the
non-engineered ones but their memory improved," said lead researcher Dr. Howard
Federoff, director of the university's Center for Aging and Developmental
Biology.

   "The interaction between the learning experience and this gene caused a
rather striking reorganization" in a brain pathway considered vital to spatial
learning and memory, he said.

   Alzheimer's is a progressive neurological disease with no known cause or cure
that affects more than 4 million Americans. Victims, most of them elderly,
suffer gradual memory loss, disorientation and personality changes.

   Federoff developed a gene-transfer method used in the study in which extra
copies of a gene that generates nerve growth factor are delivered to cells in
the hippocampus, a part of the brain thought to be a crucial way station in
funneling and retrieving information.

   When the mice reached adulthood after three months, a virus was used to turn
on the gene. The nerve growth factor allows cells to grow and maintain fibers
that link neurons in the brain, even those in distant locations.

   The mice and an equal number that didn't have the gene triggered--about 80 in
all--were divided into three groups. Over two weeks, some were kept in their
cages, others ran through the same simple maze day after day and a third set was
continually challenged to navigate new mazes.

   The university study, published in November in Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, determined that genetically modified mice were the quickest
and most adept learners. Specific neurons in the basal forebrain at the base of
their skulls were on average 60% bigger than those in mice not given a workout.

   The maze exercises appeared to be a key stimulant "in enhancing the nerve
growth factor's effect on the brain circuitry, in driving the reorganization,"
Federoff said.

   During nine months of research, long enough for the mice to grow well into
middle age, no adverse consequences of the genetic modification were uncovered,
he said.

   The researchers' aim was to manipulate a critical pathway in learning that
runs from the basal forebrain area to the hippocampus.

   "In virtually every single patient who has Alzheimer's disease, cells that
manufacture the neurotransmitter acetylcholine are diseased and their function
is profoundly decreased," Federoff said. "The most modern drugs to treat
Alzheimer's disease are intended to increase the amount of acetylcholine."

   His research team is carrying out further studies to try to develop a
strategy in which "we can envision a potential for ameliorating symptoms of
Alzheimer's disease."

   Federoff said he hopes within a few years to conduct clinical trials. Any
such project would have to get past extensive regulatory hurdles.

   Dr. Bill Thies, vice president for medical and scientific affairs at the
Chicago-based Alzheimer's Assn., said the study holds the promise of developing
gene therapies for a variety of neuro-degenerative diseases.

   "If something like this works for Alzheimer's disease, by putting your gene
modification in another place you might get it to work for Parkinson's disease
and other diseases where you have a death of nerve cells for a variety of
reasons," Thies said.

   Researchers at UC San Diego recently began transplanting cells that produce
nerve growth factor into the brains of Alzheimer's patients. The cells are taken
from the patients' skin and genetically engineered to make more nerve growth
factor.

   "We would be proposing to modify the existing brain circuitry as opposed to
introducing new cells into the brain," Federoff said. "The jury's still out, but
I firmly believe that approach makes more sense."

   *

   University of Rochester:

   http://www2.envmed.rochester.edu

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2001


                             2033 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     JANUARY 21, 2001 Sunday DCITY EDITION

SECTION: CITY & REGION; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 956 words

HEADLINE: PENN PURSUES TESTING ON GENES THE SCHOOL WANTS THE FDA TO LET IT
RESUME TWO TRIALS. SUCH WORK WAS HALTED AFTER AN 18-YEAR-OLD SUBJECT DIED.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A year after the federal government shut down eight human gene-therapy
experiments at the University of Pennsylvania, the Ivy League school has decided
to give up its efforts to get most of them restarted.

   The crackdown by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration followed the 1999
death of Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old Arizona youth who had a fatal reaction
to a gene drug being tested at Penn.

   On Jan. 21, after an investigation of the campus laboratory that produced the
drug, the FDA imposed a freeze on all human gene-therapy work at Penn's
prestigious Institute for Human Gene Therapy, headed by James M. Wilson.

   Penn officials said Friday they hoped to resume two of the eight gene trials
that had been under way. The trials, they said, would be revamped and run under
new supervision outside Wilson's institute.

   One trial focuses on a certain type of brain tumor, the other on a
particularly deadly lung cancer known as mesothelioma.

   But Penn will drop its efforts to persuade the FDA to reinstate the six other
institute-sponsored trials, Penn provost Robert Barchi said. Those trials
involve gene therapy to treat cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy, breast and
skin cancer, and a rare liver disease.

   Wilson, who has come under severe criticism for his lax oversight of the
liver-related trial that killed Gelsinger, now faces a separate FDA action that
aims to strip him of his right to conduct clinical trials anywhere in the United
States.

   Wilson, through his lawyer, said last week he would contest the FDA's
proposed action in a soon-to-be-scheduled meeting with FDA officials. He
declined to comment on the specifics of the government allegations.

   Barchi said the university was not backing away from gene therapy but
indicated that its clinical trials in the field will no longer revolve around
Wilson, once regarded as a world leader in the field.

   The university now has six human gene-therapy trials under way or about to
start outside Wilson's institute. They include gene-based therapies for
colorectal cancer, melanoma, AIDS, peripheral arterial disease, and certain
cancers of the lung, head and neck.

   All are sponsored by private industry or the National Institutes of Health.

   Gene therapy, which burst on the scientific scene in 1990, aroused great
excitement because it held out the promise of replacing defective genes with
functional ones, possible curing otherwise intractable illnesses.

   Progress had been slow, however, and Gelsinger's death slowed it further. His
death stirred an international controversy and cost Penn millions of dollars in
a settlement with Gelsinger's estate.

   Wilson, who has tenure, remains as director of the institute, but the
university has significantly narrowed the scope of his program. The institute is
doing only laboratory experiments and animal research related to gene therapy.
Its budget has been pared from $25 million to $18 million and its staff cut from
230 to 175, Penn officials said.

   Barchi said the institute still plays "a very valuable role" in basic
research and preclinical studies, but he indicated it was "only a piece" of the
university's much broader agenda in biomedical research.

   In an initiative to be announced shortly, Penn will present plans for a major
new program in the broader field of genomics, using the gene-sequencing data
churned out by the international Human Genome Project to develop new diagnostic
tests and new targets for therapeutic drugs to treat complex diseases such as
diabetes, Barchi said.

   That, he said, will be the future of medicine in the 21st century. "Gene
therapy is an exciting new area, but it's an area with limited applicability,"
Barchi said. He pointed out that most diseases do not involve the inherited
mutations in genes that gene therapy aims to correct.

   Leading gene-therapy scientists on the Penn campus have expressed private
concerns that the Penn administration may be making it virtually impossible for
them to launch cutting-edge clinical trials.

   They say the university appears to be backing off from any trial that is not
sponsored by private industry or the federal government. Such a stance may have
a chilling effect on innovation and choke off research on so-called orphan
diseases that are suffered by so few people that neither industry nor the
government is willing to finance the work, scientists say.

   Barchi said the university won't rule out sponsorship of such research, but
he said it will take a very hard look at such proposals.

   "Clearly, we favor clinical trials sponsored by industry or the [National
Institutes of Health]. They provide management with built-in [safety]
monitoring."

   Gelsinger's death and the subsequent investigation of Wilson's lab and other
labs across the country has prompted the FDA and the National Institutes of
Health to impose tough new rules aimed at protecting patient safety not only in
gene-therapy trials but in all research involving human subjects.

   At Penn, university officials say the school's own reforms go far beyond what
the new government rules require. "I don't believe there is another research
institution in the country that can match what we are doing," Barchi said.

   Under the changes, he said, campus researchers have to pass a rigorous
written test before being allowed to submit proposals for human trials; a thick
new book of standard operating procedures for clinical trials has been developed
for faculty researchers; and the system for monitoring trial safety has been
greatly expanded, with high-risk trials required to be monitored by outside
firms.

   "We are going way beyond what the FDA and the NIH require," Barchi said.

   Huntly Collins' e-mail address is hcollins@phillynews.com

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             2034 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   January 20, 2001, Saturday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 598 words

HEADLINE: Naomi Aoki can be reached by e-mail at naoki@globe.com. Material from
Globe wire services was used in this report.;
TKT LOSES LAWSUIT OVER DRUG PATENTS

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Amgen Inc., the California biotechnology giant, won a federal court ruling
yesterday that blocks a smaller Cambridge rival, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.,
from selling its own version of the top-selling anemia drug Epogen.

   US District Court Judge William Young held in a 234-page ruling that Amgen
proved three of its patents were "valid, enforceable and infringed" when TKT
produced a competing version of human erythropoietin.

      "Although we are disappointed by today's ruling, we are grateful for Judge
Young's long and intensive efforts in this case. We remain confident that our
position is strong and intend to appeal this decision," Dr. Richard F. Selden,
TKT's president and chief executive, said in a statement yesterday evening.

   "We are pleased with today's ruling because it upholds our breakthrough
inventions," Amgen chairman and chief executive Kevin Sharer said in a written
statement.

   During the four-month-long closely watched trial, which ended in September,
TKT claimed to have developed a gene-activation technology that lets it make
drugs similar to existing ones, such as Epogen, but through a different process.

   Amgen, however, argued that TKT's proposed drug, Dynepo, infringed on five of
its Epogen patents. The company filed suit against TKT and its partner Hoechst
Marion Roussel Inc., now known as Aventis Pharmaceuticals Inc., in April 1997.

   Epogen, used to treat anemia in kidney dialysis patients, has been on the
market since 1998. It generated an estimated $4 billion in sales last year.

   The Amgen-TKT case was widely viewed as a landmark case in the biotech
industry. Some feared the judge's ruling could thwart up-and-coming firms from
entering markets dominated by larger firms, quashing competition.

   Others, however, argued that a ruling in TKT's favor would have encouraged
smaller companies to develop copycat drugs, in hopes of stealing revenue from
companies that spent considerable time and money to develop drugs and create
markets for them.

   "TKT has become the lightning rod, attracting a lot of negative attention,
because it believes it has an alternative way of making proteins which does not
conflict with Amgen," William Tanner, an analyst at S.G. Cowen Securities in
Boston, said in an earlier interview with The Boston Globe. "If Amgen's patents
are valid and enforceable, TKT should be stopped. But if TKT or others have a
different mechanism for making the same protein, why shouldn't they be allowed
to pursue it," he said.

   TKT was founded by Selden in 1988 as a gene therapy company. Only recently
has it expanded into drug discovery and development.

   But rather than using gene activation to develop entirely new therapeutics,
TKT chose to go after one of the most lucrative biotech drug arenas against
Amgen and an emerging area in rare diseases pioneered by crosstown neighbor,
Genzyme Corp. In July, Genzyme sued TKT for allegedly infringing on a patent for
a drug that treats Fabry disease, a rare inherited disorder. The Cambridge firms
are locked in a race to gain regulatory approval for their nearly identical
drugs to treat the disease.

   Amgen is awaiting US Food and Drug Administration approval for an improved
version of Epogen, called Arenesp. The ruling effectively bars TKT from selling
Dynepo, ensuring that Amgen will hold onto Epogen sales until it can bring the
new drug to market.

   Amgen shares rose as high as $71.13 in after-hours trading from yesterday's
close of $60. TKT shares were halted just after 4 p.m. on the Nasdaq Stock
Market. Earlier, shares fell $1 to $34.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2001


                             2035 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     January 20, 2001 Saturday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 019

LENGTH: 374 words

HEADLINE: Amgen wins Epogen suit against TKT; Judge rules valid patents were
infringed

BYLINE: By JENNIFER HELDT POWELL

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. was dealt a devastating blow yesterday when a
federal court ruled that the Cambridge company infringed on anemia drug patents
held by the world's largest biotech firm, Amgen Inc.

   U.S. District Court Judge William Young ruled that three of Amgen's patents
were "valid, enforceable and infringed," by Transkaryotic.

   The decision prevents the small firm from selling its version of the human
protein erythropoietin, which Amgen sells as Epogen.

   "It means you're going to see Transkaryotic appealing the decision, but I
think you'd have to say the first round goes to Amgen," said Bill Tanner, an
analyst with SG Cowen Securities Corp. in Boston.

   Amgen's stock soared on the news in after-hours trading, reaching $ 72.75, up
$ 12.75 after closing regular trading down $ 2.06 at $ 60.

   Transkaryotic shares did not trade following the late afternoon release of
Young's decision, though the shares lost $ 1 to close at $ 34 yesterday.

   Amgen's sales of the anemia drug Epogen were about $ 1.8 billion in 1999.
With the ruling, it appears Amgen will be able to hang onto exclusive rights to
the drug while it seeks federal Food and Drug Administration approval for an
improved version, called Arenesp.

   "It gives them a couple extra years of breathing room," before Arenesp sales
pick up, Alidad Mireskandari, the manager of the Monument Medical Sciences Fund,
told Bloomberg News.

   Neither Transkaryotic nor Amgen officials could be reached for comment
yesterday.

   Amgen makes Epogen by inserting a human gene into hamster cells that then
produce EPO, the human protein. Transkaryotic, whose EPO drug is called Dynepo,
makes EPO without animals by inserting a promoter into human genes, stimulating
production of the substance.

   The ruling was surprising, Tanner said. "There were no tea leaves to be read
- I think everyone thought it was a bit of a coin toss," he said.

   The ruling is a temporary setback for Transkaryotic, Tanner predicted. Even
if the company loses an appeal, it has other projects that may work out.

   "This is not the only thing they're working on," he said. "And just because
they lost to Amgen with the Epogen litigation doesn't mean they will lose to
everyone who challenges them."

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2001


                             2036 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           January 20, 2001 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part C; Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 569 words

HEADLINE: AMGEN WINS EPOGEN PATENT INFRINGEMENT SUIT;
BIOTECH: DECISION ON ANEMIA DRUG IN FAVOR OF THOUSAND OAKS FIRM OVER RIVAL
TRANSKARYOTIC IS EXPECTED TO IMPACT ENTIRE INDUSTRY.

BYLINE: JAMES F. PELTZ, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A federal judge ruled Friday in favor of Amgen Inc., the world's largest
biotechnology company, in a closely watched patent dispute that's expected to
impact the entire biotech industry and the development of new genetically
engineered drugs.

   U.S. District Judge William Young in Boston found that Amgen, based in
Thousand Oaks, proved that three of its patents covering its blockbuster
anti-anemia drug Epogen were "valid, enforceable and infringed" by Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., and its partner, European pharmaceutical
giant Aventis, which want to sell their own version of the drug.

   Though it's likely to be appealed, the decision was a huge victory for Amgen.
Epogen--the company's brand name for the drug erythropoietin, which treats
anemia in patients with kidney failure by stimulating red-blood cell
production--accounts for nearly half of the company's $ 4 billion in annual
sales.

   "The most positive aspect of the ruling for Amgen is that it won on multiple
claims" instead of on just one patent, said Andrew Milne, an analyst with the
brokerage Dain Rauscher Wessels in Minneapolis. "That's extremely positive for
Amgen because . . . three patents must be appealed and not just one."

   But the case also raised the fundamental question of how broad a market a
company could claim based on its genetic discoveries. Amgen had argued that if
Transkaryotic won, it could use the same technology to copy virtually any
biotech drug.

   "This is good news for the sector," said Alidad Mireskandari, manager of the
Monument Medical Sciences Fund, which owns Amgen shares. "Had it gone the other
way, we would have seen patent challenges become a bigger corporate strategy."

   But Transkaryotic claimed, among other things, that Amgen's patents were
overly broad. And others suggested that an Amgen victory could thwart smaller
companies from entering or expanding in the biotech arena, thus crimping
competition.

   Not so, Milne said. With established patents such as those covering Epogen
protected, smaller firms will be more encouraged "to come up with brand new
drugs" instead of copying existing ones, he said. "This spurs more innovation
for new drugs."

   Transkaryotic spokeswoman Justine Koenigsberg declined to comment pending the
company's review of Young's decision. But some patent lawyers said it's almost
certain to be appealed.

   "We are pleased with today's ruling because it upholds our breakthrough
inventions which made erythropoietin available to the millions of patients
around the world who rely on this important therapy," Amgen Chairman Kevin
Sharer said in a statement.

   The ruling came after financial markets' regular hours, and Amgen's
stock--which had closed at $ 60 a share, down $ 2.06, during regular
trading--shot as high as $ 72.75 in after-hours trading. Transkaryotic's shares,
which fell $ 1, to $ 34 a share, during normal Nasdaq trading, were halted just
after the market's 4 p.m. EST close.

   Amgen is awaiting U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval for an improved
version of Epogen, and Friday's ruling would ensure that Amgen will hold onto
Epogen sales until it can bring the new drug to the market, analysts said.

   Besides marketing Epogen itself, Amgen licenses the drug to Johnson &
Johnson, which sells it in the U.S. market as Procrit for treating anemia caused
by other problems than kidney damage.

   *

   Bloomberg News was used in compiling this report.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2001


                             2037 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                    January 20, 2001 Saturday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 01D

LENGTH: 79 words

HEADLINE: Drug company infringes on competitor's patents

BYLINE:  From Journal Sentinel wire reports

BODY:

   A federal judge in Boston ruled Friday that Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.
violated a series of valid patents belonging to Amgen Inc. in its development of
a potentially lucrative anti-anemia drug. In a 235-page ruling, U.S. District
Court William Young concluded that five claims on two of Amgen's patents were
"valid, enforceable and literally infringed," and three claims on another patent
were "valid, enforceable and infringed under the doctrine of equivalents."

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2001


                             2038 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           January 20, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 942 words

HEADLINE: Amgen Wins Court Battle Over Drug For Anemia

BYLINE:  By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Amgen Inc. won a closely watched court battle yesterday that will allow it to
maintain its monopoly on the biotechnology industry's best-selling drug.

        Judge William G. Young in Federal District Court in Boston ruled that
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. had infringed three of five Amgen patents covering
Epogen, Amgen's anemia drug. The ruling, more than 230 pages long, will prevent
Transkaryotic and its partner, Aventis S.A., from selling their version of the
drug.

    The case has been scrutinized by lawyers and analysts not only because of
the financial stakes -- worldwide sales of the drug exceed $4 billion -- but
also because it could set a precedent on how strong patent protection will be
for some of the most lucrative products of the biotechnology industry. Had it
won the case, Transkaryotic, known as TKT, was planning to make its own versions
of several other drugs produced by genetic engineering.

   TKT and Aventis, the big European drug company, said they would appeal, but
even if they win, their entry into the market is likely to be delayed by months
or years. By then, Amgen is expected to be selling an improved form of the drug,
which is a protein called erythropoietin, or EPO, that can be taken less
frequently.

   Kevin Sharer, Amgen's chief executive, said the ruling "upholds our
breakthrough inventions which made erythropoietin available to the millions of
patients around the world who rely on this important therapy." He added,
"Meaningful patent protection is fundamental to innovative research companies."

   Amgen's shares rose as high as $72.75 in after-hours trading after closing at
$60, down $2.06, during the regular market session yesterday. The decision is
also good news for Johnson & Johnson, which sells the drug under the name
Procrit through license from Amgen.

   TKT's stock, on the other hand, is expected to plummet on Monday. Trading was
halted late yesterday afternoon pending the decision, after the shares had
dropped $1, to $34.

   "For Amgen, it's a cloud removed," said Eric Schmidt, an analyst at SG Cowen
who follows both companies. "This was a reason to not buy Amgen for most of
2000." But Mr. Schmidt said that "for neither of these companies would a final
decision against them be a knockout punch."

   TKT, based in Cambridge, Mass., had been counting on its version of the
anemia drug to be its first product. It is now counting on a drug that could be
approved by the Food and Drug Administration soon to treat Fabry disease, a rare
inherited disorder.

   But it faces challenges there as well from another large biotechnology
company, Genzyme. Genzyme is also applying for F.D.A. approval to sell a similar
drug for Fabry disease, and it is possible that one company will be given
exclusive marketing rights under the Orphan Drug Act, which gives drug companies
financial incentives to develop treatments for rare disorders. Genzyme is also
suing TKT for patent infringement concerning the Fabry drug.

   Erythropoietin is produced in the kidneys and stimulates the production of
red blood cells. It is used to treat anemia in patients undergoing kidney
dialysis and chemotherapy.

   EPO was discovered long before Amgen was founded about two decades ago. But
no one could isolate enough of it from human blood or urine to use as a drug.
Amgen isolated the human gene for EPO and spliced that gene into hamster ovary
cells, which churned out the protein in large enough quantities. Largely because
of EPO, Amgen, which is based in Thousand Oaks, Calif., has become the world's
largest biotechnology company.

   TKT contended it had a different way to produce EPO that did not infringe
Amgen's patents. Rather than put the human gene into hamster cells, it inserts a
genetic signal into human cells to turn on the EPO gene that is present in every
human cell but usually dormant. Amgen disagreed, and sued TKT and Aventis in
1997.

   TKT argued, in effect, that since Amgen did not discover EPO, its patents
should cover only Amgen's particular way of making EPO, not TKT's. But Amgen's
patents are written somewhat broadly, covering, for instance, any EPO drug made
in "mammalian cells" or "vertebrate cells," phrases Judge Young interpreted to
include human cells.

   TKT also tried to have Amgen's patents declared invalid, saying they did not
provide enough information and also that Amgen had fraudulently misled the
patent office.

   But Judge Young found that claims in two of the five patents were "valid,
enforceable and literally infringed," and claims in a third patent were
infringed because TKT's invention was equivalent to Amgen's. He also ruled that
Amgen "never tried to deceive the patent office."

   As to whether Amgen's claims were clear enough, he wrote, "Amgen survives,
albeit barely."

   The judge found that TKT did not infringe the claims of two patents and that
the claims in one of those were invalid in any case. But infringement of even
one patent is enough to keep TKT and Aventis from selling their product.

   The trial ran from May to September last year and involved issues so complex
that Judge Young retained a professor from the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology to help him analyze the evidence.

   The judge seemed bemused by all the attention paid to the trial by the
financial community, including in a footnote in his decision two charts showing
the volatility of Amgen and TKT shares. He noted in the footnote that during
recesses in the trial, reporters, analysts and legal commentators would rush
into the halls, turn on their cell phones and the stocks of the two companies
"would bob or dip in response to some random comment by the court, the trial
lawyers, or a particular witness."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2001


                             2039 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JANUARY 20, 2001 Saturday D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 976 words

HEADLINE: THE QUEST FOR GENE THERAPY THAT WILL TREAT HEMOPHILIA AVIGEN'S WORK
HAS PROMISE, BUT IT'S A TOUGH BUSINESS.

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: ALAMEDA, Calif.

BODY:

   Modern medicine saved Steven Faust's life, but that is not good enough.

   Faust has hemophilia, a dangerous and debilitating inherited disorder that
prevents his blood from clotting. He needs weekly injections of a clotting
protein, a cumbersome regimen that costs $150,000 a year.

   Quietly, in an industrial park on an island in San Francisco Bay,
white-coated scientists at Avigen Inc. are plugging away on a gene-therapy
treatment that could be more effective, cheaper and easier. It is hoped that one
shot each year or so could give hemophiliacs a healthy version of the gene that
orders the body to produce their missing blood-clotting protein.

   For its work on hemophilia B, one of two forms of hemophilia, Avigen has
forged a close relationship with two physicians at Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia. The company's method of making its gene-therapy treatments and
shooting them to where the body can use them was developed at Children's by
hematology expert Katherine A. High. And Catherine S. Manno, a pediatrician at
Children's, is overseeing early tests on a handful of patients.

   If gene therapy for hemophilia is successful, it would transform life for
people such as Faust. It also could lead the way to similar cures for some of
mankind's most vexing illnesses: heart disease, Parkinson's disease, perhaps
even cancer.

   In a sign of hope for the future of such treatments, German pharmaceutical
giant Bayer Corp. bought a $15 million stake in Avigen late last year in
exchange for the rights to distribute its gene-therapy treatment for hemophilia
B. The companies said they would seek regulatory approval for the technique,
which has proven promising in research on dogs and in early human trials. Avigen
hopes the treatment can hit the market by 2004.

   "The reason there is so much interest in gene therapy is the potential, and
that's the key word at this point in time: potential," said John Monahan,
president and chief executive of Avigen, an eight-year-old company with 100
employees. "In the next 10 years, there probably will not be an area of medicine
where gene therapy won't have an impact."

   That optimism can be seen in Avigen's headquarters in Alameda. A few turns
past the labs where Avigen's scientists toil, bright and freshly painted
corridors lead to empty rooms: the offices and labs the company expects to need
in coming years.

   Avigen also is eyeing possible genetic therapies for Parkinson's disease and
for Gaucher's disease, an inherited enzyme-deficiency disorder whose victims
bleed and bruise easily.

   But there is no assurance that business will be easy.

   Biotechnology companies such as Avigen take years to show a profit - if they
do so at all - because many focus on narrow or arcane techniques that may never
work well enough to get approved.

   Competition is expected to increase as the completion of the human genome
project - the mapping of nature's instructions for making and maintaining our
bodies - provides a deeper understanding of the role DNA plays in disease.

   Even now, Avigen is far from the only company hunting hemophilia. The disease
is well understood and simple - victims have one defective gene - so hemophilia
is "one of the low-hanging fruits in gene therapy," a good way to establish that
the principle works, said Jan Medina, a senior biotechnology analyst at the ING
Barings investment bank.

   "I think it does have a lot of promise, but people have to be cautiously
optimistic about the approach," he said. "We're still at the early stages. From
what we've seen, it will work."

   Avigen believes its breakthrough will be in the way it introduces healthy
genes into patients.

   For long-term production of a protein, such as the blood-clotting factor that
hemophiliacs need, healthy genes need to be delivered directly into cells.

   Researchers use viruses for that purpose because they are adept at entering
cells, and their genetic material can be replaced with beneficial DNA that
encourages production of the needed protein.

   But this approach has caused problems. One type of virus used in gene therapy
, the adenovirus, can be toxic in large quantities and is believed to have
caused the 1999 death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger in a gene-therapy
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Avigen has patented the use of a different virus, the adeno-associated virus,
which appears not to have the same toxic effects.

   The company's future rests on that virus; in fact, a slimmed-down version of
the acronym, AAV, is the "Av" in Avigen. High, the Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia physician, developed the methods Avigen is using to insert
beneficial genetic material into the virus and to deliver the virus to the
cells.

   While Avigen appears to be the only company working on hemophilia B gene
therapy, at least three competitors are trying to develop a gene therapy for
hemophilia A. Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., of Cambridge, Mass., and Chiron
Corp., of Emeryville, Calif., are conducting early clinical trials on such a
therapy. Slightly behind them in development is a partnership between GenStar
Therapeutics Corp. of San Diego and Baxter Healthcare Corp. of Deerfield, Ill.

   Hemophiliacs were badly harmed by science in the 1980s, when thousands got
HIV and hepatitis from donated clotting factor that wasn't properly cleansed.

   But Faust is optimistic that gene therapy will be safe and inexpensive enough
to be covered by regular insurance programs.

   "Maybe to a normal person, gene therapy might seem more science-fiction-scary
than for a hemophiliac," Faust, 38, said from his home in Atlanta. "It can be a
whole new frontier of salvation for us. One, it can help us keep alive and keep
healthy. And two, it can relieve a huge financial burden on ourselves and our
families."

   * Inquirer staff writer Andrea Knox contributed to this article.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART;
PHOTO
At Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Katherine High (left), a hematology
expert, and Catherine Manno, a pediatrician, are working with Avigen on its
gene-therapy treatments for hemophilia. (APRIL SAUL, Inquirer Staff
Photographer)

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             2040 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 20, 2001, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-7

LENGTH: 195 words

HEADLINE: Amgen wins ruling in patent case

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 BOSTON -- A federal judge ruled yesterday that Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.
violated a series of valid patents belonging to Amgen Inc. in its development of
a potentially lucrative anti-anemia drug.

   Shares of Amgen shot up 21 percent in after-hours trading following the
ruling, rising to $72.75 after finishing the regular session at $60, down $3.32,
on the Nasdaq Stock Market.

   In a 235-page ruling, U.S. District Court Judge William Young concluded that
four claims on two of Amgen's patents were "valid, enforceable and literally
infringed," and three claims on another patent were "valid, enforceable and
infringed under the doctrine of equivalents."

   Spokesmen from the two companies did not immediately return phone messages
seeking comment.

   The decision concerned the drug Epogen, which is known generically as
erytrhopoietin, and accounted for $1.8 billion in sales last year for the
Thousand Oaks-based Amgen.

   Amgen makes Epogen by putting cloned human genes into hamster ovary cells.
The Cambridge-based TKT had developed another method to make a similar drug by
inducing human cells to make the protein in a laboratory culture.


LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2001


                             2041 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                   JANUARY 20, 2001, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1; BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 439 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff: Associated Press: Bloomberg News:

BODY:
4th-Quarter PC Sales Hardly Grew at All, New Report SaysA day after one leading
market-research company issued a report documenting last quarter's sharp
slowdown in PC sales, a rival firm yesterday delivered numbers that make the
situation look even worse.

    According to IDC (formerly International Data Corp.), sales of PCs in the
United States during the fourth quarter increased only 0.3 percent compared to
the same period in 1999. Relative to the previous quarter, the Framingham,
Mass., research company said, sales were actually down 3.6 percent.

    Worldwide, the new report said, unit sales during the quarter rose 9.2
percent from the same period in 1999.

    A report released Thursday by Gartner Dataquest had pegged fourth-quarter PC
sales growth at 6.4 percent in the United States and 10.1 percent worldwide..

    PROFIT-TAKING SETTLES MARKET: Investors, more cautious than relieved after a
week of earnings news that turned out better than expected, took profits
yesterday and sent stocks mostly lower. Blue chips tumbled after Home Depot
warned of disappointing quarterly results. The Dow Jones industrial average
closed down 90.69 at 10,587.59, but finished up 62.21, or 0.6 percent, for the
week. The Nasdaq, dominated by technology stocks, rose a modest 1.89 to
2,770.38, finishing the week higher by 143.88, or 5.5 percent..

    BANKRUPT LACK PRIVACY: A federal report released yesterday says that people
who file for bankruptcy need better privacy protection. Conducted by the
Treasury and Justice departments, the study concluded that bankruptcy files make
too much sensitive information, such as bank account numbers, balances and
spending habits, available to the public..

    VERTICALNET CUTS 150 JOBS: E-commerce software maker VerticalNet Inc. is
cutting 150 jobs, or 8.3 percent of its workforce, to help reduce costs. About
half of the positions being eliminated are at VerticalNet's headquarters in
Horsham, Pa. The rest affect other operations around the country. VerticalNet
said the dismissals would save about $11 million a year after the company
records a one-time charge of $2 million to $3 million to cover expenses related
to the job cuts..

    JUDGE RULES FOR AMGEN: A federal judge ruled yesterday that Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., violated a series of valid patents belonging
to Amgen Inc. in its development of a potentially lucrative anti-anemia drug.
Shares of Amgen, based in Thousand Oaks (Los Angeles County) shot up 21 percent
in after-hours trading following the ruling, rising to $72.75 after finishing
the regular session at $60, down $3.32.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2001


                             2042 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                   JANUARY 20, 2001, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 823 words

HEADLINE: Watch DNA Unzip in Micromovie;

Molecular action film highlights potential of nanotechnology

SOURCE: Chronicle Science Writer

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall

BODY:
Using some extraordinary camera tricks, scientists at the University of
California at Davis have produced Lilliputian action shots of molecular "motors"
unwinding strands of DNA.

    Close to four years in the making, the grainy black-and-white movie stars an
enzyme called helicase, chugging along brightly lit tracks of fluorescent-dyed
microbial DNA.

    The footage lasts only about a minute, but it's already attracting attention
from other researchers who are trying to peer into the excruciatingly tiny realm
of molecular motion.

    "I have seen the movie," said Ron Vale, a biochemist at UC San Francisco.
"It's striking, and it's completely clear. . . . It's really amazing that you
can now see single protein molecules in motion doing their work."

    The images underscore recent dramatic advances in the field of
nanotechnology, a discipline that scientists hope will allow precise control
over the very fabric of matter. The techniques used in the UC Davis experiments
might ultimately be developed to repair DNA in patients with genetic illnesses.

    A report on the experiments appeared this week in the journal Nature.
Authors include microbiologist Stephen Kowalczykowski; Ronald Baskin, professor
of molecular and cellular biology, and post-doctoral researcher Piero Bianco,
all of UC Davis, collaborating with physicist Laurence Brewer and colleagues at
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.

    The experiments described in Nature build on earlier work -- also led by UC
Davis researchers -- that showed how the helicase enzyme, called RecBCD -- moves
along in the fashion of an inchworm, jumping with each step 23 base pairs, the
chemical units that make up the message-encoding parts of the DNA double helix.

    Powered by ATP, the same energy source that fuels our muscles, the enzyme
roars along at an astonishing speed -- the equivalent of about 1,500 miles an
hour, if DNA were scaled up to the width of a highway.

    In its natural setting, this movement is a key part of natural DNA-repair
processes. Defects in this system are linked to various inheritable diseases,
sensitivity to sunlight and certain forms of cancer.

    It has been difficult to figure out how the enzymes go about their routine
business in a molecular world too small to be glimpsed directly. Now,
Kowalczykowski and his colleagues are hoping to harness the process for medical
purposes, including gene therapy and ultra-precise delivery of DNA-repairing
drug payloads.

    "Our very simple goal was to see in real time a molecular motor running
along a strand of DNA, something that has never been visualized before,"
Kowalczykowski said.

    It took a combination of sophisticated tools and custom engineering to make
the DNA stretch out sufficiently and hold still long enough to be photographed
while the enzyme molecules were attached.

    Lighting was provided by special fluorescent dyes that make DNA glow when it
is in its typical double-stranded form, but not when the molecule has been
unzipped into two single strands.

    Glowing polystyrene beads were attached to one end of each piece of DNA to
help anchor them down. The researchers also wielded laser beams as pairs of
high-precision "optical tweezers" to help keep things under control.

    A single helicase molecule, attached to a DNA molecule, was then loaded into
one channel of a Y-shaped micromachined "flow cell." The action began when the
ATP was added as fuel through the other arm of the "Y."

    At that point, the video camera began recording the scene through an optical
microscope, capturing the glowing DNA as the enzyme molecules marched along
toward the polystyrene anchors.

    The enzyme molecules are too small to be seen one at a time, even under the
microscope. And technical problems made it impossible to use more advanced
nanotech imaging methods that make pictures by recording subtle atomic forces.

    So the researchers had to settle for the indirect strategy of the special
dye. As the enzyme unzipped the DNA into its two separate strands, the light
appears to blink out in the enzyme's wake. The pictures show the DNA strands
seemingly growing shorter and shorter.

    In the end, only the polystyrene bead is still visible, even though the
unlit DNA still dangles in place.

    Kowalczykowski said additional experiments are planned to better understand
how the enzymes work at the level of individual molecules -- activity that
biochemists traditionally have studied by mixing test tubes and beakers
containing molecules by the millions.

    Looking at a single molecule as it changes form is "a very powerful
approach," Kowalczykowski said.

    "If you want to know how a car works, you can take an aerial view of
Interstate 80 and see thousands of cars at once, which can tell you something,"
he said. "But if you really want to understand how a car works, eventually you
have to take a close look at a single car."E-mail Carl T. Hall at
carlhall@sfchronicle.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2001


                             2043 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           January 20, 2001 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E2

LENGTH: 612 words

HEADLINE: Management Shake-Up at AOL

BODY:

   AOL Time Warner announced a management reshuffling at its online division in
Dulles, effective immediately. Ray Oglethorpe, president of AOL Technologies,
was appointed president of America Online, the online subsidiary. Jan Brandt,
president of marketing, was named vice chairman and chief marketing officer. Ted
Leonsis, president of the interactive properties group, was named vice chairman
and new product officer. All three are new positions.

   The Federal Communications Commission proposed to require that some new
television sets be capable of receiving digital signals, saying that could help
boost production and bring down prices. Currently, a high-definition TV monitor
goes for about $ 2,500; a separate set-top or stand-alone tuner costs another $
1,000. Broadcasters have long complained that few consumers will pay those
prices, giving them no incentive to upgrade facilities and develop digital
programming. Consumer groups and TV makers argue that a mandate would drive up
the cost of digital sets, even as market forces are beginning to make them drop.

   The United States, Mexico and Canada have ended tariffs on almost $ 900
million worth of traded goods ahead of the schedule set by the 1994 North
American Free Trade Agreement, the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative said.
Included in the items that will now trade duty-free among the three countries
are footwear, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, auto parts and batteries.

   The Federal Communications Commission may still vote on changes in the way
local phone firms charge other companies for using their networks, even though
Chairman William E. Kennard left his post Thursday, sources said. Or the
commission may wrap the issue into a more general decision on inter-carrier
compensation, which would apply to long-distance and wireless carriers as well,
the sources said.

    ABC News is cutting its budget by as much as $ 20 million in an effort to
avoid layoffs in a softening advertising market, though sources said up to 15 of
the network's correspondents may not have their contracts renewed. The
reductions at ABC are less severe than those announced in the past week by CNN
and NBC.

   Amgen won a federal court ruling blocking smaller biotechnology rival
Transkaryotic Therapies from selling its own version of the top-selling anemia
drug Epogen, which accounts for almost half of Amgen's sales. U.S. District
Court Judge William Young in Boston ruled that Amgen's patents were "valid,
enforceable and infringed." Analysts said the ruling could reignite enthusiasm
for biotech stocks.

   Home Depot said fiscal fourth-quarter profit will fall more than forecast.
Earnings in the quarter ending Jan. 28 will fall to 20 cents a share from 25
cents a year earlier. Sales at stores open at least a year will be flat, the
home-improvement giant said.

   Ciena might periodically sell up to $ 1.5 billion in securities, the
Linthicum, Md.-based maker of fiber-optics equipment announced in documents
filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Ciena reserved the right to
choose what kinds of securities to sell -- including stock or convertible
debentures -- depending on market opportunities.

   Constellation Energy, parent of Baltimore Gas and Electric, reported that it
earned $ 345 million in 2000, up 33 percent from 1999.

   Mitsubishi Motors shareholders, meeting in Tokyo, approved the appointment of
DaimlerChrysler executive Rolf Eckrodt to its board. Previously president of
DaimlerChrysler's rail-systems subsidiary Adtranz, he also becomes Mitsubishi's
chief operating officer.

   Compiled from reports by the Associated Press, Bloomberg News, Dow Jones News
Service and Washington Post staff writers

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2001


                             2044 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                   January 18, 2001, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 741 words

HEADLINE: COOPERATION REVIVES MEDICAL-COMPLEX PLAN

BYLINE: KEVIN COLLISON; News Staff Reporter

BODY:


   Leaders at Buffalo's premier health institutions have decided to work
together to revive the decade-old dream of creating a "world-class" medical
center on High Street.

   As opposed to a similar city-led effort that foundered 10 years ago, the
institutions say they are now ready to buy into the idea and have set up a
14-member board to chart the future of what they are calling the Buffalo Niagara
Medical Center.

   "The communication that's been going on between the various health care
providers and the University at Buffalo and others is as good as I've seen in
years," said Thomas E. Baker, executive director of the Oishei Foundation.

   "People are finally coming to grips with the idea that we as a community will
do better working together than walking down separate paths."

   The Oishei Foundation has contributed $ 100,000 to assist the new
partnership, which includes Kaleida Health, operator of Buffalo General, Millard
Fillmore and Children's hospitals in Buffalo, Millard Fillmore Suburban in
Amherst and DeGraff Memorial in North Tonawanda; Roswell Park Cancer Institute;
the Buffalo Medical Group; Hauptman-Woodward Institute; and UB.

   Together, the institutions believe they can maintain and expand specialties
in treatment and research that will be a beacon for patients around the nation
and Canada.

   They include:

   Roswell Park, banking on its reputation as one of the best hospitals in the
nation for cancer care, and focusing on research in biophysical therapies,
immunology, genetics and therapeutics.

   UB, furnishing the scientists and doctors for excellence in pediatrics,
geriatrics, oncology and neurovascular research.

   Hauptman-Woodward Institute, continuing research in the field of structural
biology.

   Kaleida, treating neurological disorders such as multiple sclerosis and
strokes, performing spinal surgery and working with orthopedic implants and
rehabilitation. The relocation of Children's will allow collaboration with
Roswell Park for pediatric cancer treatment.

   "A joint pediatric oncology program would attract patients from upstate New
York and compete with the whole Northeast," said John E. Friedlander, chief
executive of Kaleida. "If you look at midsize cities, very few have a specialty
children's hospital and a cancer center."

   Without cooperation, the fear is that Buffalo will not only fail to reap the
economic benefits of being a major medical center, but will lose patients
seeking specialized treatment to other areas of the country.

   "It's the only future I find acceptable," said UB President William R.
Greiner. "We either go forward or we slide back."

   The new board also includes representatives from the city, county and the
nearby Allentown and Fruit Belt neighborhoods. Members already have made a
fact-finding trip to the Texas Medical Center in Houston and will soon visit the
Louisville (Ky.) Medical Center.

   "What makes this different is all the major stakeholders are working under
one umbrella," said Mayor Anthony M. Masiello. "I don't think that happened in
the past. We've had a Balkanized community before."

   Masiello said inclusion of Allentown and the Fruit Belt on the board means
whatever economic benefits are derived from a thriving medical district will
also benefit surrounding neighborhoods.

   Boosting the medical center initiative, supporters say, is the decision by
Thomas R. Beecher, a respected local attorney, to serve as board chairman.

   Beecher, a former Kaleida Health chairman, guided the 1998 formation of
Kaleida and recently led community meetings on the controversial proposal to
relocate Children's Hospital to High Street.

   "In order for this organization to work, the chairman had to be someone
everyone would buy into," said Richard T. Reinhard, who worked as a consultant
to the city on the medical campus effort before taking a job in Atlanta.

   Though participants say the purpose of the new medical center concept is not
to initiate a major building boom, the plan does include the proposed
construction by 2007 of a new Children's Hospital at Main and High streets.

   UB also plans to have a physical presence in the area, though it might opt to
jointly develop a research building with Roswell Park on Virginia Street, said
Dr. Michael E. Bernardino, UB vice president of health sciences.

   Each institution plans to keep its identity and board but will work
cooperatively on planning which programs to emphasize.

GRAPHIC: MAP-MEDICAL CENTER INITIATIVE

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2001


                             2045 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           January 18, 2001 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: PART A; Part 1; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 560 words

HEADLINE: OPENNESS URGED FOR SOME CLINICAL TRIALS

BYLINE: MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday proposed making information
available on all clinical trials involving gene therapy and animal-to-human
transplants, including data about deaths or serious side effects.

   The proposal stems from the controversy that arose last year over the death
of an Arizona teenager during a gene therapy study and subsequent revelations
that researchers in that trial and elsewhere had violated federal rules,
including notifying federal health officials of safety problems.

   The FDA, which shares oversight of such trials with the National Institutes
of Health, has never released information about them to other researchers or the
public. And although the NIH has released some information, it was under no
obligation to do so.

   FDA Commissioner Jane E. Henney called the action "an important step in
ensuring greater public confidence in these revolutionary therapeutic
technologies."

   In gene therapy, genetic material is administered to humans to modify or
manipulate genes or to alter the biology of living cells for therapeutic
purposes.

   Xenotransplantation is the term generally used to refer to any procedure that
involves the transplantation, implantation or infusion of animal cells, tissues
or organs into humans.

   Both approaches "hold great promise, but they may also pose a remote but
unique risk to the individuals who have volunteered to participate in these
types of studies," she added. The proposal "will ensure that the public is fully
informed" as the work continues.

   But Carl B. Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology Industry Organization,
which represents more than 950 biotech companies, academic institutions and
biotechnology centers, said that disclosing safety problems "without first
investigating the causes could unnecessarily frighten patients and the public."

   The vast majority of side effects in clinical trials are related to the
patients' underlying diseases, not the experimental medicines, he said.

   Further, under current rules, "when the cause of an adverse event is linked
to the drug being tested, the FDA immediately shuts down the clinical trial," he
said.

   "Requiring disclosure of information that has no bearing on patients or the
public could hinder the progress of innovative drug development," he added.

   Also, public disclosure could compromise patient confidentiality and raise
serious proprietary issues, said Michael Werner, bioethics counsel for the trade
group.

   "It is a dramatic deviation from decades of FDA regulation and practice," he
said. "There was a reason the rules were the way they were. Changing them would
be inappropriate."

   The FDA said its proposal would ensure that the agency's policies will be
consistent with other government agencies, including the NIH. Eventually, much
of the information will be posted on the FDA's Web site.

   Gene therapy information is already discussed to some extent at open meetings
of NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee.

   Werner acknowledged that "the NIH makes some information public" but that the
FDA proposal will go beyond what the NIH allows. He cited, for example,
"descriptions of how gene therapy products are produced, toxicology
information--all kinds of extra information not routinely submitted by companies
to NIH ."

   The proposal will be open to public comment for 90 days before the agency
issues a final ruling.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2001


                             2046 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                    January 18, 2001 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 03A

LENGTH: 109 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy side effects to be disclosed

BYLINE:  Associated Press

BODY:

   Washington -- Americans considering participating in studies of gene therapy
may soon get better information about the risks as the government announced
plans Wednesday for the first public disclosure of side effects almost as soon
as they happen.

   The Food and Drug Administration's shift was sparked by the uproar last year
when a teenager died in a gene therapy experiment.

   Under the proposed change, scientists would have to post on the FDA's Web
site most safety information about an experiment when it begins. Until now, that
information largely was kept secret. It also affects xenotransplantation,
implanting animal tissue into people.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2001


                             2047 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           January 18, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 942 words

HEADLINE: F.D.A. Plans New Scrutiny In Areas of Biotechnology

BYLINE:  By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Seeking to calm public anxiety, the Food and Drug Administration yesterday
proposed rules that would strengthen scrutiny of several biotechnology areas:
genetically modified foods, gene therapy and the transplantation of animal
organs and tissues into people.

        The agency said it would make it mandatory, rather than voluntary, for
developers of genetically modified food to subject such food to a safety review
before bringing it to market. The agency also said it would make much of the
information provided by the companies publicly available.

    The F.D.A. also issued guidelines on how food companies could voluntarily
label their products as being made without genetic engineering. But it declined
requests from numerous consumer and environmental groups that it require all
genetically engineered foods to be labeled.

   Regarding gene therapy and the animal organ transplants, the agency said it
planned to release data on clinical trials that it now keeps confidential, a
proposal that angered the biotechnology industry. Such public disclosure, the
agency hopes, will assuage public concerns that have arisen about gene therapy
since the death of a teenager in a clinical trial at the University of
Pennsylvania in September 1999.

   Providing more information about bioengineered crops is also expected to
remove some concerns about biotech foods, officials said.

   "What any product doesn't need is for there to be suspicion on the behalf of
consumers that something is being slipped by them," Jane E. Henney, the
commissioner of food and drugs, said in an interview about the food regulations.

   But many consumer and environmental groups said the new rules do not go far
enough. "It's a baby step in what needs to be a leap toward real regulation,"
said Rebecca Goldburg, senior scientist at Environmental Defense, a nonprofit
group.

   Ms. Goldburg and other critics said the safety review of genetically modified
crops would still fall far short of the more rigorous scrutiny given to food
additives.

   The food and biotechnology industries generally applauded the rules, which
they have been advocating. The industry hopes mandatory F.D.A. review will
demonstrate to consumers that biotechnology is regulated; it will not impose
many new burdens on the companies because they are already notifying and
providing data to the agency voluntarily.

   Food companies have also pushed for voluntary labeling. Mandatory labels on
foods with genetically modified ingredients, they maintain, would be interpreted
by consumers as a skull and crossbones. On the other hand, stating on a label
that a product does not contain genetically modified ingredients could be a way
to attract customers concerned about genetic engineering.

   "I think you're going to see a number of companies putting on their labels
'nonbiotech,' " said Gene Grabowski, spokesman for the Grocery Manufacturers of
America.

   Some companies, particularly organic or health food companies, have already
started such labeling.

   The new guidelines, however, would impose restrictions on such labels. The
agency said it would frown on use of labels that state a product is "free" of
bioengineered ingredients because that is virtually impossible to guarantee. It
would prefer labels saying that the products were not made using biotechnology.
It also said that any label implying that the nonbioengineered food was somehow
superior to the bioengineered equivalent would be "misleading."

   It is estimated that two-thirds of the processed foods now in American
supermarkets are made with genetically altered corn, soy or other crops. The
F.D.A. maintains that it cannot require labeling of genetically modified foods
because there is no evidence they are different in terms of safety or
nutritional value.

   Representative Dennis Kucinich, Democrat of Ohio, sharply criticized the new
rules as "purely public relations" and said he would renew his push to enact
legislation requiring mandatory labeling.

   The new food rules have been expected since May, when the F.D.A. announced
its intentions. The agency had conducted three public hearings late in 1999 and
received more than 35,000 written comments. There will now be a public comment
period before the rules are made final, giving the new administration of George
W. Bush a chance to weigh in.

   Regarding gene therapy and the animal tissue transplants, the agency said it
wanted to depart from the rules requiring that information about clinical trials
be kept confidential unless the organization conducting the trial allowed
disclosure. The justification for this departure, it said, is that the two
techniques pose a theoretical risk of viral infection to the public, not just to
the patient being treated.

   Because it is considered so novel, gene therapy trials are regulated not only
by the F.D.A. but by the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National
Institutes of Health. And some information on trials is already made available
through that committee. But the proposed F.D.A. rules are expected to increase
the amount of data made public.

   The biotechnology industry expressed dismay.

   "It's somewhat out of left field," said H. Stewart Parker, president of
Targeted Genetics, a gene therapy company in Seattle, who added that the rules
would "make it much harder to operate in the field of gene therapy."

   Ruth Macklin, professor of bioethics at the Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, said the proposed rules could undermine the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, of which she is a member. One reason for that committee's existence,
Professor Macklin said, has been to provide the public with information that the
F.D.A. kept confidential.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jane E. Henney, the commissioner of food and drugs. (Reuters)

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2001


                             2048 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           January 18, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 588 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:

   Cautious Note on Tax Cuts From Treasury Nominee
Treasury Secretary-designate Paul H. O'Neill struck a cautious note on tax cuts
that departed from the position taken by President-elect George W. Bush, calling
on Congress to reduce tax rates but expressing doubts that broad cuts would
ignite the slowing economy.

        During a three-hour hearing before the Senate Finance Committee, Mr.
O'Neill, the former Alcoa executive, supported tax cuts with words that were
noticeably less rousing than those of Mr. Bush.  Page A1.


   An economist wishes the Senate committee had sounded out Mr. O'Neill a little
more thoroughly on some crucial international issues that any Treasury secretary
is likely to confront. Jeff Madrick: Economic Scene.  C2.

G.E. Profit Meets Expectations
General Electric said its fourth-quarter earnings rose 16 percent, to $3.59
billion, which was in line with Wall Street expectations, even though revenue
gained only 6 percent, to $35 billion. But the company also said layoffs were
likely, citing the economy, the use of Internet technology to streamline
operations, the acquisition of Honeywell International and the bankruptcy of
Montgomery Ward. Shares of G.E. fell 69 cents, to $46.69.  C4.

Apple Posts a First-Quarter Loss
Struggling to cope with falling demand for its consumer products, Apple Computer
reported a $247 million loss for its first quarter, normally its strongest. A
year ago Apple earned $183 million, or 51 cents a share.  C10.

Nasdaq Climbs in Heavy Trading
Technology stocks rose but gave up hefty gains as blue chips fell. In one of its
busiest days, the Nasdaq composite index ended the day up 64.23 points, or 2.5
percent, at 2,682.78. The Dow Jones industrial average fell 68.32 points, or 0.6
percent, to 10,584.34. And the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index gained 2.82
points, or 0.2 percent, to 1,329.47.  C16.

A Report on Work-Related Injuries
A National Academy of Sciences report to be released today found that about one
million injuries were caused each year by repetitive motions on the job or by
other work-related ergonomic factors. Congressional Democrats and union
officials said the report underscored the need for the ergonomics regulations
that President Clinton issued two months ago, but Republicans and business
groups said it provided little justification for new rules.  C6.

Banks Disappoint, but Are Forgiven
Bank One and J. P. Morgan Chase reported disappointing fourth-quarter earnings,
but their stock prices barely reflected the bad news. Analysts and investors
seemed willing to give managements of both banks the benefit of the doubt, given
that each is in a state of transition. J. P. Morgan Chase is in the process of
integrating the merger announced in September of J. P. Morgan and Chase
Manhattan. At Bank One, the company's chief executive, James Dimon, is in the
midst of a turnaround effort that began last March.  C4.

'Sell' Contest for a Brokerage Firm
After Sean McGowan, Gerard Klauer Mattison's research director, found no sell
recommendations at his brokerage firm in a recent survey, he began a contest. A
cash bonus will be given to whoever produces the "sell" or "underperform" rating
on a stock that subsequently falls the most within 2001. Gretchen Morgenson:
Market Place.  C14.

F.D.A. Plans Biotechnology Rules
The Food and Drug Administration proposed rules that would strengthen scrutiny
of genetically modified foods, gene therapy and the transplantation of animal
organs and tissues into people. The rules are intended to calm public anxiety.
A12.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo Chart: "YESTERDAY"Dow industrials -- 10,584.34 down 68.32Nasdaq
composite -- 2,682.78 up 64.2310-yr. Treasury yield -- 5.16% down 0.07The euro
-- $0.9342 down 0.0068The dollar -- 118.90 yen up 1.39 Graph: "TODAY" shows
housing construction figures from June-November 2000.December figures due at
8:30 a.m. Eastern time.Expected: -3.3% Graph shows GE share prices for the week.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2001


                             2049 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           January 18, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1044 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:

        INTERNATIONAL   A3-11

Congo Says Leader Lives, But Installs Son in Top Role
Congolese officials asserted that President Laurent Kabila was alive, but
foreign officials said the Congolese were buying time to put a succession in
place before acknowledging that he had been shot to death on Tuesday. His son
Joseph assumed the role of interim leader.   A1

Warning of Yemen Attack
Federal court documents show a defendant on trial in the bombing of the American
Embassy in Kenya warned his American interrogators of a possible attack in
Yemen. On Oct. 12, the American destroyer Cole was bombed in Yemen.   A5


   Philippine Impeachment Halted
The Senate suspended the impeachment trial of President Joseph Estrada. About
40,000 people rallied in Manila to demand his ouster.   A10

Adoption Battle for Twins
Twin girls born six months ago in Missouri are the object of an extraordinary
international tug of war between a couple in Britain and another in the United
States, both of whom say they paid the same adoption broker to adopt the babies.
A3

World Briefing   A10

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Putting the Brakes on Light
Two independent teams of physicists said they had slowed light to a dead stop,
stored it and then released it as if it were an ordinary material particle. The
achievement could help realize theoretical concepts for vastly increasing the
speed of computers and the security of communications.   A1

Standards for Global Warming
Scientists from 150 governments met in Shanghai to try to agree on what evidence
of warming should be used to set global environmental policy.   A7

Monitoring Biotechnology
The F.D.A. proposed rules to strengthen scrutiny of genetically modified foods,
gene therapy and the transplantation of animal organs and tissues into people.
A12

NATIONAL   A12-21

Bush's Treasury Choice Soft-Pedals Big Tax Cut
Paul H. O'Neill, speaking at his Senate confirmation hearing for treasury
secretary, struck a cautious note on tax cuts that departed from the position
taken by President-elect George W. Bush, calling on Congress to reduce tax rates
but expressing doubts that broad cuts would ignite the slowing economy. He also
said the Fed, through its control of monetary policy, was the "first line of
action" to fight a downturn.   A1

John Ashcroft told the Senate Judiciary Committee on the second day of his
confirmation hearings that as attorney general he would not seek opportunities
to challenge the landmark Roe v. Wade abortion decision.   A16

Gov. Christie Whitman said at her confirmation hearing that as E.P.A. director
she would give the states greater latitude in heeding federal pollution-control
rules.   A18

Gen. Colin L. Powell underwent deferential questioning at his confirmation
hearing for secretary of state.   A17

Melquiades R. Martinez told a Senate committee that as housing secretary he
would work to ensure that more minority families owned homes and would fight any
effort to reduce the department's budget.   A17

Corporate America is lining up to celebrate George W. Bush's presidency by
writing big checks to the Bush inauguration effort and supporting a Republican
fund-raising drive that began long before Mr. Bush announced his candidacy.   A1


California Emergency Declared
Gov. Gray Davis declared a state of emergency, after being forced to temporarily
cut off electricity to hundreds of thousands of people from Oregon to
Bakersfield.   A1

Top Auditor's Grim Assessment
The comptroller general of the United States said the Bush administration would
inherit a government riddled with weak management.   A14

On Detaining Sexual Predators
The Supreme Court, ruling 8 to 1, upheld the continued civil confinement of a
rapist whose criminal sentence expired 12 years ago.   A20

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-13

Pataki Proposes Overhaul Of Rockefeller Drug Laws
Governor Pataki proposed shorter prison terms for many nonviolent drug offenses,
replacing mandatory imprisonment with treatment in some cases and giving judges
greater discretion in sentencing.   A1

Mild Quake Rattles City
A temblor of about 2.4 magnitude jolted the city at 7:34 a.m., its effects felt
most widely in Queens though its center was on the Upper East Side.   B1

Plan to Rescue Brownstones
Federal housing officials unveiled a plan to rehabilitate nearly 500 brownstones
in Harlem and Brooklyn that are facing foreclosure after a home mortgage
scandal.   B1

Suit Accuses Park of Bias
A group of children, parents, teachers and one of the property owners of
Gramercy Park said in a lawsuit that the private park's administrative body had
tried to bar invited schoolchildren from using the park because of their race.
B1

Neediest Cases   B6

SPORTS   D1-8

Jets Settle on a Coach
The Jets will name Herman Edwards, Tampa Bay's assistant head coach, as their
new head coach, ending 20 tumultuous days of remaking the Jets' top echelon.
D1

N.B.A. Suspends Camby
Knicks center Marcus Camby was fined $25,000 and suspended for five games for
throwing a punch at Danny Ferry of San Antonio but bumping -- and bloodying --
Coach Jeff Van Gundy instead. Ferry was suspended for one game and fined $7,500.
D1

OBITUARIES   B11-12

Leonard Woodcock
The former union leader who as envoy to China in the Carter administration
negotiated the renewal of full relations between the United States and China in
1979 was 89.   B12

BUSINESS DAY   C1-22

I.B.M. Beats Expectations
I.B.M. reported quarterly earnings slightly better than Wall Street expectations
and said it was "comfortable" with analysts' current earning projections for
this year. It added that most of its business showed no significant signs of
weakening.   C1

Automaker Reports Big Loss
General Motors' profits plunged 92 percent in the fourth quarter because of
large one-time charges, a slight erosion of profits in North America and big
losses overseas, especially in Europe.   C1

OPEC Production Cut
Oil ministers ratified a 5 percent reduction in oil production, or 1.5 million
barrels a day, beginning Feb. 1.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

CIRCUITS   G1-10

ARTS   E1-14

HOUSE & HOME   F1-16

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Washington's guessing game; turmoil in Congo; Steven R. Weisman on
Albany's school politics.
Columns: Bob Herbert, William Safire.

Bridge   E12
Public Lives   B2
Crossword   E8
Weather   B13
TV Listings   E13

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2001


                             2050 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                 JANUARY 18, 2001 Thursday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 599 words

HEADLINE: FDA RECOMMENDS MORE OPEN GENE THERAPY TRIALS

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Americans considering participating in studies of gene therapy may soon get
better information about the risks as the government announced plans yesterday
for the first public disclosure of side effects almost as soon as they happen.

   The Food and Drug Administration's major policy shift was sparked by uproar
last year when an Arizona teen-ager died in a University of Pennsylvania gene
therapy experiment.

   Under the proposed change, scientists would have to post on the FDA's Web
site - www.fda.gov - most of the safety information about an experiment when it
begins. That information largely is kept secret.

   The proposal affects mostly the hot new field of gene therapy, but also
controversial xenotransplantation - implanting animal tissue into people.

   "Both of these technologies hold great promise, but they may also pose a
remote but unique risk to the individuals who have volunteered to participate in
these types of studies," FDA Commissioner Jane Henney said.

   Consumer advocates praised the change as an overdue way to help sick
Americans make better decisions about joining medical experiments. But the
biotechnology industry promised to fight the proposed rules, arguing that
disclosing such information could confuse the public about whether a study was
truly unsafe or whether a participant's side effect really was due to the
underlying disease.

   Prompting the change was Jesse Gelsinger's death last year from a botched
Penn gene therapy study; it was the first known death from gene therapy.

   Among other problems, federal investigators found that scientists had never
warned study participants that two monkeys had died from the experiment, and
that they failed to stop the trial after some patients developed worrisome liver
abnormalities. Gelsinger died of a liver disorder four days after his treatment.

   The FDA decides whether scientists can try experimental therapies in people
based on safety studies in animals. Patients volunteering for such experiments
should receive consent forms detailing all potential risks. But the FDA largely
depends on local oversight boards to ensure that happens, and it too often does
not.

   Once the experiment begins, scientists must report all side effects to the
FDA - but until now the agency has almost always kept that information secret,
bowing to industry's insistence that what happens in clinical trials is a
commercially important trade secret.

   Even when the FDA stops an experiment because people have died, it seldom
tells the public. Study participants often learn about safety problems from
scientists with a vested interest in the experimental therapy.

   The proposed change would require scientists to reveal large amounts of
nonproprietary information about new studies, including what patients qualify,
exactly what is being tested, and results of animal safety studies or any
previous human studies. As the study continues, any serious side effects would
be revealed, too.

   Noting that many more people have been injured in studies of regular
medications than by gene therapy experiments, Sidney Wolfe, of Public Citizen,
said the change should be expanded to cover all FDA-approved experiments.

   That is just what the Biotechnology Industry Organization fears.

   The trade group's government relations chief, Michael Werner, said that if a
study really is risky, the FDA should shut it down - and if not, participants
should get safety information from researchers who know the study best.

   The FDA will begin finalizing the rules, a process that could take months,
after a 90-day public comment period.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             2051 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JANUARY 18, 2001 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 443 words

HEADLINE: FDA PROPOSES SHARING DATA ON GENE TRIALS, SOME TRANSPLANTS

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In a major shift, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration yesterday proposed
lifting the cloak of secrecy around human trials of experimental gene-based
medicines and transplants from animals to humans.

   Under the proposed new rule, the agency plans to make safety data about such
highly experimental trials publicly available on its Web site.

   FDA Commissioner Jane E. Henney called the proposal "an important step in
ensuring greater public confidence in these revolutionary therapeutic
technologies."

   Under the proposal, the FDA would disclose certain types of information now
regarded as confidential. These include how animals fared when given the
experimental drug and any serious side effects suffered by people enrolled in
human trials of the medicines.

   FDA officials emphasized that the names of enrollees in clinical trials would
not be revealed.

   The proposal, published in yesterday's Federal Register, stems from
widespread concern about the adequacy of federal oversight of experimental
medicine after the 1999 death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, in a gene-therapy
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Information about so-called adverse events suffered by people enrolled in
similar trials sponsored by private industry was not made available to the Penn
scientists, much less to the public, because of the FDA's legal obligation not
to reveal trade secrets.

   FDA officials said yesterday that the proposed rule would protect such
secrets while providing the public and other scientists with important
information.

   "Clinical research is not a right, it's a privilege," said Philip Noguchi,
who oversees regulation of gene therapy at the FDA. The agency's proposal is the
latest in a string of federal initiatives to improve safety monitoring after
Gelsinger's death.

   The rule - which would not take effect until after a 90-day comment period -
was hailed by patient advocates and denounced by the biotech industry.

   "We've been fighting for this for 10 years," said Abbey S. Meyers, head of
the National Organization for Rare Disorders. "The FDA's biggest problem has
always been secrecy."

   But the Biotechnology Industry Organization, a Washington-based trade
organization, said the proposal did not ensure the protection of patient rights
and confidential industry information.

   Carl B. Feldbaum, the group's president, said that disclosing adverse patient
events without first investigating their cause might "unnecessarily frighten"
the public. Most adverse events, he said, are due to patients' underlying
disease, not the experimental therapy they are receiving.

   Huntly Collins' e-mail address is hcollins@phillynews.com

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             2052 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 18, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 653 words

HEADLINE: S.D.-based Epimmune stock soars on hepatitis B report

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 News of the potential for a new hepatitis B treatment more than doubled the
stock price of San Diego-based Epimmune Inc. yesterday, making it the biggest
percentage gainer in the United States.

   The stock market's reaction underscores the important but largely unrealized
potential for therapeutic vaccines -- and Wall Street's unquenchable enthusiasm
for anything that makes mice feel better.

   Epimmune's stock spike is due to a new study with mice, conducted with the
Scripps Research Institute, that was published yesterday in the Journal of
Immunology.  The study indicates that Epimmune may be the first to have found a
way to overcome immune tolerance to the chronic hepatitis B virus.

   Immune tolerance -- in this case the inability of the immune system to
recognize the hepatitis B virus as a foreign invader and mount an attack against
it -- is a key barrier to development of effective vaccines to treat many
chronic infections and cancer.

   In the study, researchers engineered mice to carry the complete hepatitis B
virus genome.  The livers of the mice produce large amounts of the virus
throughout their lives, in a manner similar to humans chronically infected with
hepatitis B.

   Like humans, the mice become highly tolerant of the virus and their systems
do not mount an anti-viral immune response.  Yet using Epimmune's experimental
vaccine, the mice overcame their immune tolerance, their immune systems kicked
in and virus production in the liver was reduced.

   Dr. Frank Chisari, the Scripps Research Institute scientist who led the
study, said that other, conventional vaccines and gene therapies have been
tested on the engineered mice but failed.

   "We've tried over and over again to break immune tolerance using other
vaccines and have failed," Chisari said.  "This is the first time we've
succeeded."

   Epimmune's vaccine is based on epitopes, fragments of proteins selected from
regions of a virus that don't mutate.  Ultimately, the company hopes to develop
an epitope-based vaccine that teaches the human immune system's "killer" T-cells
to attack parts of the virus that aren't prone to mutation and are less likely
to escape an immune response.

   Yet such a feat is years in the making, researchers caution.

   More animal studies will have to be conducted before the Food and Drug
Administration would consider testing the vaccine in humans.  Further
development and testing of the vaccine in patients, through three lengthy
clinical trials, could take years.

   "This is significant," said Chisari, who is also a paid consultant for
Epimmune.  "But it is a far cry from having a vaccine in hand that we can say
works in chronically infected patients -- there will be a lot more work to get
to that point."

   The likelihood of a long research haul didn't faze Wall Street.  In early
trading, investors bid Epimmune shares as much as 180 percent higher, to peak at
$7. The stock closed at $5.06, up 102 percent.

   The stock hike was welcome news for the tiny biotech, which recently suffered
a major setback and has yet to get a drug out of animal studies and into human
testing.

   In November, Epimmune lost a major research collaboration with pharmaceutical
giant Pharmacia Corp. -- and potential millions of dollars in research funding
-- to develop a therapeutic cancer vaccine.

   The company's stock, which peaked at $21 last March during the height of an
investor frenzy in the biotech sector, has fallen steadily.  Last month,
Epimmune's stock reached a 52-week low of $1.59.

   Yet Epimmune has generated interest in recent months with published results
of several preclinical studies in animals, including an AIDS vaccine that the
company said will move into human trials late this year.

   Epimmune spokesman Robert Chesnut said Wall Street's reaction yesterday is
evidence that investors believe the company is "continuing to move forward and
is on the right track."


GRAPHIC: 1 GRAPH; UNION-TRIBUNE | SOURCE: Bloomberg; Booster shot

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2001


                             2053 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 18, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-5

LENGTH: 666 words

HEADLINE: FDA proposes a new review process for biotech foods; Plan includes
posting data on the Internet

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS and KNIGHT RIDDER NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 WASHINGTON -- Seeking to ease public anxiety about genetically engineered food,
the government proposed a mandatory review procedure for new biotech products
that will include posting scientific data on the Internet.

   The Food and Drug Administration relies on biotech companies for voluntary
consultation with the agency before the release of new biotech crops.

   In addition to the proposal yesterday for mandatory review, the FDA also is
proposing voluntary labeling guidelines for foods that claim either to be
nonbiotech or to have special biotech ingredients.  A claim such as
"biotech-free" would not be allowed, because of the difficulty of proving it.

   The mandatory review process "addresses what is of most concern to consumers;
that is making our process more open and transparent and making it mandatory,"
said FDA Commissioner Jane Henney.

   Companies would have to notify FDA of new biotech products at least four
months before they are to be put on the market.

   Scientific descriptions and data about new crops or food animals, including
information about genetic modification and the potential to cause allergic
reactions, would be put on the Internet during the agency's review.  Some of the
data could be kept confidential if a company were to convince the FDA that its
information involved trade secrets.

   The new rules are in line with a series of proposals the White House made in
the spring to respond to criticism of its regulation of the biotechnology
industry.  They do not go far enough to satisfy many consumer advocates and
environmentalists, who say federal regulation of the industry is lax and want
mandatory labeling of all biotech foods.

   Genetic engineering in agriculture involves splicing a gene from one
organism, such as a bacterium, into a plant or animal to confer certain traits,
such as drought tolerance or insect resistance in plants.

   The FDA will take public comment on the labeling guidelines and the proposed
new review process before they become final.

   Also yesterday, the FDA proposed lifting the cloak of secrecy around human
trials of experimental gene-based medicines and transplants from animals to
humans.

   Under the proposed new rule, the agency will use the Internet to post safety
data about such highly experimental trials.

   Henney called the proposal "an important step in ensuring greater public
confidence in these revolutionary therapeutic technologies."

   Under the proposal, the FDA would disclose certain types of information that
are now regarded as confidential.  These include how animals fared when given
the experimental drug and any serious side-effects suffered by people enrolled
in human trials of the medicines.

   FDA officials emphasized that the names of enrollees in clinical trials will
not be revealed.

   The proposal, published in yesterday's Federal Register, stems from
widespread concern about the adequacy of federal oversight of experimental
medicine following the 1999 death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, in a gene-therapy
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Information about so-called "adverse events" suffered by people enrolled in
similar trials sponsored by private industry was not made available to the Penn
scientists, much less to the public because of the FDA's legal obligation not to
reveal trade secrets.

   FDA officials said yesterday that the proposed rule protected such secrets
while providing the public and other scientists with important information.

   "Clinical research is not a right, it's a privilege," said Philip Noguchi,
who oversees regulation of gene therapy at the FDA. The agency's proposal is the
latest in a string of federal initiatives to improve safety monitoring following
Gelsinger's death.

   The rule -- which would not take effect until after a 90-day comment period
-- was denounced by the biotech industry.

   The Biotechnology Industry Organization, a Washington-based trade
organization, said the proposal does not ensure the protection of patient
rights.


LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2001


                             2054 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 18, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 642 words

HEADLINE: S.D.-based Epimmune stock soars on hepatitis B report

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   News of the potential for a new hepatitis B treatment more than doubled the
stock price of San Diego-based Epimmune Inc. yesterday, making it the biggest
percentage gainer in the United States. The stock market's reaction underscores
the important but largely unrealized potential for therapeutic vaccines -- and
Wall Street's unquenchable enthusiasm for anything that makes mice feel better.
Epimmune's stock spike is due to a new study with mice, conducted with the
Scripps Research Institute, that was published yesterday in the Journal of
Immunology.

   The study indicates that Epimmune may be the first to have found a way to
overcome immune tolerance to the chronic hepatitis B virus. Immune tolerance --
in this case the inability of the immune system to recognize the hepatitis B
virus as a foreign invader and mount an attack against it -- is a key barrier to
development of effective vaccines to treat many chronic infections and cancer.
In the study, researchers engineered mice to carry the complete hepatitis B
virus genome.

   The livers of the mice produce large amounts of the virus throughout their
lives, in a manner similar to humans chronically infected with hepatitis B. Like
humans, the mice become highly tolerant of the virus and their systems do not
mount an anti-viral immune response.

   Yet using Epimmune's experimental vaccine, the mice overcame their immune
tolerance, their immune systems kicked in and virus production in the liver was
reduced. Dr. Frank Chisari, the Scripps Research Institute scientist who led the
study, said that other, conventional vaccines and gene therapies have been
tested on the engineered mice but failed. "We've tried over and over again to
break immune tolerance using other vaccines and have failed," Chisari said.

   "This is the first time we've succeeded." Epimmune's vaccine is based on
epitopes, fragments of proteins selected from regions of a virus that don't
mutate.

   Ultimately, the company hopes to develop an epitope-based vaccine that
teaches the human immune system's "killer" T-cells to attack parts of the virus
that aren't prone to mutation and are less likely to escape an immune response.
Yet such a feat is years in the making, researchers caution. More animal studies
will have to be conducted before the Food and Drug Administration would consider
testing the vaccine in humans.

   Further development and testing of the vaccine in patients, through three
lengthy clinical trials, could take years. "This is significant," said Chisari,
who is also a paid consultant for Epimmune.

   "But it is a far cry from having a vaccine in hand that we can say works in
chronically infected patients -- there will be a lot more work to get to that
point." The likelihood of a long research haul didn't faze Wall Street.

   In early trading, investors bid Epimmune shares as much as 180 percent
higher, to peak at $7. The stock closed at $5.06, up 102 percent. The stock hike
was welcome news for the tiny biotech, which recently suffered a major setback
and has yet to get a drug out of animal studies and into human testing. In
November, Epimmune lost a major research collaboration with pharmaceutical giant
Pharmacia Corp. -- and potential millions of dollars in research funding -- to
develop a therapeutic cancer vaccine. The company's stock, which peaked at $21
last March during the height of an investor frenzy in the biotech sector, has
fallen steadily.

   Last month, Epimmune's stock reached a 52-week low of $1.59. Yet Epimmune has
generated interest in recent months with published results of several
preclinical studies in animals, including an AIDS vaccine that the company said
will move into human trials late this year. Epimmune spokesman Robert Chesnut
said Wall Street's reaction yesterday is evidence that investors believe the
company is "continuing to move forward and is on the right track."

GRAPHIC: 1 GRAPH; CAPTIONS: Booster shot; PHOTOBY: UNION-TRIBUNE | SOURCE:
Bloomberg

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             2055 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               January 18, 2001, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: GET OUT, Pg. 4

LENGTH: 4121 words

HEADLINE: EVENTS - LISTINGS

BODY:


Special events

THURSDAY, JANUARY 18

   Grossology: The (Impolite) Science of the Human Body: Based on the
best-selling book "Grossology," this traveling exhibition uses sophisticated
animatronics and imaginative exhibits to stimulate the senses and promote
scientific discovery of the human body. Learn the good, bad and ugly about runny
noses, body odor and much more. Entry times are every half hour during the
Science Center hours: 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturday-Thursday and 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
Friday. Through May 8. At the St. Louis Science Center, 5050 Oakland Avenue. $ 4
adults, $ 3 youths and seniors, free for members. (314-289-4400)

   Kweisi Mfume: The Arts and Issues Series continues with the former
congressman and leader of the NAACP. Mfume will present his five-point action
agenda, which encompasses civil rights, political empowerment, educational
excellence, economic development and youth outreach. 7:30 p.m. at Southern
Illinois University at Edwardsville, Morris University Center, 6 Hairpin Drive.
$ 8, $ 4 students. (618-650-5555)

FRIDAY, JANUARY 19

   Keeping Martin Luther King Jr.'s Dream Alive: Fontbonne College presents "His
Dream ... Our Reality?" in commemoration of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
11:30 a.m. at Fontbonne College, Doerr Chapel, 6800 Wydown Boulevard. Free.
(314-889-4523)

   Sing-A-Long Sound of Music: Cheer the Von Trapp kids! Sing along with Julie!
Boo the Nazis at this audience participatory screening of the classic film "The
Sound of Music." The event includes a costume contest prior to each show and
audience members will receive a complimentary interactive pack with edelweiss
and other items to be used at specific points in the film. 7 p.m. Friday, 2 and
7:30 p.m. Saturday and 7:30 p.m. Sunday at the Fox Theatre, 527 North Grand
Boulevard. $ 11.50-$ 16.50. (314-534-1111)

   Working Women's Survival Show: The annual event includes an appearance by
Deborah Norville of CBS's "Inside Edition," St. Louis' own Jenny Bluestein from
Facade demonstrating the latest in hair trends and skin care treatments and more
than 40 educational workshops focusing on topics such as health, fitness,
career, finance, fashion and leisure-time activities. 11 a.m. to 9 p.m. Friday,
10 a.m. to 8 p.m. Saturday and noon to 6 p.m. Sunday at America's Center, 801
Convention Plaza. $ 7.50 adults, $ 5 children ages 6 to 12 and seniors over 60.
(800-762-9973)

   St. Louis Cardinals Winter Warm-Up: Fans will have an opportunity to see some
of their favorite players and get autographs from former and current Cardinals
including Lou Brock, Enos Slaughter, Matt Morris, Rick Ankiel, Jim Edmonds, Mark
McGwire and others. Call for information about specific players and dates or
check the Web site at www.stlcardinals.com. 3 to 8 p.m. Friday and 9 a.m. to 5
p.m. Saturday and Sunday at the Regal Riverfront Hotel, 200 South Fourth Street.
$ 10 kids 5 to 15 years old, $ 25 for anyone age 16 or older, free for children
under 5 years of age. (314-421-3060)

SATURDAY, JANUARY 20

   Family Weekend: St. Louis, The First Hundred Years, 1764-1864: Explore 18th
and 19th century St. Louis through music, drama, storytelling, lectures, craft
demonstrations, and hands-on activities. Sponsored by the Missouri Historical
Society. Noon to 4 p.m. Saturday and Sunday at Missouri History Museum, 5700
Lindell Boulevard. Free. (314-361-9265)

   Tropic-of-City: For the winter-weary, here's an opportunity to celebrate warm
weather and exotic birds. A 6-foot volcano will be in the lobby along with a
swimming pool in which to cool off. 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturday and Sunday at
City Museum, 701 North 15th Street. $ 6, free for children under 1 and those who
wear a swimsuit. (314-231-2489)

Book signings and readings

THURSDAY, JANUARY 18

   Becky Tirabassi: The author will be signing copies of her new book, "Change
Your Life." 7 p.m. at Borders Books & Music, 7700 Forsyth Boulevard in Clayton.
Free. (314-721-0378)

SATURDAY, JANUARY 20

   St. Louis Writer's Guild: The workshop will allow each participant to give a
five-minute presentation of his or her works in progress and get five minutes of
constructive feedback. 10 a.m. at Barnes & Noble, 9618 Watson Road in Crestwood.
Free. (314-989-0085)

   Stephen J. Cannell: The author will be present to sign copies of his new
book, "The Tin Collectors." 6 p.m. at Barnes & Noble, 8871 Ladue Road in Ladue.
Free. (314-862-2948)

   Jerry Marshall: Marshall, a former sports writer for the St. Louis
Globe-Democrat, will be signing copies of his new book, "Mr. Irrelevant," a
mystery novel set in the world of professional football. 2 p.m. at Barnes &
Noble, 9618 Watson Road in Crestwood. Free. (314-843-0159)

   Julie Griggs Havey: The author and weight loss expert will be conducting a
weight loss seminar and signing copies of her new book, "Awaken the Diet
Within!" 1 p.m. at Borders Books & Music, 6601 North Illinois Street at
Interstate 64 in Fairview Heights. Free. (618-397-6097)

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 24

   Sandy Larson: The children's author will conduct a seminar, "Writing for a
Young Adult Audience," at this month's Writers Anonymous Club meeting. 7:30 p.m.
at Borders Books & Music, 6601 North Illinois Street at Interstate 64 in
Fairview Heights. Free. (618-397-6097)

Comedy clubs

THURSDAY, JANUARY 18

   Bob Zany: The comedian headlines and Joe Marlotti is the featured act at 8
tonight, 8:30 and 10:45 p.m. Friday, 7:30, 10 p.m. and midnight Saturday. At the
Funny Bone Comedy Club, West Port Plaza, Interstate 270 and Page Avenue in
Maryland Heights. $ 8-$ 15. (314-469-6692)

   Raven: The comic hypnotist will perform at 8 tonight, 8 and 10:15 p.m.
Friday-Saturday and 8 p.m. Sunday. At the Comedy Forum, 4141 North Cloverleaf
Drive in St. Peters. $ 10-$ 12. (636-498-1234)

FRIDAY, JANUARY 19

   Sean Morey: The comedian performs at 8 and 10 p.m. Friday-Saturday. At Art
Vieluf's Comedy Etc., Ramada Inn, Interstate 64 and Illinois 159 in Fairview
Heights. $ 15. (618-628-4242)

SUNDAY, JANUARY 21

   Joe Marlotti: The comedian headlines and Brett Clawson is the featured act at
8 p.m. At the Funny Bone Comedy Club, West Port Plaza, Interstate 270 and Page
Avenue in Maryland Heights. $ 8-$ 10. (314-469-6692)

TUESDAY, JANUARY 23

   Open Mic Night: Butch Lord is the host of this event at 8 p.m. Call for
information on performing. At Art Vieluf's Comedy Etc., Ramada Inn, Interstate
64 and Illinois 159 in Fairview Heights. $ 6. (618-628-4242)

   Jackie Mason - Much Ado About Everything!: The comedian brings his Broadway
comedy to St. Louis with no target too sacred, no personality too revered. If
it's in the news, it's in the show, says Mason. Performances are 7:30 p.m.
Tuesdays through Thursdays, 8 p.m. Fridays and Saturday; and 2 p.m. Sunday.
Through Feb. 2. At the Ritz-Carlton Theatre, 100 Carondelet Plaza in Clayton. $
47.50-$ 57.50. (314-421-4400)

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 24

   Flip Orley: The hypnotist comedian performs at 8 p.m. At Art Vieluf's Comedy
Etc., Ramada Inn, Interstate 64 and Illinois 159 in Fairview Heights. $ 10.
(618-628-4242)

Craft fairs and bazaars

FRIDAY, JANUARY 19

   Arts and Craft Show: Keepsake Country Shows presents its Wintertime Art and
Craft Show, which features uniquely crafted home accessories, floral
arrangements, sweatshirts, ceramics, oak furniture and more. Show hours are
Friday and Saturday from 10 a.m. to 9:30 p.m. and Sunday from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
At Mid Rivers Mall, 1600 Mid Rivers Mall Drive in St. Peters. Free.
(636-949-6513)

SATURDAY, JANUARY 20

   St. Louis Zoo Job Fair: Energetic, responsible, and service-oriented people
are needed for part-time positions including railroad engineers, face painters,
balloon vendors, groundskeepers, gift shop attendants, food service associates
and more. Job applications and screenings will be available. 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.
at The Living World at the St. Louis Zoo, 1 Government Drive in Forest Park.
(314-781-0900)

Kids

THURSDAY, JANUARY 18

   Puppet Show: The Kincaid Karacter Puppets present "Mr. Punch Takes A
Holiday," starring Mr. Punch of the classic British puppet show "Punch and
Judy." Shows are today and Friday at 10:30 a.m. At the Kincaid Karacter Cafe
Puppet Place, 331 North Main Street in St. Charles. $ 2.50. (636-916-5462)

   Kids Club: Dance and sing along with the Frilly and Miller show. 10 a.m. at
Westfield Shoppingtown South County, South Lindbergh Boulevard and Lemay Ferry
Road. Free. (314-892-5203)

SATURDAY, JANUARY 20

   Circus: The Everyday Circus features Juggling Jeff, Ring Time, the Fabulous
Flying St. Louis Arches, and the Do It Yourself and Participation circuses.
Shows on Saturday and Sunday every hour on the hour from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. At
City Museum, 701 North 15th Street. $ 6. (314-645-4445)

   Frosty the Snowman: Children ages 3-8 can join the most lovable snowman
around and enjoy snowman stories, poems, songs, treats and more. 2 p.m. at
Thornhill Branch Library, 12863 Willowyck Drive. Free. (314-721-0252, ext. 2134)


Live and learn

THURSDAY, JANUARY 18

   St. Louis Urban Forum: The Missouri Historical Society presents William E.
Strickland as the featured speaker at the next St. Louis Urban Forum. In 1968
Strickland established the Manchester Craftsmen's Guild, which initially offered
an informal, neighborhood-based arts program and exhibition space for minority
children as a means to fight economic and social devastation in urban Pittsburgh
neighborhoods. In 1986 the construct ion of a $ 7.5 million, 62,000-square foot
vocational and arts training center was completed and the center now houses a
state-of-the-art 350-seat music hall, a jazz performing arts program, and much
more. 7 p.m. at the Missouri History Museum, 5700 Lindell Boulevard. Free.
(314-746-4599)

   Brown Bag Lecture: Allen Burbach from Waddell and Reed will discuss the
criteria one should consider in financial planning. Bring a lunch; dessert and
beverages will be provided. 11:30 a.m. at Maryland Heights Community Center,
2344 McKelvey in Maryland Heights. $ 2. (314-434-1919)

   Social Work Spring Lecture Series: The George Warren Brown School of Social
Work at Washington University will be host to a series of lectures, spanning
issues from the plight of refugees to the role of philanthropy to the latest
developments in gene therapy. Today's lecturer is St. Louis Public Schools
Superintendent Cleveland Hammonds, who will be discussing "Toward Excellence in
Education: The History and Future of St. Louis Public Schools." 1 p.m. at Brown
Lounge in Brown Hall, one block west of the intersection of Skinker and Forsyth
boulevards. Free. (314-935-5251)

FRIDAY, JANUARY 19

   Introduction to Wine Class: Come learn the basics of how to read labels, pair
wine with food, and shop for the wine that suits you. Seating is limited and
payment is required with reservations to confirm a seat. 6:30 p.m. at The Wine
Merchant, 355 Oak Trail Drive in Ellisville. $ 10 plus tax. (636-230-6750)

   Beginning Telescope Program: "A Telescope for Christmas, Now What?", a
program for beginning telescope observers, will be featured at the next meeting
of the St. Louis Astronomical Society. The lecture goes beyond instructions on
how to assemble the instrument; rather, it will teach you what to look for, how
to find interesting objects, and will include suggestions about books, charts
and accessories that are useful. 7:30 p.m. at Washington University, McDonnell
Hall, room 162, accessible from Forsyth Boulevard via Houston Way in Clayton.
Free. (314-935-4614)

   Gateway Skeptics lecture: Alan Easton will discuss "What Can We Do With All
These Genes?" 7:30 p.m. at St. Louis County Library Headquarters, 1640 South
Lindbergh Boulevard. Free. (314-863-2718)

SATURDAY, JANUARY 20

   Drawing Basics Workshop: Local artist Shirley Eley Nachtrieb will hold a
one-day workshop on the basics of drawing. The class is designed for the
intermediate student who wants to increase his/her drawing confidence. 9 a.m. to
4 p.m. at St. Peters Cultural Arts Center, 3960 Mexico Road in St. Peters. $ 40.
(636-947-1936)

SUNDAY, JANUARY 21

   George E. Mylonas Memorial Lecture: Professor Ione Mylonas Shear, from the
American School of Classical Studies in Athens, Greece, will give a lecture
entitled "Homer's World and the World of Mycenaean Greece." She will share her
conclusions that reveal that contrary to popular thought, the world described in
Homer's epics does indeed reflect the world of Mycenaean Greece. The research is
the basis of her book "Tales of Heroes: The Origins of the Homeric Texts," which
is now in press. 3 p.m. at Steinberg Auditorium Washington University, 1
Brookings Drive. Free. (314-721-1889 or 314-991-1148)

   Silent Twenties: Great Films of the Jazz Age discussion series: The lecture
series, given by film historian Roy Zurick, will debut with a 1918 Western, "The
Son-of-a-Gun." 2 p.m. at Kirkwood Public Library, 140 East Jefferson Avenue in
Kirkwood. Free. (314-821-5770, ext. 0)

   How to Pay for College workshops: St. Louis University is host to a series of
workshops that will provide parents with tips for tapping into financial
assistance. Each workshop will offer a general overview of money for college
programs (university, federal, state and private) and provide
question-and-answer assistance in completing the 2001-2002 Free Application for
Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). 2 p.m. at St. Louis University Busch Memorial
Center, 20 North Grand Boulevard. Free. (314-977-2350)

MONDAY, JANUARY 22

   Genetics and Your Adopted Child's Family History: Heidi Beaver, a genetics
counselor at St. Luke's Hospital, will give a lecture on which traits in your
child's family history are genetically predisposed. Sponsored by Adoption Today.
7 to 9 p.m. at Des Peres Hospital, community room no. 2, 2345 Dougherty Ferry
Road. Free. (314-275-8829)

   St. Louis Black Repertory Adult Workshops: The St. Louis Black Repertory
Company will offer a 12-part series of adult workshops in scene study,
improvisation, voice and diction, and character development. Topics are covered
in three-part classes that will be held on Monday nights from 6 to 8 p.m. At
Harris-Stowe State College, 3026 Laclede Avenue. $ 225 for all 12 classes or $
30 per class; pre-registration is strongly recommended. (314-534-3807)

TUESDAY, JANUARY 23

   Wine Class: Premier and Grand Cru red wines of Burgundy are the featured
wines this session. Seating is limited, reservations are required and payment is
due at that time to confirm your seat. 6:30 p.m. at The Wine Merchant, 20 South
Hanley Road in Clayton. $ 50 plus tax. (314-863-6282)

   Successful Retirement Strategies Class: Learn how to prepare your finances
for retirement, address personal financial needs and define long-term goals. The
class runs for three weeks and you can attend either on Tuesdays or Wednesdays
from 6:30 to 9:30 p.m. At St. Charles County Community College, 4601 Mid Rivers
Mall Drive in St. Peters. $ 24 plus a $ 25 lab fee payable with tuition.
(636-922-8233)

Outdoors

SATURDAY, JANUARY 20

   Orienteering in Rockwoods Range: An outdoors event where participants must
use a map and compass to find their way around the park. Registration begins at
10 a.m.; training for beginners prior to the event. Take Interstate 44 to
Allentown Road (Six Flags exit) and drive north for one mile. Park in any lot
near the junction of Allenton and Hencken roads. Follow the orange and white
orienteering signs to the registration site. $ 6-$ 8. (314-647-9512)

   Tilles Park to St. Albans Bike Ride: Meet Hostelling International members at
Tilles Park at 8 a.m. Option for either a 35- or 63-mile ride. Cancel in rain or
snow. At Tilles County Park, Litzsinger and McKnight roads. $ 3. (314-367-2238
or 314-454-9700)

   Eagle Days: Come and enjoy Eagle Days at the Old Chain of Rocks Bridge,
featuring the World Bird Sanctuary, American Indian tales, and an interactive
eagle's nest. 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Saturday and Sunday. Park at either the St. Louis
Welcome Center at Riverview and Interstate 270, or at North Riverfront Park, off
Riverview south of the waterworks. A free shuttle will be available from either
location. Free. (314-416-9930)

   Bald Eagle Guided Tour: Bluff City Tours presents "A Day in Eagle Country,"
an opportunity to visit and observe American bald eagles in the Mississippi
River Valley area. The day-long tour includes transportation by trolley or
motorcoach, a continental breakfast, and lunch at Pere Marquette Lodge. All
tours depart from and return to the upper level parking lot at the Alton Square
Mall. 8:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. Saturday and Wednesday at Alton Square Mall, Homer
Adams Parkway. $ 40. (618-466-8693)

SUNDAY, JANUARY 21

   10K Historic Ferguson Walk: The St. Louis-Stuttgart Sister City Volksmarch
Club will hold a one-day walking event through suburban Ferguson. The walking
trail winds through some of the more interesting residential streets, passing a
number of classic homes and also going through old town Ferguson. Participants
must register and begin the walk between 8 a.m. and noon and complete it by 3
p.m. Meeting point is in the recreation building. At January Wabash Park, 501
North Florissant Road in Ferguson. Free. (314-524-1234 or 314-781-5665)

   Bike or Hike at Creve Coeur Park: Meet Hostelling International members at 9
a.m. in the parking lot at the bottom of the hill on Marine. If the temperature
is above 30 degrees there will be a 35-mile bike ride with moderate hills; if
the temperature is less than 30 degrees, the group will hike six miles in the
park. Both events canceled in heavy cold rain. At Creve Coeur Park, Marine
Avenue and Dorsett Road in Creve Coeur. $ 3. (314-291-7860 or 636-532-2549)

MONDAY, JANUARY 22

   Soar With the Eagles: Specially geared toward people 55 and older, this is an
excursion to watch bald eagles in their winter habitat. The group will enjoy a
short informational film and a guided viewing, followed by a f amily style
lunch. The trip will begin at 7:45 a.m. and return around 3 p.m. At Hazelwood
Civic Center, 1186 Teson Road in Hazelwood. $ 29 for Hazelwood residents; $ 39
for others. (314-839-5575)

TUESDAY, JANUARY 23

   Bridgeton to The Hill Bike Ride: Meet Hostelling International members at
8:30 a.m. for a 38-mile ride that circles Lambert Field. Bring water and lunch
money. Ride canceled in hard rain, snow or below 30 degrees. At Bridgeton
Community Center, 4201 Fee Fee Road. $ 3. (314-644-4660)

Pets

SATURDAY, JANUARY 20

   Petsmart Mobile Adoption: Come meet your next best friend and take him home
with you. 10 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. at Manchester Petsmart, 13957 Manchester Road.
(314-951-1545)

TUESDAY, JANUARY 23

   How to Keep Your Pet Healthy the Natural Way: This lecture will be given by
Christine Crosley, D.V.M., owner of Animal Health & Healing, a conventional and
holistic veterinary clinic. 7 p.m. at River City Nutrition, 100 South Kirkwood
Road in Kirkwood. Free. (314-822-1406)

School, church and organization events

THURSDAY, JANUARY 18

   American Needlepoint Guild program: The topic of this month's program is
"Shady Threads," a slide show about how to achieve color shading effects in
embroidery. 6:30 p.m. at Kirkwood Library, 140 East Jefferson Avenue in
Kirkwood. Free. (314-432-5750)

   Pasta With the Pastor: Come and enjoy a full pasta dinner. 4 to 7 p.m. at
Bethany Peace United Church of Christ, 11952 Bellefontaine Road at Trampe. $
6.50 for adults, $ 3 for children. (314-741-9062)

SATURDAY, JANUARY 20

   Winter Holiday Party: Parents as Teachers staff and families will host an
activity-filled event. 9:30 to 11 a.m. at Pattonville Learning Center, 11097 St.
Charles Rock Road. Free. (314-213-8105)

   Trivia Night: Band and orchestra parents of Eureka High School will be hosts
to a fun-filled trivia night. Admission covers snacks, beverages, cash prizes
and drawings. 6:30 p.m. at Eureka High School, 829 Highway 109 in Eureka. $ 10.
(636-938-6594)

SUNDAY, JANUARY 21

   Homemade Sausage Dinner: The 45th annual sausage dinner, sponsored by the
L.L.L. Men's Club, will be served family-style with homemade breads and pies;
carryout available. Noon to 5 p.m. at Zion Lutheran Parish Hall, Pevely. $ 6.50
for adults, $ 3 for kids. (636-479-6070)

MONDAY, JANUARY 22

   Overeaters Anonymous: The group is having a public information meeting.  7:30
to 9 p.m. at ESIC Baptist Church, 1000 University Drive in Edwardsville. Free.
(314-638-6070)

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 24

   Magnet School Preview: Parents interested in learning more about the St.
Louis Magnet Schools can meet parents whose children currently attend these
schools. The program will provide an overview of magnet schools, which
specialize in such areas as performing arts, military, international studies,
math, science and technology, and gifted education; there are no tuition fees
for eligible students, and transportation is provided. Representatives of five
magnet high schools will be on hand to answer specific questions about their
programs. 7 p.m. in the cafeteria at Mehlville High School, 3200 Lemay Ferry
Road. Free. (314-721-8422, ext. 3017)

   Value of Play: Parents of children up to 8 months old can come and learn how
their baby benefits from baby exercise and play. 9:30 a.m. at Pattonville
Learning Center, 11097 St. Charles Rock Road. Free. (314-213-8105)

   Chinese New Year Celebration: City Museum is celebrating the year of the
dragon with the Lift-for-Life Academy by making four 25-foot dragons with
recycled materials. Aarrun Marcus will work with the students to build the
dragons as part of a study unit on ancient China. Students will parade the
dragons through the museum at 10:30 a.m. At City Museum, 701 North 15th Street.
$ 6, free for children under one. (314-231-2489)

Social dancing

FRIDAY, JANUARY 19

   Singles Night Out: Music with the Bob Kuban Brass Band and disc jockey Jim
Brown. 8:30 p.m. to 12:30 a.m. at Frontenac Hilton Hotel, 1335 South Lindbergh
Boulevard in Frontenac. $ 8. (636-532-0788)

SATURDAY, JANUARY 20

   Singles Dance: Sponsored by Parents Without Partners. Music by disc jockey
Pete Hoffman; admission includes door prizes. 8:30 p.m. to 12:30 a.m. at Knights
Of Columbus Hall, 117 Mcmenamy Road in St. Peters. $ 7. (636-978-5604 or
314-781-5943)

SUNDAY, JANUARY 21

   Old Time Country Dancing: Featuring music by Ted, Barb and Tom. Dances taught
and prompted by Chris Kawa; no experience or partner required. 7 to 10 p.m. at
the Monday Club, 37 South Maple Avenue in Webster Groves. $ 5. (636-537-1643)

TUESDAY, JANUARY 23

   Cha Cha and Swing Dance: Lessons by Jane Humphrey and Bill Sharpless from 7
to 8 p.m., music from 8 to 10 p.m. At the Focal Point Arts Center, 2720 Sutton
Boulevard in Maplewood. $ 4. (636-397-5365)

To your health

MONDAY, JANUARY 22

   How to Detect and Prevent Strokes: A lecture entitled "Brain Attack: When A
Stroke Strikes," presented by neurologist Howard Weiss, will explain how to
recognize the warning signs and increase your chances of su rviving a stroke and
preventing disabilities. 1:30 to 3 p.m. at Missouri Baptist Medical Center, 3015
North Ballas Road in Des Peres. Free. (800-392-0936)

TUESDAY, JANUARY 23

   The Wise Use Of Natural Remedies: Class participants will learn about po
pular nutritional supplements and their uses and benefits, as well as their
dangers and possible interactions with prescription medications. The program is
presented by Sue Schulte, a counselor on staff at St. Anthony's Hyland
Behavioral Health. 6:30 to 7:30 p.m. at St. Anthony's Medical Center, 10010
Kennerly Road. Free; advance registration suggested. (800-554-9550)

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 24

   Stroke Support Group: The group is designed to help stroke survivors and
their families handle problems related to strokes; it meets in the library of
Anthony House, the building directly behind the main hospital. 10:30 a.m. at St.
Anthony's Medical Center, 10010 Kennerly Road. Free. (314-525-4542)

   The Healing Power of Humor: Linda Meyer will present "Ha Ha's for Health: The
Healing Power of Humor." Meyer will discuss how laughter can help improve one's
mental and physical health, and audience members will be encouraged to identify
aspects of their lives that make them laugh, discuss the physiologic influence
of laughter, find ways to introduce more laughter into their lives and discuss
how author Norman Cousins used laughter to help heal himself of a devastating
illness. 6:30 to 8:30 p.m. at St. Anthony's Medical Center, 10010 Kennerly Road.
$ 15; registration r equired. (800-554-9550)

GRAPHIC: PHOTO Photos
 (1) Fans will have a chance to see - and perhaps get an autograph - from Mark
McGwire (above) at the St. Louis Cardinals Winter Warm-Up on Friday, Saturday
and Sunday at the Regal Riverfront Hotel. Other former and current players
expected to be there are Lou Brock, Enos Slaughter, Matt Morris, Rick Ankiel and
Jim Edmonds. Here, McGwire waves to the fans after a three-run homer in April
1998.
 (2) Kweisi Mfume, former congressman and now president and CEO of the NAACP,
will speak at 7:30 tonight at Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville.
 (3) Sean Morey will perform Friday and Saturday at Comedy Etc.
 (4) Bob Zany will perform tonight through Saturday at the Funny Bone.
 (5) William Strickland will speak at 7 tonight at the Missouri History Museum
as part of the St. Louis Urban Forum.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2001


                             2056 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   January 18, 2001, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 345 words

HEADLINE: Investors cheer as techs top estimates

BYLINE: Adam Shell

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   NEW YORK -- Investors dumped blue chips and flooded back into
tech stocks Wednesday after a batch of upbeat earnings reports
from top tech companies. The Nasdaq composite gained 64.23 points,
or 2.5%, to 2682.78.

   Money flowed into tech names as investors cheered a better-than-expected
profit report late Tuesday from networking leader Juniper Networks,
which rose $ 8.19, or 6.4%, to $ 136.19.


   Other techs topping estimates: Novellus Systems, which
makes circuits used in semiconductors, and Applied Micro Circuits,
which makes chips used in high-speed data networks.

   Novellus was up $ 5.63 to $ 44.38. Applied Micro jumped $ 10 to $ 80.38.

   After the close Wednesday, IBM also posted better-than-expected
earnings.

   Blue-chip stocks, which posted sharp gains a day earlier, were
dragged down by lackluster earnings reports from 3M, J.P.
Morgan Chase and General Motors. 3M was hardest hit,
falling $ 3.50 to $ 110, and was a big reason the Dow Jones industrials
fell 68.32 points, or 0.6%, to 10,584.34.

   "The market (isn't) turning bearish on blue chips as much as
it is looking for opportunities among tech stocks," says David
Sowerby, portfolio manager at Loomis Sayles.

   The broader Standard & Poor's 500 index edged up 2.82 points,
or 0.2%, to 1329.47. The USA TODAY Internet 100 index rose 3.32
points, or 3.5%, to 97.72.

   The Nasdaq had tacked on triple-digit gains earlier in the day.
But investors still worried about the impact the slowing economy
will have on future profits were selling into the rally, Sowerby
says. He says that's why the Nasdaq was unable to close above
2700.

   Highlights: Nortel Networks rose $ 2.81 to $ 34.75.
The telecommunications-gear maker got a lift from the stellar
earnings of rival Juniper Networks.

   * Epimmune surged $ 2.56, or 102%, to $ 5.06. The gene therapy
company reported positive results for its vaccine research to
treat the Hepatitis B virus.

   * VA Linux Systems fell $ 2, or 22%, to $ 7.13. The software
and computer maker issued an earnings warning.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2001


                             2057 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           January 18, 2001 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 572 words

HEADLINE: New Rule for Gene Therapy Tests Proposed

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    Sixteen months after the death of an Arizona teenager triggered intense
scrutiny of the experimental field of gene therapy, the Food and Drug
Administration yesterday released a proposed new rule that would significantly
increase the amount of information the agency would make public about such
experiments.

    The proposed rule would allow the agency for the first time to release many
details about the safety and progress of ongoing studies in gene therapy -- a
10-year-old but still unproven technique that seeks to cure patients by giving
them new genes. The rule would also apply to xenotransplantation, a similarly
experimental field in which cells or organs from animals are transplanted into
people.

    The proposed rule calls for the FDA to release full descriptions of all
clinical studies in the two fields; the results of safety tests that led to the
human studies; copies of informed-consent forms that participants must sign; the
procedures by which volunteers are to be monitored; a constantly updated record
of safety problems in humans; and a record of any disciplinary actions by the
FDA regarding each study.

    "Today's action is an important step in ensuring greater public confidence
in these revolutionary therapeutic technologies," said FDA Commissioner Jane E.
Henney.

    The proposal garnered praise from some patient advocates and gene therapy
researchers.

    "I think the FDA has seen the light here," said Paul Gelsinger, whose son
Jesse died in a 1999 gene therapy experiment that was later criticized by the
FDA for its lack of safety controls and its exaggerated claims of efficacy. "I
hope the politics and the money pressure doesn't undo it."

    Ronald Crystal, director of the Institute of Genetic Medicine at Weill
Cornell Medical Center in New York, also expressed support. "I think it's
appropriate, and I think it will be positive," he said.

    But a representative of the biotechnology industry attacked the rule as
unnecessary for patients, harmful to the fledgling field of genetic medicine and
perhaps illegal.

    "This is a dramatic deviation from more than 30 years of FDA regulation and
practice," said Michael Werner, bioethics counsel for the Biotechnology Industry
Organization. "We want there to be an easing of public concern. But we'd
distinguish that from releasing, in real time, data from clinical trials that
could be misinterpreted and misused. We don't think the public is served by
that."

    Xenotransplantation and gene therapy have stirred controversy for years
because of their potential to spread disease-causing viruses to patients and
others, posing a potential public health problem. For that reason, both fields
have been subject to extra scrutiny by the National Institutes of Health, which
generally makes its findings public, in addition to standard oversight by the
FDA, which generally keeps information about ongoing clinical trials secret.

    FDA officials said the proposed rule would have little practical impact on
the biotech industry since most of the information at issue is already publicly
reported by companies to the NIH. The rule would still allow companies to
withhold from public view confidential or commercially sensitive information and
patients' personal information.

    "They don't have to tell their secrets, but they ought to tell about their
side effects," said Alan Milstein, Gelsinger's attorney.

    The FDA will accept comments on the proposal for 90 days.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2001


                             2058 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                          January 17, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: EDITORIAL & COMMENT, Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 479 words

HEADLINE: MONKEY BUSINESS

BODY:


   The news last week that scientists have injected a foreign gene into a monkey
egg, fertilized it and created a baby monkey may raise questions anew about the
ethical appropriateness of such research.

   Should scientists even be doing this?

   The short answer is yes, but . . .

   The goal is not to create some kind of Frankenstein monster or super human
but to use gene experimentation in animals as a substitute for and, eventually,
as a bridge toward gene therapy in humans with serious and treatment-resistant
illnesses. The monkey's genetic blueprint is closest to that of a human being,
which enhances the research value of experiments being used to develop cures for
devastating illnesses.

   Using gene therapy on people, after all, is in its infancy and involves risk.

   In many ways, this is an incremental step, said Dr. Gerald Schatten, the
senior author of the monkey report, published last week in the journal Science.
He is a biology professor at the Oregon Health Sciences University in Beaverton,
Ore.

   A colleague there, Patricia Backlar, an ethicist, said the interesting part
of Schatten's work is the possibility that "one could learn about certain types
of diseases in ways that we really couldn't in humans.''

   With gene therapy in the news, many will recall that in 1999 a young man from
Tucson, Ariz., died in a gene experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Since then, there has been progress in the science of gene therapy, but the
death also led to accusations of sloppily run clinical trials with a lack of
appropriate government oversight.

   The death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, who had volunteered for the gene-
therapy experiment at the university, touched off needed introspection into many
aspects of such experimental therapy.

   Under review were possible conflicts of interest in gene-therapy experiments.
Scientists can no longer be involved in clinical trials if they have a financial
stake in the companies that bankroll those studies.

   The invitation to bad science there is obvious. It's too bad it took a death
for the scientific community to realize changes were needed.

   No doubt the genie is out of the bottle, though, and gene therapy will go
forward because of the tantalizing possibilities.

   "Once you start attempting genetic engineering in monkeys, humans can't be
far behind,'' said professor Lori B. Andrews of the Chicago-Kent College of Law.
She is concerned about what the monkey experiment might portend for later
genetic work in humans.

   The field of gene therapy is hardly in its adolescence, and there are some
scientists who believe the work is progressing too rapidly. The potential
payoffs are great, but scientists cannot expect the public to stand behind them
unless they carefully consider ethical problems and do their best to keep the
public informed and keep risk to a minimum.

GRAPHIC: Phot

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2001


                             2059 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                           January 16, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 310 words

HEADLINE: Children's Hospital taps surgeon to run program Cardiac surgery chief
comes from top heart clinic

BYLINE: DANIEL YEE

BODY:

   ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE
Arkansas Children's Hospital has recruited a surgeon from one of the nation's
leading heart centers to head its chief of pediatric and congenital cardiac
surgery program.
Dr. Jonathan James Drummond-Webb officially will start at the Little Rock
hospital Wednesday. He comes from The Cleveland Clinic, listed in a survey last
year as the top heart hospital in the country.
The 41-year-old native of South Africa previously served as surgical director of
pediatric cardiac and lung transportation at the Ohio clinic. He also was a
staff surgeon in pediatric and congenital cardiac surgery there.
"I'm pretty hyped up" about his move to Arkansas, Drummond-Webb said Monday
afternoon. "The place has potential."
Drummond-Webb will replace previous cardiac surgery chief Dr. Stephen
VanDevanter, who retired in January 2000.
During Children's Hospital's search for a new cardiac surgery chief, the
hospital had been sending its heart surgery patients to The Cleveland Clinic.
Hospital officials then met Drummond-Webb, who had been handling the operations.

Drummond-Webb said he would like to establish the hospital's cardiac surgery
department as a teaching program. Also, he would like to expand the program's
services by recruiting two more surgeons within the next two years, he said.
"There's a definite need of high-class surgery, complex work" not only in
Arkansas but also in the surrounding region, Drummond-Webb said. "Within five to
10 years, I can make this [hospital] a dominant force in the country."
In addition to his clinical work, Drummond-Webb will continue research projects,
including efforts to improve neonatal bypass methods.
He hopes to pursue studies in genetic therapy and gene induction that could help
improve the success of heart and lung transplants, according to a hospital
bulletin.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2001


                             2060 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                           January 16, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 206 words

HEADLINE: Convicted drug task force official gets delay on reporting to prison

BYLINE: LINDA SATTER, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:

   **STATE EDITION**
A federal judge has again delayed the date for which Roger Walls of Sheridan,
former administrator of the 7th Judicial District Drug Task Force, must begin
serving a 28-month federal prison sentence.
Walls, 51, was sentenced in July 1999 after being convicted in 1997 of extortion
with former Saline County Prosecuting Attorney Dan Harmon.
Harmon, who headed the drug force that operated in Saline, Grant and Hot Spring
counties, and Walls were accused of extorting more than $ 5,000 from Ernest
Varnardo of Fort Worth, after Varnardo was arrested during a traffic stop.
U.S. District Judge Stephen M. Reasoner has extended Walls' reporting date twice
-- last January and again in October -- because of Walls' ongoing cancer
treatments.
On Friday, Reasoner said Walls "continues to suffer from metastatic melanoma,
stage 4. He is participating in research using gene therapy for treatment
because melanoma has spread to various parts of his body and the cancer has not
responded to conventional treatment."
Reasoner extended Walls' reporting date 90 days to April 15.
Harmon and Walls were originally indicted in April 1997. Harmon, convicted of
extortion and four other felonies, remains in prison.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2001


                             2061 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 16, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 448 words

HEADLINE: Acquisition creates new genetics firm

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 A leading gene-therapy company has acquired San Diego's privately held
Neurologic Gene Therapeutics and will use it as the launch pad for a subsidiary
to develop a gene therapy for Alzheimer's disease.

   Foster City-based Cell Genesys will create the new San Diego subsidiary,
dubbed Ceregene, with $10 million in funding and intellectual property and
gene-therapy programs from both Neurologic and Cell Genesys.

   Cell Genesys gets a 60 percent stake in Ceregene, while the remaining 40
percent of the subsidiary belongs to founders and early investors of Neurologic,
a Cell Genesys spokeswoman said.

   Ceregene will be the latest gene-therapy company to take root in San Diego,
which has one of the nation's largest clusters of gene-therapy firms and
academic researchers.  Two local companies, Vical Inc. and Canji, a subsidiary
of Schering-Plough, have treatments in late-stage human testing.

   However, the gene-therapy sector has had no treatments approved and few
success stories.  Cell Genesys, with $250 million in the bank and 10.5 percent
ownership in Abgenix Inc., is among the more secure and best funded gene-therapy
companies in the United States.

   Last week, Cell Genesys paid $4.8 million for Chiron's gene-therapy
manufacturing plant in San Diego.  The Chiron plant, which employs 25, will
provide operations and manufacturing support for Ceregene, according to Cell
Genesys.

   At the core of the new Ceregene subsidiary are two key gene-therapy programs
developed by Neurologic.

   Neurologic is a "virtual company" founded by UC San Diego neuroscientists
Mark Tuszynski and Armin Blesch with gene-therapy technology licensed from the
university.  Tuszynski and Blesch will serve as scientific advisers to Ceregene.
Neither scientist could be reached for comment yesterday.

   With the Neurologic acquisition, Ceregene gains an ongoing Phase I clinical
trial for an Alzheimer's gene therapy that began enrolling patients last year.
The trial is testing a treatment in which cells genetically modified to secrete
nerve growth factor are transplanted into regions of the brain that are known to
deteriorate in Alzheimer's disease.

   A second gene-therapy program for Parkinson's disease, which is not yet being
tested in humans, prevented the onset of nerve degeneration in monkeys with
Parkinson's disease.

   Ceregene's operations are expected to "expand significantly" in 2001,
including the recruitment of a chief executive and other key personnel,
according to Cell Genesys.

   Cell Genesys is focused on the development of cancer vaccines and cancer gene
therapies.  Its lead product, GVAX, is being tested in clinical trials for
prostate and lung cancer.


LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2001


                             2062 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 16, 2001 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 440 words

HEADLINE: Acquisition creates new genetics firm

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A leading gene-therapy company has acquired San Diego's privately held
Neurologic Gene Therapeutics and will use it as the launch pad for a subsidiary
to develop a gene therapy for Alzheimer's disease. Foster City-based Cell
Genesys will create the new San Diego subsidiary, dubbed Ceregene, with $10
million in funding and intellectual property and gene-therapy programs from both
Neurologic and Cell Genesys. Cell Genesys gets a 60 percent stake in Ceregene,
while the remaining 40 percent of the subsidiary belongs to founders and early
investors of Neurologic, a Cell Genesys spokeswoman said. Ceregene will be the
latest gene-therapy company to take root in San Diego, which has one of the
nation's largest clusters of gene-therapy firms and academic researchers.

   Two local companies, Vical Inc. and Canji, a subsidiary of Schering-Plough,
have treatments in late-stage human testing. However, the gene-therapy sector
has had no treatments approved and few success stories.

   Cell Genesys, with $250 million in the bank and 10.5 percent ownership in
Abgenix Inc., is among the more secure and best funded gene-therapy companies in
the United States. Last week, Cell Genesys paid $4.8 million for Chiron's
gene-therapy manufacturing plant in San Diego.

   The Chiron plant, which employs 25, will provide operations and manufacturing
support for Ceregene, according to Cell Genesys. At the core of the new Ceregene
subsidiary are two key gene-therapy programs developed by Neurologic. Neurologic
is a "virtual company" founded by UC San Diego neuroscientists Mark Tuszynski
and Armin Blesch with gene-therapy technology licensed from the university.

   Tuszynski and Blesch will serve as scientific advisers to Ceregene.

   Neither scientist could be reached for comment yesterday. With the Neurologic
acquisition, Ceregene gains an ongoing Phase I clinical trial for an Alzheimer's
gene therapy that began enrolling patients last year.

   The trial is testing a treatment in which cells genetically modified to
secrete nerve growth factor are transplanted into regions of the brain that are
known to deteriorate in Alzheimer's disease. A second gene-therapy program for
Parkinson's disease, which is not yet being tested in humans, prevented the
onset of nerve degeneration in monkeys with Parkinson's disease. Ceregene's
operations are expected to "expand significantly" in 2001, including the
recruitment of a chief executive and other key personnel, according to Cell
Genesys. Cell Genesys is focused on the development of cancer vaccines and
cancer gene therapies.

   Its lead product, GVAX, is being tested in clinical trials for prostate and
lung cancer.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             2063 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                 January 15, 2001, Monday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 41

LENGTH: 2082 words

HEADLINE: BRAVE NEW WORLD Medical advances that guarantee your body will never
be the same

BYLINE: BY AMANDA GARDNER DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

BODY:
Hard to believe, but test-tube babies are now a thing of the past. Thanks to
genetics, medicine is becoming ever more powerful and personal.

   Pretty soon, says Henry Soch, vice president of consulting services and
E-business development at Philips Medical Systems, "we'll see drug regimens
tailored to the genetic makeup of specific patients."

   We're also going to see tiny nano-robots that will perform surgery inside a
patient (remember "Fantastic Voyage"?). We'll even be able to turn on and off
the genetic triggers for various diseases. Here's a look at what else the future
of medicine holds:

   * MEMORY/ALZHEIMER'S (BRAIN)

   Right now, there is no cure and no effective treatment for Alzheimer's
disease, which affects about 4 million Americans. Experts say we're three to
four years away from a proven way to reduce the risk of developing the disease.

   We're about five years away from developing a possible Alzheimer's "vaccine,"
or drugs that will directly attack the underlying disease process, says Dr.
Norman Relkin, of the Weill Cornell Memory Disorders Program. Stem-cell research
may lead to a process in which neurons that have died as a result of the disease
can be regenerated, but we're a good 10 to 25 years away from that.

   * HAIR LOSS

   Dr. Ted Daly, director of pediatric dermatology at Nassau University Medical
Center, predicts that in the next three to four years, physicians will develop
the ability to stimulate hair growth using a person's own stem cells found on
the scalp. "We have the understanding to do that," says Daly. "We need the
technology."

   * EYES (VISION CORRECTION)

   In about a year and a half, opthalmologists will be able to correct eyesight
by changing it at each specific point in the eye, making vision more accurate.
Clinical trials for this procedure are expected to start in February, says Dr.
Barrie Soloway, director of vision correction at the New York Eye & Ear
Infirmary.

   We're probably five years away from scleral expansion surgery putting small
implants in the whites of the eyes that will restore near-vision. This year,
photodynamic therapy for macular degeneration, which causes vision loss, was
approved. The therapy uses a laser to activate drugs that are given
intravenously. New drugs are in the pipeline that will take advantage of this
technology.

   * EYES (GLAUCOMA)

   Doctors now know that glaucoma can be caused not just by elevated pressure in
the eye but also by decreased blood flow caused by various cardiovascular
conditions. This knowledge will lead to new types of treatment.

   Calcium channel blockers and even ginkgo biloba have shown promise, says Dr.
Robert Ritch, professor and chief of glaucoma service at the New York Eye & Ear
Infirmary and founder and medical director of the Glaucoma Foundation. A vaccine
against glaucoma may be tested as early as 2002.

   Molecular genetics holds the promise of being able to regulate eye pressure,
but this is at least 10 years down the line.

   * FACIAL MUSCLES

   Thanks to a 2-year-old, nerve-grafting technique, many patients with facial
paralysis can now regain facial movement, sometimes including a smile.

   The technique, called facial restoration and pioneered by Dr. Elliott Rose,
director of the Aesthetic Surgery Center and associate clinical professor at the
Mount Sinai School of Medicine, involves transferring a nerve from the back of
the leg to the face and splicing it into branches of the functioning nerves on
the "good" side of the face.

   Months later, after the new nerve has grown across the face, a muscle from
the thigh is implanted to replace the paralyzed facial muscle. The new muscle
receives its impulses from the new nerve. Eventually, says Rose, nerve-grafting
procedures may be used to improve swallowing and even improve speech patterns in
stroke victims.

   * EARS/HEARING

   About six months ago, researchers learned how to implant hearing aids in the
middle ear. Although a few kinks remain, these devices will eventually be
permanently implanted to aid people with hearing loss. Next, scientists hope to
use gene therapy to combat nerve-damage hearing loss caused by the degeneration
of inner-ear hair cells because of age, infection or noise trauma. "In theory,
if you could get all these hair cells to come alive again, you would have normal
hearing," says Dr. Joseph Arigo, assistant clinical professor of otology and
otolaryngology at New York Medical College and the New York Eye & Ear Infirmary.
"It's years away, but it's something."

   * MOUTH & TEETH

   No cavities, no pain. Scientists are working on ways to change the chemistry
of the mouth so that early cavities will heal themselves. In a healthy person,
the crown of the tooth constantly dissolves and remineralizes itself, using
phosphate and calcium from saliva. The onset of a cavity upsets this natural
balance so that the tooth dissolves faster than it can regenerate. In the
future, toothpaste, mouth rinses and chewing gum (one Trident Advantage already
exists) will actually speed up the remineralization process.

   * BREAST (& OTHER) CANCER

   We'll be seeing more targeted and individualized cancer treatments. Not only
will they be more effective, they'll have fewer side effects. "We're looking at
therapies that are targeted directly at what's broken in the cancerous cell,"
says Dr. Dennis Slamon, director of the Revlon UCLA Women's Cancer Research
Program.

   Slamon's lab was one of the first to come out with Herceptin, which
successfully targets a specific genetic alteration (HER-2) present only in a
certain group of breast cancer patients. Another drug, Iressa, targets a
specific receptor implicated in breast and lung cancer.

   Many similar drugs are in clinical trials and will be added to our cancer
arsenal in the next two years, Slamon predicts.

   * HEART

   Even though heart disease is expected to remain the major cause of death and
disability in the U.S., numerous breakthroughs are brightening the future for
heart patients, says Dr. Richard Stein, spokesperson for the American Heart
Association and chief of cardiology at Brooklyn Hospital Center.

   In the next two to three years, expect to see tools that will prevent heart
failure by acting on the tiniest parts of the heart, including the one-cell-wide
lining of the blood vessels.

   We can also expect to see smaller and more effective mechanical devices that
will be permanently implanted to assist the heart, says Dr. Howard Eisen,
medical director of the Advanced Heart Failure and Transplant Center at Temple
University in Philadelphia. We may also see totally implanted artificial hearts
and, 20 or so years down the line, the ability to reconstruct the heart from
skeletal muscle cells or stem cells.

   * GASTROINTESTINAL (& OTHER) CANCERS

   Before too long, scientists will be able to combine genetic profiling of a
patient with genetic profiling of his or her tumor to come up with a customized
drug.

   Dr. Heinz-Josef Lenz, associate professor of medicine and scientific director
of the cancer genetics program at the University of Southern California, has
been working on this problem for years. In December, his lab started offering
the first commercial test based on such research.

   The test checks for the presence of certain enzymes in people with colon,
stomach, esophageal, lung or breast cancer. The test determines whether or not a
particular course of therapy will be successful. Lenz' current challenge is to
develop profiles of all new cancer drugs coming on the market and to devise ways
of seeing if the target is present in a patient.

   * PANCREAS (DIABETES)

   Although doctors can already perform pancreatic transplants for people with
advanced diabetes and other illnesses, the hope is that one day we'll be able to
grow an entirely new pancreas from stem and other cells, says Dr. Loren Greene,
an endocrinologist at NYU Medical Center and co-author of the "Unofficial Guide
to Living with Diabetes."

   Before then, though, we can expect to see inhaled insulin as well as glucose
sensors, which adjust insulin secretion to blood-sugar level and will feed
information to the insulin delivery systems of the future.

   We also may see implantable devices that check blood sugar levels, so
diabetics won't have to prick their fingers all the time. A biotech company,
Generex, is about to start phase three trials for a technology that would let
insulin be absorbed through the cheeks and gums.

   * SKIN

   The list of new skin products and therapies seems endless. Dr. Nicholas
Perricone, assistant clinical professor of dermatology at Yale School of
Medicine and author of "The Wrinkle Cure," says that hormone replacement therapy
is likely to become standard in the next five to 10 years, and that alpha-lipoic
acid will be common in treating facial lines and scars.

   Telomerase (the enzyme that keeps the ends of our DNA lengthened) will be
rubbed on the skin to make the cells eternally youthful. Spin traps, chemicals
used in diagnostics that also have been found to hold therapeutic properties to
stroke victims, also have anti-inflammatory properties that one day may help
combat aging and cancer.

   * LIVER (& OTHER ORGAN) TRANSPLANTS

   The shortage of organ donors is likely to get worse: Right now, 70,000
patients in the U.S. are waiting for organs from some 5,000 brain-dead donors.

   Dr. Nicholas Jabbour, associate director of abdominal organ transplants at
the University of Southern California's School of Medicine, has come up with a
partial solution to the organ shortage: live donor liver transplants, which do
not require transfusions or brain-dead donors, and which can be done at an
earlier stage before the liver of the recipient deteriorates.

   The procedure involves transferring half of a healthy person's liver into the
sick person, where it will grow to normal size in two to eight weeks. Three
adults who underwent the operation more than a year ago are doing well.

   Scientists are also working on transplanting cells instead of whole organs or
genes. The ultimate solution is xenotransplantation transplanting genetically
manipulated pigs and other animals so that the human body will have an easier
time accepting the organ.

   * REPRODUCTION

   Science can already help parents with certain genetic conditions have healthy
babies, but this technology will be expanded to benefit more and more people,
says Dr. Jamie Grifo, professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the NYU School
of Medicine. Grifo was the director of the division of reproductive
endocrinology that performed the first successful embryo biopsy in the U.S.,
involving a healthy baby with a parent who had hemophilia. Researchers at St.
Barnabas are looking for ways to screen for abnormal numbers of chromosomes,
though this is still some years away.

   As women delay having children, infertility is becoming a bigger issue. One
solution being developed is a procedure called germinal vesicle transfer, which
involves taking chromosomes out of an old egg and putting them into a new egg to
produce a healthy embryo.

   * HIPS

   In the next five years, surgeons will start using arthroscopic techniques for
hip surgery, says Dr. Joseph Zuckerman, professor and chairman of the
NYU-Hospital for Joint Diseases' Department of Orthopedic Surgery. Hip
replacements will remain a mainstay of treatment but will undergo a range of
changes and improvements, including new ways for replacements to be secured to
the person's own bone, biological or bioactive coatings for the artificial hip
and new materials to reduce friction where the ball and socket meet. In the much
longer term, researchers are hoping to find ways to inject material to help
repair the surface of the joint.

   * KNEE

   Surgeons are already able to replace a portion of a person's knee using
minimally invasive surgery (MIS) and to replace cartilage, using cells that have
been cloned in a lab. Further down the line, surgeons should be able to use MIS
to resurface knee and hip joints and, one day, says Dr. Alfred J. Tria, clinical
professor of orthopedic surgery at Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New
Brunswick, N.J., use a CT scan of each individual patient's knee to duplicate
the original anatomy.

   * JOINTS/TENDONS

   Dr. John Itamura, an orthopedic surgeon at USC School of Medicine, uses
patches made from pigs' small intestines to help heal joints and tendons after
surgery. The patches are meant to support the tendons while they heal. If used
correctly, the "pig patch" will eventually be absorbed by the body.

GRAPHIC: IMAGEBANK

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2001


                             2064 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                     January 14, 2001, SUNDAYSUNDAY, 5XS5XS

SECTION: snsn; Pg. 61

LENGTH: 1455 words

HEADLINE: Paying home-age to the King GENE THERAPY FOR BAD HEARTS;
NORTH SHORE MAN AMONG THE FIRST TO TRY EXPERIMENTAL TREATMENT

BYLINE: BY NEIL STEINBERG BY JIM RITTER

BODY:


   Devotion to Elvis Presley, for most, is expressed in the form of a music
collection or video library, supplemented by various posters, black velvet
paintings, ceramic busts, wristwatches and official commemorative plates from
the Franklin Mint.

   Tom and Cindy Sanocki are going beyond that. Way beyond. On Jan. 8 -- on what
would have been, or, to some, is, Elvis' 66th birthday -- ground was broken for
the couple's new Palos Heights home, a faithful $ 1.3 million copy of Graceland,
the Memphis mansion where Elvis lived from 1959 until his death -- or, if you
wish, disappearance -- in 1977.

   Only the Sanockis' Graceland is bigger. More than twice as big.

   "We're not trying to relive Elvis," said Tom Sanocki, 42. "We found his home
to be a beautiful place we spend much time at, and now we have the opportunity
to do it here, and bring some of that Southern hospitality up North."

   The opportunity came courtesy of Cindy's parents, Alex and Ursula Snelius,
who won $ 64 million in the Big Game lottery last September. Electing to receive
their jackpot in a single $ 18 million payment, they promptly gave a million
dollars to charity and told their four children to go out and buy or build their
dream homes.

   "Each one gets a house," said Alex Snelius, 64, a former truck mechanic.
"That's all they get. The rest of it, they got to go to work. I started out with
nothing, and I was blessed with this and wanted to buy them a home."

   "My father-in-law said, 'Whatever floats your boat, whatever you want to do,
do,' " recalls Tom Sanocki.

   Without question, Elvis floats the Sanockis' boat. The couple met through
their membership in the TCB (for "Taking Care of Business," Elvis' artistic
credo) Fan Club of Chicago. They have been to Graceland about 40 times.

   "We definitely say that Elvis brought us together," said Cindy Sanocki, 40.

   Her husband's status as an editor of an important Elvis fan club's newsletter
allowed him, 17 years ago, to propose to his wife-to-be in a unique fashion: in
Elvis' dining room, just the two of them, with the engagement ring waiting under
Elvis' Christmas tree.

   "My wife and I drove up the driveway" -- something forbidden for mere mortals

 -- "she had no idea what was going on. She thought we would get in trouble," he
said.

   "I was yelling at him all the way up the driveway," remembered Cindy. "I was
screaming."

   The Palos Heights home is in Westgate Valley Estates, a new subdivision of
160 single family homes, all custom-designed and selling for between $ 500,000
and $ 1.5 million.

   "It's not going to be out-of-sync," said Pat Connelly, of Mora Builders, who
is constructing the Sanocki home. "There's quite a different array of custom
homes."

   He said he drew the plans for the home, based on photos of Graceland and
information retrieved through the Sanockis' fan club connections.

   "We're doing it almost identical on the outside," he said, adding that
reproducing the entranceway woodwork is the biggest challenge. "We're going to
duplicate some custom exterior millwork that's pretty extensive."

   Sanocki works in a commercial cleaning business. His wife takes care of their
two children, Tommy, 11, and Alexa, 8.

   They do not worry that the house will become a magnet for Elvis fans, such as
a Los Angeles Graceland copy, where fans leave bouquets on the anniversary of
Elvis' death.

   "I don't think they'll do that," he said. "It's going to be our home. We're
not going to be standing outside wearing jumpsuits. I'll be cutting the grass,
walking around with a cigar. If it turns into a shrine I'll have to deal with
that."

   The house is expected to be completed by August, in time for the 24th
anniversary of the singer's death -- or, if you prefer, disappearance -- on the
16th. Whether the couple will mark that solemn anniversary in their new home is
still an open question.

   "We'll probably want to be in Memphis," said Cindy Sanocki.HEART14P$
PAPER:CHICAGO SUN-TIMES

   In an experimental treatment that someday might reduce the need for heart
bypass surgery, researchers are using gene therapy to grow new blood vessels in
damaged hearts.

   Doctors at Evanston Hospital, participating in a clinical trial, are
injecting genes into heart muscle that's starved for blood and oxygen. The
genes, it's hoped, will jump-start the growth of microscopic blood vessels. If
the therapy proves successful, it will provide another weapon against heart
disease, along with such established treatments as bypass surgeries, balloon
angioplasties, drugs and lifestyle changes.

   Seventy-five-year-old Jerome Cohen, a retired brain researcher and North
Shore resident, was the first to volunteer. "It appealed to me as cutting-edge
research that might help me," said Cohen, who underwent single bypass surgery in
November. "I'm recovering in a pretty reasonable way."

   Cohen was a good candidate for the experimental treatment because he had few
other medical options. His arteries were so severely clogged that only one was
in good enough shape to benefit by bypass surgery.

   It's too soon, however, to tell if the gene therapy will work. Indeed, when
gene therapy has been tried on other diseases, in most cases early high hopes
have not been realized.

   "We're not ready to swear on a stack of Bibles it will work," said Dr. Todd
Rosengart of Evanston Hospital. "But we're encouraged."

   Cardiologists at Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center participated in
a trial of a different gene therapy method last year. Loyola University Medical
Center cardiologists are considering joining a trial of a third method.

   Gene therapy delivers disease-fighting genes to target cells. During the past
10 years, hundreds of researchers have tried gene therapy on such diseases as
cancer, hemophilia and cystic fibrosis.

   Gene therapy appears to have cured several babies in France of a rare
disorder of the immune system. But while progress is being made on many fronts,
there have been few other outright cures so far.

   Research slowed last year after a teenager died during a gene therapy trial
at the University of Pennsylvania. The Food and Drug Administration cracked down
with stricter regulations.

   In the Evanston Hospital trial, the goal is to promote the growth of blood
vessels, a process called angiogenesis.

   The effort begins in the lab with the virus for the common cold. A virus is
an ideal delivery vehicle for a gene because it will burrow into the nucleus of
a cell.

   Into this virus, researchers insert a gene that will direct a heart cell to
produce a protein called HIF-1a. This protein acts as a master switch to turn on
angiogenesis. In the week after the patient is injected, several million viruses
are expected to burrow into heart cells, delivering the HIF-1a gene. If it
works, it would take four to six weeks for blood vessels to grow into heart
muscle.

   The cold virus is inactivated so it doesn't reproduce and make the patient
sick. During open heart surgery, the surgeon injects the virus in about 10 spots
on the heart. Along this path, it's hoped, blood vessels will proliferate.

   Evanston is one of six centers that will enroll a total of up to 25 patients
during the one-year trial. The study is limited to patients with severe heart
disease who are less-than-ideal candidates for bypass surgery or angioplasty.

   In bypass surgery, a clogged heart artery is bypassed using blood vessels
from the chest or leg. Doctors often bypass three, four or five arteries. But
Rosengart was able to bypass only one artery during Cohen's surgery last
November. Rosengart expects that gene therapy will provide an additional supply
of blood.

   One-fourth of the patients will receive injections of an inactive placebo
rather than the real gene. To prevent bias, neither doctors nor patients know
during the trial who is getting the placebo. After the trial is completed, the
patients who received the placebo will be compared with those who got the gene.

   "I'm hoping I got the real thing, and that the real thing does something,"
said Robert Kaplan, the second Evanston Hospital patient in the trial.

   Rosengart is evaluating a third patient for the study.

   For now at least, researchers hope gene therapy will be an effective
supplement to bypass surgery. Eventually, gene therapy might become an
alternative to bypass surgery for some patients, Rosengart said.

   But first, doctors have to figure out how to deliver the virus without
opening up a patient's chest. One possibility is a minimally invasive surgical
technique that requires only a one-inch incision. But ultimately, doctors hope
to deliver the gene via a catheter passed through an artery into the heart.

   For more information about the trial, call (847) 570-2868.

GRAPHIC: Cindy and Tom Sanocki (left and right) broke ground Jan. 8 on their
dream home, a copy of Elvis' Graceland, in Palos Heights. Builder Pat Connelly
(center) is constructing the mansion. The plans for the Sanockis' home (left)
will create a larger-than-life copy of the real Graceland (right). See also
related story page 6. Jerome Cohen is participating in a study in which a cold
virus containing a gene is injected into his heart. ILLUSTRATION; CHART; See
roll microfilm. ; SCOTT STEWARTELLEN DOMKE

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2001


                             2065 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                           January 13, 2001, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 203 words

HEADLINE: Convicted drug task force official gets delay on reporting to prison

BYLINE: LINDA SATTER, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:

   A federal judge has again delayed the date for which Roger Walls of Sheridan,
former administrator of the 7th Judicial District Drug Task Force, must begin
serving a 28-month federal prison sentence.
Walls, 51, was sentenced in July 1999 after being convicted in 1997 of extortion
with former Saline County Prosecuting Attorney Dan Harmon.
Harmon, who headed the drug force that operated in Saline, Grant and Hot Spring
counties, and Walls were accused of extorting more than $ 5,000 from Ernest
Varnardo of Fort Worth, after Varnardo was arrested during a traffic stop.
U.S. District Judge Stephen M. Reasoner has extended Walls' reporting date twice
-- last January and again in October -- because of Walls' ongoing cancer
treatments.
On Friday, Reasoner said Walls "continues to suffer from metastatic melanoma
Stage IV. He is participating in research using gene therapy for treatment
because melanoma has spread to various parts of his body and the cancer has not
responded to conventional treatment."
Reasoner extended Walls' reporting date 90 days to April 15.
Harmon and Walls were originally indicted in April 1997. Harmon, convicted of
extortion and four other felonies, remains in prison.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2001


                             2066 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2001 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                             All Rights Reserved
                      The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)

                January 13, 2001 Saturday Met and metro Editions

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 01E

LENGTH: 376 words

HEADLINE: Humana debuts insurance aimed at small business;
Health plans offer consumers incentives to keep costs down

BYLINE: ADAMS HAROLD J

BODY:

   Byline: HAROLD J. ADAMS, The Courier-Journal

   Humana Inc. has introduced a new line of health plans designed to be more
affordable for small businesses and make workers more sensitive to the cost of
their health-care choices.

   The HumanaPPO 2001 plans went into effect in Wisconsin this month and will be
introduced elsewhere, including Northern Kentucky, by the end of the year as
regulatory approvals are given.

   "In many states these plans will lower medical premium costs by an average of
4 (percent) to 6 percent when compared to existing Humana plans with similar
coverage,'' said spokesman Mark Mathis.

   That will be accomplished by giving plan members bigger financial incentives
to get care from a network of preferred doctors and facilities where Humana has
negotiated discounts and by choosing low-cost drugs. As an example, Mathis
quoted one plan that covers the entire cost of a routine exam after a member
makes a copayment of $20 or $30.

   If a member goes outside the network, Humana's share of the cost drops to 60
percent, he said. Previous plans covered "maybe 90 percent in-network, 70
percent out of network.''

   The new plans add a fourth level to the three-tier prescription benefits
Humana has introduced in the past couple of years. The first three levels have
co-payments of $10, $20 or $30, depending on whether a member chooses drugs
ranging from the lowest-cost generic to the highest-cost brand names that have
generic equivalents. The fourth level switches from the flat co-payment and
requires the member to pay coinsurance equal to perhaps 25 percent of a drug's
cost, Mathis said.

   That highest-cost level covers so-called high-technology drugs, including
gene therapy or self-administered injectable drugs.

   The new plans' additional cost-sharing measures are meant to make members
more aware of and responsible for the financial impact of their health-care
decisions, Mathis said.

   "If we can instill in people an understanding of the cost involved, I think
as a system health care will work better,'' he said.

   Humana began quoting the new plans in Wisconsin on Dec. 1 and "a handful''
went into effect at companies there Jan. 1. The plans have also been approved in
Texas, effective in March.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2002


                             2067 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                    January 12, 2001, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 2073 words

HEADLINE: TROUBLES AT ROSWELL;
LAG IN RESEARCH, NOT CARE, PUTS CERTIFICATION AT RISK

BYLINE: KEVIN COLLISON; News Staff Reporter

BODY:


   Roswell Park Cancer Institute, the oldest cancer center in the nation, is in
jeopardy of losing its certification from the National Cancer Institute
following years of decline in the quality of its scientific research.

   The National Cancer Institute, a federal agency that supports cancer research
throughout the United States, last year turned down Roswell Park's request to
renew its five-year core research grant, citing numerous shortcomings with
Roswell Park's research programs.

   Instead of renewing the grant, the federal agency gave the institution three
years, at greatly reduced funding, to overcome its problems.

   Roswell Park's biggest challenge, according to a confidential National Cancer
Institute report obtained by The Buffalo News, is a critical need to recruit
top-flight scientists and physicians to jump-start research.

   "It will be essential for the institute to recruit investigators that either
have, or are developing, research programs that are capable of contributing at
the highest levels," the report said following an inspection in late 1999.

   The National Cancer Institute report focused on cancer research at Roswell
Park, not the quality of patient care. Roswell Park hospital continues to rank
among the Top 10 in the nation, according to a survey last year by U.S. News &
World Report.

   Roswell Park executives say that retaining its status from the federal agency
is very important and that they believe their institution has made great strides
toward recruiting new scientists since the National Cancer Institute team
reviewed the facility more than a year ago.

   "With the changes we've made, I'm totally confident we will continue to be an
NCI-designated center and we'll get a significantly more favorable score this
next time," said Dr. David C. Hohn, who has been president and CEO of Roswell
Park since 1997.

   "This will be a bump in the road. I don't think it's going to be a crash into
the wall at the end."

   But a review by the Roswell Park Cancer Institute Advisory Board, a group of
distinguished national scientists conducted in October, a year after the
National Cancer Institute inspection, concluded that much work remains to be
done:

   Recruiting for a variety of positions, including scientific and clinical
directors, specialists in cancer research and cancer prevention, and
physician-scientists.

   Developing additional clinical programs aimed at specific cancers.

   Translating drug research in the laboratory into treatments for patients.

   Improving support programs for cancer genetics research.

   Building additional research space.

   "In a cancer institute like (Roswell Park), the primary mission should be
research," the advisory board concluded.

   If Roswell Park were to lose its national cancer center status, it would not
only be a devastating blow to the facility's national prestige, it also would
have serious economic repercussions to the community.

Effect on the area

   The state over the past several years invested more than a quarter-billion
dollars to build a new hospital for Roswell Park, and Gov. George E. Pataki this
month identified the institution as a major component in his plans to
reinvigorate the Western New York economy.

   Though the National Cancer Institute core cancer center grant represents a
small part of Roswell Park's annual $ 246 million budget -- the previous grant
was about $ 1.5 million annually -- its cachet in the world of cancer research
makes it highly coveted.

   The core grant represents a National Cancer Institute "stamp of approval"
that has many important spinoffs, said Brian W. Kimes, the agency official in
charge of the core grant program.

   "It means you have the capability to do research beyond a normal
institution," he said. "That attracts patients and also opportunities for
philanthropists because you know it's one of the best.

   "If you're a patient, you have another chance to consider what to do other
than a standard treatment. It means an institution is at the cutting edge of the
most novel treatments."

   Kimes said his agency estimates that for every dollar a cancer center
receives from its core grant, it attracts more than 10 times that amount from
philanthropy and other sources. Charitable donations are an increasingly
important source of funding for research, he said.

   "The comprehensive designation is an important tool for fund raising," Kimes
said.

Inspection team report

   The National Cancer Institute team that inspected Roswell Park in late 1999
described an institution where science had been in decline for more than a
decade. To a large degree, the team found that Roswell Park was no longer doing
the "cutting edge" work worthy of National Cancer Institute support in the very
competitive world of cancer research.

   The review team recommended that it receive a four-year grant extension and a
10 percent cut in funding. A minority of the commission recommended pulling the
plug on Roswell Park's core grant funding immediately.

   "It is the opinion of a minority of the reviewers that this center does not
fulfill the scientific requirements of comprehensive designation," the report
said.

   "Roswell faces a major challenge to turn its science around and attract the
best and brightest in the country," said Howard Ozer, director of the University
of Oklahoma cancer center and a former Roswell Park researcher.

   It costs $ 2 million to $ 5 million to recruit a top scientist, and the
number of National Cancer Institute-designated cancer centers competing for them
has almost doubled to 38 over the past 20 years.

   Hohn acknowledged that "the goal is to cure cancer."

   "That's a competitive ballgame, probably the most competitive game in the
world," Hohn said.

   The loss of its National Cancer Institute designation as a national cancer
center would be a devastating blow to the reputation of an institution that was
a pioneer in cancer research when it was founded 100 years ago by a Buffalo
physician, Dr. Roswell Park.

   "It's like taking away your whole heritage," said Ozer, who worked at Roswell
Park from 1979 to 1985. "Cancer center designation is the affirmation of
continuing to do what you were founded to do. Nobody founded Roswell to see
patients in Buffalo; they founded it to create new knowledge."

Progress is cited

   At the time he was recruited from M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston,
where he was vice president for patient care, Hohn acknowledged that improving
research at Roswell Park was not the priority of the community leaders who
interviewed him.

   His most important initial tasks were to complete Roswell Park's separation
from direct state control to allow it more operational flexibility as a
public-benefit corporation and to attract more patients to improve its financial
situation.

   "An institute has to be economically viable to support all of its mission
areas," he said. "As far as I'm concerned, the bottom line is a means to an end,
and that end is science."

   Once those financial goals were accomplished, Hohn said, he began focusing
attention on improving the quality of research at Roswell Park.

   Hohn said there are many good scientists at Roswell Park, estimating that
more than 80 percent were receiving outside grants, but that there had been no
change in leadership positions since 1985.

   "That tells the whole story," he said. "How can you be competitive?"

   With his new independence from state hiring restrictions, Hohn set a goal of
recruiting 30 scientists during the next three years and landed its first big
catch in April 1999 when Soldano Ferrone decided to accept the post of chairman
of the immunology department.

   Critics say that Roswell Park has continued to lose talent since Hohn arrived
in January 1997 -- citing the departure of at least eight respected scientists
-- and believe he is part of the problem.

   "Hohn has no research background that I'm aware of. He's an MBA business
type," said Peter Reese, a clinical research data analyst who retired last month
after 27 years at Roswell Park.

   "The place has been destroyed. Its mission is no longer to study cancer and
diseases; its mission is to compete with local hospitals and take cancer
patients from them."

The review process

   Before Hohn could proceed much further into his recruiting program, the
National Cancer Institute review team arrived as part of the grant renewal
application.

   Roswell Park, in its request for 2000 to 2005, had sought to double the
amount it received each year, from $ 1.5 million to $ 3 million.

   The toughest criticism from the review team regarded science.

   Of the eight programs reviewed, only one -- biophysical therapies, the use of
means such as light and heat to attack cancer -- received the "excellent"
evaluation that is the minimum generally required for National Cancer Institute
funding.

   Therapeutics and gastrointestinal oncology, cancers of the colon and
digestive system, were borderline with an "excellent to very good" rating.

   Immunology, mouse molecular genetics and DNA replication merited a "very
good" rating. Cancer genetics and breast cancer research were described as "very
good to good."

   Overall, Roswell Park was given a "good to very good" rating.

   Ultimately, the National Cancer Institute decided on a harsher course of
action than the four-year extension and 10 percent cut recommended by the review
team. It gave Roswell Park a two-year extension of its core grant at half the
previous funding, about $ 750,000 per year.

Granted an extension

   Roswell Park officials then asked for an extra year to allow more time to
prepare to reapply for full funding. They were granted that request, but with no
additional funding. The institution now has until June 2002 to reapply.

   One member of the National Cancer Institute review team, who asked not to
identified, said Roswell Park faces an uphill, but not impossible, battle.

   "I've seen places turn themselves around," she said, "but usually it takes a
major influx of funds or a real focus on specific areas of research.

   "Can they get back to a second-tier level? Sure. Unfortunately, Roswell Park
used to be at the top level, but I don't think they'll get back there."

   As part of its reapplication plan, Roswell Park has decided to trim the
number of individual scientific research programs it wants to fund from eight to
four: biophysical therapies, immunology, genetics and therapeutics.

   It also will pursue one nonscientific program deemed to be critical to
retaining its comprehensive cancer center designation, cancer prevention.

Recent hiring

   Hohn believes he has solved one important part of the leadership vacuum at
Roswell Park with the recent hiring of John Cowell to be chairman of the
genetics program. Cowell comes from the Cleveland Clinic.

   Hohn also said the institution is on the verge of hiring a new director for
the Department of Pharmacology.

   The October advisory board report described Cowell's hiring as a "very
positive step" and described him as "highly qualified."

   The board noted, however, that Cowell will need help from the institution to
bring "talented young" investigators with a cancer genetics focus to Roswell
Park.

   "Recruiting is the priority for the next several years, and it will be a
priority permanently," Hohn said.

   Critics note, however, that Roswell Park's commitment to research is
difficult to reconcile with the fact that none of the nine members on its board
of directors is a scientist or doctor.

   "What's wrong here is the emphasis was taken from science and research to
collecting money," said Reese, the former research analyst.

Top-flight scientists leave

   Hohn acknowledged that Roswell Park has lost some top researchers during his
tenure but said many departed for much better opportunities.

   One was Pieter DeJong, a researcher who brought national recognition to
Roswell Park through his work mapping the human genetic code. He left in 1999
for what he described as a "golden opportunity" in the San Francisco area to
work for a large pharmaceutical company.

   DeJong said Hohn has a "tremendously difficult task" to find new scientists
and researchers for Roswell Park.

   "What they need is vision, but when you're in a state of decline, it's
difficult to attract people of vision," he said. "It's like a continuing sliding
down. It's difficult to obtain the uphill trend."

GRAPHIC: "What they need is vision, but when you're in a state of decline, it's
difficult to attract people of vision." Pieter DeJong, former Roswell Park
researcher; SHARON CANTILLON/Buffalo News; Dr. David C. Hohn, president of
Roswell Park Cancer Institute.

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2001


                             2068 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JANUARY 12, 2001 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 998 words

HEADLINE: IN A FIRST, A PRIMATE IS GENETICALLY ENGINEERED THE RESULT IS ANDI, A
RHESUS MONKEY WITH A JELLYFISH GENE. THE EVENTUAL GOAL IS LEARNING MORE ABOUT
HUMAN DISEASES.

BYLINE: Faye Flam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Oregon scientists have created the first genetically engineered primate - a
baby rhesus monkey named ANDi. The apparently healthy, frisky 3-month-old
carries a gene from a jellyfish.

   The scientists who carried out this genetic-engineering feat at the Oregon
Primate Center in Portland say they eventually want to create genetic defects in
monkeys to mimic human diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, much the
way specially bred mice are used today.

   "Our goal is to learn more about human disease," said Anthony Chan of the
Oregon team, adding that they have no interest in creating genetically
engineered humans. Still, this success does bring the possibility closer to
reality.

   Richard Schultz, a biologist at the University of Pennsylvania, called it a
"very encouraging first step" toward creating monkey models of certain human
diseases - especially those, like Alzheimer's, caused in part by a
malfunctioning gene.

   "Primates are the ultimate experimental model," he said. But he and others
cautioned that it may take years before medically useful engineered monkeys
become available.

   While the prospect of engineering such close relatives of humans raises
ethical concerns, Penn ethicist Arthur Caplan said it is justified if the goal
is to alleviate human suffering.

   "It's a terribly sad trade-off that you make a breed of mouse that has
cancers or use gene transfer to give a monkey Parkinson's disease, but it's one
that should be done if you're going to cure these diseases," he said.

   ANDi (backwards for inserted DNA) started out, like all monkeys, from an egg
and a sperm cell. Before these two entities were united, scientists added a gene
to the egg - a gene that, in jellyfish, makes them glow in the dark, or
phosphoresce.

   They picked this gene because it was considered a good "marker." In recent
years, other scientists had inserted the gene in mice and rabbits, resulting in
rodents that glowed under a black light, but otherwise seemed healthy and
unharmed. The Oregon scientists had hoped that they could get a monkey to glow
under black light as well.

   ANDi doesn't glow, but blood and tissue tests show his cells carry the gene,
a strip of DNA that is incorporated into his own genetic material.

   Two monkeys in the experiment that were stillborn did have hair and nails
that glowed under black light.

   ANDi might start glowing when he gets older, Chan said, if the gene is simply
taking time to begin expressing itself. When he gets older, scientists plan to
check his sperm, and ultimately, to breed him, to see if the gene is passed to
future generations.

   The work was published in today's issue of the journal Science.

   Chan and team got the DNA into ANDi by using a virus to infiltrate a monkey
egg. Viruses are also used as a vehicle for carrying DNA into cells in
gene-therapy experiments.

   In gene therapy, the genes are added after the patients are born, entering
only a small fraction of the body's trillions of cells in the hope of correcting
genetic disease. In genetic engineering, foreign genes are added to an egg or
early embryo, allowing these genes to be copied billions of times into other
cells as the animal or plant develops.

   For the ANDi experiment, Chan and his colleagues infected dozens of monkey
eggs with the virus carrying the jellyfish gene, fertilized them in test tubes,
and then watched as some of the cells began to grow into monkey embryos.

   The researchers implanted 40 of these embryos into female monkeys. Only five
pregnancies resulted and of those, two ended in stillbirths. Of the surviving
three, only one showed signs that it had picked up the gene - ANDi, who was born
on Oct. 2.

   Scientists began experimenting with the transfer of genes between species in
the 1970s, starting with simple bacteria. In 1982, Penn biologist Ralph Brinster
made headlines by creating "mighty mouse," the first animal whose traits were
altered through genetic engineering. The oversized mouse carried a growth
hormone gene from a rat.

   Unlike Brinster's mouse, ANDi's genetic alteration didn't have any apparent
effect on his physical traits, but tests showed that the gene was functioning,
ordering cells to pump out jellyfish protein, though at a low level.

   Schultz and other biologists say they would like to see some demonstration
that a gene could be expressed enough to make a good monkey "model" of disease.

   Today, thousands of genetically altered mice are used in research on human
disease, though most of them are created by cruder means. Scientists generally
subject hundreds of mice to radiation and then choose ones that get a particular
mutation. Those are then inbred to create whole strains of mice with various
genetic abnormalities: cancer-prone mice and diabetic mice, obese mice and mice
that get dementia.

   The Oregon Primate Center where ANDi was created made headlines in 1997 by
cloning rhesus monkeys - a variation on the cloning of Dolly the sheep in
Scotland, announced a few weeks earlier. Unlike genetic engineering, cloning
does not add any new genes to an animal. It simply copies the genes of one
animal, creating identical twins.

   Because scientists don't think they can inbreed monkeys the way they do mice,
they say they might need to combine cloning with genetic engineering to create
enough identical monkeys for meaningful research.

   Since monkeys are more like humans than mice, they should yield more insight
into some human disease than mice can. That's especially true in studying the
brain, Penn biologist Ted Abel said.

   If genetic engineering can be done in our close cousin, the monkey, it
probably can be done in humans. But as ethicist Caplan points out, it's easier
to make an animal sick or defective than to improve its health or appearance,
presumably the goal of anyone wanting to engineer humans.

   "If the road to genetically engineering humans is ten miles long," he said,
"this is a trip of about two feet."

   Faye Flam's e-mail address is fflam@phillynews.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART;
PHOTO
The rhesus monkey ANDi, whose name is backwards for "inserted DNA," was born in
October. (Oregon Regional Primate Research Center)

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             2069 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    January 12, 2001, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 858 words

HEADLINE: THIS MONKEY'S PART JELLYFISH: TRANSGENIC SUCCESS A BREAKTHROUGH

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   Just 3 months old, ANDi looks like any young, healthy rhesus monkey. Yet
never has there been a monkey quite like him.

   ANDi -- a backward acronym for "inserted DNA" -- is the world's first
transgenic monkey -- a monkey genetically altered to include a gene from another
species, in this case a glowing jellyfish. Researchers in Oregon took a bit of
jellyfish DNA and slipped it into the monkey egg that eventually became ANDi.

   The jellyfish gene produces proteins that glow green, which isn't anything
that's important to a monkey. In fact, ANDi doesn't glow, or at least not yet.
What's important is simply that the gene is there, in every cell of his body.

   The advance, reported in today's edition of the journal Science, is a first
step toward genetically tailoring monkeys so that they can mimic devastating
human diseases, such as Alzheimer's, diabetes and Parkinson's.

   Transgenic lab mice have been used this way for years, but a transgenic
monkey could prove especially valuable for developing and testing treatments
because monkeys are close genetic relatives to humans.

   "I think it's actually quite a big deal," said Dr. Ronald Herberman, director
of the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute. A transgenic monkey with human
genes that promote cancers, for instance, could provide insights that lead to
new treatments and accelerate the evaluation of those treatments.

   But the humanlike characteristics that make monkeys so valuable as disease
models also raise ethical concerns. "It is hard to see what would ever justify
genetically modifying monkeys to model human disease," said Donald Bruce,
director of the Church of Scotland's Society, Religion and Technology Project.
"Most people value large mammals and primates higher than small animals like
mice and rats."

   Anthony Chan, a senior scientist at the Oregon Regional Primate Research
Center at the Oregon Health Sciences Center, sees it differently. By making
monkeys that develop the same disease as humans, or perhaps develop it faster,
scientists might be able to use fewer monkeys to get results.

   The number of diseases in which monkeys are used may multiply, but the total
number of research monkeys may not change much because fewer are used for each
experiment, added Chan, who headed the transgenic monkey experiment with senior
scientist Gerald Schatten.

   Development of a transgenic monkey has lagged behind other transgenic species
because researchers have tried to minimize the number of animals used, Chan
said. Conventional gene transfer techniques are very inefficient -injecting DNA
into fertilized eggs might result in just one transgenic animal out of 100
births.

   So Chan and Schatten used a technique similar to that used in many gene
therapy trials. The jellyfish DNA was packaged inside a viral vector, a virus
altered so that it cannot cause disease but will carry a gene inside a cell's
nucleus. The vector was used to transfer the DNA into 224 monkey eggs, which
were then fertilized. About half divided to become embryos and 40 of those were
selected for implantation in monkey wombs.

   The result was five pregnancies and three live births. Two of the three
monkeys did not have the green fluorescence gene, but ANDi did.

   The fluorescent gene was used, as it has been in many previous transgenic
experiments, because it usually is easy to detect. Chan said genetic analysis
shows that the gene has been activated, but has not yet produced fluorescent
proteins, or at least not enough to detect.

   It will be awhile before monkey-based disease models begin appearing in labs.
"This is not entirely straightforward or safe technology," Herberman said, and
experts such as Schatten and Chan are few. Pitt is ill-equipped to develop such
animals, but Herberman said he hopes to develop a collaboration with Schatten, a
friend of his.

   Chan said the Oregon facility, home to 2,200 primates, is looking for that
kind of input as the researchers try to decide which human disease should be
transferred to monkeys first. He expects the first such disease models will be
developed later this year or next year.

   "We need to have a lot of input to make it right," Chan said.

   The idea of redefining a species to accommodate human experiments "is
sobering, at the very least," said Ronald Cole-Turner, an ethicist at the
Pittsburgh Theological Seminary who specializes in science and technology
issues. Scientists will be altering a species for a purpose other than what
evolution or God intended.

   "But we do things that are sobering because cancer is devastating,"
Cole-Turner said. "If it advances the science, then limited use, I think, is
justified."

   From a broader perspective, the Oregon experiment can be seen as a step
toward so-called "germ-line" modification of humans, Cole-Turner said. Many
moral and ethical questions remain to be answered before anyone should attempt
to change the inheritable traits of humans, he emphasized, but the Oregon
results underscore the fact that such modifications are "really very difficult."

   "It shows how difficult it's going to be to cross the safety threshold," he
said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, PHOTO: Associated Press: ANDi, a rhesus
monkey who's the first; genetically modified primate, is seen as another step
toward designing and; perfecting new treatments for many human diseases.;
INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: Oregon Health Sciences University; P. Santilli, Wm. J.;
Castello/Associated Press: (Altering genetics)

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2001


                             2070 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 12, 2001, Friday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1066 words

HEADLINE: Genetically altered monkey called research boon

BYLINE: Faye Flam; KNIGHT RIDDER NEWS SERVICE | The Boston Globe contributed to
this report.

BODY:
 PHILADELPHIA -- Scientists have created the first genetically engineered
primate -- a baby rhesus monkey named ANDi. The apparently healthy, frisky
3-month-old carries a gene from a jellyfish.

   The scientists who carried out this feat at the Oregon Primate Center in
Portland say they eventually want to create genetic defects in monkeys to mimic
human diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, much the way specially bred
mice are used today.

   "Our goal is to learn more about human disease," said Anthony Chan of the
Oregon team, adding that the team has no interest in creating genetically
engineered humans.  Still, this success does bring the possibility closer to
reality.

   "I think the big picture is to make a perfect human disease model" to
accelerate research into killers and cripplers of humankind, Chan said.

   Richard Schultz, a biologist at the University of Pennsylvania, called it a
"very encouraging first step" toward creating monkey models of certain human
diseases -- especially those, such as Alzheimer's, that are caused in part by a
malfunctioning gene.

   "Primates are the ultimate experimental model," he said.  But he and others
cautioned that it will take years before medically useful engineered monkeys
become available.

   While the prospect of engineering such close relatives of humans raises
ethical concerns, Arthur Caplan, a University of Pennsylvania ethicist, said it
is justified if the goal is to alleviate human suffering.

   "It's a terribly sad trade-off that you make a breed of mouse that has
cancers or use gene transfer to give a monkey Parkinson's disease, but it's one
that should be done if you're going to cure these diseases," he said.

   Moreover, ANDi's birth comes when animal welfare advocates are pushing
medical researchers to rely less on monkeys and primates generally, especially
for potentially painful or lethal procedures.

   "It's like charting new waters and it will require careful oversight to make
sure the projects are well-founded," said Peter Theron, director of the health
and hospitals division of the Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals.

   ANDi (backward for inserted DNA) started out, like all monkeys, from an egg
and a sperm cell.  But before they were united, the Oregon scientists added a
gene to the egg -- a gene that, in jellyfish, makes them glow in the dark, or
phosphoresce.

   They picked this gene because it was considered a good "marker." In recent
years, other scientists had inserted the gene into mice and rabbits, resulting
in rodents that glowed under a black light but otherwise seemed healthy and
unharmed.  The Oregon scientists had hoped they would get a monkey that glowed
under black light.

   ANDi doesn't glow, but blood and tissue tests show his cells are carrying the
gene, a strip of DNA that is incorporated into his own genetic material.  For
now, scientists can't be sure the gene is "expressed" -- meaning that it can
produce proteins that cause the glow.

   Two other monkeys in the Oregon experiment -- twins that were stillborn --
did have hair and fingernails that glowed under black light.

   ANDi might glow when he gets older, Chan said, if the gene is simply taking
time to begin expressing itself.  When he gets older, they also plan to check
his sperm and, ultimately, to breed him to see if the gene gets passed on to
future generations.

   The work is published in today's issue of the journal Science.

   Chan and his colleagues got the DNA into ANDi by using a virus to infiltrate
a monkey egg.  Viruses are also used as a vehicle for carrying DNA into cells in
gene therapy experiments.

   In gene therapy, the genes are added after the patients are born, entering
only a small fraction of the body's trillions of cells in the hope of correcting
genetic disease.

   In genetic engineering, by contrast, foreign genes are added to an egg or
early embryo, allowing them to be copied billions of times into other cells as
the animal or plant develops.

   For the ANDi experiment, Chan and his colleagues infected dozens of monkey
eggs with the virus carrying the jellyfish gene, fertilized them in test tubes,
and then watched as some of the cells began to grow into monkey embryos.

   The researchers implanted 40 of these embryos into female monkeys.  Only five
became pregnant and of those, two had stillbirths.  Of the other three, only one
showed signs that it had picked up the gene -- ANDi, who was born Oct. 2.

   Scientists began experimenting with the transfer of genes between species in
the 1970s, starting with simple bacteria.  In 1982, University of Pennsylvania
biologist Ralph Brinster made headlines by creating Mighty Mouse, the first
animal whose traits were altered through genetic engineering.  The oversized
mouse carried a growth hormone gene from a rat.

   Unlike Brinster's mouse, ANDi's genetic alteration didn't have any apparent
effect on his physical traits, but tests showed that the gene was functioning --
translating its code into protein, though at a low level.

   Today, thousands of genetically altered mice are used in research on human
disease, though most of them are created by cruder means.  Scientists generally
subject hundreds of mice to radiation and then choose those that get a
particular mutation.  Those mice are then inbred to create whole strains of mice
with various genetic abnormalities such as cancer-prone mice, diabetic mice,
obese mice and mice that get dementia.

   Because monkeys are much more like humans, they should yield more insight
into some human diseases.  That's especially true in studying the brain, said
Ted Abel, a biologist at the University of Pennsylvania.

   For example, scientists found the gene for a rare disease in children called
ataxia telangiectasia, or AT, and created transgenic mice they hoped would serve
as models for the human disease.

   But, said Dr. Evan Snyder, a neuroscience researcher at Children's Hospital
in Boston, the mouse had all the symptoms of AT "except for the one the kids
have that probably kills them" -- degeneration of the brain's cerebellum.

   "Why is the mutant gene doing something in the kids but not in the mice?"
Snyder asked.  If you could add the AT gene to a monkey, more closely related to
humans, "you might answer that question, and also you might have a model that's
a more faithful representative" of the human AT disease for testing treatments.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; Associated Press; ANDi is the first genetically modified rhesus
monkey. (A-20)

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2001


                             2071 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   January 10, 2001, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 1175 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY SEE MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA;
GREAT EXPECTATIONS SURGE IN FDA APPLICATIONS SEEN PAYING DIVIDENDS IN 2001

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Handicapping when promising new drugs get to the market is difficult. In
1998, Genzyme Corp. trumpeted in its annual report that it would have "eight
[drug] products marketed by the year 2001." So far it has four, with
expectations of adding two more this year.

   Still, there are strong signs that 2001 will be a solid year, with a steady
stream of new drug applications submitted for Food and Drug Administration
approval.

      US regulators have approved over 95 biotech drugs for sale or expanded use
since 1995, more than triple the 27 drugs approved during the first half of the
1990s, according to the Biotechnology Industry Organization, a trade group.

   By the end of last year, 350 biotech compounds were in late stages of testing
- 50 more than in 1999, the trade group said.

   In Massachusetts, there were no major drug approvals in 2000, but at least
five are expected to gain FDA marketing permission in 2001.

   "This year will be a huge year of importance for companies like Genzyme,
Millennium, Biogen and TKT [Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.], as we see some new
drugs get through phase III clinical trials and FDA approval," said William
Tanner, biotechnology analyst at SG Cowen & Co. in Boston.

   "For genomics companies, the onus on them is to show that they are really
drug developers and not just gene hunters. Millennium and a few other companies
took steps last year to bridge this gap, but others will also have to make this
transition," he added.

   Also adapting to changes are scores of biopharmaceutical firms, whose stock
prices soared during most of last year as investors abandoned Internet stocks to
jump on the biotech and genomic bandwagon. Those stocks are down now as part of
the technology sell-off. So investors will be looking for results, particularly
real drug products on the market or therapeutics nearing FDA approval.

   "For us and many of the companies that did their phase III clinical trials,
this is the year the rubber meets the road as we have real products that will
make a difference, creating revenues and profits," said Carl Rausch, chief
executive of Biopure Corp. Biopure plans to seek FDA approval later this year
for Hemopure, its bovine-based alternative to red blood cell transfusion in
orthopedic surgery patients.

   Jay Silverman, a biotech analyst at Robertson Stephens, has forecasted that
up to 30 biotech companies will become profitable this year, up from 17 three
years ago.

   Thus, biotech firms without near-term products will likely face a tough year,
said Silverman and several other Wall Street analysts.

   Nationally, more than 30 new drugs are near to FDA approval. They range from
Aranesp, Amgen's improved version of Epogen (the world's best selling biotech
drug), to two new cancer drugs from Idec Laboratories Inc. and Coulter
Pharmaceuticals to treat non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Also seeking the regulatory
green light is an allergy and asthma medication called Xolair, developed and
marketed by a trio of companies led by Genentech Inc.

   And there are clear signs that new product introductions from New England
firms will be more plentiful this year. Some of the new therapeutics are
narrowly focused on helping certain patients who failed other medications or
have rare inherited disorders.

   Campath, from Cambridge-based Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc., is a drug
aimed at an estimated 10,000 to 15,000 people who have failed other forms of
medication to treat a certain form of leukemia. Wall Street estimates the drug,
expected to be approved in coming weeks, will eventually have annual sales of
about $100 million.

   Other drugs developed by local biotech companies could be major winners.
Abbott Laboratories bought BASF's international pharmaceutical operations, in
part to gain a promising rheumatoid arthritis drug, developed in Worcester by
BASF Bioscience, that some analysts said could have annual revenues of $800
million.

   "The biotech and genomic companies are moving to address the major
pharmaceutical companies' need for billion-dollar drugs," said Mark Levin, chief
executive of Millennium.  The company recently announced a nearly $500 million
deal with Aventis SA to codevelop drugs to treat rheumatoid arthritis, multiple
sclerosis and asthma.

   At the same time, some local biotech firms will try to determine if they have
sufficent funds to stay independent, get acquired or continue to pursue
partnerships.

   Knocking on their doors are big biotech and pharmaceutical companies anxious
to expand their drug pipelines. They seek out smaller firms that either lack
cash or are willing to license their drugs for selected markets.

   On Monday, Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc., in one of the first major deals of
the new year, said it was licensing the European rights of its lead drug,
Cidecin, to Gilead Sciences Inc. of Foster City, Calif. Gilead agreed to pay
Cubist an up-front licensing fee of $13 million, additional cash payments of up
to $31 million in coming years plus a fixed royalty on net sales for the drug
used to treat serious bacterial infections.

   Cubist is also among the dozens of biotech and genomics companies that raised
a record $40 billion in capital last year. That has made some of them cash-rich
with the ability to withstand the temptation from drug companies to sell out.

   But Rausch of Biopure does not expect the same huge influx of cash to flow to
biotech companies this year, as companies must now prove themselves.

   "The day when you see market capitalizations [all the shares multiplied by
the company's stock price] in the $1 billion range, with a product two to three
years out, is not going to be there this year," said Rausch. "Sure they can
raise money, but it will probably be considerably smaller."

   And while pharmaceutical and biotech companies have high hopes for gene-based
or genomics drugs that are still three to five years away from any major
financial payoff, drug companies are keeping a watchful eye on the legislative
agenda of Washington, D.C., and President-elect George W. Bush.

   Key among the industry's concerns is the Medicare prescription drug benefit,
which some company officials say may not get passed because of the sharp
divisions between Democrats and Republicans.

   President-elect Bush's two-part plan would provide federal funds to the
states to establish their own prescription drug benefit plans for low-income
Medicare recipients, followed later by a more comprehensive benefit plan that
would use private insurers. The plan has strong biotech industry support.

   Current Medicare coverage of drugs is only for medicines administered to
patients in a physician's office or hospital - not for prescription drugs from
pharmacies.

   "With the Senate split 50-50, it will be a challenge to get a complete bill
through," said Lisa Raines, Genzyme's vice president of government affairs. "But
the consensus is to preserve the existing Medicare coverage and expand from it
rather than start anew." SIDEBAR CLASS OF 2001-2002 THE PROMISING
BIOPHARMACEUTICALS

GRAPHIC: PHOTO    CHART, Biopure Corp. of Cambridge plans to seek FDA approval
this year for one of its blood products.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2001


                             2072 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   January 10, 2001, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 701 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY IN THE PIPELINE;
BIOGEN AIMS TO TEST 3 NEW DRUGS THIS YEAR

BYLINE: BY NAOMI AOKI and RONALD ROSENBERG

BODY:

   With its most promising new drug, Amevive, in pivotal phase 3 clinical trials
- and with plans to announce early test results from a second drug - Biogen Inc.
expects to launch human testing of three other drugs this year.

   The Cambridge biopharmaceutical company is best known for Avonex, the leading
multiple sclerosis treatment, introduced nearly five years ago.

      A promising second product, Antova, was being tested in phase 2 trials to
treat hemophilia, diabetes, and four other illnesses. But it was hastily
withdrawn in 1999, after some participants experienced blood clots.

   Yesterday, Biogen's president, James C. Mullen, said that Amevive, a
treatment for chronic psoriasis, will make Biogen a multiproduct operation. It's
set to hit the market by mid-2002.

   "The psoriasis marketplace is the kind Biogen understands," he said. "There
are many parallels to the MS [multiple sclerosis] marketplace back in 1996, when
we launched Avonex - a large, underserved patient population and a medical
community that is close-knit and tightly focused."

   Biogen is also collaborating with Elan Pharmaceuticals on Antegren, a second
drug to treat multiple sclerosis as well as Crohn's disease, a chronic
inflammation of the intestinal tract. Phase 2 results will be announced by the
end of March.

   Mullen said the phase 1 safety trials are for Adenosine A1 (for congestive
heart failure), soluble lymphotoxin beta receptor (for autoimmune diseases), and
interferon beta gene therapy (for glioma, a tumor of nonnerve cells in the
nervous system.

   Drug may be useful for acute infections

   Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc. and Wyeth-Ayerst Research, the pharmaceutical
research and development division of American Home Products Corp., said they
have identified a drug candidate to treat life-threatening bacterial infections.

   The drug has proven safe and effective in animal studies, the companies said,
and works in a way that is distinct from the function of conventional
antibiotics.

   The compound is the first to achieve drug-candidate status as part of the
companies' five-year collaboration.  Millennium will receive milestone payments
of undisclosed amounts for its discoveries.

   The Cambridge biotech company has also identified a dozen antibacterial drug
targets as part of the alliance with Wyeth-Ayerst. In addition to milestone
payments, the company will receive royalties on any drugs developed in
collaboration.

   This week, Millennium also announced a three-year alliance with Roche
Diagnostics, a division of Roche Group, to develop diagnostic products for
rheumatoid arthritis.

   Phylos raises $25m in private financing

   Phylos Inc., a Lexington biotechnology company, has raised more than $25
million in a round of private financing.

   The company is developing technologies for understanding the function of
proteins in disease. The field, known as proteomics, is becoming increasingly
important as gene-related discoveries expand the pool of proteins that could be
used as potential drugs or targets for drugs.

   The company said the money will be used to fund the commercialization of its
protein chip and to continue developing other protein-based technologies.

   The protein chip can be used to identify rapidly and validate thousands of
drug candidates and targets, greatly speeding the process of drug development.

   EPIX to get $3m from Schering

   EPIX Medical Inc., of Cambridge, will receive $3 million in upfront fees and
milestone payments from Schering AG Germany for the exclusive rights to market
EPIX's magnetic resonance imaging agent in Japan. The imaging agent, MS-325, is
in the final stages of clinical testing to determine its usefulness in
diagnosing peripheral vascular disease.

   In an earlier agreement, EPIX gave Schering worldwide sales and marketing
rights for the product, excluding Japan. To sell the rights to the Japanese
market, EPIX had to reacquire them from Daiichi Radioisotope Laboratories.

   EPIX retains responsibility for completing the clinical development of MS-325
in the United States. EPIX and Schering will share operating profits in the
United States, and Schering will pay EPIX a royalty on gross profits elsewhere.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2001


                             2073 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          January 10, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 696 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   Nanogen warns on revenues

   Nanogen said it expects to report a fourth quarter net loss of 29 cents to 32
cents a share, with revenue below Wall Street's expectations.  The net loss
would be ahead of Wall Street's consensus estimate of 36 cents a share, as
compiled by Zacks.  San Diego-based Nanogen said revenue would miss expectations
because of lower-than-expected sales of the company's Nanochip cartridges, which
are used in genetic research.  The company said it expects to report revenue of
$2.7 million to $3 million.

   Webvan sees smaller loss

   Online grocer Webvan Group Inc. of Foster City said yesterday that its
fourth-quarter loss will be smaller than expected, projecting a loss of 23 cents
per share, on revenues of $84 million, when it reports its fourth-quarter
results Jan. 25. Industry analysts had predicted a loss of 26 cents per share.
Webvan attributed the improvement to savings from its acquisition of former
rival HomeGrocer.com.

   ViaSat in pact with Astrolink

   Carlsbad's ViaSat Inc. entered into a $30 million contract with Astrolink
International of Maryland to make gateways for Astrolink's satellite-based
broadband system.  Astrolink is expected to launch its service in 2003.

   Nike Golf selects Gable Group

   Nike Golf selected The Gable Group of San Diego to help with the company's
media, special events and trade show programs, including the 2001 PGA
Merchandise Show in Orlando, Fla., the golf industry's largest trade show.

   Chiron to sell local plant

   Chiron said it would sell its San Diego gene therapy manufacturing facility
to Cell Genesys of Foster City for $4.8 million.  Emeryville-based Chiron said
Cell Genesys will keep "substantially all" of the facility's 25 employees.  The
purchase does not include any of Chiron's gene therapy research programs.

   Capital Bank earnings grow

   Capital Bank of North County reported earnings of $1.3 million last year, a
26 percent increase over the prior year.  Assets grew 23 percent.  The bank has
branches in Carlsbad, Vista and Encinitas, as well as a business loan center in
Oceanside.

   Heritage Golf adds courses

   Heritage Golf Group, a San Diego-based owner and operator of golf courses,
added five new courses to its portfolio under a long-term management agreement.
Heritage Golf Group will manage Angel Park and The Legacy, both in Las Vegas;
Langdon Farms Golf Club in Portland, Ore; Trophy Lake in Port Orchard, Wash.;
and Washington National in Auburn, Wash. The company, founded by Bob Husband,
former CEO of Cobblestone Golf Group, has eight courses in its portfolio.

   WebSideStory funding grows

   WebSideStory Inc. said it received $7.5 million in funding from two Silicon
Valley-based venture capital firms.  The money, from TA Associates and Summit
Partners, will be used for general operations, said president and chief
executive John Hentrich.  The company offers a service that measures online
visitor and customer behavior in real time.

   WORLD AND NATION

   Rite Aid loss declines

   Rite Aid Corp. reported a smaller loss from continuing operations in the
third quarter, boosted by stronger sales of prescription drugs.  The drugstore
chain said its loss from continuing operations was $241.2 million, or 74 cents
per share, vs. a loss from continuing operations of $249.8 million, or $1 a
share, a year ago.  The net loss after the sale of its pharmacy benefit
management firm PCS Health Systems Inc. was $105.7 million, or 34 cents a share.

   Levitt ready to step down

   Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Arthur Levitt is likely to end
his reign as Wall Street's longest-serving regulator by the end of January,
according to a SEC official.  President-elect George W. Bush has not named
Levitt's replacement but Laura Unger, the only current Republican commissioner,
is expected to head the panel of up to five members in the interim.

   UPS orders 60 aircraft

   United Parcel Service said it has ordered 60 Airbus Industrie freighters, in
a $6 billion deal that is the largest aircraft buy ever by the package delivery
giant.  Delivery of the planes will be spread over nine years.


LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2001


                             2074 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 10, 2001 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 677 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA Nanogen warns on revenues Nanogen said it expects to
report a fourth quarter net loss of 29 cents to 32 cents a share, with revenue
below Wall Street's expectations.

   The net loss would be ahead of Wall Street's consensus estimate of 36 cents a
share, as compiled by Zacks.

   San Diego-based Nanogen said revenue would miss expectations because of
lower-than-expected sales of the company's Nanochip cartridges, which are used
in genetic research.

   The company said it expects to report revenue of $2.7 million to $3 million.
Webvan sees smaller loss Online grocer Webvan Group Inc. of Foster City said
yesterday that its fourth-quarter loss will be smaller than expected, projecting
a loss of 23 cents per share, on revenues of $84 million, when it reports its
fourth-quarter results Jan. 25. Industry analysts had predicted a loss of 26
cents per share.

   Webvan attributed the improvement to savings from its acquisition of former
rival HomeGrocer.com. ViaSat in pact with Astrolink Carlsbad's ViaSat Inc.
entered into a $30 million contract with Astrolink International of Maryland to
make gateways for Astrolink's satellite-based broadband system.

   Astrolink is expected to launch its service in 2003. Nike Golf selects Gable
Group Nike Golf selected The Gable Group of San Diego to help with the company's
media, special events and trade show programs, including the 2001 PGA
Merchandise Show in Orlando, Fla., the golf industry's largest trade show.
Chiron to sell local plant Chiron said it would sell its San Diego gene therapy
manufacturing facility to Cell Genesys of Foster City for $4.8 million.

   Emeryville-based Chiron said Cell Genesys will keep "substantially all" of
the facility's 25 employees.

   The purchase does not include any of Chiron's gene therapy research programs.
Capital Bank earnings grow Capital Bank of North County reported earnings of
$1.3 million last year, a 26 percent increase over the prior year.

   Assets grew 23 percent.

   The bank has branches in Carlsbad, Vista and Encinitas, as well as a business
loan center in Oceanside. Heritage Golf adds courses Heritage Golf Group, a San
Diego-based owner and operator of golf courses, added five new courses to its
portfolio under a long-term management agreement.

   Heritage Golf Group will manage Angel Park and The Legacy, both in Las Vegas;
Langdon Farms Golf Club in Portland, Ore; Trophy Lake in Port Orchard, Wash.;
and Washington National in Auburn, Wash. The company, founded by Bob Husband,
former CEO of Cobblestone Golf Group, has eight courses in its portfolio.
WebSideStory funding grows WebSideStory Inc. said it received $7.5 million in
funding from two Silicon Valley-based venture capital firms.

   The money, from TA Associates and Summit Partners, will be used for general
operations, said president and chief executive John Hentrich.

   The company offers a service that measures online visitor and customer
behavior in real time. WORLD AND NATION Rite Aid loss declines Rite Aid Corp.
reported a smaller loss from continuing operations in the third quarter, boosted
by stronger sales of prescription drugs.

   The drugstore chain said its loss from continuing operations was $241.2
million, or 74 cents per share, vs. a loss from continuing operations of $249.8
million, or $1 a share, a year ago.

   The net loss after the sale of its pharmacy benefit management firm PCS
Health Systems Inc. was $105.7 million, or 34 cents a share. Levitt ready to
step down Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Arthur Levitt is likely to
end his reign as Wall Street's longest-serving regulator by the end of January,
according to a SEC official.

   President-elect George W. Bush has not named Levitt's replacement but Laura
Unger, the only current Republican commissioner, is expected to head the panel
of up to five members in the interim. UPS orders 60 aircraft United Parcel
Service said it has ordered 60 Airbus Industrie freighters, in a $6 billion deal
that is the largest aircraft buy ever by the package delivery giant.

   Delivery of the planes will be spread over nine years.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             2075 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           January 10, 2001 Wednesday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 216 words

HEADLINE: Former chancellor remembers Merv Trail

BODY:

   I was shocked and profoundly saddened to learn of the death of Dr. Mervin
Trail.

   During my tenure as Chancellor of Tulane University Medical Center from 1994
to 1999, Merv was sometimes an adversary, sometimes an ally (I much preferred
him in the latter role), and always a colleague.

   Merv was not born in New Orleans and did not attend LSU, but no native son
was ever more dedicated to New Orleans and Louisiana than Merv, and no alumnus
was ever more loyal or more giving to LSU.

   For the first part of my tenure, I struggled with Merv over the issues of
control and the use of Charity Hospital.

   Even at times when our positions were farthest apart, I would come home from
a meeting, scratch my head and wonder how it could be that I could disagree with
him so violently and like him so much.

   I remember that when we spoke about joining forces to develop a gene therapy
research initiative for New Orleans, the issue that finally brought him on board
full force was his realization that it would be good not only for LSU, but for
his beloved New Orleans.

   Mervin Trail was an exceptional man of exceptional achievements.

   We are all richer that he was with us and poorer for his passing.

John C. LaRosa, M.D.

President

SUNY Downstate Medical Center

Brooklyn, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2001


                             2076 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                     JANUARY 8, 2001, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 692 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECH IN BRIEF

SOURCE: BIOTECH IN BRIEF

BODY:
SOME BIOTECH FIRMS FARED WELL DESPITE MARKETSome biotechnology and
pharmaceutical companies that prospered on Wall Street during most of 2000 only
to falter by year's end still came out as major winners.

    Among the standouts:

    -- Pfizer Inc., which operates one of the nation's largest pharmaceutical
research centers, in Groton, Conn., saw the value of its shares rise more than
any other major drugmaker. One reason was the success of its 1999 acquisition of
Warner Lambert, which included Lipitor, the nation's biggest-selling
cholesterol-lowering drug.

    At the close of the year, Pfizer's market value was $290.2 billion --
highest among major drug companies -- an increase of $85.6 billion, or 29.5
percent, since January.

    -- Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc. was successful in getting its first drug,
Campath, a leukemia treatment, approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration. It also prospered with the highest stock price gain in 2000
among biotech companies.

    The Cambridge, Mass., company's shares closed 2000 at $61.88, up 409 percent
for the year.

    -- Praecis Pharmaceuticals Inc., also of Cambridge, bucked the trend among
many new companies that ended the year below their initial public offering
price. The company was the biggest stock price gainer last year among biotech
companies that went public, rising 193 percent from its $10 per share offering
in April to $29.25 on Dec. 29. It was also the seventh-biggest stock price
gainer among 393 IPOs in all industry sectors.

   --------------------------------------- . HUNTER'S SYNDROME DRUG TRIAL:
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said it plans to begin testing a drug to treat
Hunter's syndrome, a rare inherited genetic disorder that affects about 5,000
people worldwide.

    The proposed drug is an enzyme replacement therapy that breaks down large
biomolecules for Hunter's syndrome patients who suffer from symptoms including
skeletal deformities, obstructive airway disease and heart failure.

    Most people with the painful and disfiguring disorder live into their 50s
and 60s while the life expectancy of patients with the most severe forms is
between 10 and 15 years. Currently, there is no effective treatment.

    Transkaryotic said it submitted a new drug application to the FDA and plans
to test 12 patients with Hunter's syndrome for six months. Some will receive a
placebo while others will receive the company's proposed drug, known as
iduronate-2-sulfatase, or I2S. The study's principal investigator is Dr. Joseph
Muenzer, associate professor of pediatrics at the University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill.

    I2S is the Cambridge, Mass., company's second enzyme replacement therapy to
treat a rare inherited disease. It is awaiting FDA action on Replagal, its
proposed treatment of Fabry disease, another rare disorder. Transkaryotic and
Genzyme Corp. are each developing enzyme replacement drugs to treat rare
diseases. Both have treatments for Fabry disease, and Genzyme has been
successful with Cerezyme, its treatment for Gaucher's disease.

   ---------------------------------------

    MORPHOSYS, BIOGEN CUT DEAL: MorphoSys AG shares rose 4.5 percent after the
German company said it will sell access to its library of antibodies to Biogen
Inc. as the Cambridge, Mass., biotechnology giant seeks to develop new drugs.

    Biogen will pay an unspecified amount of money for using the library as well
as milestone and royalty payments on any drugs developed as a result of the
collaboration.

    MorphoSys is marketing a screening technology called a Human Combinatorial
Antibody Library to help customers find likely drug candidates and speed up the
costly process of drug development.

    Biogen has incorporated a growing number of new technologies to tap into the
genomics revolution and augment its existing strengths in biology.

    This deal is the second announced in recent weeks involving Biogen. Gene
Logic Inc., a Maryland company, said it will supply Biogen with a customized
gene expression database to help discover and validate new drug targets, develop
promising therapeutic compounds and facilitate clinical trials.Boston Globe

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2001


                             2077 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 7, 2001, Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. H-2

LENGTH: 1267 words

HEADLINE: Biosurgery: the new fix-it; Traditional medical devices are yielding
to biological products

BYLINE: Naomi Aoki; THE BOSTON GLOBE

BODY:
 Imagine surgery without scars.  Knee replacements that leave behind no metal.
Heart surgery that harnesses the power of the human body to heal itself.  Brain
surgery that replaces vital tissue lost to Parkinson's disease or cancer.

   In the not-too-distant future, scientists and industry observers say, these
will be realities.  Worn-out and damaged parts will be repaired using biological
materials that are absorbed naturally into the body.

   Doctors already are using absorbable glues instead of stitches to close
wounds and incisions, injectable liquids to stave off knee replacement surgeries
and a small tube made of human bone instead of metal in spinal surgeries.

   As scientists unravel the mysteries of human biology, companies are forming
to turn that knowledge into products that will improve surgery and overcome its
limitations.  The emerging field, known as biosurgery, is a cross between
traditional medical devices and biotechnology.

   It is one of the fastest growing areas of the health-care industry, says
Robin R. Young, managing director of life sciences research at Stephens, the
investment bank.

   Transforming technologies

   By Young's count, the number of companies in the field has grown from seven
to 47 in five years, the number of products from 26 to 103 and total revenue
from $50 million to more than $1 billion.  By 2008, Young predicts, biosurgery
will be a $12 billion market with more than 60 companies and 345 products.

   "These are transforming technologies," Young says.  "They will change how
surgeries are done.  They will change how patients heal."

   In the past, he says, complications have been considered a necessary evil.
If surgery saved a patient's life, it was deemed a success even if it left
behind severe scarring or led to a lifetime of drug therapy.

   Today's surgeons, however, measure success differently.  They strive for less
invasive procedures with shorter recovery times and fewer complications.  And
eventually, Young says, they want to operate on patients without leaving any
traces behind: no scars, no metal or plastic parts, no residual aches and pains.

   Young became aware of biosurgery, and its possibilities, about four years ago
when he noticed that the sales of specially preserved human heart valves by
CyroLife, a small company in Georgia, was hurting the sales of standard
mechanical valves.

   Better for the patients

   Young was intrigued because the human valves were harder for surgeons to put
in and more expensive than mechanical valves.

   But it turned out they more accurately mimicked the action of the original
valves and reduced the risk of blood clots that could lead to heart attacks.
"It was better for patients, and that was the bottom line for surgeons," Young
says.

   Two companies in Cambridge, Mass., are among the leaders in biosurgery and
betting heavily on the field's future.

   One is Genzyme, which recently merged two of its divisions and acquired a
company to form Genzyme Biosurgery.  The other is Curis, which was formed last
year out of the merger of three companies.

   Figuring out the business of biosurgery, however, will have its challenges.

   Genzyme, a major player in the biotech industry, has stumbled more than once
as it ventured into the field.  Its surgical products division, now merged into
Genzyme Biosurgery, repeatedly failed to meet Wall Street's expectations.

   "To be honest, we embarrassed ourselves," says Earl Collier Jr., president of
Genzyme Biosurgery.  "We thought it would be like selling pharmaceuticals.  We
learned the hard way that it's a totally different business."

   Talk to the surgeons

   Pharmaceuticals sales representatives are expected to make a dozen calls a
day, Collier says.  They drop off literature and drug samples, talk to the
doctor or office staff, then head off to the next doctor's office.

   On the other hand, sales reps for surgical products are expected to go into
the operating room to talk to surgeons and answer highly technical questions.
They are lucky to make a dozen sales calls in a week, Collier says.

   Surgeons, he says, are also a much more conservative group and appropriately
so.  Learning to use a new surgical product is much trickier than prescribing a
new pharmaceutical product.

   And before surgeons adopt the product, they want to be sure it is going to
improve the result or eliminate a serious complication.

   Education and hands-on training become a critical part of a company's sales
and management strategy.  In that way, Collier says, biosurgical products have
more in common with traditional medical devices.

   But on the research, development and manufacturing side, biosurgery is more
like the biotech industry.  The science and manufacturing processes are based
more in biology than in engineering mechanical replacements for human parts.

   As Genzyme contemplated whether to stay in the surgical products business,
Collier says, it began to see its earlier missteps as strengths.

   A competitive advantage

   Medical device companies were well-suited to selling the products, but not to
developing or manufacturing them.  Biotech companies would suffer the same
transitional woes Genzyme already had been through.  Small biosurgery companies
probably would have trouble funding the sales forces needed to market their
products.

   "We began thinking that the difficulty of penetrating this market might give
us a competitive advantage," Collier says.

   Genzyme Biosurgery will focus on cardiac and orthopedic surgeries,
historically the two biggest areas for medical devices.  With its acquisition of
Biomatrix, the company picked up Synvisc, an injectable fluid that has helped
many patients delay total knee replacement surgery.

   The company has another product to treat cartilage damage in the knee and
Seprafilm, a bioabsorbable product used to reduce internal scarring after
surgeries.

   Genzyme is working on cellular and gene therapies that would be delivered to
the heart during surgeries to treat a number of conditions.

   "It's important to have a fair number of products because there is no
blockbuster like Lipitor here," Collier says.  "The $500 million product is rare
in surgical products.  It's mostly $50 million to $100 million.  So you can't
bet the ranch on any one product."

   Market opportunities

   As biology transforms the nature of medical devices and surgery, Dr. Doros
Platika, president and chief executive of Curis, believes the market
opportunities for these products will also grow.

   Treatments will become available for conditions that were untreatable or
poorly treated.

   Of the 500,000 people nationwide who lose their bladder to cancer or suffer
other serious bladder conditions, Platika says, only 20,000 a year undergo
reconstructive surgery because of the high rate of complications.

   If Curis succeeds in its efforts to grow replacement bladders, he believes
many more patients would opt to undergo the surgery.

   But balancing the medical need for a product with economic and practical
considerations is crucial.  The company is in late-stage clinical trials for a
product that could repair a urological defect in children, sparing them a life
of kidney problems and even kidney failure.

   The same product could be developed to treat incontinence in the elderly.
But, Platika says, the procedure would be so much more expensive than diapers
that it becomes a tough sell for patients, insurance companies and investors.

   But, as companies venture into the realm of harvesting cells from a patient
to grow customized tissues or organs, business strategies will evolve.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; New York Times News Service; 1. Earl Collier is the president of
Genzyme Biosurgery, a biotech in Cambridge, Mass. Biosurgery is a cross between
traditional medical devices and biotechnology. "We thought it would be like
selling pharmaceuticals," Collier says. "We learned the hard way that it's a
totally different business."

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2001


                             2078 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 6, 2001, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 686 words

HEADLINE: Just a hint of bad news puts market into a funk; Sell-off by nervous
investors all but erases earlier gains

BYLINE: Lisa Singhania; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 NEW YORK -- The slowing economy reasserted itself on Wall Street yesterday,
sending stocks tumbling and erasing much of the big gains the market enjoyed
earlier in the week.

   Rumors of losses tied to slower economic growth triggered a sell-off, first
in financial stocks and later in high-tech bellwether Cisco Systems.  The plunge
illustrated how vulnerable the market remains to even a hint of bad news despite
its rally Wednesday on the Federal Reserve's interest rate cut.

   The Dow Jones industrial average fell 250.40, or 2.3 percent, to 10,662.01,
bringing its two-day decline to nearly 284 points and leaving the blue chips
with less than 16 points of their 299-point gain on Wednesday.

   The Nasdaq composite index fell 6.2 percent, sliding 159.18 to 2,407.65, and
leaving the high-tech dominated index with less than 116 points of Wednesday's
nearly 325-point gain.

   The broader Standard & Poor's 500 index was off 34.99 at 1,298.35, a 2.6
percent loss, leaving it with just 15 points from a 64.29-point advance
Wednesday.

   Heavy selling began early in the session, when rumors spread that Bank of
America had suffered credit losses tied to the weakening economy.  The company
quickly denied the rumors, but its statement did not placate extremely nervous
investors.

   Bank of America lost nearly 7 percent, closing down $3.50 at $48.

   The damage spread to other financial stocks and then to the rest of the
market.

   Banker J.P. Morgan Chase traded down $3.06 at $48.94. Wal-Mart lost $2.25 to
close at $53.94, and Boeing fell $2.25 to $58.75.

   Tech stocks were generally weak.  Microsoft rose 69 cents to $49.13, but
Hewlett-Packard fell $4 to $30.63 after Goldman Sachs lowered its projection for
the company's earnings.  Both stocks are Dow components.

   Among San Diego-based companies, shares of Applied Micro Circuits fell more
than 13 percent after a Banc of America Securities analyst trimmed his annual
target for the chipmaker's stock by 25 percent.

   In recalibrating expectations for the company, Alex Gauna said in a research
note: "Our previous target is out of line with market multiples being awarded to
other premium broadband semiconductor and optical networking companies."

   Shares of Applied Micro Circuits fell by $9.88 to close at $63.50 in Nasdaq
trading of 27.7 million shares -- almost double the recent average daily volume.

   Gateway fell more than 10 percent, or $2.29, to close at 19.46 and JNI Corp.
dropped 11 percent, or $2.22, to close at $17.63. Remec, which has been trading
near the bottom of its 52-week range, slipped more than 6 percent to close at
$9.31.

   Biotechnology stocks were among the hardest hit yesterday, particularly
genomics and so-called tool companies that provide researchers with drug
discovery data or technologies.  Such companies offer less financial risk, but
also fewer rewards since they aren't as closely involved in the development of
potentially blockbuster drugs.

   In San Diego, several tool companies tumbled, including Discovery Partners
International (down 21 percent), Aurora Biosciences (down 18 percent), Illumina
(down 15 percent), Nanogen (down 15 percent) and Sequenom (down almost 14
percent).

   The biggest loser was a gene therapy company, Collateral Therapeutics, which
fell 24 percent to close at $15.06.

   Another set of rumors late in the day that Cisco had held a special board
meeting to discuss earnings problems sent its stock tumbling more than 12
percent, or $5.25, to $36.63. Cisco said it would not comment on the rumors.

   "I'd expect we're going to see sell-offs like this on and off through January
and probably through February and March," said Charles Pradilla, chief
investment strategist at SG Cowen Securities.

   "The Fed rate cut earlier this week was very good, but there are still other
issues to work out.  Some of these stocks are still overvalued, and then there's
earnings and the slowing economy."

   The Dow closed the first week of 2001 down 124.84 or 1.2 percent.  The Nasdaq
ended the week down 62.87 or 2.5 percent.


LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2001


                             2079 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     January 5, 2001, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D7

LENGTH: 200 words

HEADLINE: REGIONAL BUSINESS IN BRIEF;
ETC.

BYLINE: GLOBE STAFF AND WIRE SERVICES

BODY:

   Vox2 Inc. of Northborough, which late last year unveiled a product linking
home and office phones to Nokia and Ericsson wireless phones, said it will offer
this winter a VoxLink unit serving 10 models of Motorola StarTac and TimePort
phones . . . Lexington-based Waste Systems International Inc. defaulted under
its senior bank debt, missed an interest payment on subordinated notes, won't
make a payment on senior notes, and is considering all alternatives, including a
sale. The firm also got notice from Nasdaq that its stock doesn't meet the
exchange's $1 minimum bid price rule and has until March 19 to comply with the
rule or face delisting . . . Fidelity Investments said Dow Chemical Co. has
tapped it to run the second-largest chemical maker's $2.9 billion 401(k) plan .
. . Shares of Boston Scientific Corp. rose $1.50, or 11 percent, to $15 on
speculation the medical-device maker may sell part or all of its business to
rival Medtronic Inc . . . Cambridge-based Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. fell
$3.31, or 9 percent, to $33.25 after US regulators asked the company on
Wednesday for more data on Replagal, its Fabry disease drug, delaying an
approval decision.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2001


                             2080 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 5, 2001, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 203 words

HEADLINE: Here are some tips for growing older slower

BODY:
 Theories on ways to stunt the aging process:

   [] Hormonal therapy -- According to the theory, energy, lean muscle mass and
skin thickness can be increased by raising the level of human growth hormone,
along with testosterone in men and estrogen in women.

   [] Changes in lifestyle -- Stopping or decreasing smoking and drinking,
avoiding overexposure to the sun, eating healthier foods such as fruits and
vegetables, and exercising more can help.

   [] Fewer calories -- Studies of apes suggest that lowering the amount of
calories consumed may extend life expectancy.  Two recent studies of monkeys
suggest that a 30 percent decrease in caloric intake increased levels of good
cholesterol and slowed the decline in human growth hormone.

   [] Gene therapy -- The new frontier.  The Massachusetts Institute of
Technology reported that in studies with yeast, reducing caloric intake extended
life expectancy by affecting activity at gene SIR2, or silent information
regulator 2, which is involved in aging.  Studies are being done to learn
whether the findings are true for higher organisms, which have their own version
of SIR2. Some believe, however, that aging is the result of many genes, not just
one.


LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2001


                             2081 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    January 3, 2001 Wednesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 989 words

HEADLINE: Osiris is banking on universal cell

BYLINE: Julie Bell

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   Osiris Therapeutics Inc., once hailed as a bellwether for Baltimore's
biotechnology industry only to fall on rough times, now hopes that it has
achieved the kind of scientific breakthrough needed to combat investor
skepticism.

    The company, which has labs and offices in Fells Point, develops products
deigned to regenerate human connective tissues such as muscle, bone and
cartilage. Its experimental products, two of which are being tested in patients,
are derived from stem cells, the progenitor cells that lead to all others in the
body.

    While the ability to repair damaged heart muscle or to regenerate injured
neurons might seem like something out of science fiction, research in the field
has been advancing at a number of companies. Among them are: Publicly traded
Geron Corp. of Menlo Park, Calif.; NeuralStem Biopharmaceuticals Ltd. of College
Park; and PPL Therapeutics PLC, another public company, which cloned the sheep
Dolly.

    Until recently, Osiris didn't have evidence to show that it might be able to
regenerate tissue without using stem cells harvested from the bone marrow of
patients or their "matched" relatives. And that, investors worried, would make
Osiris' products too costly and inconvenient to be of much use.

    "What we've been able to show over the last year is that mesenchymal stem
cells are not recognized by the immune system," Osiris Chief Executive Officer
Annamarie B. Moseley said, referring to the kind of stem cells Osiris uses.

    Early evidence suggests that the cells don't spur patients' bodies to reject
the resulting tissues - no matter who donated the stem cells.

    "As a result," she said, "these cells have the ability to be used in a broad
way without the need for matching."

    The company is focusing on "off the shelf" products that can be made from
adult stem cells harvested from unrelated donors, then stored until a patient
needs them.

    The approach would cut the cost of producing Osiris' products 10- to
20-fold, making the prices more in line with traditional therapies, the company
said. It also may make it possible for the stem cell products to be used in
emergencies.

    Still, it remains to be seen whether the preliminary evidence of Osiris'
advances, presented at a recent series of scientific conferences, will be enough
to attract investors.

    Osiris needs an infusion of money because the company has only enough funds
to keep operating through the middle of this year, Moseley has said.

    "Certainly, this increases the probability of them raising money," said
Stefan D. Loren, a Legg Mason Wood Walker analyst, after reviewing Osiris'
written presentations showing its potential to generate off the shelf products.

    But yesterday, as Loren sat in his downtown Baltimore office watching
biotech stocks fall on a computer monitor full of blinking red, he said raising
money for a biotech company won't be easy.

    "Right now, a lot of the biotech investment community seems to be in
retrenchment mode," he said.

    Osiris was hailed as a key to local efforts to build a strong presence in
biotechnology in 1995 when it was lured from Cleveland to Baltimore with a $ 3
million state-backed loan and other incentives.

    Osiris most recently raised money last year, garnering $16.5 million from
private investors despite a host of recent challenges.

    In 1999, it lost a key contract with Novartis AG. The contract had meant $10
million a year in salary subsidies for employees doing research related to
osteoporosis and arthritis.

    The company cut 40 positions as a result, leaving it with 80. CEO James R.
Burns resigned in September 1999, leaving relatively new Senior Vice President
Moseley as the interim and, later, permanent CEO.

    Moseley, a former director of clinical gene therapy at Novartis company
SyStemix and an experienced clinical and regulatory affairs executive, put plans
for a company stock offering on hold to allow Osiris to move its research along.

    "That they've been able to sustain themselves, despite that loss, is a
positive thing," Martha Connolly, senior biotechnology specialist in the state
Department of Business and Economic Development, said about the Novartis
contract.

    Despite the financial pressures, Connolly regards Osiris as well-positioned
in part because its stem-cell research comes at a time when government and
public acceptance of the experimental therapy is growing.

    Osiris also avoids some of the most vehement opposition because it uses stem
cells derived from the bone marrow of adults, rather than using cells from
embryos.

    Two Osiris products now undergoing human testing are OsteoCel and Allogen.
OsteoCel, in the first of the FDA's three testing phases, is designed to grow
bone where it has been surgically removed, such as in bone cancer surgery.

    Allogen is designed to grow the spongy stroma of the bone marrow, where
blood cell development takes place.

    The treatment has been undergoing tests as a method for improving cancer
patients' recovery from bone marrow transplants and chemotherapy.

    The company now plans to move Allogen into the third and final phase of
human tests required by the Food and Drug Administration.

    Because Allogen already is so far along in development, however, Osiris
plans to bring it to market initially as a "family" product, meaning stem cells
will be extracted from the marrow of the patient or a relative.

    The extracted cells are then returned to the lab where the number of them is
expanded using Osiris' proprietary process before being shipped back to the
hospital and infused into the patient, where they make their way to the marrow
and create stroma.

    The company already is laying plans to turn OsteoCel into a "universal"
off-the-shelf product for future testing.

    All in all, Moseley said about 2000, "I would say it's probably a turning
point year for us." But then, she acknowledged, Osiris still has a long way to
go.


GRAPHIC: 1. Eureka? Annamarie Moseley, Osiris Therapeutics' CEO, says,
preliminary research shows that certain stem cells are not rejected, by the
body's immune system.; , 2. Investors wanted: Osiris has only enough money to
keep it, operating through the middle of this year., NANINE HARTZENBUSCH : SUN
STAFF PHOTOS

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2001


                             2082 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    January 3, 2001 Wednesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2C BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 1293 words

BODY:

   In the Region

    Lockheed Martin wins $388 million pact for C-5 parts

    Lockheed Martin Corp. won a three-year, $388 million contract from the U.S.
Department of Defense to buy parts needed to repair C-5 military transport
planes.

    The contract, which has options for another seven years, calls for Lockheed
to provide parts for the 126 cargo planes it sold to the Pentagon between 1970
and 1989. It may be worth as much as $1.1 billion if all options are exercised.

    Bethesda-based Lockheed doesn't make most of the parts that are needed for
the C-5, said spokesman David Jewell.

    United Therapeutics is Endogen co-owner

    United Therapeutics Corp., a Silver Spring developer of biopharmaceuticals,
said yesterday that it has formed a new gene-therapy company based in Canada
with a University of Toronto researcher.

    The company, Endogen, is majority owned by United Therapeutics and minority
owned by a technology development company controlled by the University of
Toronto's Duncan Stewart and by Dacha Capital of Montreal.

    The company said Stewart has invented a gene therapy that has been licensed
to Endogen.

    Caliber Learning gains $11 million in financing

    Caliber Learning Network Inc., a Baltimore company that provides online
corporate training, said yesterday that it received $11 million of financing,
with the promise of another $4 million.

    The funding comes from Sylvan Ventures LLC and Fleming US Discovery Fund
III, which will be investing equally in Caliber.

    EntreMed repurchases stock from Bristol-Myers

    EntreMed Inc. said yesterday that it had exercised an option to repurchase
shares of its stock from Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.

    The Rockville developer of biopharmaceuticals said it had exercised the
second of three options to repurchase 291,666 shares of its common stock at
$13.14 per share. The company repurchased the first block of the shares
available under a 1995 agreement with Bristol-Myers on Dec. 10, 1999.

    Bristol-Myers formerly had an agreement with EntreMed to develop EntreMed's
anti-tumor drug Angiostatin, but EntreMed since has reassumed those rights.

    Igen International files to sell 3 million shares

    Igen International Inc., the Gaithersburg maker of diagnostic tests, says it
has filed a shelf registration statement with the Securities and Exchange
Commission that will allow it to sell up to 3 million shares of its common
stock.

    The company said it will use the proceeds to pay for research and
development and manufacturing, and may invest some of the money in other
companies, products or technologies.

    Igen also said yesterday that it will continue its alliance with Bayer
Diagnostics to explore new products to be used in hospitals and that Bayer would
provide unspecified additional funding.

    Elsewhere

    Ford to provide tire warranties on 2001 vehicles

    Ford Motor Co. said yesterday that it will offer tire warranties on all of
its Ford, Lincoln and Mercury models as a way to alert itself to problems such
as the failures of Firestone/Bridgestone tires on Ford trucks that have been
linked to more than 140 deaths.

    Ford said its tire warranties would begin with 2001 models and cover repairs
made on or after Jan. 1. The warranties provide that tires with defects in
materials or construction will be replaced free.

    The warranties will come as part of the basic vehicle warranty, which runs
for three years or 36,000 miles on Ford and Mercury vehicles, and four years or
50,000 miles on Lincolns. Other automakers have said they are considering such
warranties.

    Boeing says it delivered 489 commercial jets

    Boeing Co. says it delivered 130 commercial jets in the fourth quarter of
2000, boosting its full year total to 489, in line with forecasts by the world's
biggest airplane manufacturer.

    The Seattle aerospace giant also reiterated its projections for about 530
deliveries each in 2001 and 2002.

    The company booked orders for 606 new jets, less 24 cancellations, in 2000,
up from 389 new orders in 1999. Boeing's best-selling 737 narrow-body plane led
the way in 2000 with 279 deliveries, including 70 in the fourth quarter.

    Alcoa appoints Belda chairman; succeeds O'Neill

    Alcoa Inc. President and Chief Executive Officer Alain Belda was officially
named chairman of the aluminum company, officials announced yesterday.

    Belda, 57, succeeds Paul O'Neill, who was tapped last month as
President-elect George W. Bush's Treasury secretary. Alcoa had previously said
Belda would replace O'Neill upon his retirement, effective at the end of 2000.

    Belda, a native of Morocco, has been Alcoa's president and chief executive
since May 1999. He joined Alcoa's Brazilian affiliate, Alcoa Aluminio, in 1969.
He was named president there 10 years later.

    Janus withdrawals climb as performance slumps

    Janus Capital Corp., last year's best-selling mutual fund company, suffered
increased client withdrawals last month as its investment performance slumped
along with plunging technology stocks.

    Investors pulled $581 million out of Janus retail funds in November, after
withdrawing $772 million in October and $ 46 million in September, according to
Financial Research Corp., a Boston consulting firm.

    With the Nasdaq composite index tumbling 31 percent in the fourth quarter,
Janus equity funds tracked by Bloomberg News lost 18.2 percent. Among the
Denver-based firm's biggest funds, the $24 billion Janus Twenty Fund lost 25
percent in the quarter, while the $39 billion Janus Fund was down 18 percent.
The Janus equity funds Bloomberg tracks lost 0.73 percent last month.

    Coors expands partnership with Molson in Canada

    Adolph Coors Co., the No. 3 U.S. brewer, said it has expanded a partnership
with Canada's Molson Inc., Canada's largest brewer, to sell Coors brands in
Canada.

    Coors and Molson extended their agreement indefinitely and added performance
guarantees, Coors said. The companies also added sales of Coors beers in Nova
Scotia, Prince Edward Island and New Brunswick, and agreed to co-create light
beers for Canada.

    Coors and Molson created a joint venture in October to sell Molson brands in
the United States. Coors paid $65 million for a 49.9 percent stake in the
venture. Montreal-based Molson owns the rest.

    WebMD to take a charge as it ends News Corp. ties

    WebMD Corp., an Internet health information company that has lost more than
$2 billion, will take a $275 million charge in the fourth quarter to end two
ventures with Rupert Murdoch's News Corp.

    News Corp. will take back WebMD's 50 percent stake in the Health Network
cable channel, drop plans to promote the Internet company overseas and reduce
advertising and promotion services for WebMD to $205 million from $ 700 million
over 10 years.

    WebMD changed management after its shares lost three-quarters of their value
last year and is scaling back its consumer-health Web site to focus on providing
software and electronic processing of health insurance claims. Company officials
previously said they expected fourth-quarter charges.

    NACCO to shut down lift truck plant in Ill.

    NACCO Industries Inc. says it will close a lift truck assembly plant in
Danville, Ill., putting about 680 people out of work.

    The company's subsidiary, NACCO Materials Handling Group Inc., will phase
out plant operations over 12 to 18 months and consolidate some of the work at
plants in Berea, Ky., and Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

    Some lift truck components currently manufactured in Danville will be made
by outside vendors or at the company's Lenoir, N.C., plant, the company said.

    This column was compiled from reports by Sun staff writers, the Associated
Press, Bloomberg News and Reuters.


LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2001


                             2083 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   January 3, 2001, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 687 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY / IN THE PIPELINE;
SOME REGIONAL FIRMS SAW A PROSPEROUS YEAR

BYLINE: RONALD ROSENBERG and NAOMI AOKI, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Some biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies that prospered on Wall Street
during most of 2000 only to falter by year's end still came out as major
winners.

   Among the standouts in New England:

      Pfizer Inc., which operates one of the nation's largest pharmaceutical
research centers, in Groton, Conn., saw the value of its shares rise more than
any other major drug maker. One reason was the success of its 1999 acquisition
of Warner Lambert, which included Lipitor, the nation's biggest-selling
cholesterol-lowering drug.

   At the close of the year, Pfizer's market value was $290.2 billion - highest
among major drug companies - an increase of $85.6 billion, or 29.5 percent,
since January.

   Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc. was successful in getting its first drug,
Campath, a leukemia treatment, approved by the US Food and Drug Administration.
It also prospered with the highest stock price gain in 2000 among biotech
companies.

   The Cambridge company's shares closed last Friday, the final trading day in
2000, at $61.88, up 409 percent for the year.

   Praecis Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Cambridge bucked the trend among many new
companies that ended the year below their initial public offering price. The
company was the biggest stock price gainer last year among biotech companies
that went public, rising 193 percent from its $10 per share offering in April to
$29.25 last Friday. It was also the seventh-biggest stock price gainer among 393
IPOs in all industry sectors.  TKT to test therapy for Hunter's syndrome

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said it plans to begin testing a drug to treat
Hunter's syndrome, a rare inherited genetic disorder that affects about 5,000
people worldwide.

   The proposed drug is an enzyme replacement therapy that breaks down large
biomolecules for Hunter's syndrome patients who suffer from symptoms including
skeletal deformities, obstructive airway disease, and heart failure.

   Most people with the painful and disfiguring disorder live into their 50s and
60s while the life expectancy of patients with the most severe forms is between
10 and 15 years. Currently, there is no effective treatment.

   TKT said it submitted a new drug application to the FDA and plans to test 12
patients with Hunter's syndrome for six months. Some will receive a placebo
while others will receive the company's proposed drug known as as
iduronate-2-sulfatase, or I2S. The study's principal investigator is Dr. Joseph
Muenzer, associate professor of pediatrics at the University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill.

   I2S is the Cambridge company's second enzyme replacement therapy to treat a
rare inherited disease. It is awaiting FDA action on Replagal, its proposed
treatment of Fabry disease, another rare disorder. TKT and Genzyme Corp. are
each developing enzyme replacement drugs to treat rare diseases. Both have
treatments for Fabry disease, and Genzyme has been successful with Cerezyme, its
treatment for Gaucher's disease.  MorphoSys marketing antibodies library

   MorphoSys AG shares rose 4.5 percent after the German company said it will
sell access to its library of antibodies to Biogen Inc. as the Cambridge
biotechnology giant seeks to develop new drugs.

   Biogen will pay an unspecified amount of money for using the library as well
as milestone and royalty payments on any drugs developed as a result of the
collaboration.

   MorphoSys is marketing a screening technology called a Human Combinatorial
Antibody Library to help customers find likely drug candidates and speed up the
costly process of drug development.

   Biogen has incorporated a growing number of new technologies to tap into the
genomics revolution and augment its existing strengths in biology.

   This deal is the second announced in recent weeks involving Biogen. Gene
Logic Inc., a Maryland company, said it will supply Biogen with a customized
gene expression database to help discover and validate new drug targets, develop
promising therapeutic compounds, and facilitate clinical trials.

   Shares of MorphoSys rose 5.67 euros to 131.67 euros on the Stuttgart exchange
in Germany.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2001


                             2084 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   January 3, 2001, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. A-2, CORRECTION/CLARIFICATION

LENGTH: 238 words

HEADLINE: NO HEADLINE

BODY:


   National. A Washington Post story in Sunday's editions about efforts to
extend the stays in this country of amputees from Sierra Leone mistakenly
omitted the closing paragraph, which contained a quote from David Conteh, a
Sierra Leonean, who was among those greeting the amputees when they arrived
Sept. 21.

The paragraph said: "I don't know who will tell them the news that they have to
go and who will take them to the airport that day," said Conteh. "I know this. I
won't be there."

National. Joe Glorioso, director of the University of Pittsburgh's new
Cardiovascular Gene Therapy Center, is also the chairman of Pitt's molecular
genetics and biochemistry department. The name of the department was misstated
in a story in yesterday's editions on the Human Gene Therapy Applications
Laboratory.

Local news. Harry Finnigan, executive director of the Pittsburgh Downtown
Partnership, will represent the group on Mayor Tom Murphy's new Plan C task
force on Fifth and Forbes redevelopment. A story in the editions of Dec. 23
incorrectly listed Wendy Dodd as the Downtown Partnership's representative.

Editorials. In a Dec. 26 editorial about a protest against Christmas lights in a
cemetery, the name of the community was incorrect. It is Shamokin Dam, Pa.

   Editorials. An editorial yesterday about local Jefferson Award winners
misstated the first name of recipient Eileen Reynolds Spear.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2001


                             2085 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           January 3, 2001 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E5

LENGTH: 275 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF

BODY:

   * OTG Software, a Bethesda-based supplier of data-storage software, plans to
announce today the release of its DiskXtender software for Linux systems. The
storage software extends the functions of the company's software for Windows
2000 to computers running Red Hat's version of the Linux operating system, which
is commonly used on systems that power Web sites.

   * EntreMed repurchased 291,666 shares of its common stock from Bristol-Myers
Squibb for $ 3.8 million. EntreMed, a biopharmaceutical company, exercised the
second of three options contained in a 1995 agreement with Bristol-Myers Squibb.
The Rockville-based company exercised its first repurchase option on Dec. 10.

   * United Therapeutics obtained an exclusive license for a new type of gene
therapy that avoids the toxic reactions associated with other therapies, the
Silver Spring company said. The company signed an agreement with Duncan Stewart,
the inventor of the technique, known as autologous cell-based gene therapy, and
hopes to use it to develop a gene-based cure for pulmonary hypertension.

   * Nx Networks named John DuBois chief executive, replacing Steven Francesco,
who left the company in November. The Herndon company manufactures equipment for
voice and data networks. DuBois was formerly a vice president at Redback
Networks.

   * Convera of Vienna has reached an agreement with FoxSports.com to provide
game highlights over the Internet. This is Convera's first customer since the
company was created in a merger between Excalibur Technologies and Intel's
Interactive Media Services division. The company develops software for the
transmission of video over the Internet.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2001


                             2086 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    January 2, 2001, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1505 words

HEADLINE: AMATEUR SPECIALISTS STEP UP TO THE CYBERSOAPBOX A CYBERSOAPBOX WITH
ADMISSION PRICE

BYLINE: By Dolores Kong, Globe Staff

BODY:

   When Jake Walker got an e-mail inviting him to expound on his area of
specialty on a new financial Web site, he jumped at the chance to get on the
virtual soapbox, and maybe make a profit while he was at it.

   So the 21-year-old Babson College senior, whose areas of concentration are
economics and international business, uploaded a paper on international monetary
policy to the site that is, fittingly enough, called Soapbox.com.

      He's sold only one copy of the admittedly academic report - titled "Why
the Bretton Woods Institutions Are Good for the Developing and Developed World"
- for $5.

   But Walker's not disappointed by his experience on Soapbox.com, a new venture
by The Motley Fool, the popular investment team started by brothers Tom and
David Gardner. "The concept is fascinating," he said.

   In the latest twist in Internet culture and commerce, financial Web sites
like Soapbox.com are creating a marketplace for regular folks with an area of
specialized information, amateur stockpickers, and other self-styled money
specialists, potentially allowing them to profit from their ability or
knowledge.

   Since the launch of Soapbox.com in June, some people already have made
thousands of dollars selling reports about everything from how to retire early,
to stem cell therapy, to wireless communication. In fact, the site's
best-selling author has made more than $25,000 to date.

   At the same time, buyers of that knowledge may get the chance to interact by
engaging in online conversations with the sellers or rating the information they
purchased.

   Of course, "buyer beware" is still the operative phrase. Tom Ryan, chief of
enforcement for the Massachusetts securities division, said people who are
considering investing based on information bought online should "look at things
with a little bit of skepticism. Why is this person saying this? Is there other
information I could look at?" But he added that he is not aware of any
complaints lodged against these sites.

   This latest trend in financial Web sites fits right in with the ever-evolving
cyberculture, say people who study virtual communities.

   On the one hand, these sites appeal to those Internet users who have a strong
desire for recognition. On the other, they have a democratizing effect, of
letting virtually everyone proclaim their area of expertise, say specialists in
understanding the Internet culture.

   "We've seen this in numerous other sectors of Internet culture," said Steve
Jones, professor and head of communication at University of Illinois-Chicago,
and author of "Cybersociety" and other books on virtual communities.

   "It's not as if the Internet itself has created people who seek attention.
But what I think it's done is provide a medium that allows people to gain
attention in particular, specialized areas, in ways they're unable to get
attention in their own local communities," Jones said.

   In July, Wired magazine, that chronicler of cyberculture, used the phrase
"egoboo" - short for ego boost - to describe why some people are addicted to
giving free advice or opinions at sites such as Epinions.com.

   But for folks who post on these new financial Web sites, there's also the
added profit motive.

   "Instead of people just swapping ideas for the socialness or fun of doing it,
they're doing it for financial gain," said David Silver, adjunct professor in
the master's program in communication, culture and technology at Georgetown
University, and director of the Resource Center for Cyberculture Studies.

   Silver considers the emergence of financial sites such as Soapbox

   .com, iExchange.com, and others as a third generation of virtual communities.

   "The first one could be called social communities," where people freely
swapped ideas, as if in a "gift economy," Silver said. "The second generation is
what I would call consumer communities, like at Amazon and eBay. Users
contribute for notoriety and public attention, but ideas ultimately benefit the
companies."

   But in the third generation exemplified by these financial Web sites, "the
user can be both consumer and profiteer," Silver said.

   These new Web sites also seem to push the edge of the cyberculture envelope
by elevating the quality of discussion and content over what might be found on
free stock discussion boards at sites such as RagingBull.com, and by appearing
to disprove the mantra that people won't pay for content online, said Howard
Rheingold, author of "The Virtual Community" and other books about the Internet
culture.

   "This seems like the right model," said Rheingold in a telephone interview
from California, as he brought up Soapbox.com on his computer. "People aren't
going to pay for information online unless it's specific, timely, from an
expert, and with a direct application to their need."

   Kevin Dewalt, director of Soapbox.com, said the concept of selling such
information occurred to The Motley Fool based on the quality of some of the
comments on Fool.com's free discussion boards.

   "We saw people coming in and having incredibly rich conversations," Dewalt
said. The Motley Fool did a trial run by asking one of its frequent posters, a
law student studying to be a patent attorney, to write a report on his area of
expertise, biotechnology. The report sold around 2,000 copies - and Soapbox.com
was born.

   "People really will buy content from other people," Dewalt said. "What most
consumers are interested in buying is teach-and-tell content. . . . 'Here's
information about the wireless communications industry and here's five
investment possibilities.' That's the kind of stuff people gravitate to."

   Since the site's launch in June, about 100 authors have signed up, and nearly
200 online reports are available to be purchased, typically priced between $10
and $25 each, according to Dewalt. Authors keep 60 percent of the sales price.
Among the authors: A Harvard Medical School student named Arlo Miller who's sold
nearly 200 reports based on his knowledge about such topics as stem cell
research and gene therapy.

   Soapbox.com offers a money-back guarantee for people who are unhappy with
reports they've bought. Fewer than 2 percent of purchases have been returned,
but Dewalt would not disclose overall sales figures. While Soapbox.com has an
application process and disclosure policy that authors must abide by, it does
not do a background check on applicants.

   Most of the other new-generation financial Web sites don't have quite the
same model as Soapbox

   .com. Rather, such sites as iExchange.com and marketocracy

   .com give amateur stock-pickers the chance to be recognized based on how
their stocks do, and the possibility of profiting in such ways as winning cash
for having the best track record, or being hired as a money manager. One of the
sites at one time did sell stock research reports by some of the stock-pickers,
but has apparently stopped that practice.

   Walker, the senior at Wellesley's Babson College, may have made only a few
bucks from selling his international monetary policy paper on Soapbox.com. But
he credits another report he bought from the site with helping him to cut his
losses on what has turned out to be an emblem of the dot-com and stock-market
meltdown of 2000: Priceline.com.

   At the time he bought the report, Walker was deciding whether to buy more
shares as the price came down from where he first purchased the stock, in the
$40 to $50 range. He decided to stop buying more. "My decision wasn't solely
based on that. It was influential," said Walker, who plans to start an online
business in London, selling tickets to events, after he graduates from Babson in
May.

   "I still own some, unfortunately. I'm waiting for it to do something. Any
move up at all, and I'm about ready to sell it. It's below $2."

   But, he added, "It could have been a lot worse." SIDEBAR: A personal soapbox

   Some samples of papers available on Soapbox.com and what buyers had to say
about them.

   Oh My god, Oh My God! Agghhhh!!!

   By Dan

   Price: $5

   Number of pages: 6

   Number of copies sold: 6

   An introduction paper on the topic of faith and wealth integration in our
lives.

   Sample review: This article is extremely light on content. Mostly, it seems
to be part advertisement, part preview of his grandiose plans for future
articles on the topic. . . . However, this article was so lacking in content
that I have requested a refund.

   A Fuel Cell Primer: The Promise and the Pitfalls

   By Tom Koppel

   Price: $25

   Number of pages: 30

   Number of copies sold: 824

   Sample review: Wow. Great job. This was the best $25 I ever spent!! . . .
This brought all the pieces together and filled gaps in my knowledge. You not
only made the point that you didn't have all the answers, but gave signposts for
us to watch for as this journey unfolds. Excellent job of fog-lifting!

   Why the Bretton Woods Institutions Are Good for the Developing and Developed
World

   By Jacob Walker

   Price: $5

   Number of pages: 6

   Number of copies sold: 1

   No reviews.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO    CHART, Babson College senior Jake Walker was asked to share
his knowledge on Soapbox.com. / GLOBE PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2001


                             2087 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    January 2, 2001, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1519 words

HEADLINE: PITT GROUP HOPING GENE THERAPY HELPS HEART PATIENTS

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   In the words of Joe Glorioso, the gene therapy expert who worked to establish
it, it's a "very big deal."

   Under a $ 14 million, five-year grant from the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, the new Cardiovascular Gene Therapy Center at the University of
Pittsburgh will oversee efforts using gene therapy to revitalize failing hearts,
prevent blood vessels from clogging and tackle other deadly problems.

   In addition, the university's Human Gene Therapy Applications Laboratory will
become the only national facility that will make viral vectors, the tools of the
gene therapy trade, for use in future clinical trials sponsored by the
institute.

   In gene therapy, genes are put into cells where they make proteins to alter a
biochemical process that is causing disease. Tackling cardiovascular disease is
a far cry from what was initially envisioned for gene therapy, namely correcting
genetic disorders such as cystic fibrosis by replacing a missing or defective
protein.

   "Now we're taking it to a much broader audience, if you will, and looking at
disease that affects millions of people rather than disease that affects
hundreds of people," said Dr. Arthur Feldman, director of UPMC's Cardiovascular
Institute. "That's very exciting for the future of medical care."

   Pitt researchers won the federal grant because they not only had solid basic
science experiments in cardiovascular disease but also the ability to carry out
clinical trials, said Inder Verma, president of the American Society of Gene
Therapy and a scientist at the Salk Institute.

   "They have the opportunity to do something novel by taking advantage of the
basic science and taking it to the clinic," he said.

   The NHLBI also awarded smaller grants to Stanford University, the University
of Washington and Cornell University. The four centers will combine technical
resources and share information to enhance gene therapy applications for heart,
blood and lung diseases.

   Glorioso, chairman of Pitt's molecular genetics and biochemistry department,
said the federal grant was important "because it gives us an opportunity to
develop clinical trials in the treatment of cardiovascular disease that we
otherwise would have a very difficult time underwriting. And it provides not
only money to treat patients, but also to produce the clinical grade material,
the vectors and put genes in them, to carry out those trials."

   At present, about 10 large, multi-center trials of gene therapy are under way
for cardiovascular problems, most of them focusing on treating coronary artery
disease by growing new blood vessels. Lowering cholesterol through gene therapy
is another target, said Dr. Joon Lee, Pitt's director of interventional
cardiology.

   Lee said that not one of the large trials has shown a clear benefit yet, but
definitive, randomized trials are only just beginning. Including smaller, single
center studies, cardiovascular gene therapy trials may number around 50.

   Congestive heart failure

   One cardiovascular problem Pitt researchers will tackle is congestive heart
failure, which occurs when cardiac muscles are made weak from heart attacks or,
less often, from viral illness. As the heart becomes a less efficient pump,
fluid builds up in the lungs and causes breathing difficulties.

   According to Feldman, a heart failure authority, more than 5 million
Americans suffer from the progressive disease at an annual cost of about $ 50
billion. Heart failure is treated with diuretics and medications to make the
heart contract more powerfully.

   When the heart is first damaged, it grows a little bigger so that it has more
contractile power, just as a rubber band has greater recoil when it is
stretched. But a rubber band loses its elastic properties when it is used
repeatedly.

   "The same thing happens to the heart," Feldman explained. "It becomes floppy
and limp."

   Experts blame a chemical messenger called tumor necrosis factor, which is
used in the healing process throughout the body. Congestive heart failure
patients have excess levels of the chemical messenger, which leads to the
heart's enlargement.

   A heart transplant ends the failure problem, but donor organs are scarce and
older people are not candidates for the operation. Doctors have been implanting
mechanical pumps, called left ventricular assist devices, to help out the heart
until a donor organ becomes available, and some researchers are testing LVADs as
substitutes for transplant.

   Feldman and his colleagues want to see if gene therapy against TNF can
improve function of cardiac muscle, thus reducing or eliminating the need for
either an LVAD or a transplant. Feldman said that in animal studies, the heart
resumes a normal size after gene therapy.

   In human trials expected to begin in about two years, surgeons will inject
treatment genes at the same time a heart assist device is implanted in a
transplant candidate. They will inject the heart muscle with a gene that
produces a protein that binds to TNF and blocks it from damaging heart cells.

   At first, the researchers will inject one area of the patient's heart muscle
with the treatment gene and another with a harmless marker gene. After the
patient receives a heart transplant, or dies, the heart tissue will be examined
to see if the treatment gene had any effect.

   If all goes well, the next step will be injecting patients' entire hearts
with the treatment gene and comparing them with patients who don't get gene
therapy to see if one group is more likely to be weaned from the heart assist
device.

   "Our hope is that we'll be able to save some of them from getting a
transplant," Feldman said.

   Help for dialysis patients

   Another human trial, which could begin by the end of this year, will explore
whether gene therapy can prevent blood flow problems from developing in blood
vessel grafts commonly used by kidney dialysis patients.

   During dialysis, patients have their blood diverted from an artery through
the dialysis machine for toxin removal, and then returned to a vein. Often this
is done at blood vessels at the elbow crease. Surgeons construct a bridge
between an artery and a vein, called an AV graft, to simplify access to the
blood system.

   Within six months, about 30 percent of patients begin to get blood flow
problems at the point where blood enters the vein at the graft site. After 18 to
24 months, most patients return to the operating room to have the graft fixed,
said Dr. Timothy Billiar, chairman of Pitt's surgery department and co-director
of the new gene-therapy program.

   "It's not uncommon to see somebody who has been on dialysis for five or 10
years with scars on this arm, scars on [that] arm, on the groin, some fancy
stuff done up in their arms," he said. "They may go through a dozen procedures
to maintain their ability to undergo dialysis."

   Billiar said the problem is triggered by a loss of endothelial cells, which
line the inner walls of blood vessels, and the overgrowth of underlying smooth
muscle cells as the body tries to heal itself.

   The overgrowth of smooth muscle cells can narrow the vein, disrupting blood
flow -- a process called intimal hyperplasia.

   The endothelial cells produce a chemical call nitric oxide, or NO, which has
a number of functions, including dilating the vessel, supporting the growth of
endothelial cells and suppressing the proliferation of smooth muscle cells.

   The clinical trial, headed by vascular surgeon Dr. Edith Tzeng, will involve
30 dialysis patients. While performing AV graft surgery, Tzeng and her team plan
to administer a gene for inducible nitric oxide synthase, or iNOS, that
increases nitric oxide production at the site where occlusion could later occur.

   Because dialysis treatments are performed three times a week, blood flow
through the graft will be routinely monitored after the gene therapy is
delivered.

   This is the first phase of human trials of the technique for AV grafts, so
the primary goal is to ensure that it does not have serious side effects.

   Billiar said that experiments in pigs and rodents have shown that it can
prevent half to almost all of the vessel blockage. But it may be effective even
if it modestly reduces intimal hyperplasia.

   In humans, "if we have a 30 percent reduction in narrowing of a forearm AV
graft site, my prediction is that we will prolong the life of that graft by
months to years," Billiar said.

   Increased nitric oxide production may also improve the success of heart
transplantation. Some patients develop diffuse vessel disease in the donated
heart, probably because of immunological rejection. Researchers will work with
animal models to find ways to deliver the iNOS gene throughout the heart and to
see if nitric oxide can prevent the problem.

   Starting with AV grafts is wise because the risk from the experimental
therapy is low and the potential of nitric oxide can be assessed.

   "As long as it shows no toxicity, we'll be pretty content and feel a little
more confident that we can go to other sites where we think it's likely to work,
such as angioplasty," Billiar said.

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: James
Hilston/Post-Gazette; University of; Pittsburgh, Thermo Cardiosystems Inc.: (
Gene therapy initiative)

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2001


                             2088 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    January 2, 2001, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-7

LENGTH: 506 words

HEADLINE: GENE CARRIERS TO BE MADE, TESTED AT PITT

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   A federal grant that supports cardiovascular gene therapy experiments at the
University of Pittsburgh also designates one of its laboratories to make
vectors, the agents that carry genes into cells, for future trials funded by the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.

   "We're now going to have to expand the production facilities in the
biotechnology center to accommodate new viruses that might be useful to
patients," said Joe Glorioso, chairman of Pitt's biochemistry and molecular
biology department and a program director of the newly established
Cardiovascular Gene Therapy Center.

   "In addition, we're going to have to hire some new people here who will be
involved in quality assurance and quality control for the production side."

   In all forms of gene therapy, researchers have to find ways of introducing
therapeutic genes into cells involved in the disease process. One method is to
use viruses, which have the ability to infect cells, as vectors to deliver
therapeutic genes. Researchers strip these viral vectors of genes that cause
disease, but leave intact the viral machinery necessary to enter cells.

   Vectors differ in the kinds of cells they can infect, the size of gene they
can carry, how long they survive in cells and so on. A vector-gene system is
constructed depending on the biochemical process that needs to be altered.

   "We have literally hundreds of these vectors with different genes in them,"
Glorioso said. "Lentiviruses, adeno-associated virus, herpes virus, adenonovirus
-- we have this huge laundry list."

   In lab and animal experiments, small quantities of gene-carrying vectors are
needed for study. But for human study, vector quality must be far better and the
quantity far greater. The Gene Therapy Lab, directed by Dr. John Barranger, will
help develop safe and efficient ways of scaling up production to accommodate the
needs of a variety of clinical trials.

   "This stuff is really expensive to do and most labs are not going to want to
be bothered with the kind of meticulous work that has to go into production,"
Glorioso said.

   Because the staff at Pitt's Human Gene Therapy Applications Laboratory will
be modifying biological material, such as viruses and genes, for administration
into humans, rigorous testing and thorough documentation are among the stringent
federally mandated requirements called "good manufacturing practices."

   "It means you do it exactly according to the protocol with exactly the same
materials," Glorioso said. "It's like baking a cake. If you follow the recipe
exactly, you should get a good cake every time. That's what we hope to achieve
with this technology."

   Biotechnology companies can provide similar services, but a research lab that
doesn't have its own high-grade production facilities or ties to industry will
now be able turn to the Pitt center.

   "We're not trying to control vector production," Glorioso said. "We're trying
to facilitate the use of this technology for people who don't have the
wherewithal to make it."

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2001


                             2089 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 2, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. A-14

LENGTH: 361 words

HEADLINE: Immusol closes in on a cancer suspect

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 A biotechnology company in San Diego has discovered a gene that could prove a
crucial target for treating breast and ovarian cancer.

   The gene, called ID4, appears to be involved in preventing the normal
production of an anti-cancer protein called BRCA1, according to a research team
lead by Immusol, a privately held genomics company.

   About 90 percent of all breast and ovarian cancer patients produce the
beneficial BRCA1 at lower-than-normal levels.

   In laboratory studies, Immusol was able to detect and suppress the ID4 gene,
forcing human breast-cancer cells to make more BRCA1 which, in turn, reversed
the malignant properties of the cancer cells and helped restore them to a more
normal state, the company said.

   That finding could point the way to new drugs designed to inhibit the ID4
gene, allowing the body to produce sufficient amounts of cancer-suppressing
BRCA1.

   The research is very early-stage, however, and it could take years before a
potential drug is developed, let alone proven effective.

   Immusol's research was published in today's issue of The Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences.

   "We think it is an important discovery," said Tsvi Goldenberg, Immusol's
chief executive.  "Ninety percent of all breast cancer is associated with the
low expression of BRCA1, and we've identified a 'bad guy' gene responsible for
suppressing BRCA1."

   The company also said it has located other genes that appear to play a role
in blocking BRCA1, but for now it is only publishing the data on ID4.

   Immusol was founded in the early 1990s as a gene therapy company, but its
efforts to develop a gene therapy to treat AIDS ultimately fizzled.

   The company has since managed to reinvent itself, using a proprietary library
of ribozymes -- enzymes that inhibit a gene from producing a protein involved in
a disease -- to identify genes that play a role in cancer, hepatitis C and
Alzheimer's.

   Last year, Immusol raised about $17 million from private investors.  The
company, which employs 40, is in "serious, late-stage discussions" with a large
pharmaceutical company to develop gene-based drug targets to treat cancer,
Goldenberg said.


LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2001


                             2090 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 2, 2001 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. A-14

LENGTH: 356 words

HEADLINE: Immusol closes in on a cancer suspect

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A biotechnology company in San Diego has discovered a gene that could prove a
crucial target for treating breast and ovarian cancer. The gene, called ID4,
appears to be involved in preventing the normal production of an anti-cancer
protein called BRCA1, according to a research team lead by Immusol, a privately
held genomics company. About 90 percent of all breast and ovarian cancer
patients produce the beneficial BRCA1 at lower-than-normal levels. In laboratory
studies, Immusol was able to detect and suppress the ID4 gene, forcing human
breast-cancer cells to make more BRCA1 which, in turn, reversed the malignant
properties of the cancer cells and helped restore them to a more normal state,
the company said. That finding could point the way to new drugs designed to
inhibit the ID4 gene, allowing the body to produce sufficient amounts of
cancer-suppressing BRCA1. The research is very early-stage, however, and it
could take years before a potential drug is developed, let alone proven
effective. Immusol's research was published in today's issue of The Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences. "We think it is an important discovery,"
said Tsvi Goldenberg, Immusol's chief executive.

   "Ninety percent of all breast cancer is associated with the low expression of
BRCA1, and we've identified a `bad guy' gene responsible for suppressing BRCA1."
The company also said it has located other genes that appear to play a role in
blocking BRCA1, but for now it is only publishing the data on ID4. Immusol was
founded in the early 1990s as a gene therapy company, but its efforts to develop
a gene therapy to treat AIDS ultimately fizzled. The company has since managed
to reinvent itself, using a proprietary library of ribozymes -- enzymes that
inhibit a gene from producing a protein involved in a disease -- to identify
genes that play a role in cancer, hepatitis C and Alzheimer's. Last year,
Immusol raised about $17 million from private investors.

   The company, which employs 40, is in "serious, late-stage discussions" with a
large pharmaceutical company to develop gene-based drug targets to treat cancer,
Goldenberg said.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             2091 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                     JANUARY 1, 2001, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4; BIOTECHNOLOGY IN BRIEF

LENGTH: 692 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY IN BRIEF

SOURCE: Boston Globe

BODY:
FDA Finishes Review, Requests New Study On Enzyme DrugThe Food and Drug
Administration has completed its application review of Fabrazyme, Genzyme
Corp.'s enzyme replacement drug to treat Fabry's disease, and requested
additional data and another study, the company reported.

    That's expected to delay FDA approval, but not affect Genzyme's financial
performance this year, said Henri Termeer, the company's chairman and chief
executive.

    "We are moving forward expeditiously with the investigators and trial sites
for our study and anticipate patient enrollment will begin in January," Termeer
said in a statement.

    Genzyme plans to embark on a Phase 4 trial, which is conducted as a
follow-up study to confirm a product's clinical benefit. The multicenter study,
due to start this year, calls for Genzyme to examine several issues, including
Fabrazyme's ability to prevent deterioration of kidney function.

    For Genzyme, the FDA request comes near the finish line of a hotly contested
race with Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., which is developing Replagal, a nearly
identical drug to treat Fabry's disease.

    In June, both companies -- within days of each other -- asked the FDA to
approve their drugs. Each wants to be the exclusive provider of the drug to
about 2,500 men who have Fabry's disease, under the government's "orphan drug"
program, which is designed to encourage the development of treatments for rare
disorders.

    Wall Street analysts have estimated that either Genzyme or Transkaryotic
Therapies will be able to command as much as $100,000 a year per patient.

    At a scientific meeting in October, the two companies showed how their drugs
reduced a type of fat, called GL-3, that builds up in the kidneys of patients
with this rare inherited disorder. Since Fabry's patients lack a key enzyme,
GL-3 builds up, causing pain and placing them at risk for stroke, kidney damage
and heart attacks.

    However, a side-by-side comparison of the data presented by Transkaryotic
Therapies and Genzyme at the meeting was difficult, because each had different
goals. Transkaryotic Therapies' primary study sought a reduction in pain;
eliminating GL-3 was the focus of Genzyme's pivotal clinical trial.

    In July, Genzyme claimed patent infringement and went to court in Delaware
to block Transkaryotic Therapies from marketing Replagal, if it is approved.
Transkaryotic wants the case moved to U.S. District Court in Boston.

    ,,5 CUSTOM DATA SOURCE: Gene Logic Inc. will supply a customized gene
expression database to Cambridge, Mass., biotechnology giant Biogen Inc.

    The Maryland provider of genomic information said the database will be
derived from its GeneExpress series of databases, which are used to discover and
validate new drug targets, develop promising therapeutic compounds and help
facilitate clinical trials.

    Biogen, among the oldest biotech companies, has increasingly incorporated
genomics and related technologies into its research programs to augment its
strengths in biology and to speed drug discovery.

    The company's drug development efforts focus on four areas: cancer,
autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, fibrotic diseases, and neurodegenerative
diseases.

    Financial terms of the agreement were not disclosed.

    ,,5 $46.8 MILLION RAISED: Curis Inc., which is awaiting regulatory approval
to market a product that spurs bone growth in hard-to-heal fractures, raised
$46.8 million in a private placement of 5.2 million shares of newly issued
stock.

    The Cambridge, Mass., company said it will use the money to help fund its
research and development programs in regenerative medicine, to build its sales
and marketing capabilities and for potential acquisitions.

    The company is conducting human clinical trials for a product to treat a
pediatric urological disorder known as vesicoureteral reflux, which can cause
serious kidney complications. It is also developing ways to regenerate cells,
tissues and organs to treat a number of conditions, including heart disease and
diabetes.

    Curis has about 31.3 million shares of outstanding stock, trading about $8 a
share on the Nasdaq exchange.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2001


                             2092 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                     JANUARY 1, 2001, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 1327 words

HEADLINE: A New World of Surgery;

Biotech changes treatment options and its products

SOURCE: Boston Globe

BYLINE: Naomi Aoki

BODY:
Imagine surgery without scars. Knee replacements that leave behind no metal.
Heart surgery that harnesses the power of the human body to heal itself. Brain
surgery that replaces vital tissue lost to Parkinson's disease or cancer.

    In the not-too-distant future, scientists and industry observers say, these
will be realities. People's worn-out and damaged parts will be repaired using
biological materials that are absorbed naturally into the body.

    Doctors are already using absorbable glues instead of stitches to close
wounds and incisions, injectable liquids to stave off knee replacement
surgeries, and a small tube made of human bone instead of metal in spinal
surgeries.

    As scientists unravel the mysteries of human biology, companies are forming
to turn that knowledge into products that will improve surgery and overcome its
limitations. The emerging field, known as biosurgery, is a cross between
traditional medical devices and biotechnology.

    And it is one of the fastest growing areas of the health care industry, said
Robin R. Young, managing director of life sciences research at investment bank
Stephens Inc.

    By Young's count, the number of companies in the field has grown from seven
to 47 in just five years, the number of products from 26 to 103, and total
revenue from $50 million to more than $1 billion. By 2008, Young predicts,
biosurgery will be a $12 billion market with more than 60 companies and 345
products.

    "These are transforming technologies," Young said. "They will change how
surgeries are done. They will change how patients heal."

    In the past, he said, complications have been considered a necessary evil.
If surgery saved a patient's life, it was deemed a success even if it left
behind severe scarring or led to a lifetime of drug therapy.

    Today's surgeons, however, measure success differently. They strive for
less-invasive procedures with shorter recovery times and fewer complications.
And eventually, Young said, they want to operate on patients without leaving any
traces behind -- no scars, no metal or plastic parts, no residual aches and
pains.

    Young first became aware of biosurgery, and its possibilities, about four
years ago when he noticed that the sales of specially preserved human heart
valves by a small Georgia company named CryoLife Inc. were hurting the sales of
standard mechanical valves.

    Young was intrigued, because the human valves were harder for surgeons to
put in and more expensive than mechanical valves. But it turned out they more
accurately mimicked the action of the original valves and reduced the risk of
blood clots that could lead to heart attacks, he said.

    "It was better for patients and that was the bottom line for surgeons,"
Young said.

    Two Cambridge, Mass., companies, among the leaders in biosurgery, are
betting heavily on the field's future. Genzyme Corp. recently merged two of its
divisions and acquired a company to form Genzyme Biosurgery. Curis Inc. was
formed earlier this year out of the merger of three companies.

    Figuring out the business of biosurgery, however, will have its challenges.
Genzyme, a giant in the biotech industry, has stumbled more than once as it has
ventured into the field. Its surgical products division, now merged into Genzyme
Biosurgery, repeatedly failed to meet Wall Street's expectations.

    "To be honest, we embarrassed ourselves," said Earl "Duke" Collier Jr.,
president of Genzyme Biosurgery. "We thought it would be like selling
pharmaceuticals. We learned the hard way that it's a totally different
business."

    Pharmaceuticals sales representatives are expected to make a dozen calls a
day, Collier said. They drop off literature and drug samples, talk to the doctor
or office staff, and then head off to the next doctor's office.

    Surgical products sales reps, on the other hand, are expected to go into the
operating room to talk to surgeons and answer highly technical questions. And
they are lucky if they can make a dozen sales calls in a week, Collier said.

    Surgeons, he said, are also a much more conservative group, and
appropriately so. Learning to use a new surgical product is much trickier than
prescribing a new pharmaceutical product. And before surgeons adopt the product,
they want to be sure it is going to improve the result or eliminate a serious
complication.

    Education and hands-on training become a critical part of a company's sales
and management strategy. In that way, Collier said, biosurgical products have
more in common with traditional medical devices.

    But on the research, development and manufacturing side, biosurgery is more
like the biotech industry. The science and manufacturing processes are based
more in biology than in engineering mechanical replacements for human parts.

    As Genzyme contemplated whether to stay in the surgical products business,
Collier said, it began to see its earlier missteps as strengths.

    Medical device companies were well-suited to selling the products, but not
to developing or manufacturing them. Biotech companies would suffer the same
transitional woes Genzyme had already been through. Small biosurgery companies
would probably have trouble funding the sales forces needed to market their
products.

    "We began thinking that the difficulty of penetrating this market might give
us a competitive advantage," he said.

    Genzyme Biosurgery will focus on cardiac and orthopedic surgeries,
historically the two biggest areas for medical devices. With its acquisition of
Biomatrix Inc., the company picked up an injectable fluid called Synvisc that
has helped many patients delay total knee replacement surgery.

    The company has another product to treat cartilage damage in the knee, and a
bioabsorbable product called Seprafilm to reduce internal scarring after
surgeries. It is working on cellular and gene therapies that would be delivered
to the heart during surgeries to treat a number of conditions.

    "It's important to have a fair number of products because there is no
blockbuster like Lipitor here," Collier said. "The $500 million product is rare
in surgical products. It's mostly $50 million to $100 million. So you can't bet
the ranch on any one product."

    As biology transforms the nature of medical devices and surgery, however,
Dr. Doros Platika, president and chief executive of Curis, says the market
opportunities for these products will also grow. Treatments will become
available for conditions that were untreatable or poorly treated.

    Of the 500,000 people nationwide who lose their bladder to cancer or suffer
other serious bladder conditions, Platika said, only 20,000 a year undergo
reconstructive surgery because of the high rate of complications. If Curis
succeeds in its efforts to grow replacement bladders, he says, many more
patients would opt to undergo the surgery.

    But balancing the medical need for a product with economic and practical
considerations is crucial. The company is in late-stage clinical trials for a
product that could repair a urological defect in children, sparing them a life
of kidney problems and even kidney failure.

    The same product could be developed to treat incontinence in the elderly.
But, Platika said, the procedure would be so much more expensive than diapers
that it becomes a tough sell for patients, insurance companies and investors.

    And as companies venture into the realm of harvesting cells from a patient
to grow customized tissues or organs, he said, business strategies will also
evolve. Sales representatives, surgeons and patients will have to coordinate
their schedules for procedures. Economies of scale will fade away, and living
cells can't be stored on shelves as they await buyers.

    "But that is the future," Platika said. "We're going to move more and more
away from plastic and metal, and more and more toward natural products -- cells
and growth factors -- that will give you back what you had naturally."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Earl Collier is president of Genzyme Biosurgery. The company is
a leader in its emerging field but has not met Wall Street expectations. /
Boston Globe

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2001
