
                              401 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                            January 14, 2008 Monday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE MEDICINE AND TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 916 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS CREATE A RAT'S BEATING HEART

BYLINE: LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN, THE NEW YORK TIMES

BODY:

   Medicine's dream of growing new human hearts and other organs to repair or
replace damaged ones received a significant boost yesterday when University of
Minnesota researchers reported success in creating a beating rat heart in a
laboratory.

   Experts not involved in the Minnesota work called it "a landmark achievement"
and "a stunning" development. But they and the Minnesota researchers cautioned
that the dream, if it is ever realized, was still at least 10 years away.

   Dr. Doris A. Taylor, the head of the team that created the rat heart, said
she followed a guiding principle of her laboratory: "Give nature the tools, and
get out of the way."

   "We just took nature's own building blocks to build a new organ," Ms. Taylor
said of her team's report in the journal Nature Medicine.

   The researchers removed all the cells from a dead rat heart, leaving the
valves and outer structure as scaffolding for new heart cells injected from
newborn rats. Within two weeks, the cells formed a new beating heart that
conducted electrical impulses and pumped a small amount of blood.

   With modifications, scientists should be able to grow a human heart by taking
stem cells from a patient's bone marrow and placing them in a cadaver heart that
has been prepared as a scaffold, Ms. Taylor said in a telephone interview from
her laboratory in Minneapolis. The early success "opens the door to this notion
that you can make any organ: kidney, liver, lung, pancreas -- you name it and we
hope we can make it," she said.

   Todd N. McAllister of Cytograft Tissue Engineering in Novato, Calif., said,
"Doris Taylor's work is one of those maddeningly simple ideas that you knock
yourself on the head, saying, 'Why didn't I think of that?'" Mr. McAllister's
team has used a snippet of a patient's skin to grow blood vessels in a
laboratory, and then implanted them to restore blood flow around a patient's
damaged arteries and veins.

   The science of tissue engineering has been growing rapidly. For many years,
doctors have used engineered skin for burn patients. Engineered cartilage is
used for joint repairs. Researchers are investigating the use of stem cells to
repair cardiac muscle damaged by heart attacks. Also, new bladders grown from a
patient's own cells are being tested in the same patients.

   Ms. Taylor is a newcomer to tissue regeneration. She began her professional
career at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx investigating
gene therapy and then cell therapy. She said she switched to tissue regeneration
when she realized the limiting step in trying to generate an organ was not the
number of cells needed, but the complexity of creating a three-dimensional
structure.

   "The heart is a beautiful organ," Ms. Taylor said, "and it's not one that I
thought I'd ever be able to build in a dish."

   Her view changed about three years ago when she recalled that cells were
removed from human and pig heart valves before they were used to replace damaged
human ones. As she contemplated replacing the old rat cells with new ones, Ms.
Taylor followed another of her mantras: "Trust your crazy ideas."

   Progress came in fits and starts. "We made every mistake known, did every
experiment wrong and had to go back and do them right," Ms. Taylor said.

   She poured detergents like those in shampoos in the rat's arteries to wash
out heart cells and then injected neonatal cardiac cells. The first two
detergents failed. But a third concoction led to a clear, translucent scaffold
that retained the heart's architecture.

   After injecting the young rat heart cells into a scaffold, she stimulated
them electrically and created an artificial circulation as the equivalent of
blood pressure to make the heart pump and produce a pulse. The steps also helped
the cells mature. Examining slices of the heart under a microscope showed they
were living cells.

   To test the biological compatibility of the new hearts, the team transplanted
them into the abdomens of unrelated live rats. The hearts were not immediately
rejected. A blood supply developed. The hearts beat regularly. And cells from
the host rats moved in and began to reline the blood vessels, even growing in
the wall of the hearts.

   Ms. Taylor is conducting similar experiments on pigs as a step toward human
work. "Working out the details in a pig heart made a lot more sense" because the
anatomy of the porcine heart is the closest to humans and pigs are plentiful,
she said.

   "The next goal will be to see if we can get the heart to pump strongly enough
and become mature enough that we can use it to keep an animal alive" in a
replacement transplant, Ms. Taylor said.

   As for human hearts, the best-case situation would be to obtain them from
cadavers, remove their cells to make a scaffold and then inject bone marrow,
muscle or young cardiac cells from a patient. The process of repopulating the
scaffold with new cells would take a few months, she said.

   The body replaces its proteins every few months, so the hope is that the body
will create a matrix that it recognizes as its own.

   One potential problem is that anti-rejection drugs might be required to
prevent adverse immune reactions from the scaffold. In that case, Ms. Taylor
hopes such therapy would be needed only temporarily.

   Many things that work in experiments on animals fail in humans because of the
species barrier. Mr. McAllister said that in Ms. Taylor's case "the principal
problem in escalating it to humans is one of scale, not of cell biology, and
that is an easier problem to solve potentially."

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: American Heart AssociationAP: (Living with
failing hearts)

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2008


                              402 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 11, 2008 Friday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 861 words

HEADLINE: Salk finds a partner in French drug firm;
Institute, for first time, tapping private sector

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: LA JOLLA

BODY:

   LA JOLLA -- In the latest example of a nonprofit research center teaming up
with private industry for money, the Salk Institute today will announce a
partnership with a Paris-based drug company that hopes to benefit from Salk
discoveries.

   It is the first time the La Jolla landmark, which receives two-thirds of its
approximately $90 million annual budget from federal funds, has paired with a
for-profit drug company. Some of its researchers have separate deals with
for-profit firms.

   The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, a bastion of academics and basic
science, will receive about $10 million from Ipsen over the next three to five
years. The grants will be used to create the Ipsen Life Sciences Program.

   The acceptance of money from a drug company represents a subtle change in
direction for the Salk Institute, said professor Inder Verma, an expert on
viruses used to transport gene therapies. He will receive some of Ipsen's funds.

   "If you ask me whether people are mentally more prepared to deal with a
pharmaceutical company than they were 10 years ago, I would say yes," Verma
said.

   Today, he added, biomedical institutes collaborate much more with private
companies through scientific conferences and informal discussions.

   One reason for the lowered resistance is because funding from the National
Institutes of Health to research centers nationwide has stagnated or declined in
recent years. Other challenges include the increasing difficulty of obtaining
donations from philanthropists and the rising expense of tools needed to conduct
research, Verma said.

   It costs about $2.5 million to finance one faculty member with a lab for
three years, he said. The Salk Institute has 59 faculty members among its
estimated 1,100 scientific and administrative employees.

   Some pacts between nonprofit research institutions and pharmaceutical
companies have been controversial. Critics say they allow the pharmaceutical
industry to give a relatively small amount of money in exchange for ultimately
reaping the best findings from work that was mainly supported by federal
taxpayers.

   They also contend that such agreements could encourage scientists to focus on
products that are more profitable for industry than are medically useful to
patients.

   Partnerships that have generated debate include the one between Pfizer and
The Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla and the oil industry's contributions
of more than $700 million to UC Berkeley, UC Davis and Stanford University.

   Officials for Salk and Ipsen said their arrangement carries none of those
risks. They said only one part of the agreement gives Ipsen the first rights to
certain findings from the institute.

   Ipsen has a long history with the Salk. It was Salk professor and Nobel
laureate Dr. Roger Guillemin who decades ago discovered a key that formed the
basis of Ipsen's only U.S.-licensed drug.

   "We have a lot of respect for the Salk, which has synergy with our own
research and focuses on the same diseases and technologies as we do," said
Jean-Luc Bélingard, chairman and chief executive officer of Ipsen.

   The Ipsen-Salk alliance has three components:

   * The Target grant, about $750,000 a year, will support research in pituitary
problems that cause acromegaly, a defect in which too much growth hormone is
produced. The condition causes disfigurement and gigantism, or excessive growth
usually seen first in the hands, feet and face.

   About 7,000 people in the United States and 19,000 worldwide have developed
acromegaly.

   One of the institute's goals is to make the first mouse model for acromegaly
so scientists can use it to test genes suspected of causing the defect and drugs
that may cure it.

   Ipsen will have the first right to obtain ownership of discoveries only from
this segment of the partnership.

   * The Core grant, about $1.25 million a year, will be awarded to researchers
studying inflammation. Scientists believe inflammation plays a key role in
aging, neurodegenerative diseases, metabolic changes and many kinds of cancer.

   * The Innovation grant, about $500,000 a year, will give young researchers
the chance to explore topics in any category deemed worthy by a selection panel.

   Ipsen, with roughly $1.5 billion in sales per year, describes itself as a
mid-sized French pharmaceutical company. It makes about 20 drugs approved for
sales abroad.

   Ipsen's major products include its top-selling drug, which reduces
testosterone in patients with prostate cancer; a compound derived from ginkgo
biloba leaves that is used to improve cognitive function in the elderly; and
several competitors to Botox that decrease facial wrinkles.

   Verma, the Salk researcher, said the institute's agreement with Ipsen has
"opened up the possibility that Salk may have more interactions with
pharmaceutical companies in the future. But no one is standing at the door at
this moment."

   THE SALK INSTITUTE FOR BIOLOGICAL STUDIES

   Founded: by polio pioneer Jonas Salk in 1963

   Location: Torrey Pines Mesa

   Employees: about 1,100, including 59 faculty members and 850 other scientists

   Federal grants in 2007: $59 million

   Philanthropy in 2007: $27 million

   Main research areas: molecular biology and genetics, neurosciences, plant
biology

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: 1. Professor Inder Verma will receive
research funds through Salk Institute's partnership with a French drug maker. 2.
THE SALK INSTITUTE FOR BIOLOGICAL STUDIES; PHOTOBY: 1. Salk Institute

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2008


                              403 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2008 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           January 9, 2008 Wednesday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Business; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1117 words

HEADLINE: Florida woos OHSU with unit with deal to expand

BYLINE: TED SICKINGER, The Oregonian

BODY:

   SUMMARY: Research   | Part of the VAccine and Gene Therapy Institute would
start with $118 million in incentives

   Florida has recruited one of Oregon Health & Science University's research
units to expand on that state's Treasure Coast, lavishing a $118 million
incentive package on the institute to recruit 200 staff and occupy a new
building amid a rapidly evolving biotechnology research hub there.

   Between 2001 and 2006, OHSU received more than $500 million from private
donors and Oregon's tobacco settlement, based mostly on its heady promises to
spin off biotech companies and jobs after recruiting top-shelf scientists and
building state-of-the-art research space.

   Those jobs have been slow to materialize, however, and Tuesday's announcement
likely means that the bulk of expansion in at least one of the university's
fast-growing research institutes will take place in another state.

   OHSU used state money to underwrite recruitment of many of the principal
scientists at the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute, the unit that will expand
to Port St. Lucie on Florida's eastern seaboard. The university said no VGTI
staff would move from Oregon to Florida for now, though VGTI's director, Jay
Nelson, will serve as co-director of the Florida branch.

   OHSU, facing deep losses from research support and medical education, can't
compete with the kind of expansion subsidies that Florida is throwing at the
institute. But OHSU university officials hope that collaboration with top-tier
institutions recruited to Florida will spur more growth in Oregon. It also would
provide new revenue for OHSU if technology created there ends up producing
licensing revenue.

   "Past experience has shown that proximity is one of the main factors in
promoting these partnerships," said Nelson in a news release. "This institute in
Florida will allow for unique regional partnerships that will cross-connect with
operations in Oregon and benefit us all."

   State Sen. Rick Metsger, D-Welches, who sat through OHSU's pitch for $200
million in state support in 2001, said the state probably would look for more
clarity on why the expansion isn't taking place in Oregon, given OHSU's promises
several years ago.

   His colleague, Senate Majority Leader Richard Devlin, D-Tualatin, said he
understood the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute's motivation in light of
Florida's offer and a recent downturn in federal research funding.

   "I'm pleased they're keeping their core staff here," Devlin said. "I would
hope they would continue to expand here, but they are an institution that is
trying to do as much as they can."

   Florida's recruitment of VGTI is an endorsement of the research center's
work. Established in 2001 at OHSU's West Campus in Beaverton, the institute has
grown from $650,000 in annual grant support to more than $10.4 million in 2007.
It has 13 scientists and about 90 employees in total who carry out research on
immunology and infectious diseases, such as AIDS, monkey pox and West Nile
virus.

   The Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute was formed in close association with
the Oregon National Primate Research Center in Hillsboro and conducts some of
its studies with nonhuman primates, a resource that won't immediately be
available in Florida.

   Dan Dorsa, vice president of research at OHSU, said VGTI had run out of space
on OHSU's West Campus. The Florida funding, he said, will ease those
constraints.

   "Given our financial challenges, it's a little more challenging to think
about expanding the Oregon enterprise than it will be here in Florida," said
Dorsa, who was in Florida for the announcement.

   The institute's expansion to Florida reflects both the aggressiveness of the
Sunshine State's efforts to elbow into the biotech arena and the realities of
tighter funding at the National Institutes of Health, the primary underwriter of
basic health research in the country.

   Florida has been ladling out hundreds of millions of dollars in subsidies to
recruit some of the leading biotech players in the world, including the Scripps
Research Institute, Torrey Pines Institute for Molecular Studies, Burnham
Institute, Max Planck Society and Mann Research Center.

   "As long as Florida continues to write checks, I'm sure that other
researchers will be happy to cash them," said Joe Cortright, a local economist
who has studied the development and concentration of the biotech industry in a
number of centers nationwide.

   Florida officials are telling their taxpayers that VGTI Florida and its
commercial spinoffs will support approximately 1,466 positions directly and
indirectly over a 20-year period and will generate $2 billion in payroll and
$4.2 billion in gross state product during the same period.

   Cortright is skeptical that the national biotech arms race, liberally
subsidized by taxpayers in various states, ultimately will deliver the promised
economic bonanza. Private biotech jobs, he believes, will continue to gravitate
toward established hubs beyond Florida and Oregon that already have the
research, managerial, manufacturing and financial expertise to sustain it.

   Still absent in Florida, Cortright said, are private companies making big
investments. "Florida's biotech boom is almost entirely public money going to
researchers," he said.

   From the Oregon perspective, he said, the key question is where VGTI would
choose to develop any products based on research it undertakes.

   Dorsa said the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute had pledged to make a best
effort to develop companies in Florida stemming from intellectual property
developed there. At the same time, he said, the university would still look to
develop similar opportunities in Oregon and would need to be clear about what
was created in Oregon versus Florida.

   The $117.9 million incentive package includes $60 million from the Florida
Innovation Fund to underwrite the recruitment of 200 staff over 10 years. The
city of Port St. Lucie has committed to providing another $53 million of
improvements in a 120-acre research park that will house Torrey Pines and VGTI.
Developers of a new building are asking for $4.4 million in property tax
abatements and another $500,000 in impact fee rebates.

   VGTI will be housed in the Torrey Pines building until its own is complete.
Torrey Pines President Richard Houghten originally approached VGTI in May about
joining his scientists in Florida, Dorsa said.

   Dorsa said he wasn't aware of a tug of war over the institute or any
discussion of moving the whole outfit to Florida.

   "They never shared that with me," he said. "I'm sure they thought about it,
but they see this as just an expansion opportunity to achieve the vision they
have for the institute."

   Ted Sickinger: 503-221-8505; tedsickinger@news.oregonian.com

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2008


                              404 of 783 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2008 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                           January 9, 2008 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 439 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFS

BYLINE: A staff and wire report

BODY:

   TAMPA BAY AREA

   Publix Settles Benzene Suit

   Publix Super Markets has settled a consumer suit alleging that two
ingredients of the grocer's private-label diet lemon-lime soft drinks could
combine under heat exposure to form benzene, which has been known to cause
cancer.

   The Food and Drug Administration and other food authorities said there were
no known health risks from potential benzene levels in the drink, which would be
measured in single digits of parts per billion. As part of the suit settlement,
Lakeland-based Publix and Cott Beverages, which supplies the product, agreed to
reformulate the drink. Financial terms were not disclosed.

   Cans with a use-by date of July 3, 2008, or later have been reformulated.
Cans with use-by dates before then may be returned for a refund or replacement.

   Two Harbour Place Sold

   CNL Commercial Real Estate of Orlando and Amstar Group, a Denver-based
private equity firm, have paid $32 million for Two Harbour Place, a 12-story,
180,000-square-foot office building on Harbour Island in Tampa. Beneficial
Management sold the 10-year-old building.

   Sanchez Leaves Steel Biz

   Frank Sanchez said Tuesday that he will step down by month's end as head of
Ybor City-based Renaissance Steel, which recently was bought by East Coast-based
Innovative Steel Technologies. Sanchez was one of five owners of Renaissance
Steel. The other four were RV dealer Don Wallace and developers Tracy Harris,
Bill Bishop and Bing Kearney.

   STATE

   Vaccine Institute Coming

   The Oregon Health & Science University's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute
said Tuesday that it will open a 130,000-square-foot campus in Port St. Lucie,
adding to a growing biotech cluster forming in Florida. The institute,
established in 2001, said it will create 200 jobs in the next 10 years, enticed
by $117.8 million in state and local incentives.

   Bear Stearns CEO Changes

   Bear Stearns Cos. chief executive James Cayne said Tuesday that he will give
up day-to-day control of the fifth-largest U.S. investment bank amid
unprecedented losses from the subprime mortgage crisis. Cayne, 73, will serve as
non-executive chairman of the New York-based company, according to a memo
obtained by The Associated Press. He will be succeeded as CEO by President Alan
Schwartz, effective immediately. Cayne led Bear Stearns to its first loss since
being founded in 1923 after it took a $1.9 billion write-down in the fourth
quarter.

   A staff and wire report

   Watch the Tribune's Business report at 5, 6 and 11 a.m. Tuesday to Friday and
9 a.m. Saturdays on WFLA-TV.

   Copyright © 2008, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2008


                              405 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                           December 22, 2007 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 6Z

LENGTH: 1266 words

HEADLINE: NO QUIT IN CHEATERS;
SCIENTIFIC GAINS THREATEN TO LEAVE ANTI-DOPING OFFICIALS BEHIND;
ON PERFORMANCE-ENHANCERS

BYLINE: Childs Walker, Sun reporter

BODY:

   Major League Baseball officials have spoken of former Sen. George Mitchell's
report on steroids as a way to put a stamp of understanding on the past and move
toward a cleaner future.

   But those who have battled doping for much longer in cycling, track and
field, and other sports said that's wishful thinking. Hard experience has taught
them that the economic and competitive drives behind doping inevitably lead
athletes to newer, more effective, less detectable substances and methods.

   "What we have to do is constantly look at the advances that are being made in
medical science in a proper way and imagine how they might be abused by
athletes," said David Howman, director general of the World Anti-Doping Agency.

   Imagine if you wanted to run a marathon and could receive a simple shot that
would tell your muscles to be better suited to endurance.

   Or what if you tore your knee and an injection of your own stem cells not
only helped it heal but also left the joint stronger than before?

   These are not far-fetched scenarios reserved for science fiction but very
real possibilities given the direction of medical research.

   And that scares anti-doping officials at the highest levels of sports, who
know that athletes will seize on any medical breakthrough to push their bodies
to surreal heights.

   "No matter what resources you put into enforcing the rules, there will be
those who want to break them," Howman said. "If you're looking for a battle that
is going to be won, this probably isn't it."

   Even as professional leagues and law enforcement agents get better at
catching steroid abusers, athletes have moved on to insulin and slightly altered
versions of previously detectable designer steroids.

   Eventually, scientists say, performance-enhancing substances might seem
antiquated, left behind by genetic manipulation and medical procedures involving
stem cells.

   Human growth hormone is the first hurdle to clear. As the Mitchell Report
made apparent, many athletes have turned to hGH for injury recovery or as a
substitute for anabolic steroids (though scientists disagree over its
effectiveness as a strength builder).

   Baseball commissioner Bud Selig wants to convene an expert conference on hGH.
Longtime drug researcher Don Catlin, who has received grants from Major League
Baseball and the NFL to work on a reliable urine test for the substance, said
he's making progress.

   But by focusing too much on hGH, drug experts say, baseball officials could
miss the reality that many athletes have already moved past it.

   In the quest to keep up, WADA officials have spent five years courting the
world's leading genetic scientists. Despite such efforts, Howman called improper
use of genetics a "distinct threat."

   "It's something that can and probably will happen, given athletes' tendency
to push the envelope," said Dr. H. Lee Sweeney, a physiologist at the University
of Pennsylvania.

   The technology for gene therapy is evolving slowly, he said. Right now,
researchers have to use viruses to get genetic alterations into the body. These
injections trigger immune system responses that can be deadly. But the
theoretical benefits of gene manipulation are staggering.

   "You could change any property of the muscle," Sweeney said. "You could make
it bigger, stronger, better for endurance. You could gear it to training so that
you need a lot less effort to get the same effect. You could certainly extend
the competitive life of the athlete."

   Such manipulations might be undetectable without biopsy, he added.

   By injecting adult stem cells into rats, Dr. Johnny Huard, a researcher at
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, can speed and improve muscle healing. In some
cases, the treated muscles end up stronger than they were pre-injury.

   Recovery or strengthening?

   The Mitchell Report and other sources have suggested that athletes turn to
banned drugs as much to bounce back from injuries as to build strength. So it's
not hard to imagine the appeal of Huard's methods.

   Given that the patient would receive an injection of his or her own cells,
detection would be difficult.

   Some even theorize that by injecting stem cells into healthy muscle, athletes
could replicate the growth and strengthening effects of steroids and human
growth hormone. Such injections often have no effect in the lab, Huard said, but
that doesn't mean no one will try.

   Stem cells could be dangerous because they're similar to cancer cells. Huard
doesn't have hard data but said he worries that patients who receive improper
injections could face elevated cancer risks.

   Perhaps his research will revolutionize the standard practices in sports
medicine. Or perhaps outlaw doctors will try to use it to boost performance and,
instead, hurt their patients.

   It's too early to tell. (Huard estimated that his research might apply to
sports medicine in 10 years.) But the fact that anti-doping officials have their
eyes on his work illustrates the bizarre climate of modern athletics, one in
which every scientific breakthrough related to muscle growth has a potential
dark side involving performance enhancement.

   "It is strange," Huard said. "But it tells me we've been pretty successful."

   Similarly, Howman said doping officials must work with the pharmaceutical
industry so they know which new drugs are ripe for abuse.

   Pharmaceutical companies have begun trials for drugs that would inhibit
myostatin, a protein that moderates muscle growth. The drugs are intended for
muscular dystrophy patients and others whose muscles are wasted by disease. But
the bodybuilding community is already excited, because if the gene can, in
effect, be turned off, workouts could lead to much greater muscle growth.

   Testing is not enough, doping officials agree. Commonly used substances such
as hGH are undetectable in the urine tests of most U.S. sports leagues. And
forget about the latest designer drugs, which might evade even the most
sophisticated tests.

   Enforcing the law

   That's where law enforcement comes in. Most of the American athletes flagged
for hGH use have been caught in crackdowns on Internet pharmaceutical rings.
Similar crackdowns will be key to stopping doctors from performing illegal
genetic procedures, Howman said.

   "If you rely solely on science and the collecting of samples, you'll never
totally get on top of it," he said.

   What lies ahead might be as much a philosophical reckoning as an attempt to
stay ahead of the latest quests for performance enhancement.

   It's possible that we will face a new normal, one in which gene therapy and
stem cell treatments are part of routine health regimens. If such physical
enhancements pose no medical risks, will there be a moral imperative to prevent
them?

   Already, we accept athletes taking cortisone shots and receiving laser eye
surgery because we perceive these procedures as simply getting them back to
normal levels. More broadly, we accept plastic surgery as a means to build
self-esteem and raise prospects for professional success.

   `Genetic cocktail'

   "If, in 50 years, people are receiving a customized genetic cocktail instead
of vaccinations, the minute you do that, you are changing their performance
throughout their lives," Sweeney said. "Who wouldn't want that if it's safe?"

   Given the vast array of possible enhancements, Howman said, anti-doping
officials have to wage a philosophical and moral war.

   "We really have to think about what we want sport to be," he said. "We have
to educate the athletes of the future so they don't want to go down paths their
predecessors have gone down. And we have to hope that more and more of them boo
those who do go down those paths."

   childs.walker@baltsun.com

GRAPHIC: Photo(s)
 World Anti-Doping Agency director general David Howman (center) - shown at a
Paris conference on drug abuse in cycling, with anti-doping officials Anne
Gripper and Pierre Bordry - says the drug fight is likely a losing battle.
 Bertrand Guay : Agence France-Presse

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2007


                              406 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2007 The Detroit News
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Detroit News (Michigan)

                           December 22, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: HOMESTYLE; Pg. 12H

LENGTH: 804 words

HEADLINE: New technology can seal ductwork with aerosol

BYLINE: Glenn Haege

BODY:

   This being the Christmas season, I am going to write about a part of the
government that works to make life better and actually saves you money.

   This part of the government produced Aeroseal, a technology that cuts
residential and commercial heating and cooling bills by about 30 percent. In
doing so, it saves a vast amount of energy and could dramatically cut down on
greenhouse gases.

   The technology was developed by the U.S. Department of Energy's (DOE)
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.

   Many of the lab's research activities are fairly arcane, but have practical
applications that are licensed to corporations. Recently, they licensed a gene
therapy for Parkinson's disease; ion mobility analysis technology for
cardiovascular disease indicators; and technology for the cost-effective removal
of mercury from coal-fired power plant emissions.

   Way back in 1987, the laboratory's Environmental Energy Technologies Division
was concerned with the tremendous amount of heating and cooling energy wasted by
sloppy residential and commercial ductwork.

   It turns out that the ductwork taking the heated and cooled air from the
furnace and air conditioner to our living space is so badly assembled that
leakage costs consumers about $5 billion a year. That's wasting the equivalent
of the energy consumed by 13 million cars.

   Dr. Mark Modera, a staff scientist, had the idea that since ducts are often
in hard to get to places and are difficult to seal from the outside, an aerosol
technology might be developed that would seal the ductwork from the inside.

   The DOE and the California Institute for Energy & Environment funded the
research in 1990. Within a few years a process was developed by which duct
outlets were blocked and very small, sticky vinyl particles dispersed under
pressure into the ductwork.

   The only way the particles could get out was through the leaks in the
ductwork. The particles bumped into and adhered to the edges of the leaks and
each other, sealing the leaks. Under laboratory conditions, particles could seal
holes as large as 1 inch across. In real-world conditions this was reduced to
5/8 inch.

   I have over-simplified the description of the technology and the challenges
that had to be overcome to make the idea viable. Particles had to be developed
that would adhere to the edges of a hole and to each other, yet not stick to the
ductwork.

   Special, non-clogging, atomizing nozzles were developed that would shoot the
particles under high pressure. Techniques had to be developed to block off and
protect the heating and cooling equipment as well as the ductwork grilles.

   After years of refinement and testing, residential and small commercial use
of the Aeroseal technology was licensed to the Carrier Corp. A specialist
company, Carrier-Aeroseal was created to further develop and market the
technology. By 2005, some 25,000 residential duct systems had been sealed.

   Sealing the ductwork reduced heating and cooling required up to 30 percent
and resulted in energy savings of up to $300.

   Before Aeroseal seals ducts, homes are tested to determine the actual
ductwork leakage. The ducts are then sealed and the home's ductwork is re-tested
for leakage. The job is guaranteed for 10 years.

   Here are a few real-life results.

   ¥ Building A: a 21-year-old, 1,238-square-foot, two-story home with a
two-year-old, 72,000-BTU natural gas heating and 36,000-BTU cooling system.

   The home was tested and found to have leaks equaling a 142-square-inch hole.
The Aeroseal treatment reduced leakage by 95 percent to 6 square inches. This
created a 42 percent improvement in heating and cooling capacity, and actual
energy savings of $213 per year.

   ¥ Building B: A 36-year-old, 3,200- square-foot, two-story home with a
72,000-BTU natural gas furnace and a 36,000-BTU cooling system. Initial testing
showed leaks equaling an 87-square-inch hole. Aeroseal treatment reduced leakage
by 91 percent, leaving the equivalent of 8 square inches of air leakage. Heating
and cooling capacity improved 30 percent and actual energy costs were reduced
$273.

   ¥ Building C: A 14-year-old, 1,200-square-foot, single-story commercial
building with an 8-year-old, 72,000-BTU natural gas furnace and a 36,000-BTU
cooling system. Initial testing showed leaks equaling 110 square inches. The
Aeroseal treatment reduced leakage by 87 percent, leaving 14 square inches of
air leakage. Capacity of the heating and cooling equipment improved 34 percent
and actual energy savings was $256.

   It's simple. If you want to save money on heating and cooling at the same
time you help save the planet, check out the Aeroseal system.

   The Aeroseal contractor for Metro Detroit is Safety King, (800) AIR-DUCT. Out
state, call Aeroseal of Michigan, (866) 900-SEAL. To find a contractor in other
parts of the country, call (800) 772-6459 or click on www.aeroseal.com .

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2007


                              407 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            December 16, 2007 Sunday
                                 CITY-D Edition

SECTION: CURRENTS; Inq Col Carlin Romano; Pg. C05

LENGTH: 1119 words

HEADLINE: Two polar, persuasive stands on reproductive genetics

BYLINE: By Carlin Romano; Inquirer Book Critic

BODY:

   Babies By DesignThe Ethics of Genetic Choice

   By Ronald M. Green

   Yale University Press. 279 pp. $26


   The Case Against PerfectionEthics in the Age of Genetic Engineering

   By Michael J. Sandel

   Harvard University Press. 162 pp. $18.95

   Consider some new definitions for the 21st century.

   Little girl? Sugar and spice and everything nice - plus an exact genetic
blueprint, like the how-to sheet that comes with your new cyber-era thingamajig.

   Little boy? Snakes and snails and puppy-dog tails - in addition to
precociously muscled arms (Why wait until baseball camp?), a psychology
programmed away from dopey cigarette smoking and binge drinking, and maybe
freckles if you like them.

   We sit on the cusp of a new world in which the ability to genetically
engineer our children, as well as reupholster our own organs, promises to become
routine rather than exotic. Just as old definitions of life proved ethically
problematic once medicine understood pregnancy better (would people fight over
abortion if everyone agreed a child before birth is not conscious?), our
traditional ideas of how we should control our bodies and those of our children
look increasingly fragile in the face of "reprogenetics," the new medical field
that unites reproductive and genetic technology.

   Among the smartest and best-equipped thinkers to address these issues -
despite no known manipulation of either's genes by their parents - are Ronald M.
Green, director of Dartmouth College's Ethics Institute and cofounder of the
Office of Genome Ethics at the National Institutes of Health, and Michael J.
Sandel, the Harvard government professor who served on President Bush's Council
on Bioethics that published the 2003 report "Beyond Therapy" (a document that
opposed various uses of genetic intervention for human "enhancement").

   Green and Sandel come at the subject from sharply different angles, making
reading them together particularly useful.

   You should read Green's book first because it's enormously more detailed,
reportorial, imaginative and precise in explaining the science involved and the
options we face. Green visits crucial researchers in Philadelphia, Salt Lake
City and elsewhere, plumbs popular culture treatments of the issues from H.G.
Wells' The Time Machine through the film Gattaca (1997) and the fiction of
Octavia Butler, and integrates philosophical perspectives from his onetime
teacher John Rawls as well as Jewish and Christian theologians.

   Green even responds to an earlier version of Sandel's book - the article in
the Atlantic from which Sandel's book grew. Agree with Green or not, Babies by
Design consistently and brilliantly offers a persuasive brief for carefully and
wisely moving forward.

   Whether it's extending our life spans, genetically prescreening our babies,
expanding tissue regeneration, or any of a number of other avenues, Green
believes we must make "deliberate interventions into our own and our children's
genetic makeup - to both prevent disease and enhance human life." He foresees
engineer-parents reducing family fighting (by preselecting for less aggressive
behavior) and argues it's normal for gene wizardry to evolve from therapeutic
uses to sheer enhancement, just as plastic surgery did. He urges the reader to
distinguish today's science from the discredited eugenics of the 19th and 20th
centuries because today's technologies arrive as choices for the individual, not
state-directed programs.

   We have, Green concludes, always tried to make ourselves healthier, better
and better looking (largely succeeding over the centuries), and nothing's going
to stop us from doing so in the imminent age of the "$1,000 genome." When
genetic profiles come down far enough in price, everyone and his or her doctor
will have to confront these choices. "The time to start talking about this
challenge," Green warns, "is now."

   By contrast, in The Case Against Perfection, Sandel argues against Western
science's bent since Francis Bacon to control nature whenever it can. Choosing
our children's qualities, he contends, may not only impair their autonomy and
skew our desired egalitarian social landscape, but will - this is Sandel's most
distinctive point - deny us our sense of life as a "gift," an "endowment" that
should exceed our control.

   Sandel prefers that we reject a "stance of mastery and dominion that fails to
appreciate the gifted character of human powers and achievements," that treats
children as "objects of our design." He extrapolates from this into criticism of
"hyperparenting," the intense management of one's children for success.

   Like Green, Sandel ponders a phenomenon at the top of the news last week -
the use of enhancement drugs and gene "therapies" in sports. Like Green, Sandel
points out that the history of sports is full of activities once thought to
alter fair competition into unfair competition - e.g., the use of shoes by
runners - but later judged perfectly natural, the way munching an energy bar is
today.

   Unlike Green, who asks - in a chapter titled "Creating the Superathlete" -
"What's wrong with gene doping, and why shouldn't we regard it as just another
tool, like better food or innovative training techniques, to improve
competitiveness?" Sandel sees a difference between what enhances a sport and
what turns it into "spectacle."

   Still, they share the view that bans on particular substances or practices in
sports are just conventions of a particular time. That implies a useful
guideline for analysts of last week's Mitchell Report: Distinguish ethical
issues about following current rules from future issues about the relation of
"enhancement science" to athletic performance. What's happening in baseball just
shows what an impact new science can have on settled ways of life.

   Is Green right that we always fear change and exhibit a "status-quo bias"?
Should we heed Sandel's warning that the future of human solidarity is at stake?
Green, with a greater grasp of the science, emphasizes medicine's many victories
for humankind. Sandel, a savvy student of political history, notes how often
exploitation of new science has led to disaster through pollution, global
warming, industrialized genocide and nuclear proliferation.

   Both, however, agree on one crucial truth: We all need much greater literacy
in the ethical concepts and scientific information necessary to make informed
decisions about these choices, especially given, as Green reports, "how fast the
science is moving."

   One solution is as old as Gutenberg. Before you plan that baby or fit
together the crib, pick up these genetically engineered progenies, so to speak,
of Dr. Spock's Baby and Child Care.

   Contact book critic Carlin Romano

   at 215-854-5615 or cromano@phillynews.com.


GRAPHIC: Photograph by: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2007


                              408 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 The Columbus Dispatch
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                            December 7, 2007 Friday
                               Home Final Edition

SECTION: FEATURES - LIFE & ARTS; Pg. 01D

LENGTH: 753 words

HEADLINE: AN OHIO LIFE / MEGAN SCHLAEGEL;
Loyal friend looked out for others

BYLINE: Matt Tullis, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   Some people have a gift for living life to its fullest. In this occasional
feature, Life & Arts remembers them.

   Melissa Karl stood in the cold rain for almost three hours the Sunday after
Thanksgiving clutching a fuzzy red, black and gray teddy bear. Across the bear's
chest was a bandaged heart, made of red construction paper.

   A short letter taped to the bear's shoulder told its story:

   Karl's father had passed away unexpectedly in 2002 when she was a senior at
Graham High School in Champaign County. Classmate Megan Schlaegel gave her the
bear, which for Karl came to symbolize the permanence of friendship.

   On that dreary night, Karl decided to return the bear to Megan. She hugged
Jerry and Lynn Schlaegel, Megan's parents, and laid the bear down beside her
friend's casket.

   "It was heart-wrenching," Karl said.

   Megan Schlaegel died Thanksgiving morning after she lost control of her car
and crashed into a tree. The Dublin resident was driving from her parents' home
outside Urbana to a family gathering. She was 24.

   * * *

   When you die, how many people will come to your visitation or funeral?

   Jerry Schlaegel wonders as much; he knows the number won't come close to what
he and Lynn witnessed during their daughter's calling hours.

   On Nov. 25, they stood for more than nine hours in the Walter-Schoedinger
Funeral Home in Urbana, along with son Chris and his wife, Annie. From 1 p.m.
until well after 10, they hugged, cried and talked about their daughter and
sister.

   One by one, story by story, the mourners gave Megan back to her family. The
Schlaegels quickly learned that Megan was special to more people than they could
have imagined.

   Her friends included the bartender from the Lodge Bar in Columbus, Megan's
favorite hangout; the entire staff of J. Alexander's restaurant, where she
worked as a server three days a week; a representative from the president of
Ohio University, from which Megan graduated in 2006.

   "She helped so many people," Mr. Schlaegel said. "She gave everything she
had."

   The mourners arrived from all over the country. They included former
boyfriends and parents of former boyfriends.

   Many said the same thing: Megan changed their lives.

   * * *

   From Megan's MySpace page:

   I'm pretty simple.

   I'm emotional but mostly I like to laugh.

   I care about others; often too much.

   I'm a great friend but I expect my friends to be great.

   I just want to be proud of who I am when I look in the mirror every night.

   Her family adds to that page now, telling stories about Megan because the
memories are all they have left:

   Megan was a quilter but hadn't quite finished a wedding quilt for Chris and
Annie, who were married in June.

   In high school, she invited 23 classmates to her house the night of a
homecoming dance because they were all too shy to find dates. Then, everyone
went to the dance together.

   When she was 7, she struck up a conversation with then-Sen. Bob Dole outside
the U.S. Capitol.

   For as long as anyone could remember, she had wanted to be a pediatrician.
She mailed an application to medical school about a month ago.

   * * *

   Megan continued to work at J. Alexander's on the North Side even after her
promotion at the Research Institute of Nationwide Children's Hospital.

   She was part of a team researching cures for muscular dystrophy, playing a
large role in establishing a screening program for central Ohio newborns. Megan
often had the task of persuading parents to have their newborns tested for the
disease. She usually succeeded.

   "She believed in the cause she was working for," said her roommate, Danielle
Vail, "so it was easy for her to sit down with parents of babies who were 10
hours old and explain the benefits."

   In a letter to her parents, Dr. Jerry Mendell, director of the Center for
Gene Therapy at Children's, said the program wouldn't have gotten off the ground
without Megan.

   "We are really struggling right now," Mendell said this week.

   * * *

   Jerry and Lynn Schlaegel were home from the crash site for less than an hour
when their phone rang.

   On the line was a representative from Mercy Memorial Hospital in Urbana,
wondering about organ donation.

   During the next 30 minutes, Mr. Schlaegel gave away Megan's heart valves,
blood vessels, skin, veins, arteries, bones and connective tissues.

   As painful as the process was, it was also easy.

   Megan had wanted to be an organ donor since she took pre-med classes and held
human organs.

   "She would have made a wonderful doctor," her father said. "She was going to
heal and make people better."

   Through the organ donations, Megan will still do that.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Megan Schlaegel

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2008


                              409 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Cincinnati Enquirer (Ohio)

                            December 2, 2007 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1546 words

HEADLINE: Fighting cancer, and her insurer

BYLINE: Peggy O'Farrell pofarrell@enquirer.com

BODY:

   Experimental treatment tab may be $200K

   PAYING FOR HEALTH CARE

   For years, Connie Hudson has told thousands of women and girls that breast
cancer isn't a death sentence.

   The story can have a happy ending with early detection and treatment, she
said.

   It worked for her when she learned she had breast cancer in 1999. A
lumpectomy, followed by radiation and chemotherapy, sent the cancer packing.

   Once healthy, Hudson and a handful of women formed the Cincinnati chapter of
the Sisters Network, a support group for women of color who've survived breast
cancer.

   In August, Hudson, 48, learned her cancer was back, this time in her spine.

   Radiation therapy stopped it from spreading, but it's still there, a
contained clump of malignant cells clustered just behind her breastbone.

   Now, the Woodlawn woman's story is starting a new chapter.

   An experimental therapy might kill the cancer in her spine, but her health
insurance company, Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield and Blue Shield in Ohio, won't
pay for the treatment.

   "At the end of the day, I'm just like a person who doesn't have insurance.
How can that be? I've paid thousands and thousands to this company," she said.

   Stories like Hudson's play out across the country.

   Who should pay?

   Medical advances like stem cell transplants and gene therapy hold hope for
desperately ill Americans, but who should pay for the unproven and often
astronomically expensive treatments?

   Employers regularly wrestle with the question as the cost of health care
coverage climbs.

   In 2007, health benefits costs rose 6.1 percent - twice the rate of inflation
- according to Mercer's National Survey of Employer-Sponsored Health Plans.

   Health-care costs are beginning to take a bigger chunk out of employers'
budgets than wages and materials, the survey of 3,000 employers found, and fewer
employers offer workers health insurance. This year, 61 percent of employers
surveyed offered health insurance, down from 63 percent last year.

   Workers are also feeling the increase as they see bigger and bigger
deductions taken from their paychecks for their health-care coverage.

   Among employers with 500 or more workers surveyed by Mercer, deductibles
jumped an average of 11 percent.

   It's natural that consumers expect to get their money back, said Gary
Claxton, director of the health-care marketplace project for the Kaiser Family
Foundation, a health-care philanthropy that studies coverage and cost issues.

   But the fact is, all of those dollars paid by all those workers pay for
treatment for just a fraction of the members in most insurance plans.

   "Health insurance pools risks," Claxton said. "Most years, a large percentage
of the payout is on behalf of a relatively small share of people. It's not
something where you're pulling out your share every time."

   Insurers bank on the fact that most of their customers won't need coverage
for a catastrophic illness, such as cancer or an organ transplant.

   When they're wrong, Claxton said, "that's when health plans go bankrupt."

   Appeal under review

   Kim Ashley, an Anthem spokeswoman, issued the following statement:

   "Experimental/investigational procedures are not covered under the terms of
Anthem certificates because these procedures are not yet proven to be safe and
effective by the medical community. This is determined by our medical policy
which takes into consideration peer-reviewed medical literature, external
clinical research and evidence-based medicine."

   In October, Anthem officials said the treatment was experimental and
medically unnecessary.

   Hudson and her doctor are appealing Anthem's decision.

   Hudson's appeal will be considered by a doctor experienced in stem-cell and
bone-marrow transplants, Ashley said.

   If Anthem still denies coverage, Hudson can appeal to the Ohio Department of
Insurance for an independent review. Kentucky law also allows for an independent
review of health claims denials.

   Ashley and others in the health insurance industry say insurers pay for
treatments shown by research to work.

   "I don't think expense (of a treatment) is the issue," said Mohit M. Ghose, a
spokesman for America's Health Insurance Plan, an industry organization
representing some 1,300 health insurers

   "In general, what drives coverage is the medical evidence behind the
intervention for a particular condition for that particular individual. The
second thing that drives coverage is the ability of the covered individual or
the employer to have that particular service or intervention as part of their
package, meaning their ability to pay for that coverage."

   Not all experimental treatments work, Ghose said. He cited the use of
then-experimental bone marrow transplants to treat late-stage breast cancer in
the 1990s. Bone marrow transplants are, in essence, a more primitive form of
stem cell transplants.

   When insurers refused to pay for the treatments, several states passed laws
mandating coverage.

   But in 2000, studies were released showing that the transplants actually made
all but a handful of patients sicker, Ghose said.

   Ghose's organization and its members are lobbying for the establishment of an
independent review board charged with determining whether insurers should pay
for new treatments, whether they're still in the clinical trials stage or have
recently won approval from the Food and Drug Administration.

   "One of the things we've said as an industry is we must have research
available to back up whether an intervention is safe and effective," he said. "I
think consumers demand that. Employers demand that."

   Some data show stem cell transplants can be effective treating certain
cancers, including some forms of lymphoma and leukemia, but the numbers aren't
there for breast cancer, said Rami Komrokji, a hematologist-oncologist and
director of the leukemia/lymphoma unit at University Hospital and the University
of Cincinnati.

   For now, guidelines from the National Cancer Institute and the American
Society of Clinical Oncology stipulate stem cell transplants to treat breast
cancer should only be used in research trials.

   Some insurance companies pay at least a portion of the costs incurred when
patients participate in clinical trials, Komrokji said, though patients may have
to file an appeal to get the coverage.

   She worries about waiting

   Right now, Hudson's cancer is contained. She worries that if she waits for
treatment until the cancer starts spreading, it will be too late.

   She's healthy enough now to argue with the insurance company, and her
employer is helping.

   "What about people who don't have a voice, who can't speak up for
themselves?" Hudson asked. "What are they supposed to do?"

   She and her employer, Huntington Bank, have paid Anthem premiums for years,
Hudson said, and she feels she's entitled to something in return for the
investment.

   "I've worked all my life and paid into the insurance all these years," she
said. "I don't see why they won't pay now. Never in a million years did I think
the day would come when I couldn't get health care that I needed."

   This year, she pays about $173 a month for health coverage and puts money in
a health savings account.

   Next year, her premiums will increase to about $215.

   Whatever the outcome of the appeal, Hudson is going ahead with the stem cell
transplant. She'll start the treatment regimen - an aggressive course of
chemotherapy, followed by a transplant of stem cells harvested from her own body
- on Friday at Wayne State University's Karmanos Cancer Institute in Detroit.

   Her oncologist and radiologist say the experimental regimen is the best and
most cost-effective option. She hasn't sought opinions from other doctors.

   "This is the only form of treatment that's been offered to me," Hudson said.
"This is what I need to do. Yes, it's a research protocol. But they didn't do
liver transplants, eye surgery, heart transplants without research."

   Hudson says she doesn't have the money to pay for the treatment - a tab she
estimates will total $200,000 or more.

   "I don't know anyone who has that kind of money just sitting around in case
they need health care," she says. "People are using their savings for their
retirement or their kids' college."

   Friends and family are pitching in for Hudson. Two accounts have been set up
to accept donations.

   Hudson has already decided her story will have a happy ending, whatever the
outcome.

   "This is the road I've been chosen to walk," she said. "Whatever happens, I'm
going to have a new story to tell."

   To appeal an insurance claim denial

   Rules vary by state, but Ohio and Kentucky both allow consumers to appeal to
a third party if their health insurer denies coverage for a claim. Consumers
have to go through the company's appeals process before contacting the state.

   In Ohio, contact the Ohio Department of Insurance at 1-800-686-1526 or
www.ohioinsurance.gov.

   In Kentucky, contact the Kentucky Department of Insurance at 1-800-595-6053
or www.doi.state.ky.us.

   To learn more about appealing a claims denial, visit the Kaiser Family
Foundation and Consumer Union's guide online at www.kff.org/consumerguide

   The Enquirer / Gary Landers

   Connie Hudson of Woodlawn is battling with her insurance company over an
experimental stem cell transplant to treat her cancer. Despite the insurance
company's refusal to pay, Hudson plans to start treatment this week. Friends and
family are pitching in to help.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2007


                              410 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                           November 27, 2007 Tuesday
                                 SECOND EDITION

SECTION: METRO; Pg. D8

LENGTH: 651 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy study resumes following inquiry into death Participants
now won't get injections if they have signs of infection. The participant who
died had a slight fever.

BYLINE: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   A nationwide gene therapy study halted after an Illinois arthritis patient
died will resume with one main change: Participants won't get injections if they
have signs of infections, the experimental treatment's developer said Monday.

   While an investigation indicated gene therapy injections didn't kill Jolee
Mohr, Targeted Genetics Corp. is being cautious in resuming the study of what it
considers a potentially promising treatment for inflammatory arthritis.

   Mohr had a slight fever - a sign of infection - when she received the last of
two injections at a Springfield, Ill., clinic on July 2. She died three weeks
later after doctors discovered a massive fungal infection and internal bleeding.

   Targeted Genetics says the investigation found its product didn't contribute
to Mohr's condition, but it has chosen a "conservative" approach in resuming the
experiment, company chief executive officer H. Stewart Parker said in a
telephone interview Monday.

   Remaining study participants will be told of Mohr's death, the company said.

   Investigation participants included the company, the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration and the University of Chicago Medical Center, where Mohr was
transferred after she fell ill and where she died. Final results are to be
discussed at a federal gene therapy committee meeting on Dec. 3 at the National
Institutes of Health outside Washington.

   Panelists at a previous NIH committee meeting in September had raised
concerns about Mohr receiving the experimental treatment when she already had
signs of illness.

   Questions also had been raised about whether genetically engineered viruses
injected into patients' joints as part of the experiment might spread throughout
the body, causing illness.

   But molecular tests on Mohr found only trace amounts in tissues outside her
joints, not enough to have contributed to her death, said Dr. Kyle Hogarth, a U
of C physician who treated Mohr after she fell ill.

   Seattle-based Targeted Genetics believes arthritis medicine Mohr already was
taking, which has been linked to an increased risk for fungal infections, likely
played a role.

   Hogarth said "it's great" that the study is resuming because the experimental
treatment could be useful. But he also said troubling questions remain,
including why participants will be allowed to continue taking arthritis medicine
that could complicate efforts to prove that the gene treatment is safe.

   Hogarth also noted that Mohr's own doctor recruited her for the study, which
he said raises ethical concerns because it could have made Mohr mistakenly
assume an unproven treatment would make her better.

   Alan Milstein, an attorney for Mohr's husband, Robb, said the family still
believes her death was avoidable.

   The study involved injecting patients with trillions of genetically
engineered viruses designed to help the body produce an inflammation-fighting
protein.

   The FDA halted the study after Mohr's death but on Wednesday told the company
it could resume after reviewing safety information on all 127 participants.

   "We believe this is a vindication for the product and for the gene therapy
field in general," Parker said.

   Mohr's death was one of two "serious adverse events" in the study that were
reported to the FDA. The second was in a patient whose knee developed a severe
infection-related arthritis. Investigators said that was probably related to the
gene therapy, but the company said the patient recovered.

   Patients at 22 sites around the country were to receive two injections. When
it resumes in coming weeks, the study will target the 35 patients who had not
received the second injection.

   The revised study protocol calls for each of them to be told about Mohr's
death before receiving the second injection; then they will be followed for 30
weeks.

   Even if some decide to drop out because of Mohr's death, Parker said the
company expects to be able to proceed and expand the study late next year.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2007


                              411 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 26, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 604 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Study to Resume After Woman's Death

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Federal regulators have given permission for a company to resume a gene
therapy study in which a woman died, the company is expected to announce today.

     The company, Targeted Genetics, said the decision by the Food and Drug
Administration is effectively an acknowledgment that the gene therapy did not
cause the woman's death.

     ''I think it's a vindication for the product, for the company and really
for gene therapy,'' H. Stewart Parker, the chief executive of Targeted Genetics,
said Friday in an interview.

     The death had threatened to be another black eye for gene therapy, a field
that has not had much success in treating disease and that suffered a setback in
1999 when a teenager died while participating in a clinical trial at the
University of Pennsylvania.

     A spokeswoman for the F.D.A. said the agency could not comment on its
communications with companies involving drugs in clinical trials. The agency
halted the clinical trial in July after the death of the woman, Jolee Mohr, 36,
of Taylorville, Ill.

     Her husband, Robb Mohr, said yesterday that he had not been convinced that
the gene therapy was not a cause of Ms. Mohr's death and said the trial should
not resume.

     ''I think it's very reckless,'' he said in an interview. ''They still don't
know what caused her death. They still haven't reported on her death.''

     Gene therapy involves implanting genes, usually carried by viruses, into a
patient's cells to induce them to produce some needed protein. Ms. Mohr, the
mother of a young daughter, died three weeks after receiving her second
injection of a gene meant to reduce inflammation and treat her rheumatoid
arthritis.

     The direct cause of her death appeared to be a fungal infection,
histoplasmosis, according to testimony at a review of her case in September by
an advisory committee to the National Institutes of Health. But the committee
said it was too early to conclude that the gene therapy had not been a factor,
perhaps by suppressing Ms. Mohr's immune system.

     The committee, called the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, is scheduled
to review the case again on Dec. 3.

     But since September, Targeted Genetics has presented new data showing that
the gene and the viral carrier, which were injected into Ms. Mohr's knee, had
not spread widely through her body.

     It has also presented data it says suggests that the level of immune
suppression from the gene therapy was minuscule compared with that from Humira,
an arthritis drug Ms. Mohr had been taking. Humira's label has a warning about
the risk of fungal infections.

     But Mr. Mohr said it was impossible to distinguish the immune suppression
caused by the gene therapy from that caused by the Humira.

     Ms. Parker, the Targeted Genetics executive, said patients wanting to
continue in the trial would have to sign a new consent form, which was being
revised to reflect Ms. Mohr's death. And review boards at all trial sites will
have to approve new safeguards for the trial, like not treating patients who
have fevers.

     The early stage trial, which had 127 participants, was mainly devised to
test the safety of the treatment. When it was halted, about 35 people had not
yet received the second of two injections. Ms. Stewart said that while some
patients could be reluctant to rejoin the trial, the company thought many would
take part.

     Dr. Mark A. Kay, a Stanford University professor active in gene therapy but
not connected with Targeted Genetics, said the resumption of the trial was
appropriate. ''It's really tragic this woman died,'' he said, ''but it really
didn't appear to be due at all to the gene therapy.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2007


                              412 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 26, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1167 words

HEADLINE: News Summary

BODY:

   INTERNATIONALA3-11

     Musharraf Rival Returns, Hoping to Regain Power

     Nawaz Sharif, a former Pakistan prime minister, arrived home from exile to
a tumultuous welcome, providing a new rallying point for the country's
disillusioned opposition and setting the stage for an overnight shift of the
political scene.A1

     Syria Joins Mideast Talks

     Syria announced that it would attend this week's Middle East peace meeting
in Annapolis, Md., joining the rest of the Arab League participants in a
turnabout that represented a victory for the Bush administration.A11

     The Annapolis conference is the culmination of Secretary of State
Condoleezza Rice's efforts to push the Bush administration toward mediating
between the Israelis and the Palestinians. A1

     Arctic's Treacherous Waters

     Months before the sinking of the Explorer, the first ship built
specifically to ferry tourists to Antarctica, the United States and Britain
warned that tourism to the polar region could be a disaster in the making.A3

     Baghdad Blast Kills 9

     A car bomb killed nine people near Baghdad's medical district. It was the
second major bombing in the city in three days.A9

     Bangladesh's Other Storm

     The cyclone that ravaged the country this month sees its counterpart in a
political storm. A state of emergency exists, curtailing freedoms, a fight
against corruption rages, and the economy is tottering under pressure from
rising oil prices and flood relief efforts. A6

     Police Subdue Putin Protests

     Riot police officers aggressively broke up a rally against President
Vladimir V. Putin in St. Petersburg, detaining numerous marchers, including two
prominent politicians.A6

     Tear Gas at Kurdish Protest

     The police in southern Turkey used water cannon, tear gas and batons
against Kurds who were protesting efforts to shut down a Kurdish political
party.A11

     Cafe Monitors Eating Habits

     A Dutch university restaurant wired with sensors and recording devices is
devoted to discerning what makes people eat and drink the way they do.A4

     Chavez's Row with Colombia

     Venezuela and Colombia moved further toward a diplomatic crisis after an
exchange of insults between President Hugo Chavez and his Colombian counterpart,
President Alvaro Uribe, left.A6

     NATIONALA14-20

     Aides Forge Networks

     As Iowa Caucuses Near

     The outcome of the Iowa caucuses hinges on creating a strong and loyal
person-to-person network of influential residents, and hundreds of Democratic
and Republican campaign aides, stationed in Iowa, are responsible for building
and sustaining these contacts throughout the state's 99 counties.  A1

     Green Initiative in Chicago

     Chicago has decided to retrofit its 2,000 miles of alleys with
environmentally sustainable road-building materials under a new Green Alley
initiative, something experts say is among the most ambitious public street
makeover plans in the country.  A14

     Changes for a Denver Avenue

     In Denver, the famous and notorious drag of Colfax Avenue, is showing signs
of change as ambitious new zoning laws and an increased police presence are
drawing businesses and driving down crime. And some residents worry that the
resurgence will sanitize the thoroughfare's legendary grit.  A15

     Society of Charity Alumni

     The LAFF society , which stands for Life After the Ford Foundation, is an
alumni association for former foundation employees. It is perhaps the first such
organization in the philanthropic community and has inspired former employees of
other charities to form their own groups and share their past experiences.  A16

     Giuliani Spars With Rivals

     As the presidential campaigns ratcheted up for the post-Thanksgiving
countdown to the first nominating contests, Rudolph W. Giuliani found himself
under fierce attacks from his rivals, Mitt Romney and Fred D. Thompson.  A20

     Mr. Thompson recommended that people have the option to pay a simplified
tax on their income. The plan was advocated by, among others, the Republican
Study Committee, a conservative caucus.  A20 Gaining Ground on Fires

     The fire that burned nearly 5,000 acres and destroyed about 50 homes in
Malibu over the weekend was mostly contained yesterday, officials said.  A18

     SCIENCE/HEALTH

     U.S. to Lift Gene Study Ban

     Federal regulators have given permission for Targeted Genetics to resume a
gene therapy study in which a woman died, effectively an acknowledgment that the
gene therapy did not cause the woman's death.  A16

     NEW YORK/REGIONA22-24

     What Workers Endure To Make Manhole Covers

     A photographer's recent visit to a foundry in India, where New York's
manhole covers are made, revealed a scene like something from the Middle Ages:
sandal-clad workers toiling amid flame, smoke and liquid iron, with scant safety
precautions.A1

     Yes, Gum Tasting Is a Job

     Tasters at Cadbury's Gum Center of Excellence in Whippany, N.J., play a
crucial role in the process of creating new flavors. But they are also the envy
of their friends: Four mornings a week they sit and chew gum, then report how it
tastes. Then they get paid.A22

     More Women in Hard Hats

     Since 2005, more women have gone into the building trades in New York City
than at any other period in history. Though construction sites are
male-dominated, the appearance of more women is a result of a campaign by Mayor
Michael R. Bloomberg and some unions. A22

     BUSINESS DAYC1-8

     Black Friday Reports

     With stores dangling steep discounts and consumers worried about the
economy, retail sales surged on the day after Thanksgiving, but the amount of
money each shopper spent fell, according to two reports.  C1

     Video Games Face Off

     This year, one of the most watched rivalries in the video game business is
between two games that put players in the role of rock musicians.  C1

     F.C.C.'s Cable Powers

     With the Federal Communications Commission set to vote on a report that
would give them  expanded powers over the cable industry, the industry's efforts
to kill the proposal may be paying off.  C1

     Life on the Picket Line

     As striking writers and studio executives continue to negotiate, pickets
are finding that striking in Hollywood is not that bad. Many say they are
enjoying networking, taping YouTube videos,organizing theme days and dreaming up
placard slogans.  C1

     Business DigestC2

     ARTSE1-10

     Schlesinger Papers at Library

     The New York Public Library aquired  excerpts from the historian Arthur M.
Schlesinger Jr.'s journals, including additional pages, datebooks, sound
recordings and correspondence between Mr. Schlesinger and figures including Dean
Acheson, Truman Capote, Lauren Bacall and Bill Clinton.B1

     OBITUARIESA21

     John H. Noble

     An American who never knew why the Soviets imprisoned him in their
notorious gulag, but not only lived to write books on the experience but also
recovered his family's company and castle in the former East Germany, he was
84.A21

     EDITORIALA22-23

     Editorials: You're eating that?; faux fiscal discipline; test and switch;
Verlyn Klinkenborg on true November.

     Columns: Roger Cohen, Paul Krugman.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2007


                              413 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                            November 26, 2007 Monday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A03

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 653 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Study Is Allowed to Resume;
Woman's Death Had Raised Concerns

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration has given a Seattle company permission to
resume its human tests of an experimental, gene-based arthritis treatment whose
safety came into question this summer after a 36-year-old study participant
died.

   Although a final report from outside investigators will not be made public
until Dec. 3, the regulatory agency has concluded that the death was not related
to the treatment, said a spokeswoman for the company, Targeted Genetics.

   "We're very pleased to have the study resume," said the spokeswoman, Stacie
Byars. "We think this is a real vindication for gene therapy as a whole."

   As many as 35 patients are still eligible to get one more injection of the
experimental product, Byars said, adding that the company recognizes that some
may opt out because of the death.

   The treatment involves the injection of viruses engineered to produce an
immune-suppressing protein. The protein helps block the inflammatory process
that goes awry in the joints of people with rheumatoid arthritis.

   Jolee Mohr, of Taylorville, Ill., died July 24,  about three weeks after
getting trillions of the genetically engineered viruses injected into her right
knee as part of an experiment sponsored by Targeted Genetics. She first became
ill the day she got that injection, eventually dying of a fungal infection and
massive internal bleeding.

   The timing of her death raised the question of whether the treatment
contributed to her death.

   But investigations by company scientists, a National Institutes of Health
expert panel and doctors at the University of Chicago, where Mohr was
transferred before she died, found no evidence that the treatment was at fault.

   Kyle Hogarth, an intensive-care unit physician at the University of Chicago
who cared for Mohr and was involved in the investigation, said yesterday that he
feels reasonably certain that the treatment did not kill her. But he is still
bothered by the study's design, he said, because it allows participants to keep
taking prescription  medications that cannot be distinguished from the
immune-suppressing protein made by the treatment's gene-modified viruses.

   That makes it impossible to fully sort out whether problems that arise during
the experiment may be caused by the treatment or the drugs the subjects are
taking, he said.

   Although conventional arthritis  medications can, on rare occasions, make
patients especially susceptible to fungal infections, Hogarth and others have
questioned whether the gene treatment left Mohr especially defenseless.

   "I think they have a horrible design," Hogarth said. "It muddies the
picture."

   Hogarth also echoed a concern raised by others in the course of the
investigation: that Mohr was recruited into the study by her personal physician,
who stood to profit from each new patient he enrolled. Medical ethicists have
criticized such arrangements as posing a potential conflict of interest.

   Contacted by a reporter yesterday, Robb Mohr, Jolee Mohr's widower, said he
was unaware that the company had gained permission to resume the study.

   "It seems weird that they are allowing it to go ahead, especially on patients
who are already taking immune-system drugs," Mohr said. "To me, it is reckless
experimentation."

   He said he and his lawyers have not yet had substantive talks with the
company, pending the release of results from the National Institutes of Health
investigation. Those results, which are to be made public at a meeting a week
from today, conclude that the engineered viruses do not appear to have
replicated in Mohr's body -- an initial concern.

   Byars said the protocol for the experiment has been changed. From now on, she
said, participants will not be allowed to get an injection of the experimental
product if they have a fever, as Jolee Mohr did the day she got her shot.

   "We know this has been incredibly tough on the Mohr family," Byars said, "and
we again offer our condolences to the family."

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2007


                              414 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2007 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                            November 25, 2007 Sunday
                                 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: B; Pg. 1 MetFront

LENGTH: 799 words

HEADLINE: SUNDAY CONVERSATION;
Pediatric chief cites years of progress

BYLINE: ALEXIS GRANT, Staff

BODY:

   For 30 years, Dr. Ralph Feigin has served as Texas Children's Hospital's
physician-in-chief and chairman of the department of pediatrics at Baylor
College of Medicine. Talking with Chronicle reporter Alexis Grant, the
specialist in infectious diseases takes a look back at the state of pediatrics
when he moved to Houston three decades ago and offers some advice for parents.

   Q: What are the main differences between how sick children are treated today
and when you started at the hospital in 1977?

   A: When I arrived at Texas Children's, we really had nothing in the way of
intensive care units. We also had a far more limited repertoire of pediatric
subspecialists, and what they could do for children was far more limited.

   In my own field of infectious disease, for example, the number of antibiotics
available to treat children was probably about a third of what we have today.
And antiviral medication, except for one or two drugs, was not a possibility.

   We certainly couldn't do the type of organ transplants that we do today.

   There was no cell therapy, no gene therapy. It was just like day and night.

   Q: Is this where you expected you'd end up when you started your career?

   A: I always knew I wanted to be a doctor, from the time I was 3 or 4. I
didn't know I was going to be a pediatrician until I was a third-year medical
student.

   I never really had pictured myself as taking on more and more administrative
work. I never truthfully wanted to get away from the bedside and seeing complex
problems and teaching residents, and so that's what I do to this very day.

   Q: If you had to choose another profession, what would you do?

   A: I really wouldn't know, because I've loved medicine so much. I guess I'd
play baseketball, but I'm not tall enough.

   Q: How old are you? Do you have any plans to retire?

   A: Sixty-nine. I hope not. I work every day. I enjoy what I do immensely. Of
course, I have a family, which to me is fundamental. I have a wife, three
children and six grandchildren.

   Q: Do your grandchildren help you gain perspective on children's health?

   A: One of our grandchildren has a neurologically handicapping condition. I've
always been a very empathic person. But it definitely helps in understanding
what other families are going through on a minute-to-minute and day-by-day
basis.

   Q: Do you think the issue of MRSA, drug-resistant staph infection, has been
overblown?

   A: Oh, no. We'll see several thousand children every year at Texas Children's
with this infection, compared with 10 or 15 in 1977. So it's a dramatic
increase. It can get in your bloodstream and kill you.

   Q: It's flu season. What's the best way to keep kids living under one roof
from spreading germs?

   A: I wish I had a magic formula. The most important thing you can do is wash
your hands and wash objects the child touches repeatedly. Viruses, of course,
can be transmitted in the air, and some distancing, instead of people being on
top of each other, can be helpful. But it may not be practical.

   Q: Why do pediatricians' offices have toys for kids to play with, when it
increases the chances they'll catch something while they are there?

   A: I don't have problems with toys that can be washed and sterilized. I
recognize that, in the average pediatrician's office, that's not going to happen
between each person. But at least you can wash them in the evening.

   Q: Now that some infant cough and cold remedies have been pulled from the
shelves, what should parents do for toddlers with those symptoms?

   A: The most important thing for the common cold is time, taking in sufficient
fluids and getting appropriate rest. And while some of the cough medicines that
have been pulled certainly probably did help ameliorate the symptoms, they
didn't do anything for the disease.

   The medicines that are still on the shelves are the ones that have been
improved.

   Q: Texas has a significant number of children without health insurance. How
does that affect your hospital?

   A: About 48 percent are on Medicaid, CHIP or have no insurance. We do
everything we can with our resources to care for all children, but it puts a
tremendous strain on not just our hospital, but all resources in the community.
If everyone were covered, you could do so much more to extend care to more
people and do more research.

   Q: What parts of children's health are most lacking research?

   A: Preventing or treating neurodevelopmental diseases. That's part of the
reason that we've put together this pediatric neurological research institute at
Texas Children's. We currently have a lot of genetic tools. We have a tremendous
understanding of the development of the brain. We're not yet at the point where
we can take drugs or other pharmaceutical interventions and really apply them
across the board to making a long-term difference, except in a handful of those
diseases.

NOTES: alexis.grant@chron.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: 1. HEALING KIDS: Bedside care remains important today to Dr.
Ralph Feigin, who is seen with a patient at Texas Children's Hospital in 1979;
2. HEALTH ADVOCATE: Dr. Ralph Feigin laments that some children lack adequate
health coverage (P. 5)
ALL TEXAS CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL PHOTOS

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2007


                              415 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2007 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                          November 21, 2007 Wednesday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Science; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 867 words

HEADLINE: Advances: Time clock moves up for transplants

BYLINE: ANDY DWORKIN, The Oregonian

BODY:

   SUMMARY: Medical advances   | OHSU researchers soon will use the new method
to turn human skin cells into stem cells

   Time clock

   moves up

   for transplants

   ANDY DWORKIN

   In one week, two breakthroughs have revolutionized humanity's ability to turn
adult cells into embryo-like stem cells, say Oregon scientists who now are
working to make the cells.

   Oregon Health & Science University scientists announced last week that they
made versatile stem cells by cloning a monkey's skin cell, a first in primates.

   On Tuesday, Japanese and U.S. scientists working separately said they made
similar cells by genetically tweaking adult human cells with viruses. Both kinds
of cells appear to act like stem cells made from embryos, though more tests are
needed to confirm the similarity.

   The advances suggest that stem cells genetically identical to adult human
cells could soon be made without destroying embryos, an ethical problem that has
slowed stem cell research.

   "For me, part of the joy here is that the ethical impasse and the pressure to
have access to human eggs and embryos is going to pass quickly," said Dr. Markus
Grompe, director of OHSU's Oregon Stem Cell Center.

   More immediately, scientists can use the newly made stem cells to study
diseases and hunt for useful drugs. They also can transplant the cells back into
the adult DNA donors, to test whether stem cell treatments meet promises to
treat diabetes, strengthen damaged hearts and otherwise lengthen life.

   Those tests are expected first in monkeys, perhaps rhesus monkeys with
diabetes at Hillsboro's primate center. It probably will take years to finish
monkey tests and refine the new methods before transplants are considered in
humans.

   Several OHSU scientists plan to turn humans cells into embryo-like stem cells
through the "direct reprogramming" method outlined Tuesday.

   "We are going to take human skin cells that we have here and make stem cells
from them as soon as possible," Grompe said. With all the steps published, it
should take only a few months, he said.

   Scientists at the Oregon National Primate Research Center will make similar
cells from monkeys, said Shoukhrat Mitalipov, who led last week's cloned stem
cell study.

   Mitalipov's method, somewhat overshadowed by Tuesday's papers, will still be
used to study how stem cells can best be made and to create genetically altered
monkeys for research, Mitalipov and Grompe predicted. Such monkeys could help
scientists study brain diseases and other human ailments too complex to study in
nonprimates, the scientists said.

   Unlike adult cells with one job, such as forming hair or bone, embryonic stem
cells can turn into any kind of cell in the body. Doctors dream of growing stem
cells into tissue genetically identical to that of sick patients, then
transplanting the healthy tissue without fear of rejection.

   Obstacles overcome

   But scientists who hoped to turn human adult cells into embryonic stem cells
faced two obstacles so great they sometimes seemed impassable.

   One obstacle was the use of human eggs, which are expensive, tricky to
harvest and pose ethical questions. The other involved splicing foreign genes
into adult cells's DNA to reset their genetic clocks, which risks making mutant
cells and cancers.

   Now scientists have proved that they can overcome both obstacles.

   The Oregon work shows that researchers can make embryo-like stem cells in
monkeys without changing the donor cell's DNA, by using an egg to clone the
cell. Tuesday's breakthrough shows that cells can be reprogrammed without an
egg, by having viruses insert genes into the donor.

   It's as though you dreamed of rock 'n' roll, then different people invented
the guitar and the amplifier within seven days.

   "It's a huge change within a week," said Mitalipov, who added that he is
"quite sure that the future will be" direct reprogramming of cells without using
eggs. But he said science must find a way to avoid viruses that randomly stick
foreign genes into the donor cell's DNA.

   It should be fairly simple to avoid virus problems, Grompe said. He plans to
make his cells with viruses that don't splice DNA into a cell's chromosomes.

   Still, he said, two big challenges remain before stem cells could be used in
humans: Embryo-like stem cells tend to form tumors in tests. And scientists
haven't figured out how to spur human stem cells to form high-quality adult
cells worthy of transplant, such as the pancreas' cells that make insulin.

   Grompe plans to study genetic diseases with the stem cells made from human
skin, including Fanconi anemia, a rare genetic disorder that kills most victims
in their youth. The illness affects several Oregon families, including that of
University of Oregon President Dave Frohnmayer. He called the breakthroughs
"wonderful news," because stem cell treatments might be easier than other gene
therapy for Fanconi anemia.

   But families facing serious diseases know that a gap exists between growing
stem cells in a dish and healing people, said Mary Ellen Eiler, executive
director of the Eugene-based Fanconi Anemia Research Fund. "I think the families
have good reason to be hopeful, but good reason to be very, very cautious, too."

   Andy Dworkin: 503-221-8564; andydworkin@news.oregonian.com

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2007


                              416 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 The Columbus Dispatch
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                           November 20, 2007 Tuesday
                               Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS - SCIENCE; Pg. 04B

LENGTH: 811 words

HEADLINE: Tiny science, big advances;
Nanotechnology research looks at everything from more efficient lights to
artificial muscles

BYLINE: Kevin Mayhood, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   A coating of fibers too small for the eye to see makes water droplets on a
glass sheet act like marbles on a tabletop.

   Tilt the glass, and the droplets roll off.

   Flip the glass over, where the nanofibers have been treated with chemicals
that attract water, and water droplets flatten, turning a foggy glass clear
again.

   "The chemistry and morphology control the properties of the surface," said
Arthur J. Epstein, director of Ohio State University's Center for Materials
Research.

   Cool? Definitely. Practical? Getting there.

   With the right chemicals, these microscopic lawns made up of plastic fibers
can make coatings that can repel dirt or oil, or uncoil and hold DNA
outstretched for study.

   Fibers can conduct electricity and light up plastics. Buried under the skin,
they could work as an artificial muscle.

   The list goes on.

   The research is in the growing field of nanotechnology, a science that
manipulates materials at the molecular level to make everything from sun blocks
to stain-resistant clothing.

   At Ohio State, researchers have built nanoscaffolding on which to grow human
tissue, developed a process to squeeze DNA down to a size that might be usable
for gene therapy, found that nanoparticles injected in animals might help detect
cancer early and begun to develop new materials to gather solar energy.

   Epstein's former postdoctoral student Nan-Rong Chiou came up with a process
that grows plastic nanofibers -- about one-500th of the width of human hair --
in a uniform pattern.

   "Nobody realized you could do that," said Ric Kaner, a professor of inorganic
chemistry, materials science and engineering at UCLA and a director of the
California NanoSystems Institute.

   "People have been trying to figure this out for a number of years."

   Under a powerful microscope, the nanofibers resemble a putting green. Chiou
mixed weak concentrations of aniline, a component of dyes used in Oriental
carpets, with an oxidant called ammonium persulfate.

   He dipped a plastic film into the solution, and polyaniline fibers grew on
the surface. Polyaniline is a chain that links simple aniline molecules into a
complex molecule.

   The chemical reaction was halted when the film was rinsed in water. That's
when he got his uniform pattern.

   "Anything you can do to get them aligned and get them to grow where you want
to is a significant advance," said Sanjeev Manohar, a chemical engineering
professor at the University of Massachusetts, Lowell.

   Manohar has used plastic nanofibers that grow randomly to build tiny
transistors. He expects the OSU research to be useful in his work.

   "If you have a bunch of wires going one way instead of (resembling)
spaghetti, the electronic transport is more efficient."

   Kaner said the process holds a lot of promise.

   "It's certainly effective scientifically. Whether it makes things cheaper and
more accessible, it's hard for scientists to know."

   Epstein, Chiou and others at Ohio State are doing more research and have
found that they can coat almost any kind of material.

   Glass treated with the hydrophobic -- not capable of uniting with or
absorbing water -- coating could one day become self-cleaning windows.

   With L. James Lee, a chemical and biomolecular engineering professor, the
researchers have laid out patterns of hydrophilic and hydrophobic fibers that
draw fluids through channels.

   Epstein said if you put a light-emitting polymer on top of the nanofiber turf
and connect the positive charge from a battery to the turf and the negative
charge to the opposite end of the polymer, the device emits light using far less
electricity than a traditional incandescent bulb or fluorescent tube.

   Nanocoating also can be used to reduce static electricity. Epstein said that
a walk across a carpet creates enough static electricity to shock us when we
touch a doorknob. That can be reduced by coating a knob or even the soles of our
shoes so that electrons are released into the atmosphere.

   "You can change the properties so that you can conduct or insulate
electricity under the skin, whichever is desired," said Chiou, who is now senior
research and development manager for Nanomaterials Innovation Limited, a startup
with Lee, with offices at OSU.

   Chiou said he is particularly interested in medical uses, including
artificial muscles.

   When the researchers apply an electric charge to a film, one side can attract
or repel ions from polymer fibers. The action changes the length of fibers.
Shorten the fibers on one side, and the film curls like a closing fist. Lengthen
them and the film extends, like a fist opening. The researchers must determine
if the curling and opening action is strong enough to be useful.

   The scientists have applied for a patent and expect to work with industry to
further develop uses.

   The research is funded by the National Science Foundation Center for
Affordable Nanoengineering of Polymeric Biomedical Devices.

   kmayhood@dispatch.com

GRAPHIC: Photo, NEAL C. LAURON / DISPATCH PHOTOS, Above: Nanofiber researcher
Nan-Rong Chiou puts a drop of water on a piece of acetate coated with a poly-
mer that is hydrophobic -- not capable of uniting with or absorbing water.,
Right: Chiou, left, and Arthur J. Epstein, director of OSU's Center for
Materials Research, examine acetate coated with polymers., OSU, An electron
microscope reveals plastic fibers grown to conduct electricity.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2007


                              417 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2007 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            November 19, 2007 Monday

SECTION: METRO; HIGHER EDUCATION NOTES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 698 words

HEADLINE: Man is honoree at Dillard coronation;
First time 'Mr.' title bestowed at university

BYLINE: By John Pope, Staff writer

BODY:

   Dillard University's Coronation Ball on Friday night featured a new luminary:
the first Mr. Dillard University.

   The title, which the Student Government Association established, was bestowed
upon Kael Louis Saloy, an economics and finance major from New Orleans, who won
the title in an election. Veronica Lynette Sumner, a pre-medical student from
Little Rock, Ark., is the new Miss Dillard University.

   During his 2007-08 reign, Saloy said he plans to establish a leadership
development program called MOVE, which stands for Men of Vision and Excellence.
Sumner, a former cheerleading captain, has created a group she calls Real
Optimistic Sisters Extending Service, or ROSES, to help women become role models
and to be mentors for high school girls.

   Sumner and Saloy made their first post-ball appearance in Saturday's
homecoming parade.

   . . . . . . .

   DIRECTOR TAKING NEW POST: Dr. Darwin Prockop will leave his job as director
of Tulane University's Gene Therapy Center next summer to become director of the
Institute for Regenerative Medicine at Texas A&M University's medical school.

   Prockop, the center's founding director, said his appointment in College
Station will start in August.

   He came to Tulane in 2000 after being director of the Center for Gene Therapy
at MCP Hahnemann University in Philadelphia.

   Dr. Lee Hamm, chairman of the department of medicine in Tulane's medical
school, will be the interim director, said Dr. Benjamin Sachs, the school's
dean.

   . . . . . . .

   HONORS:

   -- Dr. Gerard J. Chiche, chairman of the department of prosthodontics at
Louisiana State University School of Dentistry, has been named this year's
recipient of the Greater New York Academy of Prosthodontics Foundation
Distinguished Lecturer Award.

   -- A three-member team from Loyola University's law school  --  Marisa
Escudero, Chris Otten and Brandon Robb  --  won the Stetson University
International Environmental Moot Court Competition in Gulfport, Fla.

   -- Flozell Daniels Jr., Tulane University's associate vice president in
charge of state and local affairs, has been named president and chief executive
officer of the Louisiana Disaster Relief Foundation.

   -- Demetrius Porche, dean of LSU's School of Nursing, was elected to a second
two-year term as president of the American Assembly for Men in Nursing.

   -- Dr. Edward Helm, associate dean for community and minority health
education at LSU's medical school, is this year's recipient of the Service Award
from the Association of American Medical Colleges' group dealing with student
and minority affairs.

   -- Tulane President Scott Cowen will receive an honorary doctorate Dec. 9 in
New York City from Yeshiva University at its 83rd annual Hanukkah dinner and
convocation. He will deliver the keynote address.

   -- Leonard Jack Jr., who holds the Jim Finks Endowed Chair of Health
Promotion at LSU's School of Public Health, has been elected to the Society of
Public Health Education's board of trustees.

   -- Dr. Nicolas Bazan, director of the LSU Health Sciences Center's
Neuroscience Center of Excellence, has received $850,000 from the Eye, Ear, Nose
& Throat Foundation. He will use the grant to buy research equipment.

   -- Mario Reyes, a graduating student in Delgado Community College's culinary
arts program, has been honored for his work by the local chapter of the American
Institute of Wine and Food. The annual accolade, which includes a certificate
and $250, is awarded by the faculty.

   . . . . . . .

   POLLSTER TO LEAD CENTER: Bob Sims, a veteran public-opinion pollster, has
been named director of the University of New Orleans' Survey Research Center,
which produces the annual UNO Poll. He succeeds Susan Howell, who retired in
May.

   Sims, who has spent 11 years as a researcher for Market Dynamics Research
Group Inc. of New Orleans, said he expects to release the center's first
nationwide poll between Thanksgiving and Christmas.

   The online survey, to be called "How Our Nation Views New Orleans," will
include opinions about such subjects as recovery from Hurricane Katrina,
governmental reaction to the storm and its aftermath, and corruption in
Louisiana, he said.

   . . . . . . .

   John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3317.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2007


                              418 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            November 12, 2007 Monday
                                 CITY-D Edition

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE; Inq Health & Science; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1230 words

HEADLINE: Research's best friend

BYLINE: By Marie McCullough; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:


   Eileen Eisenhower noticed the golf-ball-size lump on the hind leg of her
beloved dog and immediately knew it was a cancerous lymph node.

   At age 8, Kyra was in late middle age, prime time for lymphoma to strike.
What's more, one of the Rhodesian ridgeback's siblings had recently undergone
chemotherapy for the disease.

   Eisenhower and her husband, Brian, were reluctant to put Kyra through such
toxic treatment. Even if it worked, they knew the cancer would probably return
and kill her within a year.

   But then the Pennsauken couple read online about an immune therapy - a
supplement to chemotherapy - being developed by the University of Pennsylvania's
School of Veterinary Medicine and its Abramson Cancer Center. If this novel
"cancer vaccine" worked well in dogs with lymphoma, it would eventually be
tested in children with the human equivalent, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

   Kyra became the first dog to test the vaccine.

   Now, almost two years later, the sleek, honey-brown hound with a ridgelike
cowlick on her back seems to be cured. Of nine other dogs treated so far, three
have been healthy for more than a year.

   And their humans are doubly happy.

   "I'm a nurse and I've taken care of children with lymphoma," Eisenhower said
last week, stroking Kyra. "Maybe someday I'll be giving the vaccine to a child."

   Penn oncologist Robert Vonderheide, a leader of the vaccine study, said,
"Dogs and humans share a lot of the same biology. Like the vet school motto
says: 'Many species. One medicine.' "


   Man's best friend is becoming increasingly important to the study and
treatment of human cancers. One indicator is a new research program launched by
the National Cancer Institute in 2003 to improve human cancer-drug development
by using dogs and cats as comparative models.

   As part of this "comparative oncology" initiative, the institute set up a new
consortium of veterinary medicine schools - including Penn's - that will conduct
clinical trials of experimental treatments.

   "Dog cancers capture the 'essence' of the problem of human cancer in a manner
not possible with other animal model systems," notes Chand Khanna, head of the
cancer institute's comparative oncology program.

   Cancer researchers have long taken advantage of the similarities between
canine and human anatomy and physiology. A big difference has also been
beneficial - dogs age faster, so studies produce results more quickly. Fifty
years ago, dogs helped pioneer the concepts and techniques for human blood
stem-cell transplants, also known as bone marrow transplants.

   "The dog has contributed to a legacy that saves thousands of patients
annually," Seattle cancer researcher Rainer Storb wrote in a recent article
about cell transplantation in the journal Veterinary and Comparative Oncology.

   While comparative oncology goes way back, several recent advances have
spurred the field. Experts point to the sequencing of the canine genome in 2005,
and the advent of "targeted" cancer therapies for humans.

   Targeted drugs disrupt the molecular machinery of cancer cells; conventional
chemotherapies, by contrast, poison fast-dividing cells, both healthy and
malignant. Chemo is more toxic, but easier to test in humans.

   The National Cancer Institute says dogs can help researchers figure out
dosing, side effects, and, most of all, whether a targeted drug is hitting its
molecular mark - or not worth pursuing.

   Unlike laboratory mice, which are genetically manipulated and induced to
develop human cancers, dogs are naturally affected by prostate, breast, bone and
other cancers that closely mimic the human versions. In addition, the potential
pool of needy canines is vast. Of the estimated 70 million pet dogs in this
country, four million are diagnosed with cancer each year.

   Many humans are willing to go to great lengths - not to mention expense - to
prolong the lives of their four-legged family members.

   "Why not transform the cancer toll in pet dogs from something that is only a
sorrow today into a national resource, both for helping other pets and for
aiding people?" Purdue University comparative oncologist David J. Waters wrote
in a Scientific American article last year.

   Lymphoma, one of the most common and aggressive canine cancers, takes a
particularly high toll.

   Without treatment, dogs usually die within a few months. Even when they
receive the same chemotherapies as humans - at a cost of up to $5,000 - most
have just a brief remission and die on average 11 months after diagnosis. Only
about 15 percent are cured with conventional therapy.

   Kyra's sibling was not one of the lucky ones.


   "The point is, we need more than chemotherapy," said Karin Sorenmo, chief of
oncology at Penn's vet school.

   She and a colleague, Penn veterinarian Nicola Mason, were eager to see if
Vonderheide's cancer vaccine could be used after chemotherapy to keep the cancer
from coming back so soon.

   A number of drug companies are developing therapeutic cancer vaccines for
humans, but none are yet approved in the United States. Unlike conventional
immunizations, which prevent disease by priming the immune system to attack an
infectious invader, the new vaccines are designed to make the immune system
fight cancer after it arises.

   This is quite a feat because cancer is made of the body's own out-of-control
cells; in effect, the vaccine must trick the body into attacking itself.

   During four years of research, Vonderheide had achieved promising results -
but only in lab dishes. Kyra, diagnosed with the most advanced stage of
lymphoma, was the real deal.

   After getting approval from an ethics review committee at Penn, the
researchers removed infection-fighting B cells from a sample of Kyra's blood.
Then they extracted genetic material called RNA from their furry patient's
lymphoma cells. With a bit of molecular technology, they slipped this RNA into
the B cells.

   They hoped that these modified B cells, when returned to the dog's body,
would act like tattletales, telling her immune system how to recognize and
attack any lurking lymphoma cells.

   And that's what apparently happened.

   "We were incredibly delighted," Vonderheide said. "We know we can improve the
vaccine. But to have promising results with our very first formulation was very
encouraging."

   The treatment - three vaccine shots a week for three weeks, plus various
scans and tests - was free to the Eisenhowers. By the end, Kyra had regained
most of the 10 pounds she lost while undergoing four months of chemotherapy. She
was her usual squirrel-chasing, sofa-crowding, bacon-begging self.

   "She's very sweet," Eisenhower said last week as Kyra sat obediently -
waiting to be rewarded with a bit of bacon.

   Six dogs in the trial did not respond to chemotherapy, so they did not
receive the vaccine. Four of the nine dogs who got the shots, including Kyra,
have been in remission for a year or more - a better rate than would be expected
with chemo alone.

   The numbers are too small to draw conclusions, but good enough to expand the
study, which is being funded by the nonprofit Alliance for Cancer Gene Therapy.

   "We have a long way to go, but we're encouraged," Vonderheide said. "If this
works, it's possible the approach could be used in kids and adults with any type
of cancer."


   More about this and other canine cancer research: http://go.philly.com/health


   Contact staff writer Marie McCullough at 215-854-2720 or
mmccullough@phillynews.com.


GRAPHIC: Photograph by: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2007


                              419 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            November 12, 2007 Monday
                                 CITY-D Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; P-com Biz; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 1233 words

HEADLINE: Decoding DNA fast, cheap;
A start-up in W. Phila. is closing in on a technology.

BYLINE: By Linda Loyd; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   One day, patients may give a drop of blood at their doctor's office and get a
complete reading of their DNA to determine things like whether they carry the
Alzheimer's gene or are predisposed to cancer. And it'll cost less than $100 and
take only eight hours.

   That's the goal of a West Philadelphia start-up called BioNanomatrix Inc.
that believes it has the technology and expertise to sequence an entire
individual human genome faster and cheaper than can be done now.

   Current technology, which takes about two months and costs $1 million, chops
DNA material into bits and pieces and studies it, reassembling it like a massive
puzzle using a complex computer. The process is both time-consuming and
expensive.

   BioNanomatrix's technology - a tiny silicon "nano" chip - permits whole
strands of DNA to remain intact through analysis. The strands are "read" and
imaged without being broken, like sentences in a book.

   The serendipitous story of seven-person BioNanomatrix, which recently landed
an $8.8 million federal grant and is about to close its first venture-capital
financing, begins with molecular biologist Han Cao.

   A post-doctorate fellow at the University of Pennsylvania's gene-therapy
center, Cao left Penn in 2000 to join the electrical-engineering department at
Princeton University.

   There, he worked with engineers pushing the frontiers of nanofabrication,
making miniature devices - no bigger than one-sixteenth the size of a small
pinkie fingernail - that are the domain of the semiconductor industry.

   Cao and the Princeton team developed a "nano channel array" chip that holds
reams of information in more than a mile of tiny channels, or tunnels - not just
the 46 chromosomes of one person's DNA, but the entire DNA of 200 people, on a
single chip.

   With a background in biology and genetics, Cao saw the chip's potential for
genetic analysis and for decoding the human genome. In late 2003, he left his
junior research-associate post at Princeton, licensed the technology from
Princeton, and founded the company.

   "I always wanted to be an entrepreneur," said Cao, 39. "I basically worked
out of Internet cafes in Philadelphia. I didn't have money for anything. It was
just myself in a virtual mode."

   Cao pitched the technology to investors and, in 2004, raised $400,000 from a
wealthy angel investor in Alabama. He also met Michael Boyce-Jacino, a molecular
geneticist and former chief scientific officer at Orchid BioSciences in
Princeton.

   Persuaded by the science and Cao's entrepreneurial bent, Boyce-Jacino, who
had experience starting a company, taking it public and raising money - $200
million in the case of Orchid - signed on as BioNanomatrix's president and chief
executive officer.

   "We have absolutely astounding technology," Boyce-Jacino said, in the company
offices at the Science Center at 37th and Market Streets. "We have the
brainpower and innovation capabilities that we need. We are building
partnerships for commercialization that are essential, and we are bringing in
money that's necessary to reduce it to practice."

   BioNanomatrix has purposely stayed under the radar until now, raising money:
$250,000 from Ben Franklin Technology Partners of Southeastern Pennsylvania and
$900,000 in National Institutes of Health funding and other federal grants.

   "I first started looking at the company in January 2006. I really liked both
the technology and the team," said Jennifer Hartt, director of life sciences
with the Ben Franklin group. "This is truly a platform technology, a whole new
way of doing things that can change the paradigm of the way things are done in
the lab."

   Elsewhere, a half-dozen companies are racing to come up with a faster,
less-costly system to decode the genome - the complete hereditary information of
a person encoded in the DNA.

   If the price ever becomes affordable to the average person, experts say, it
would transform medicine - improving doctors' ability to diagnose and treat
disease and scientists' ability to develop and customize new drugs based on a
patient's genetic information.

   "The gold standard right now is about two months and between $1 million and
$2 million for a complete genome," said Richard A. Gibbs, director of the Human
Genome Sequencing Center at Baylor College of Medicine. "People can argue with
you about those numbers, but not by very much. Certainly no one is anywhere near
this new goal."

   A Connecticut firm, 454 Life Sciences, says it can sequence a complete human
genome in a month.

   BioNanomatrix, operating out of labs and offices at the Science Center and
using labs at Princeton, recently formed a joint venture with a California firm,
Complete Genomics Inc., to develop a system to sequence the entire genome in
eight hours at a cost of less than $100. The companies received an $8.8 million
government grant for the five-year project.

   What Complete Genomics brings to the joint venture is the chemistry for
probing DNA.

   "If we lay this DNA out, and use the Complete Genomics chemistry, we can see
in living color the order of all those DNA sequences, those pieces of
information, very quickly and very efficiently," Boyce-Jacino said. "It speeds
up the whole process very dramatically. That's how we get to $100 and eight
hours."

   BioNanomatrix and Agilent Technologies, of Santa Clara, Calif., are
collaborating to develop instrumentation that combines both companies'
technologies.

   While the chip is the heart of the start-up firm, a box or analysis machine,
resembling a microwave, is required to image the DNA imbedded the chip.

   BioNanomatrix is jointly developing a prototype for the box with Agilent,
which specializes in electronic measurement and bio-analytics instruments and
systems. With Agilent, the company will work on genetic diagnostics of cancer
and will study DNA damage due to radiation.

   In addition, the company is collaborating with scientists at the National
Cancer Institute and UCLA, which provide genetic samples to use to check the
information content of the chip. "That moves us toward determining the
performance of the device," Boyce-Jacino said. "We're doing it now."

   The company is on the verge of closing its first private-equity financing.

   "We've already had offers to acquire us - we said 'no,' " said Boyce-Jacino.
"This is a very exciting technology. We said 'no' because of the opportunity to
really grow this into something much more significant."

   With money coming in, the company expects to grow to 15 employees by June and
30 to 50 in three to five years. Plans are to outsource manufacturing and
partner some of the commercialization. "We can keep the core on research and
development," the CEO said.

   Han, a named inventor on the company's patents, recruited two nanofabrication
scientists he worked with at Princeton, Paru Deshpande and Michael Austin.

   Just last week, Ming Xiao, an expert in single-molecule-analysis technology,
joined the company from the University of California, San Francisco.

   "He was heavily recruited, Boyce-Jacino said, "but joined us.

   "One of the problems with start-up companies is that it's very easy to get
ahead of yourselves in terms of telling people what you think you can do, versus
what you know you can do," he said. "We're talking about these things when we
know we can do them. That's the key, I think, to building a successful company."

   Contact staff writer Linda Loyd at 215-854-2831 or lloyd@phillynews.com.


GRAPHIC: Photograph by: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2007


                              420 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                            November 11, 2007 Sunday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 026

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: THE CORPORATE SHUFFLE

BODY:

   Shooting for the stars.

   Sirtris Pharmaceuticals honored CEO and Vice Chair Christoph Westphal as a
2007 Mass High Tech All-Star for his work in the life sciences industry.

   ** ** **

   There's new hope.

   yogaHOPE, a not-for-profit yoga outreach program based in Boston, has hired
Jasmine Punzalan as fundraiser and event coordinator. yogaHOPE is dedicated to
establishing rehabilitative yoga programs in residential facilities for
underserved women in substance abuse recovery, homeless women and victims of
domestic violence.

   ** ** **

   A Capitol idea.

   Capitol Construction announced the addition of four new members to its
management team. Michael Garrity will be the new chief estimator; Paul Brooks
will take on the role of superintendent; field operations will be headed up by
Kevin McGrath and John Ciaramaglia will act as senior project manager.

   ** ** **

   In Nadeau we trust.

   Rockland Trust named Gerard Nadeau as the executive vice president of
commercial banking.

   ** ** **

   A strategic decision.

   Suzanne Bruhn was named senior vice president of strategic planning and
program management for Shire Human Genetic Therapies.

   ** ** **

   Jumping through hoops.

   Saint Michael's College announced the addition of Peter F. Hooper to its
board of trustees.

   ** ** **

   Time for Cooper-ation.

   Carbonite named Keith W. Cooper as its president and CEO.

   ** ** **

   Entering a new Millennium.

   Karen Ferrante was named senior vice president of clinical development for
Millennium Pharmaceuticals while Charles Reinhart takes on the job of senior
vice president of finance.

   ** ** **

   Excellent marketing, just in time.

   TimeTrade Systems appointed Cindy Johnson as the vice president of marketing.

   ** ** **

   Herald alumni day.

   Former Herald reporter Ed Hayward was named associate director of Boston
College's public affairs office.

   ** ** **

   A mutually beneficial sale.

   Penn Mutual Life Insurance Company announced that John F. Pircio has joined
the company as a sales manager.

   ** ** **

   Everything that rises must first converge.

   Deborah Grosvenor of Grosvener Literary Agency has merged her company with
Kneerim and Williams and was appointed director of the company's new Washington,
D.C. office.

   ** ** **

   Partners you can count on.

   KPMG LLP named five new partners: Peter Bloomfield, Brad Curley, Thomas Cyr,
Pauline Mak and Jason Tata.

   Send Corporate Shuffle items to shuffle@bostonherald.com

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2007


                              421 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2007 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                           November 10, 2007 Saturday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; CRITTERS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 604 words

HEADLINE: CAT DNA SECRETS UNRAVELED MAY HELP IN FIGHT AGAINST HUMAN & FELINE
DISEASES

BYLINE: BY AMY SACKS DAILY NEWS WRITER

BODY:

   One feline is proving that cats are the spice of life.

   Scientists have decoded the DNA of an Abyssinian cat named Cinnamon, saying
the exciting discovery may help forge new ground in treatments for both feline
and human diseases

   "It's like finding the Rosetta stone - or a fossil," said Dr. Steve O'Brien,
chief of the National Cancer Institute's Laboratory of Genomic Diversity, which
spearheaded the sequencing project.

   O'Brien says the discovery means the cat can be used as an animal model for
human hereditary and infectious diseases, genome evolution and comparative
studies of the 37 species within the Felidae family.

   "We can determine why a domestic cat is tame but a wild cat isn't," he added.

   The study adds cats to the roughly two dozen mammals whose DNA has been
unraveled, a list that includes dogs, chimps, rats, mice, cows and, of course,
humans.

   So why the feline? O'Brien says cats get more than 200 diseases that resemble
human illnesses, and knowing the details of their genetic makeup should help in
the search for vaccines and treatments.

   The list includes FIV (a cat form of HIV), SARS, diabetes, retinal disease
and spina bifida.

   Still, aside from helping combat human disease, what's in it for Fluffy?

   Veterinarian Dr. Arnold Plotnick, who runs Manhattan Cat Specialists, says
knowing the cat's genetic fingerprint can help better manage health care and
diagnosis.

   "Gene therapy is an expanding field, and knowing the details of the feline
genome has the potential to design new therapies for treating cats," said
Plotnick.

   It's likely that veterinarians will be able to tailor treatments by selecting
the best drug and the best dose for that particular animal.

   Animal experts say the promise is that we will be able to manipulate the DNA
and correct underlying hereditary problems before they strike.

   Still, your own kitty's health may have to wait. For now, new treatment
options, such as gene therapy and vaccines, remain farther down the road.

   "Veterinarians will be beneficiaries of research that will identify the
genetic inconsistencies, and the therapies that will be developed will restore
genetic harmony," said veterinary cardiologist Dr. Frank Pipers, director of
telecardiology services at VDIC.

   Ultimately, however, it will come down to finances.

   Because research costs are always the limiting factor as to what
veterinarians can study, the cat diseases most likely to be addressed are those
that mirror the human diseases, Pipers said.

   Martin Stevens, vice president for animal research issues at the Humane
Society of the United States, says the discovery is a mixed bag and he fears it
will increase then number of cats used in laboratory research.

   But Patricia Olson, a veterinarian who heads the Morris Animal Foundation,
which funds humane animal studies, disagrees. She says testing can be done with
the population of animals in the home and not using laboratory animals.

   The identification of the dog genome a few years ago has allowed breeders to
work on reducing the incidence of diseases prone to certain breeds.

   And scientists at the National Human Genome Research Institute believe canine
genome research is particularly useful in studying cancer.

   The most exciting spinoff of the canine genome may be the Canine Breed
Heritage Test, by MetaMorphix Inc., which allows dog owners to determine the mix
of their mutts.

   So far the Maryland-based company says it has processed over 20,000 requests
to determine a dog's mix.

   So will cat owners soon be able to determine if Fluffy's part Russian blue?
The company says not in the near future - it's still too busy dealing with the
dogs.

   amysacks1@hotmail.com

GRAPHIC: Attendant Kengi Ruiz looks after this threesome at Animal Haven in
Flushing, Queens. The cats have feline form of HIV. Photo by Linda Obuchoska

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 2007


                              422 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Cincinnati Enquirer (Ohio)

                            November 6, 2007 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 736 words

HEADLINE: Keeping firm private keeps invention alive

BYLINE: John Eckberg jeckberg@enquirer.com

BODY:

   BLOOMINGTON, Ind. - Perhaps there's a global executive worth billions who
gets into the office before Bill Cook does at 5 a.m.

   But that exec is not likely to head 50 companies as Cook does. Nor will he
have started his firm with a $1,500 investment in the office in the back bedroom
of an apartment in a college town.

   As founder and chairman of Cook Group Inc., Cook leads the world's largest
privately held medical device company and is one of the most respected names in
medical research.

   Cook, 76, is the keynote speaker at the 2007 Deloitte Cincinnati USA 100
Awards luncheon at 11:30 a.m. next Tuesday at Music Hall. The event - sponsored
by the financial and professional services firm, the Cincinnati USA Regional
Chamber and The Enquirer - honors the largest privately held businesses based in
Greater Cincinnati and Northern Kentucky.

   A former cab driver, Army medic, recruiter at Martin-Marietta, inventor and
computer programmer, Cook had a passion for research early on and knew he wanted
to start a medical-devices company.

   In 1963, he found investors willing to back him for that start-up to
manufacture hypodermic needles, catheters and stents for the then-budding field
of coronary artery research. Today, he ranks 68th (along with seven individuals)
on Forbes magazine's list of the 400 richest Americans. His net worth, according
to Forbes: $4.5 billion.

   Cook, who rarely speaks with reporters, believed then and still believes that
private companies are better suited than public companies to create and market
medical devices. And don't try to change his mind about that, either.

   "Public companies, I think, have a predisposition to acquire technology. We
have a predisposition to develop technology," which makes private companies more
nimble, Cook said.

   "In our field, an initial public offering is a good idea if you're
capital-intensive," he said. "But it can be patient-be-damned. I don't have to
worry about investors putting the pressure on me like they do J&J or Guidant or
Boston Scientific."

   Guidant made a bid to buy Cook for $3 billion in 2003, but that deal
collapsed from a court challenge.

   While there are plenty of executives who get into the office in the early
morning each day like Cook, none are likely to have side gigs as strange as his:

   He often drives the tour bus for rock icon John Mellencamp.

   A promoter of drum and bugle corps throughout the state, he also sometime
dabbles in Broadway shows such as the Tony-winning "Blast", which he produced.

   He is owner of professional sports teams in England and a community-minded
investor who has spent $400 million to renovate the French Lick and West Baden
resorts in southern Indiana. The restoration preserved old hotels with mineral
springs, plus added a casino to the site.

   "It started as benevolence. It ended up a passion," Cook said. "We wanted to
spend the money to stabilize the hotels but never found anybody who wanted them.
We thought (Donald) Trump wanted them, but he didn't have the money."

   Already, the resorts have received coveted Four Diamond rankings from the
American Automobile Association. The French Lick resort has 93 percent to 97
percent occupancy.

   "In West Baden, we're going slowly because we're going after a five-star
rating," Cook said. It might be six to eight years before revenues are
sufficient to pay off renovation debt, he said.

   A golf course designed by Pete Dye, well known in golf circles for his
designs, is planned for a spring 2008 opening. That will make the resort an
international magnet for golfers, Cook predicted - particularly with golfers in
the British Isles.

   Cook has founded firms that manufacture cardiovascular, critical care,
diagnostic and interventional products, extruded and injection-molded plastics,
stainless steel tubing, urological equipment, ob/gyn devices and endoscopic
instruments.

   Other of his companies are involved in real estate, historic restoration,
antiques, travel and aircraft service.

   These days, he admits that he is excited about a medical approach with a
cobalt chromium stent that delivers a proprietary gene therapy agent that might
prevent coronary arteries from reclogging after angioplasty.

   "We own the worldwide license on this, and we think companies will want to
buy it," he predicted. That product faces European clinical testing in January.

   Provided

   Bill Cook is the keynote speaker at next Tuesday's luncheon honoring the
region's largest private businesses.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2007


                              423 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            November 4, 2007 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEW JERSEY; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 1150 words

HEADLINE: Her smile hides a world of pain
A little girl stands tall against ravages of rare disease

BYLINE: JONATHAN CASIANO, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   Maria Oliveira looks over the pile of gauze and bandages on her dresser with
familiar sadness, bracing herself for the most difficult part of her day.

   Over the next three hours, she will lead her 9-year-old daughter Sarah
through an agonizing routine of blister popping, bleach baths and full-body
bandaging, all with the hope that Sarah will make it through another day without
infection and another night without the excruciating pain that is a constant in
her young life.

   "You prepare yourself emotionally for this. . . . You put yourself into a
zombie mode," Oliveira said. "You hear her scream, but you block it out because
you know you have to do it."

   Sarah suffers from epidermolysis bullosa, a rare genetic skin disorder marked
by constant blisters from head to toe. Its sufferers are known as "butterfly
children," because their skin is so fragile that the slightest friction causes
it to peel off completely, leaving painful open wounds that can take weeks to
heal.

   Some children with EB develop infections almost immediately and never make it
past infancy. Others may survive until early adulthood, but the disease is
progressively debilitating with the risk of skin cancer and infection increasing
each year. There is no known cure and, as with many rare diseases, there are
currently no EB-specific medications on the market.

   "The general impulse when someone hears `skin disease' is minor
inconvenience, something cosmetic. But ours is one of the most medically
devastating diseases, period," said Suzanne Cohen, executive director of the
Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association of America, a national
support group, resource center and fundraising machine for EB.

   "When you have a child where the highest doses of morphine can't get them
through a bandage change, that gives you an idea of the severity," she said.

   Sarah puts it more simply when asked if she's in pain.

   "Sometimes," she said, "like, usually always."

   Between 12,000 and 25,000 American children suffer from some form of EB, with
severe cases like Sarah's accounting for just a small fraction. Many doctors who
treat butterfly children have seen the disorder only in textbooks. The
treatments are less sophisticated, as well. Patients are given morphine to dull
the pain and prescription antihistamines like Zyrtec to control the unbearable
itching beneath the bandages.

   Over-the-counter ointments are used to treat the wounds, while cleaning
requires a torturous soak in warm water mixed with bleach or vinegar.

   Like most butterfly children, Sarah was diagnosed shortly after birth.
Oliveira remembers the nurses at Rahway Hospital frantically running into her
room with the news every mother dreads: "There's something wrong with your
baby."

   "It was such a horrible sight," Oliveira remembers. "She had no skin from her
knees down, no skin from her wrists down. It was like someone had just peeled it
off."

   Three days later, a biopsy indicated EB. Genetic tests later revealed that
both Oliveira and Sarah's father carry the gene that causes the disorder, making
Sarah's EB type one of the rarest.

   "They told me what it was, and I couldn't even pronounce it," Oliveira said.
"Suddenly, you're just thrown into this world of bandages and needles and
ointments and blood and gore that nobody understands."

   The early years were particularly tough for Oliveira. There was the nightly
anguish of cleaning and bandaging, accompanied by the gradual realization that
her little girl would never wear dainty shoes, or ride a bike or walk on the
beach and feel the sand between her toes.

   On top of that were the physical surprises. Sarah developed blisters inside
her ear canals that jeopardized her hearing, and in her esophagus that made it
impossible to swallow. Four times, she has been hospitalized because of internal
blistering, including blisters on her colon.

   But the Oliveiras have learned to cope. Sarah can't ride a bike, but has a
plastic pedal car she can ride on the sidewalk. She went swimming for the first
time last summer in a hotel in Wildwood. And the feisty third-grader has built
up an arsenal of comebacks for gawking strangers.

   "Take a picture - it will last longer" is her favorite gibe.

   With her friends, she's all 9-year-old, chattering away about birthday
parties, Webkins and Hannah Montana. Instead of playing sports, they huddle up
at Sarah's place and watch movies.

   "I know she's different, so she can't do all the things I can do, so
sometimes we just do the things that she likes to do," said her best friend,
Destiny Johnson. "We just change it up."

   Sarah even attends public school, where her smarts have earned her a slot in
Elizabeth's gifted-and-talented program at Monsignor Jaoa Antao School 31.

   "I think she's determined to just be a regular child," said her teacher,
Samira Laskey. "She doesn't feel sorry for herself, she doesn't ask for anything
special. . . . I really don't even see the bandages anymore."

   Still, no matter how good the day, there remains the night, when Sarah's
howls of pain echo through the old wooden house she shares with her
grandparents.

   Her mother is hopeful current research will bear fruit, and Cohen said her
hope is not misguided. A gene therapy trial in Europe recently was able to
reproduce healthy skin patches and graft them onto a man with EB, while a gel to
help wounds heal faster is being tested on patients in the United States.

   "This is probably one of the most active times in a long time as far as
research moving forward," said Cohen. "All these researchers are dedicating
their careers to this."

   Oliveira's main hope is for a treatment that will dull Sarah's pain and make
the blisters more manageable.

   "A viable treatment," she said, "that will help her heal faster and enhance
her life."

   But again, Sarah puts it more simply.

   She wants a cure.

   Jonathan Casiano may be reached at (908) 527-4012 or jcasiano@starledger.com

   Multimedia: Catch the video at nj.com and tvjersey.com

   From tvjersey.com:
http://tvjersey.com/2007/11/sarahs_story_living_with_eb.php

   Sarah's story: Living with EB

   EB is an extremely rare skin disorder affecting less than 500,000 people in
the world. For children like 9-year-old Sarah Oliveira of Elizabeth NJ, who
suffer from severe cases, the disorder is debilitating and can be deadly.
Sarah's skin is so fragile that any friction will cause it to flake off
completely, leaving bloody open wounds that take days to heal. Because of this,
EB sufferers are known as "Butterfly Children" and must be bandaged from toe to
neck every day of their lives. Sarah is a trooper. A profile of Sarah and a
window into a little-known disorder. (Audio slideshow by Aristide Economopoulos
with story by John Casiano)

   Photo Credit: PHOTOS BY ARISTIDE ECONOMOPOULOS/THE STAR-LEDGER

   Infobox: "She doesn't feel sorry for herself, she doesn't ask for anything
special. . . . I really don't even see the bandages anymore." -SAMIRA LASKEY,
SARAH'S TEACHER

GRAPHIC: 1. Above, Maria Oliveira hugs her daughter Sarah, 9, who suffers from a
rare skin disorder characterized by chronic blisters from head to toe. Below,
Sarah and her best friend Destiny Johnson chat over lunch at Monsignor Jaoa
Antao School 31 in Elizabeth, where Sarah is in the gifted-and-talented program.
2. Sarah leads Ariel Cunha, Delfina Chirigliano and Micaela Guevara in a game
during recess. Despite her almost constant pain, she manages to live each day to
the fullest. 3. Sarah works on her spelling homework, her hands bandaged to
protect her fragile skin and ward off the ever-present threat of infection. 4.
After lunch, Sarah is reluctant to go with Roseann Palmieri, her personal
assistant, to have the school nurse check her mouth for a possible new blister.
Luckily, she said, it turned out to be a false alarm.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2007


                              424 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 San Francisco Chronicle
                              All Rights Reserved

                    The San Francisco Chronicle (California)

                            October 29, 2007 Monday
                                 FINAL Edition

SECTION: Main News; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 2319 words

HEADLINE: STEM CELL WAGER;
Nascent San Carlos firm turns unused embryos from fertility clinic customers
into stem cells, which it stores for them. Is it ethical? Will it even work?

BYLINE: Bernadette Tansey, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

   A San Carlos startup is offering to create "personalized" stem cells from the
spare embryos of fertility clinic clients on the chance that the cells, frozen
and stored away, may some day help a family member benefit from medical
breakthroughs.

   The novel business plan of StemLifeLine Inc. - which started promoting its
service to fertility patients earlier this year as "insurance for the future" -
set off a flash fire of protest from stem cell research opponents and supporters
alike.

   The outcry from anti-abortion groups wasn't surprising. StemLifeLine derives
stem cells from very early stage human embryos, which are destroyed in the
process. Opponents of the research see this as the moral equivalent of killing a
child. This belief is the basis of the Bush administration's limits on federal
funding of embryonic stem cell research.

   But some of the most fervent denunciations of StemLifeLine came from vigorous
supporters of embryonic stem cell research. Two Stanford University critics
aired their complaints in newspaper editorial pages. A prominent Stanford
ethicist challenged UC San Francisco scientists who are advisers of the company
to sever those ties. These critics accuse StemLifeLine of trying to profit from
the promise of stem cell research in the present, even though the work may not
yield medical treatments for decades, if ever.

   "These companies are essentially taking advantage of people's ignorance and
fears to make a buck," said David Magnus, director of the Stanford Center for
Biomedical Ethics.

   StemLifeLine's commercial debut also raised unsettled ethical questions that
experts had thought they would consider when therapies actually materialized.
The questions can reach deep into the heart of a family's beliefs. Such issues
are usually dissected by committees of experts overseeing university stem cell
studies involving human embryos, to ensure ethical behavior by the scientists.

   But no law dictates how fertility clients may make use of their embryos, and
StemLifeLine was legally free to set up shop. As medical research advances,
consumers are increasingly facing complex choices in such areas that are not
fully regulated, including genetic testing and cord blood banking. As part of
the controversial stem cell field, StemLifeLine may present the thorniest
example to date.

   StemLifeLine chief executive Ana Krtolica said the company arose to help
fertility clients who face a difficult decision when they end up with extra
embryos after they finish creating their families. The majority of these spare
embryos are eventually discarded; a small percentage are given to other
infertile couples; and some are donated for research. Clients have asked whether
they could personally benefit if their embryos were used to create stem cells,
Krtolica said.

   StemLifeLine created that option for families willing to bet that stem cell
treatments will arise some day. "They feel that way they are preserving
something out of the embryos that will have some use in the future," Krtolica
said.

   Theoretically, stem cells could yield treatment for many illnesses such as
diabetes, Alzheimer's disease and spinal cord injuries by providing replacement
tissues. Stem cells, which are found throughout the body, are immature cells
that can develop into specialized cells that need to be replenished. The most
versatile are stem cells derived from human embryos, which can develop into any
type of cell such as nerve, heart or skin. StemLifeLine is affiliated with three
fertility clinics outside California that explain its service and ship the
embryos of interested clients to San Carlos. Patients at other clinics can
contact StemLifeLine directly. At its lab on Industrial Road, the company
extracts cells from the embryos and converts them into stem cells, which are
grown into cultures or "lines" containing millions of cells. The vials of cells
are then frozen or "cryopreserved."

   StemLifeLine charges as much as $7,000 to create and freeze the stem cell
line, and about $350 a year for storage. Additional fees up to $2,000 can be
charged by fertility clinics that facilitate the transaction, Krtolica said. The
company also offers customers the free option of donating an extra vial of their
stem cell cultures for research. Krtolica said about 15 families have
participated in pilot studies or as paying customers since the company was
founded in 2005. The company does not make clients available for interviews.

   Whether StemLifeLine's clients ever benefit hinges on the chance that a stem
cell therapy will arise for a specific disease by the time a family member needs
treatment for that very illness. In addition, the company that developed the
therapy would have to be willing and able to use the family's StemLifeLine cell
culture. The chances of all that are remote, say some of the most ardent backers
of stem cell research.

   Magnus, the Stanford ethicist, said StemLifeLine should tell customers that
no stem cell therapy may exist for 30 or 40 years. What's more, he said, the
technology may have changed so much a decade from now that the family's stem
cells would be unusable. Magnus and other critics also fault StemLifeLine for
calling their product "personalized" and "genetically matched" to the family.
The cell line would not be an identical genetic match to any family member, they
say. It would have a unique assortment of genes from the mother and father, as
would a child of the couple. If the cells were transplanted into one of the
parents or their children, it's likely that the recipient would still have to
take drugs to prevent immune system rejection.

   Magnus compares StemLifeLine to the now-defunct Genetic Savings & Clone of
Sausalito, which charged fees to store genetic material from beloved pets and
planned to make cloned copies for their owners. The outfit folded last year
after billing one woman $50,000 for a duplicate feline. Magnus said such
companies hype their technologies while offering little of value. He said
reputable scientists should dissociate themselves from StemLifeLine.

   Those scientists associated with the company include one of the most
prominent stem cell researchers in the nation.

   Among StemLifeLine's advisory board members is Susan Fisher, who leads UC San
Francisco's stem cell program. One of the scientists in Fisher's lab, Olga
Genbacev, sits on StemLifeLine's board of directors. The company's staff and
boards also include present and former research collaborators of Fisher's.

    Fisher defended her ties with StemLifeLine. The company is making
high-quality, state-of-the-art cell lines, she said. While they won't be
identical genetic matches to any family member, they could be as valuable as a
near relation's organ donation for a transplant. With that closer genetic
relationship, a stem cell recipient might be able to take lower doses of drugs
to suppress immune rejection, Fisher said.

   "These stem cell lines are going to be much better genetic matches to the
family than some random stem cell line," she said. Fisher said she has no
financial interest in the company, and serves on its board free of charge.

   Krtolica, a former researcher at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and UC
San Francisco, said clients are told that stem cell therapies may not arrive for
years. Customers are clearly informed that the stem cells are not clones of any
family member, she said. "It goes against everything we believe in to push
someone to do this if they don't want it," she said.

   The director of Stanford's stem cell program, Renee Reijo Pera, said many of
StemLifeLine's customers could lay out a substantial sum and receive nothing.
StemLifeLine's Web site states that it has the best chance of creating a stem
cell culture if clients have at least 10 spare embryos. Pera said few patients
end up with that many.

   Krtolica said StemLifeLine will accept clients with fewer than 10 embryos.
The client's $5,400 stem cell derivation fee would be returned if the company
can't create a culture, she said. An initial $1,200 fee, however, is
nonrefundable. Participating fertility clinics would set their own refund
policies, Krtolica said. The company declined to provide a copy of its contract.

   Pera said embryo-derived stem cells could become irrelevant in future medical
care. Scientists at UCSF and other institutions have managed to reprogram adult
cells to morph into other cell types. If that work pans out, the patients' own
adult cells could be used to create replacement tissues with genes identical to
their own.

   Genetic matching might not be needed at all under the experimental strategy
of the Menlo Park stem cell company Geron, chief executive Thomas Okarma said.
The company is trying to create an array of stem cell-derived human cells - such
as nerve and skin cells - that will trigger no harmful immune system reactions.

   One of StemLifeLine's own advisory board members shares some of the critics'
doubts. By the time stem cell therapies are on the market, Food and Drug
Administration guidelines for creating the cell cultures may have changed
substantially, said Joe Conaghan, director of embryology laboratories at Pacific
Fertility Center in San Francisco, which is not formally affiliated with
StemLifeLine.

   Conaghan and other observers say it might make more sense for families to
keep their embryos in a frozen state, and have stem cells made only when
therapies actually exist and FDA requirements are known. But Fisher maintains
that frozen embryos lose viability over time. Fisher also doubts that stem cell
technology will change so much that StemLifeLine's cultures would be useless.

   "Personally, if I had a friend going through in vitro fertilization, I would
advise my best friend to do this," she said.

   At this point, StemLifeLine's services are offered through three clinics: the
Nevada Center for Reproductive Medicine in Reno, its affiliate the Idaho Center
for Reproductive Medicine based in Boise, and the Colorado Center for
Reproductive Medicine in Denver. Dr. Russell Foulk, director of the Nevada and
Idaho clinics, co-founded StemLifeLine.

   Foulk said StemLifeLine can ease the often painful quandary of fertility
clients who can't decide what to do with spare embryos. "This provides them
another opportunity," he said.

   Dr. David Adamson, chief executive of the fertility services firm Advanced
Reproductive Care in Palo Alto, said he doesn't think many fertility clinics
will sign up with StemLifeLine because they could run into legal or ethical
snags.

   Many clinics follow the voluntary practice guidelines of professional groups
such as the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Adamson, the
president-elect of the group, said StemLifeLine's operations would probably be
seen as an experiment by committees that set these standards. As subjects of an
experiment, StemLifeLine's customers probably should not be charged fees,
Adamson said.

   Any charges by the fertility clinic would probably be scrutinized by
professional societies, he said. "The financial relationship with the clinic and
the company would have to be very carefully crafted to protect the best
interests of patients," Adamson said.

   Pera said she fears some clinics would push the stem cell option on clients
as an obligation to protect the family's health. "I worry that people will feel
coerced to care for the family in this way," she said.

   To head off any such concern, Foulk said his fertility clinics have not
charged fees for linking clients to StemLifeLine. Christopher Scott, director of
the Stanford program on Stem Cells in Society, wonders whether some individuals
might ask fertility clinics to create embryos for the sole purpose of creating a
stem cell line, without any intent to conceive a child.

   "I certainly wouldn't do it," Foulk said.

   Krtolica said none of the clinics currently offering StemLifeLine's services
would accept such clients. Doing so would not be illegal, said Robin Alta Charo,
a professor of law and medical ethics at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

   But she said the question touches on a major underlying ethical issue that
advocates of stem cell research have not previously had to resolve. Supporters
of the technology clearly feel it's acceptable to donate an embryo to further
medical research - what they see as an altruistic act. But StemLifeLine's
activities raise the question: Is it also ethical for parents to create and
destroy an embryo in their own self-interest, potentially to save their own or
their children's lives?

   "It depends on your view of the moral status of an embryo," Charo said.
People who see the embryo as a baby would say no. "If you view it as nothing
more than a nonsentient collection of cells, like the cells in your liver, you
would have no objection. Most people in the United States see it as something in
between," Charo said.

   Adamson said the complex issues raised by StemLifeLine's operations should be
dissected by a panel of 15 to 20 specialists in ethics, religion, economics and
medicine who have no conflicts of interest related to the work. "These really
important issues have largely been avoided by the government," he said. "These
are issues that need to be dealt with."

Stem cell resources

     ·    To learn more about StemLifeLine or stem cells in general, here are
          some resources:
     ·    -- StemLifeLine Inc., San Carlos www.stemlifeline.com e-mail:
          info@stemlifeline.com Telephone: 650 592-7836
     ·    -- National Institutes of Health stem cell research Web page
          stemcells.nih.gov/info/health.asp
     ·    -- California Institute for Regenerative Medicine California's $3
          billion stem cell research funding program www.cirm.ca.gov



Stem cell resources

   "Families feel ... they are preserving something out of the embryos that will
have some use in the future. "

   ""

   Ana Krtolica, StemLifeLine chief executive

   "These ... lines are going to be much better genetic matches to the family
than some random stem cell line. "

   Susan Fisher, UC San Francisco's stem cell program

GRAPHIC: StemLifeLine's laboratory manager Eduardo Caceras fills a cell culture
plate with a nutrient-rich medium in which stem cells are grown. Michael Macor /
The Chronicle
Top: StemLifeLine's CEO Ana Krtolica retrieves cells from cypropreservation in a
liquid nitrogen tank maintained at minus 320 degrees. The tank can hold 1,000
vials with stem cells. Michael Macor / The Chronicle
Above: A microscopic view of a single living stem cell colony, as shown on a
computer screen, surrounded by feeder cells, which provide nutrition to the cell
colony as it grows. Michael Macor / The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2007


                              425 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                           October 27, 2007 Saturday
                                  1ST Edition

SECTION: ZONE SOUTH - SOUTH INDY STAR; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 769 words

HEADLINE: Your neighbors

BODY:

   Michele Kuntz Wood

   Age: 55.

   Family: Husband, Gary; sons, Thor, 26, and Nate, 19.

   Residence: Center Township, just north of Beech Grove.

   Education: St. Agnes Academy; Marion County General Hospital for Nursing
School (became Wishard); nurse practitioner degree was received from Harbor UCLA
Medical Center in Torrance, Calif.

   Hobbies: "Reading and writing. At my husband's insistence, I'm starting to
work on fly fishing. I like to hang out with my family."

   What do you write: "I do a lot of writing for work. I'm exploring writing
memoirs, essays, a little poetry . . . basically trying to use a different part
of my brain.

   Activities and memberships: Indiana Breast Cancer Awareness trust, Susan B.
Komen board, Catholic youth association board, Sigma Theta Tau nursing honor
society.

   Notable: Has been named a Distinguished Hoosier by Indiana Gov. Mitch
Daniels.

   Employment: Manager of Women's Health Services at St. Francis Hospital, 14
years. Was a nurse manager prior to that.

   What are your responsibilities: "I have an unusual job in that I have a
clinical background and nursing but much of my job is in advocacy, education,
and sales and marketing for women's health. I work with the Cancer Service Line,
Cardiac Services Line, Women's Health."

   In what areas are we failing in women's health care: "I really think that
even though we have more women in the field of medicine we educate physicians in
a pretty traditional way. Things are better for women, but we still need a lot
more gender specific understanding of women and differences in our physiology.
With all of the advances in medicine, women have become more like men
healthwise. Poverty is the biggest health risk we have. It affects everything .
. . how you eat, how you exercise, what is available to you. Taking insurance
away from children seems like a crazy idea in my mind."

   What area have you been pleased with its advancement: "We have seen many
advances in the arena of breast cancer in the last 15 years with consumer
advocacy at the helm. With continued emphasis on research, we have seen so many
advances in identifying kinds of cancer and treatment of cancer. There is a lot
of hopefulness in that area that I am excited about with earlier detection, less
invasive treatment. I feel pretty proud about what we have accomplished there. I
am also excited about things being done with gene therapies, using cord blood. I
think this is very exciting. Indiana will have the first breast cancer tissue
bank in the nation at IU."

   If you were not in your current position what would you want to do: "I'd like
to travel, I'd like to write more. I'd like to study gardening. I have fantasies
of working more in isolation, but I'm an extrovert. I love the feedback of being
engaged with people. I like to get things started and then hand them off to
someone else."

   If you won the lottery, what would you do with the money: "I'd become debt
free, I would gift some of it to family, I'd set up a foundation with the
hospital. I really would like to set up a center for healing and the use of
integrated medicine and arts for all types of healing. A serenity center that
would include dance and music therapy, writing and art."

   If you could spend the day with anyone in the world who would it be and why:
"Oprah Winfrey. I want to know how she goes on every day . . . how she continues
to work so hard on so many things. The pace of the travel she does is
remarkable."

   What advice do you give to others: "Everything is temporary. Good, bad, it's
all transient. I like to live large. Every day is a gift."

   If you could travel anywhere, where would it be: "I'd like to visit a lot of
Italy. Second to that, Bali."

   Is there something someone would be surprised to learn about you: "Some
people might be surprised that I have periods of real insecurity and depression
and uncertainty. I think that's not apparent to a lot of people."

   What would you like to be doing in 10 years: "I hope that I'll be able to
enjoy my boys being more settled and successful. I'd like to be able to travel
and enjoy more time with my husband and family."

   When you were growing up, what did you want to be: "My mother influenced me
the most about nursing being a good profession. I wanted to be a football
player, go to Purdue and fool around. I didn't really know what I wanted so I'm
grateful my parents guided me toward nursing. I've been lucky to do work that
can impact people's lives. My parents saw things in me I didn't know were
there."

   To nominate a neighbor, call Kathy Day at (317) 444-2700 or send an e-mail
with the nominee's name and contact information to starsouth@indystar.com

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2007


                              426 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                           October 25, 2007 Thursday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NORTHWEST; Pg. Reg2

LENGTH: 1932 words

HEADLINE: Community briefing

BODY:

   GLOBE NORTHWEST 1

   ACTON

   LIGHT ON SCHOOL'S SOLAR PANEL - Installation of a new solar panel at the
Leary Field will be celebrated Nov. 17. The Acton-Boxborough Regional School
District and the town of Acton were awarded a solar panel by the Massachusetts
Technology Collaborative. It is now part of the electrical grid for the school.
The scoreboard at Leary Field and the concession stand are now solar-powered. To
qualify for the panel, Acton collected 170 donations from residents and
businesses for the nonprofit New England Wind Farm. The celebration is at 2 p.m.

   - Jennifer Fenn Lefferts

   Arlington

   PROJECT COMPLETION EYED - The Summer Street road improvement project is
expected to be completed by early next summer, after the state recently approved
two change orders. The approval means contractors can proceed with work after
several delays. The $4.3 million project aimed to reconstruct 1.35 miles of
Summer Street from the Lexington town line to Hospital Road and was originally
to be completed by November 2005. Various issues, including environmental
concerns about nearby McClennen Park, got the schedule off track. Work is
expected to start again in a few weeks.

   - Melissa Beecher

   Ayer

   SCHOOL BOARD APPOINTMENT - Town and school officials will be meeting Nov. 7
at the Page-Hilltop School's Professional Development Room to select a new
member of the School Committee. A joint meeting between selectmen and the School
Committee will begin at 7 p.m. Those interested in being considered must be a
registered voter in Ayer and submit their name and statement of interest to the
superintendent's office by Oct. 31. Materials can also be mailed to 141
Washington Street, Ayer 01432.

   - Melissa Beecher

   Bedford

   LAST CHANCE FOR HEARING - A public hearing, on the selectmen's docket since
January, has been delayed again. Mahoney Oil had requested a special permit in
the Aquifer Protection District but has failed to have the matter heard for
nearly a year. The company has been busy with an environmental assessment at a
new property in Woburn, Town Manager Richard Reed said. The Fire Department has
been monitoring empty fuel trucks nearly daily because the business is near the
aquifer. Selectmen continued the matter to Nov. 26, when the proposal must
either be heard of withdrawn.

   - Melissa Beecher

   BELMONT

   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS - The Federal Emergency Management Agency, in
concert with state agencies overseeing flood hazards, released preliminary flood
insurance rate maps this fall. A 90-day appeal period follows their release,
after which FEMA studies additional information and renders a final
determination. Towns may then adopt or amend their flood plain regulations.
Belmont has not updated its flood insurance rate maps since 1982, according to
the town. The state Department of Conservation and Recreation has scheduled a
meeting for 7 p.m. Nov. 7 at Belmont Town Hall to discuss the process. The maps
are available for viewing at the town Office of Community Development during
business hours. - Dan Tuohy

   BILLERICA

   CONTROL RUBBISH OR FACE FINE - Town Meeting on Oct. 11 approved a bylaw
designed to control rubbish around town. Littering is prohibited, and yard sale
signs can no longer be posted sooner than five days before an event. Materials
brought outdoors must be placed inside suitable containers or inside a building.
Household and commercial waste must be contained or bundled. A first-time
offense may bring a warning, but officials have the authority to impose a $100
fine. The fine increases with each offense, jumping to $300 per day for a fourth
offense.

   - Joyce Pellino Crane

   BOXBOROUGH

   FLU SHOT CLINICS - The Nashoba Associated Boards of Health will hold two flu
clinics for seniors, young children, and adults with chronic illnesses. The
clinics will be held from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. on Nov. 14 and from 11 a.m. to noon
on Dec. 12 at the Boxborough United Church of Christ, 723 Massachusetts Ave. For
more information or for clinics in other communities, call 800-698-3307. -
Jennifer Fenn Lefferts

   BURLINGTON

   PAPAS WINS COACH AWARD - Nick Papas, coach of the Burlington High School
boys' basketball team, has been selected to receive the Leo Miller Award from
the Massachusetts Basketball Coaches Association in recognition of his
dedication, service, and contributions to high school basketball in the state.
Papas, a past president of the association, has won more than 380 games during a
more than 30-year coaching career and is a five-time MBCA coach of the year.
After graduating from Watertown High School and Springfield College, Papas
coached at a high school in Montreal, then started the basketball program at
Minuteman Regional High School in Lexington. He then coached Melrose High School
for a decade and a half, leading the team to an undefeated Middlesex League
record in 1989, before becoming coach at Burlington in 2000. Papas has also
taught physical education at Minuteman for 33 years. The Winchester resident
will receive the award at an association banquet on Nov. 18. - Eric Moskowitz

   CARLISLE

   HELP BUILD A BOARDWALK - The trails committee is looking for help to build
boardwalks along trails on Carlisle conservation land. The committee plans to
build two boardwalks in the Davis Corridor on Nov. 3. Volunteers can park at the
Malcolm Meadows trail parking lot. On Nov. 4, the committee will be working at
the Towle land. Parking is available near the trail entrance on Bingham Road.
Start any time after 9 a.m. on both days. Volunteers are asked to bring hammers,
nail aprons, gloves, eye protection, and waterproof boots. The work will be
postponed to the following weekend in the event of heavy rain. For more
information, call Henry Cox at 978-371-0316 or Steve Tobin at 978-369-1680.
-Jennifer Fenn Lefferts

   CONCORD

   BIRTHING CENTER BENEFIT - Tickets are available for Emerson Hospital's
upcoming dinner dance to raise money for the expansion and renovation of its
birthing center. The Oh Baby! event will be held Nov. 2 at the Boston Park
Plaza. Tickets cost $175. Attendees also have the option of arriving after
dinner for a champagne toast and dancing. Those tickets cost $50. Call
978-287-3084. - Jennifer Fenn Lefferts

   HARVARD

   SCHOOL COMMITTEE MEMBER RESIGNS - On the heels of a Town Meeting vote to
censure the School Committee and the resignation of the town auditor, School
Committee member Jeff Shaw has resigned. His resignation was expected to be
officially accepted at a School Committee meeting Monday night. School Committee
members and selectmen will fill the position in a joint meeting in the next
month.

   - Melissa Beecher

   Lexington

   TAX BREAK FOR BUSINESS APPROVED - Town Meeting endorsed a tax break last week
to allow biopharmaceutical giant Shire HGT to expand its facilities on the
Spring Street property owned by Patriot Partners Lexington LLC. Local officials
believe the move will eventually bolster sagging municipal revenues. The 20-year
agreement could bring hundreds of new highly paid employees to work for Shire
HGT, the division of Shire Pharmaceuticals that produces human genetics
therapies. The deal exempts 95 percent of the company's property taxes in fiscal
year 2009 and ends with a 5 percent exemption in fiscal 2028. The agreement also
requires Shire to contribute $400,000 and Patriot $100,000 to the town for
various projects. The town will also receive $2.6 million for infrastructure
improvements either from the state or from Shire, said Town Manager Carl
Valente.- Connie Paige

   LITTLETON

   SPECIAL TOWN MEETING NOV. 5 - A question on the Nov. 5 Special Town Meeting
warrant asks residents to spend $25,000 on developing an economic development
strategy and action plan for the town. Residents will also be asked to approve
expedited permitting for two sites in town. State law allows communities to
speed the permitting process in an effort to spur development in certain
locations. Town officials hope residents will approve the process for the former
Hewlett-Packard property on King Street and the Cisco property on Great Road.

   - Jennifer Fenn Lefferts

   MEDFORD

   SITE AIMS TO SPUR VOTING - Vote Medford 2007 is up and running at
votemedford.org. The new site was designed by several residents who want to
encourage their neighbors to vote in local elections. The website includes
nonpartisan information about the candidates for the City Council and School
Committee as well as voting information. - Christine McConville

   NORTH READING

   TOWN FOUND TO BE FRUGAL - Town officials released the findings of a
benchmarking study comparing the town's expenses with those of other
communities. The report showed that North Reading spends less per capita when
compared with other towns, including Hanover, Bedford, Reading, Wilmington, and
Lynnfield. In 2006, North Reading spent $3,061 per person, while its peer group
spent an average $3,204. "North Reading is a relatively healthy community," said
Robert Mauceri, chairman of the Board of Selectmen, adding the town appears to
be "more frugal" than some of its neighbors.

   - Laura M. Colarusso

   READING

   FOCUS ON INFRASTRUCTURE - Officials are looking to form a Municipal Building
Committee to study the town's infrastructure needs. The idea, suggested by
Selectwoman Camille Anthony, is in the infancy stages so no details are
available yet, according to Town Manager Peter Hechenbleikner. He is researching
"what other communities have for permanent building committees," he said, and
will present his findings to the Board of Selectmen after Town Meeting, which
starts Nov. 13.- Laura M. Colarusso

   STONEHAM

   ARENA EXPANSION TO BE STUDIED - The Board of Selectmen will undertake a
feasibility study for a sports facility as part of an expanded Stoneham Arena.
Voters at the Special Town Meeting last week narrowly approved the study and an
appropriation of up to $20,000. Selectmen have discussed the expanded sports
complex as another way to generate revenue. A draft brought to Town Meeting had
gauged support for a new facility that would cater to hockey, skating, soccer,
lacrosse, field hockey, and other sports and entertainment activities. George
Seibold, chairman of the selectmen, said the study would examine a second
arena's income potential as a long-term town investment.

   - Dan Tuohy

   WILMINGTON

   COMCAST PROMISES BROADBAND - Comcast has announced it will offer high-speed
Internet service to Wilmington's schools and library for free this academic
year. The company estimates the service is valued at $16,440, according to Jane
Lyman, a senior manager. - Laura M. Colarusso

   WINCHESTER

   FOOTBRIDGE MISSED - More than 250 residents have petitioned the selectmen to
rebuild a pedestrian footbridge. Wedgemere pedestrian bridge, which crossed the
Aberjona River, was removed last year because of safety concerns, but a group of
residents has asked for it back. Selectmen have taken the issue under
advisement. Petitioners are considering private fund-raising. - Melissa Beecher

   WOBURN

   SENIOR APPRECIATION DINNER - Mayor Thomas L. McLaughlin will host the city's
30th annual Mayor's Senior Appreciation Dinner on Nov. 11 at the Woburn Memorial
High School cafeteria. The event will begin with singing and dancing at 11 a.m.,
with the meal to follow at noon. The dinner will be prepared by members of the
Woburn Lodge of Elks and will feature a drawing for prizes donated by local
businesses. The appreciation dinner, which is free for local senior citizens, is
sponsored by area businesses, nonprofit organizations, and others. To obtain
free tickets, or to contribute to the dinner or donate prizes to the raffle,
contact the mayor's office at 781-932-4501. - Eric Moskowitz

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2007


                              427 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                           October 25, 2007 Thursday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: WEST; Pg. Reg7

LENGTH: 140 words

HEADLINE: Voters back firm's tax break

BYLINE: CONNIE PAIGE

BODY:

   GLOBE WEST 1

   Lexington's Town Meeting endorsed a tax break last week to allow
biopharmaceutical giant Shire HGT to expand its facilities on the Spring Street
property owned by Patriot Partners Lexington LLC.

   Local officials believe the move eventually will bolster sagging municipal
revenues.

   The 20-year agreement could bring hundreds of new highly paid employees to
work for Shire HGT, the division of Shire Pharmaceuticals that produces human
genetics therapies.

   The deal exempts 95 percent of the company's property taxes in fiscal year
2009 and ends with a 5 percent exemption in fiscal 2028.

   The agreement also requires Shire to contribute $400,000 and Patriot $100,000
to the town for various projects.

   The town will also receive $2.6 million for infrastructure improvements
either from the state or from Shire, said Town Manager Carl Valente.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2007


                              428 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                            October 23, 2007 Tuesday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 669 words

HEADLINE: New center helps save lives using stem cells;
Local facility to store umbilical cord blood used to treat cancers

BYLINE: Regina McEnery, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   A new center specializing in the collection and storage of umbilical cord
blood will give new mothers a chance to save lives.

   The Cleveland Cord Blood Center in Warrensville Heights, which opens this
week, joins a national network that hopes to more than double the inventory of
stem cell-rich cord blood now used increasingly for the treatment of deadly
blood cancers and a handful of life-threatening genetic disorders.

   A major goal of the center, and nine others like it across the country, will
be to increase the donor pool for black, Latino and Asian patients, where the
chances of finding a suitable stem cell match is 15 percent compared with 50
percent among whites.

   The center, which will add 20 biomedical jobs, is unique to Ohio and aside
from a private research facility in St. Louis, unequaled in the Midwest, said
Dr. Mary Laughlin, director of the Allogeneic Bone Marrow Transplant Program at
Case Western Reserve/University Hospitals Ireland Cancer Center and a pioneer in
the field.

   In 1993, Laughlin performed one of the first umbilical cord blood transplants
in an adult after struggling to find suitable adult matches for one of her
leukemia patients. Since then, the use of cord blood in adult patients has
fueled numerous studies and today accounts for about a quarter of the 30,000
stem cell transplants performed in the United States.

   Unlike embryonic stem cell research, the use of stem cells from umbilical
cord blood and bone marrow are not controversial because the products do not
result in the destruction of the fertilized egg.

   That's because umbilical cord blood is collected right after the birth of the
child.

   Stem cell transplants are a powerful, though secondary, therapy for patients
with leukemia or lymphoma.

   They are also recommended for a number of genetic disorders that prevent the
breakdown of certain nutrients.

   Some believe the stem cells may also hold promise for other chronic diseases
like diabetes.

   Family members, followed by unrelated adult donors, are the preferred options
for stem-cell patients. Cord blood becomes the next line of defense when a
suitable match can't be found, Laughlin said.

   Laughlin helped start the center with a $7.5 million grant from the Abraham
J. and Phyllis Katz Foundation and will serve as its medical director. It will
be part of a national network of 10 centers endeavoring to bring the inventory
of available cord blood units from 65,000 to 150,000 within five years, she
said.

   The center already has agreements with Hillcrest and Fairview hospitals and
is negotiating with several other hospitals in the area. The center hopes to
collect between 400 and 500 units of cord blood by April.

   Hospitals around the country will be able to purchase the units for
transplant procedures. The center said it will provide the cord blood units free
of charge to uninsured patients. The center will also supply stem cells to
researchers for free, said Laughlin.

   The use of cord blood in stem-cell medicine is growing in popularity.

   Magee-Womens Hospital in Pittsburgh and DeKalb Medical Center in Atlanta
rolled out programs this fall encouraging families to consider donating their
baby's umbilical cord blood to public banks. Mothers can also store their
newborn's cord blood for family members or offer it for research.

   University Hospitals Case Medical Center has one of the most active cord
blood research programs in the country and for a number of years has shipped its
cord blood donations to the New York Blood Center.

   But the Cleveland Cord Blood Center, in addition to providing the only cord
blood within hundreds of miles, will also aid in local research, said its
executive director, Barry Smernoff.

   Smernoff said the center also wants to supply stem cells for research
projects in advanced tissue engineering and regenerative medicine that could
open the door to new therapies in orthopedics, diabetes, heart disease and
spinal cord injuries.

   "We're talking about the human body, with over 200 types of cells, needing
replacement parts," he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2007


                              429 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 The Hartford Courant Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                            October 16, 2007 Tuesday
                     1S NEW HAVEN COUNTY/SHORELINE EDITION

SECTION: CONNECTICUT; EDUCATION BRIEFS; LIBRARY NOTE: Here 'n There was also
published as a column name for this story.; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 802 words

HEADLINE: $1.7 MILLION AWARDED FOR BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH

BYLINE: This week's Education Briefs column was written by Courant Staff Writer
Melissa Pionzio. LIBRARY NOTE: Marlene Clark was also published as a byline for
this story.

BODY:

   A number of physicians and professors from the University of Connecticut, its
health center and Yale University have received awards totaling $1.7 million
from the state Department of Public Health's Biomedical Trust Fund program, Gov.
M. Jodi Rell has announced.

   Lance Bauer, a professor of psychiatry at the UConn Health Center, and
Godfrey Pearlson, a professor of psychiatry at Yale, received $538,605 for a
project that investigates the effects of heavy smoking on brain structure and
function.

   UConn's Quing Zhu and Molly Brewer received $315,563 for their study of a
device to detect and treat ovarian cancer patients. Other key personnel involved
in the study are John Gamelin, Malinda Sanders, Mozafareddin Karimeddini and
Changping Zou.

   Jennifer Tirnauer, of the UConn health center, received $299,044 to study how
colon cancer develops and to provide new therapeutic measures.

   John Peluso, of the UConn health center, received $281,016 for research of a
therapy that could improve the overall effectiveness of chemotherapy and reduce
undesirable side effects.

   Yingqun Huang, of the Yale University School of Medicine, received $177,223
to study the development of a novel tumor-specific delivery system for cancer
gene therapy.

   David Gregorio, of the UConn health center, received $107,409 to study the
accuracy and adequacy of tobacco use data in cancer research.

   Gabriel Bol Deng, one of the so-called Lost Boys of Sudan, is making several
speaking appearances in the coming week in Connecticut.

   Deng, who was about 10 when his village was attacked 20 years ago, is now an
American citizen who is speaking out about violence in Darfur.

   Some of his appearances, which are free and open to the public, are:

   On Thursday, he and Onek Adyanga from UConn will speak on ``Human Rights
Matters Everywhere'' at 2 p.m. at Quinebaug Valley Community College in
Danielson. Students have built a small-scale replica of a refugee camp.

   A free bus will leave Quinebaug's Willimantic Center on Main Street at 1 p.m.
and leave the Danielson campus at 3:30 p.m. For more information, call Riette
Pranger at 860-742-1954.

   On Saturday, Deng and Connecticut journalist David Morse will show a
presentation at 7 p.m. titled ``The Connections between Darfur and South Sudan''
at the Storrs Friends Meeting at 57 Hunting Lodge Road in Mansfield.

   For more information, call Morse at 860-429-6803.

   On Sunday, Deng and Morse will be among the speakers at a rally at Minuteman
Park near the state Capitol in Hartford that is aimed at urging China to use it
influence to end the violence in Darfur.

   For more information, call Danielle Millard at 860-912-0380.

   Gary Waslewski, a pitcher for the 1967 Boston Red Sox, and Dan Desrochers,
co-editor of ``The 1967 Impossible Dream Red Sox,'' will discuss the 1967 Sox
team on Saturday during the next meeting of the Smokey Joe Wood Chapter of the
Society of American Baseball Research.

   The meeting will be held from 12:30 to 4 p.m. on Oct. 20 in the College of
Liberal Arts 1, Room 107 at Quinnipiac University in Hamden.

   Waslewski, who was born in Meriden, and Desrochers will take part in a panel
discussion on the 1967 Red Sox, who won the American League pennant but lost the
World Series to the St. Louis Cardinals in seven games.

   The event is free and open to the public. For more information, call
203-582-8652.

   St. Joseph College in West Hartford has been granted licensure from the state
Department of Higher Education for its new master of science degree in
biochemistry, which will be offered online.

   The program is designed to be completed in two years.

   It consists of 30 graduate credits, six of which can be transferred in from
another institution. Required courses include chemical thermodynamics,
biochemistry and genetics. Students select course work in cell biology,
pharmacology, toxicology, endocrinology, immunology, organic chemistry, and
biochemistry of cancer.

   The college also offers online master's degrees in biology and nutrition.

   For more information on the college's graduate programs, visit
www.sjc.edu/graduate.

   The UNESCO Chair and Institute of Comparative Human Rights at UConn will hold
a summit Oct. 23 on the connection between human rights and the global
environment.

   Amii Omara-Otunnu, who holds the UNESCO chair at UConn, is holding the summit
from 9 a.m. to noon in the Student Union Theater at UConn in Storrs.

   Speakers include Matt Petersen, president and CEO of Global Green of
California; Vandana Shiva, a physicist and environmental activist; Pam Dashiel,
an activist from New Orleans; Jim Enote, a farmer and activist, and Marie-Denise
Finnigan, a physician and human rights advocate from Haiti. Scholars who hold
UNESCO chairs from South Africa and Uruguay are also expected to attend.

   For more information, visit
http://web.uconn.edu/unescochair/upchrconference.htm.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2007


                              430 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 The Hartford Courant Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                            October 16, 2007 Tuesday
                  5 NORTHWEST CONNECTICUT/SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: CONNECTICUT; EDUCATION BRIEFS; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 590 words

HEADLINE: $1.7 MILLION AWARDED FOR BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH

BYLINE: This week's Education Briefs column was written by Courant Staff Writer
Melissa Pionzio.

BODY:

   A number of physicians and professors from the University of Connecticut, its
health center and Yale University have received awards totaling $1.7 million
from the state Department of Public Health's Biomedical Trust Fund program, Gov.
M. Jodi Rell has announced.

   Lance Bauer, a professor of psychiatry at the UConn Health Center, and
Godfrey Pearlson, a professor of psychiatry at Yale, received $538,605 for a
project that investigates the effects of heavy smoking on brain structure and
function.

   UConn's Quing Zhu and Molly Brewer received $315,563 for their study of a
device to detect and treat ovarian cancer patients. Other key personnel involved
in the study are John Gamelin, Malinda Sanders, Mozafareddin Karimeddini and
Changping Zou.

   Jennifer Tirnauer, of the UConn health center, received $299,044 to study how
colon cancer develops and to provide new therapeutic measures.

   John Peluso, of the UConn health center, received $281,016 for research of a
therapy that could improve the overall effectiveness of chemotherapy and reduce
undesirable side effects.

   Yingqun Huang, of the Yale University School of Medicine, received $177,223
to study the development of a novel tumor-specific delivery system for cancer
gene therapy.

   David Gregorio, of the UConn health center, received $107,409 to study the
accuracy and adequacy of tobacco use data in cancer research.

   Gabriel Bol Deng, one of the so-called Lost Boys of Sudan, is making several
speaking appearances in the coming week in Connecticut.

   Deng, who was about 10 when his village was attacked 20 years ago, is now an
American citizen who is speaking out about violence in Darfur.

   Some of his appearances, which are free and open to the public, are:

   On Thursday, he and Onek Adyanga from UConn will speak on ``Human Rights
Matters Everywhere'' at 2 p.m. at Quinebaug Valley Community College in
Danielson. Students have built a small-scale replica of a refugee camp.

   A free bus will leave Quinebaug's Willimantic Center on Main Street at 1 p.m.
and leave the Danielson campus at 3:30 p.m. For more information, call Riette
Pranger at 860-742-1954.

   On Saturday, Deng and Connecticut journalist David Morse will show a
presentation at 7 p.m. titled ``The Connections between Darfur and South Sudan''
at the Storrs Friends Meeting at 57 Hunting Lodge Road in Mansfield.

   For more information, call Morse at 860-429-6803.

   On Sunday, Deng and Morse will be among the speakers at a rally at Minuteman
Park near the state Capitol in Hartford that is aimed at urging China to use it
influence to end the violence in Darfur.

   For more information, call Danielle Millard at 860-912-0380.

   Gary Waslewski, a pitcher for the 1967 Boston Red Sox, and Dan Desrochers,
co-editor of ``The 1967 Impossible Dream Red Sox,'' will discuss the 1967 Sox
team on Saturday during the next meeting of the Smokey Joe Wood Chapter of the
Society of American Baseball Research.

   The meeting will be held from 12:30 to 4 p.m. on Oct. 20 in the College of
Liberal Arts 1, Room 107 at Quinnipiac University in Hamden.

   The event is free and open to the public. For more information, call
203-582-8652.

   St. Joseph College in West Hartford has been granted licensure from the state
Department of Higher Education for its new master of science degree in
biochemistry, which will be offered online.

   The program is designed to be completed in two years.

   It consists of 30 graduate credits, six of which can be transferred in from
another institution. For more information on the college's graduate programs,
visit www.sjc.edu/graduate.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2007


                              431 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            October 14, 2007 Sunday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. V13

LENGTH: 836 words

HEADLINE: ENGINEERING AND SCIENCE

BODY:

   YOUR CAREER

   One need only listen to the news to know our country's aging infrastructure
needs serious rehabilitation. "Just like with an old house, and the cars and
people we love, there's always something to fix. It's the same with old roads
and bridges," said Wentworth Institute of Technology's Dr. Cornelia Demers,
associate professor of civil engineering technology and coordinator of the
school's civil engineering technology program.

   Mechanical and electronic engineering grads are two of the most sought after
by recruiters coming from around the nation to Boston-area schools, according to
Greg Denon, Wentworth's director of career services. In Massachusetts, firms
want these specialists for work in medical devices and alternative energy.

   In the sciences, Boston and Cambridge remain strong for academic jobs,
research, product development, and sales of medical devices and pharmaceuticals.
The area's diverse markets enable most professionals to find work, despite the
changing fortunes of some biomedical companies.

   For professional and career connections, check nspe.org, www.engineers.org,
and sciencecareers.org.

   BIOLOGICAL SCIENTISTS

   Average salary: $73,770

   Demand: Very good in most areas. Industry demand is particularly strong in
this region from biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies; government funding
remains good for research on cancer, Alzheimer's disease, and gene therapies.
Sales, marketing, and applied research also offer good opportunities.
Competition for work and grant money tempers the market for PhDs in some other
biological sciences.

   Qualifications: Doctorate necessary for independent research; master's for
applied research; bachelor's for some sales.

   CHEMISTS

   Average salary: $77,640

   Demand: Fair to good. Opportunities are good in pharmaceutical, medical, and
environmental research, but competition is tough. The market for
nonpharmaceutical chemists is weaker.

   Qualifications: Independent research requires a PhD; those with a master's
can work in applied research, sales, and marketing.

   CHEMICAL ENGINEERS

   Average salary: $86,480

   Demand: Mixed. Much chemical manufacturing is in decline, but opportunities
are good in energy, biotechnology, and pharmaceutical manufacturing. Some work
goes offshore.

   Qualifications: Bachelor's degree required. Must keep current in field or
face layoffs.

   CIVIL ENGINEERS

   Average salary: $80,010

   Demand: Strong. Civil engineers are in high demand to rehabilitate our aging
infrastructure, and to design environmentally sustainable green structures.
Businesses, schools, and governments are actively seeking more engineers, both
experienced and at entry level.

   Qualifications: Civil engineering degree plus state licensure. Keeping
current with new technologies is crucial.

   ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS

   ENGINEERS

   Average salary: $94,060 (electrical); $88,130 (electronics)

   Demand: Very good. Firms actively seek these specialties for energy
management, medical device design, wireless electronics, and more.

   Qualifications: Bachelor's degree, plus continuing courses to stay current in
new technologies; analytical and creative abilities.

   ENGINEERING AND NATURAL SCIENCE MANAGERS

   Average salary: $126,690 (engineering); $139,750 (natural science)

   Demand: Strong. Experienced engineering and science managers with additional
business backgrounds are in demand.

   Qualifications: Bachelor's degree in engineering, field experience, good
technical and communication skills. Additional degree in business or engineering
management increases marketability.

   MECHANICAL ENGINEERS

   Average salary: $86,660

   Demand: Very good. Demand is high for mechanical engineers for designing
medical devices, fuel cells, wind turbines, and other alternative energy
systems. Also, many engineers are retiring, leaving more jobs to fill.

   Qualifications: Degree in mechanical engineering, continuing courses in new
technologies.

   GEOLOGISTS, GEOPHYSICISTS, AND OCEANOGRAPHERS

   Average salary: $79,890 (geoscientists); $88,680 (oceanographers)

   Demand: Good. Growing needs to find new energy sources and to study the
impact of climate change on our water, earth, and undersea life are fueling
increased demand for these scientists. New technologies enable more advanced
studies of tectonic plate movements, shipwrecks, and whale populations.
Retirements also create openings.

   Qualifications: Graduate degrees required for research; bachelor's degree for
entry-level work. Mobility and a second language necessary for many fields.

   PHYSICISTS AND ASTRONOMERS

   Average salary: $102,340 (physicists); $120,570 (astronomers)

   Demand: Mixed. Competition continues to be tough, as the `90s produced far
more PhDs than jobs, and federal research funding has been cut in many areas.
Energy research, defense work, and applied research and development provide good
opportunities.

   Qualifications: PhD and postdoctoral training needed for university teaching
and research; master's degree can qualify for applied research and product
development; those with bachelor's degrees often switch to engineering or
computer work.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2007


                              432 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           October 11, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Classified; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 424 words

HEADLINE: Paid Notice: Deaths GOLDEN, WILLIAM T

BODY:

    GOLDEN--William T. The Board of Directors and Scientific Advisory Counsel of
Alliance for Cancer Gene Therapy, Inc. (ACGT) mourn the passing of William T.
Golden, who provided early insight and support for ACGT's mission to find a cure
for cancer through gene therapy research. Bill Golden's vision within the
scientific and philanthropic community was an inspiration to us all. Edward &
Barbara Netter, Co-Founders

    GOLDEN--William T. The members of the Department of Biological Sciences at
Columbia University mourn the death of their illustrious alumnus, Bill Golden.
Both through his support of Departmental efforts and his personal friendships,
Bill enriched our science and our lives. We send our deepest sympathy to his
daughters Dr. Pamela Golden and Sybil Golden, Chairman of the Black Rock Forest
Consortium, to his wife, Catherine Morrison, and to all his family and friends
who miss him as we do.

    GOLDEN--William T. The Trustees of the Neurosciences Research Foundation and
the scientists and staff of The Neurosciences Institute in La Jolla are deeply
saddened by the passing of William T. Golden, our esteemed colleague and dear
friend. Beginning in 1981, Bill served the Foundation with great dedication as
trustee, chairman, and chairman emeritus. We shall miss his wise counsel, keen
intellect, and unsurpassed commitment to science for the benefit of the public.
We extend our heartfelt condolences to his family and to all he touched over his
remarkable lifetime. William D. Walsh, Chairman Gerald M. Edelman, President W.
Einar Gall, Research Director

    GOLDEN--William T. The New York Academy of Medicine acknowledges with
profound sorrow the death of William T. Golden. We join many in remembering his
keen intellect and contributions to science, and we are especially grateful for
his friendship, extraordinary contribution of wisdom and generosity to the
Academy. The Academy Board, Fellows and staff extend deepest condolences to his
family. Jo Ivey Boufford, M.D., President Thomas Q. Morris, M.D., Chairman,
Board of Trustees

    GOLDEN--William T. It is with deepest sympathy that the Board of Directors
and Staff of The Catskill Center for Conservation and Development express our
condolences to the family of Bill Golden, who served on our board for over 26
years. We will remember him with much admiration and affection for his profound
wisdom and sense of humor. He will be greatly missed. His daughter, Sibyl R.
Golden continues to serve on our board. H. Claude Shostal, President, Tom
Alworth, Executive Director

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2007


                              433 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            October 9, 2007 Tuesday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: FOREIGN; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 750 words

HEADLINE: 2 Americans, Briton share Nobel Prize in medicine Scientists honored
for their work in `gene-targeting'

BYLINE: Malcolm Ritter Associated Press

BODY:

   NEW YORK - As a child in Italy during World War II, he lived for years on the
streets and in orphanages. Six decades later, as a scientist in the United
States, Mario Capecchi joined two other researchers in winning the Nobel Prize
in medicine.

   Their work led to a powerful and widely used technique to manipulate genes in
mice, which has helped scientists study heart disease, diabetes, cancer, cystic
fibrosis, and other diseases.

   The $1.54 million prize was awarded yesterday to Capecchi, 70, of the
University of Utah in Salt Lake City; Oliver Smithies, 82, a native of Britain
now at University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill; and Sir Martin J. Evans, 66,
of Cardiff University in Wales.

   Their "gene-targeting" technique lets scientists deactivate or modify
individual genes in mice and observe how those changes affect the animals. That
in turn gives clues about what those genes do in human health and disease.

   The work has had "a revolutionary effect on the ability to understand how
genes work," said Richard Woychik, director of The Jackson Laboratory in Bar
Harbor, Maine, a center for mouse genetics.

   The prize is a particularly striking accomplishment for Capecchi (pronounced
kuh-PEK'-ee). A native of Italy, he was separated from his mother, a poet, at
age 3 when the Gestapo took her to the Dachau concentration camp as a political
prisoner in 1941. He spent a year with a peasant family, until the money she'd
left for his care ran out.

   At age 4, "I started wandering the streets," he recalled yesterday. For about
four years, he lived on the streets or in orphanages, and he ended up in a
hospital with malnutrition.

   Dachau was liberated in 1945, and his mother survived.

   "Then she set out to find me," searching through hospital records. "I was in
a hospital and when they keep you in a hospital, they didn't want you to run
around. They took your clothes away. She came and bought me an outfit."

   She showed up on Capecchi's ninth birthday. Soon thereafter, "we were on a
boat to America. ... I literally expected roads to be paved with gold. What I
found was, it was a land of opportunity," he said.

   In the United States, he went to school for the first time, starting in third
grade despite not knowing English.

   The three prize-winning scientists mostly worked separately, although they
exchanged information about their research. Evans identified embryonic stem
cells in mice, while the gene-targeting technique used on those cells came from
work by Capecchi and Smithies.

   Capecchi's work has uncovered the roles of genes involved in organ
development in mammals, the committee said. Evans developed strains of
gene-altered mice to study cystic fibrosis, and Smithies created strains to
study such conditions as high blood pressure and heart disease.

   To create gene-altered mice, researchers introduce a genetic change into
mouse embryonic stem cells. These cells are then injected into mouse embryos.
The mice born from these embryos are bred to produce offspring with the changed
genes.

   In 1989, the first mice born with genes manipulated through the technique was
announced. More than 10,000 different genes in mice have since been studied this
way, the Nobel committee said. That's about half the genes the rodents have.

   Apart from making mice with altered DNA, the work has also shown how to
manipulate genes in human embryonic stem cells for lab research.

   Such basic studies can help scientists learn how to turn the cells into
specialized cells that might prove useful in therapy, said Doug Melton,
co-director of the Harvard Stem Cell Institute.

   And scientists hope that by putting disease-related genes into human
embryonic cells for lab studies, they can learn how the diseases develop and
screen potential therapies, said John Gearhart, a stem cell expert at the Johns
Hopkins School of Medicine.

   The prize-winning work has "formed the foundation for much of what we do" in
human embryonic stem cell research, Melton said.

   Evans, asked yesterday about the prize while visiting his daughter in
Cambridge, England, said, "I haven't come to terms with it yet. In many ways it
is the boyhood aspiration of science, isn't it? And here I am unexpectedly with
it. It's amazing."

   Moments after a 5 a.m. call from Sweden, Smithies called the Nobel "very
gratifying."

   "My work was never toward getting the Nobel Prize," Smithies told The
Associated Press over a cup of tea at his lab a few hours after the Nobel
committee called with the news. "It was solving a problem, and enjoying the
solution."

GRAPHIC: Mario Capecchi, recipient of the Nobel Prize in medicine, held the vial
that once contained the cells from his first experiment.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2007


                              434 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            October 9, 2007 Tuesday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 573 words

HEADLINE: Overlooking oversight

BODY:

   Millions of Americans enroll each year in studies of experimental drugs and
medical devices. Jolee Mohr of Springfield, Ill., was one of them. She died at a
Chicago hospital in July while participating in a gene therapy trial.

   Research on drugs and medical devices takes place at more than 350,000
locations around the country. Protecting the people who participate is the
responsibility of review boards, panels of professionals who are supposed to be
independent of the research itself.

   You might wonder how the U.S. Food and Drug Administration keeps track of all
those studies and checks on the work of those thousands of review boards. The
answer, unfortunately, is not very well.

   A report released last month by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services Inspector General highlights the FDA's dismal record:

   - Between 2000 and 2005, the FDA inspected just one out of 100 places at
which drug trials took place. The agency has only 200 inspectors for this work
and no comprehensive database listing all drug trials or the committees of
experts called Institutional Review Boards that oversee them.

   - During that four-year period, FDA inspectors found serious problems at 348
test sites but later downgraded those findings 68 percent of the time. Only 26
researchers were disqualified from conducting future clinical trials. And only
twice did the agency reject completely the data gathered at a problem location.

   The departmental report was released as the National Institutes of Health
investigates Ms. Mohr's death. The 36-year-old Springfield woman, who was
survived by her husband and a 5-year-old daughter, enrolled in the study in the
mistaken belief that it might provide her with relief from arthritis pain. In
fact, the trial was not designed to test the effectiveness of the treatment,
only its safety.

   As part of the study, Ms. Mohr was taking immune-suppressing drugs. She died
of a fungal infection that was a known complication of those drugs.

   "The biggest question I have is, would my wife still be alive today if she
hadn't participated in this study?" her husband Robb Mohr told the NIH. "I have
it in my heart that she'd still be here."

   At one time, most drug trials were conducted at universities and funded by
the federal government. The review boards, panels of independent experts who
sign off on patient protections, were made up of medical school professors.

   Today, most drug studies are funded by pharmaceutical companies. They often
take place in physician offices, and doctors typically receive a payment for
each patient they enroll. In some cases, the review boards who oversee the trial
have been hired on a contract basis.

   Often, the FDA visits study sites long after research has been completed; its
focus is determining whether the data gathered were accurate, not whether
patients have been protected.

   A bill signed into law last month will create, for the first time, a registry
of all drug trials. That's a start - but only a start.

   The FDA also should conduct more inspections while studies are underway. It
should have a database listing all institutional review boards. And it needs
more legal authority to take action when it uncovers evidence of wrongdoing.
Only Congress can give it that authority.

   Medical research depends upon patients agreeing to participate in drug
trials. They have an absolute right to understand the risks they're taking and
to be protected from foreseeable, preventable harm.

NOTES:  OUR VIEW | MEDICINE OPINION

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2007


                              435 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                             October 5, 2007 Friday
                                 FIRST EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 767 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   THE REGION

   Decision on acquisition of Bioenvision due today

   Genzyme Corp. will likely find out today whether its $345 million bid to buy
Bioenvision Inc. of New York will be successful. A vote by Bioenvision
shareholders was originally slated to be completed yesterday, but Bioenvision
decided to extend the deadline because the proposal was close to passing and
many shareholders had not yet voted. So far, shareholders controlling 47 percent
of shares have voted in favor of Genzyme's bid, just shy of the majority needed
for approval. But many shares were still outstanding yesterday. Genzyme, based
in Cambridge, has already purchased 22 percent of shares through a tender offer.
Bioenvision's board voted to accept Genzyme's $5.60 per share offer, but some
shareholders have said the price is too low. (Todd Wallack)

   Japan OK's sales of drug to treat Hunter syndrome

   Biotechnology company Genzyme Corp. said it received approval to market its
drug Elaprase in Japan for the treatment of Hunter syndrome, a life-threatening
genetic condition. Elaprase is designed to replace the so-called
iduronate-2-sulfatase enzyme, which is deficient or absent in people with the
disease. Genzyme said it plans to launch Elaprase this quarter, following
reimbursement approval. Shire Human Genetic Therapies Inc., a division of
British drug maker Shire PLC, develops Elaprase, while Genzyme sells the product
in Japan and other Asia-Pacific countries. (AP)

   Natixis names president, CEO North American unit

   Natixis Global Asset Management said it named John T. Hailer president and
chief executive of North American operations. Hailer, in Boston, will also
continue in his role as president and chief executive of Natixis Global
Associates, the distribution organization. He succeeds Jeremiah Chafkin, who was
named head of Natixis's alternatives group. Natixis is the investment and
project banking unit of France's Banque Populaire and Caise d'Epargne groups.
(Ross Kerber)

   THE NATION

   More items made in China recalled because of lead

   More than a half-million Chinese-made products were recalled, including
"Pirates of the Caribbean" flashlights and Baby Einstein toys, because they
contain dangerous levels of lead, the Consumer Product Safety Commission said.
The recall also includes Totally Me! Funky Room Decor Set decorating kits
imported and sold by Toys "R" Us Inc. and a variety of wooden toys imported and
sold by KB Toys Inc. Aluminum water bottles, imported and sold by The Sports
Authority Inc., were also recalled. Also, the Boy Scouts of America said a
painted, plastic totem badge worn by some of its youngest scouts is being
voluntary recalled after a test revealed high levels of lead in the paint. (AP)

   Sprint Nextel mum about CEO-president's future

   Sprint Nextel Corp. said it wasn't commenting on a published report that its
board is looking to replace chairman and chief executive Gary Forsee. The Wall
Street Journal, quoting unidentified people familiar with the situation,
reported on its website that Sprint Nextel's board had begun talking to industry
leaders for a successor and hoped to make a selection by early December. The
Journal reported activist investor Ralph Whitworth, the principal of Relational
Investors LLC, said he no longer had faith in Forsee and Nextel's board. (AP)

   Alcoa to sell 2 divisions, restructure one other

   Alcoa Inc., the biggest US aluminum producer, said it will sell its packaging
and consumer and automotive castings businesses, and restructure its electrical
and electronic solutions business. The company said it has received "strong
indications" from potential buyers for its packaging and consumer business.
Alcoa said it plans to complete a sale of that business this year or early in
2008. The company also said it is near an agreement to sell its automotive
castings business and should be able to close that transaction by year-end.
Alcoa did not disclose terms of the deal. (AP)

   Merck cholesterol drug shows dramatic results

   An experimental Merck & Co. cholesterol drug from the same class as one that
failed for Pfizer Inc. had dramatic results in a small clinical trial without
the safety problems that doomed the Pfizer medicine. The new class of drugs,
which block a protein known as CETP, raise levels of "good" HDL cholesterol and
the Merck candidate did so spectacularly, according to data presented at the
Drugs Affecting Lipid Metabolism meeting in New York. At the second-highest dose
tested in the eight-week midstage trial, MK-859, raised levels of
heart-protective HDL 139 percent and cut levels of "bad" LDL cholesterol 40
percent. (Reuters)

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2007


                              436 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            October 4, 2007 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NORTHWEST; Pg. Reg1

LENGTH: 925 words

HEADLINE: Town to vote on running utility

BYLINE: Connie Paige Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   GLOBE NORTHWEST 1 / LEXINGTON

   Lexington Town Meeting will be asked next week to endorse a state bill
allowing communities to set up municipal electric companies that advocates say
could lower electric bills dramatically.

   If the article passes at the Special Town Meeting Wednesday, the vote could
send a message to Beacon Hill about the support for municipal electric
companies.

   "The reality is, with the cities and towns that have municipal electric
companies, the lights are on more often and for less money and with better
service than in investor-owned utility territory," said Patrick Mehr, a longtime
advocate for municipal electric companies and sponsor of the article.

   NStar, the investor-owned utility that serves Lexington, said its delivery
prices are "stable," the "service reliability is consistently improving year to
year," and the company "builds and maintains partnerships" with its communities.

   Spokesman Mike Durand gave as an example a parking lot recently donated in
downtown Lexington.

   "We've heard directly from customers throughout our service areas that
they're comfortable staying with us," he said.

   Officials from National Grid, the other investor-owned utility serving the
area, did not return calls for comment early this week.

   The Lexington vote would endorse passage of House Bill 3319, permitting
formation of municipal electric companies, often called "munis." Lexington state
Representative Jay Kaufman, the bill's lead sponsor, said he believes munis save
ratepayers money, but he wants the Legislature to include $300,000 in next
year's budget to study their benefits and drawbacks.

   Officials from area munis contend their rates are lower than those of
investor-owned utilities.

   Priscilla Gottwald, community relations manager of Reading Municipal Light
Department, started in 1894, said Reading residential customers pay an average
of $81.70 per month, compared with what would be average monthly bills in that
town from NStar of $139.53 and from National Grid of $116.17. The rate is based
on the average customer's monthly use of 750 kilowatt hours, she said.

   Durand disputed the figure for his company, saying it would be $134.51.

   Other area communities with munis are Belmont, Concord, Groton, and
Littleton.

   Kaufman said that while state law allowed communities like these to set up
their own municipal electric companies more than a century ago, many local
officials now believe investor-owned utilities could bar the practice. The
Democrat said the state Department of Telecommunications and Energy has taken
that position, which "has not been tested in court."

   Without a legislative go-ahead, communities are unwilling to pay what it
would cost to prepare an infrastructure for establishing a muni, only to have it
shot down, he said.

   Kaufman said the bill has had slight technical changes since its first
incarnation five years ago; the only substantial difference this year is that an
increasing number of his colleagues have signed on.

   The tally is now 53, including representatives Cory Atkins of Concord,
William Brownsberger of Belmont, James Eldridge of Acton, James Marzilli of
Arlington, Charles Murphy of Burlington, Carl Sciortino of Somerville, and
Thomas Stanley of Waltham; and senators Susan Fargo of Lincoln, Patricia Jehlen
of Somerville, Pamela Resor of Acton, Steven Tolman of Watertown, and Susan
Tucker of Andover.

   Supporters are hoping the bill will not end up like it did last year, when
the Senate and House chairmen of the Joint Committee on Telecommunications,
Utilities, and Energy placed it in what is called a study committee - "a
technical term for a black hole," Kaufman said.

   Mehr said he believes the bill has not advanced because of lobbying by
industry representatives, who have also donated to the campaign coffers of some
legislators.

   Kaufman vehemently disagreed.

   "It's a cheap and unfair shot to impugn the integrity of someone who doesn't
see things the way you do," he said. "It actually bothers me a lot that their
opposition would be characterized as `for sale."'

   Kaufman said theirs is a "legitimate concern" that establishment of munis
could have a detrimental economic impact on the investor-owned utilities and
their ratepayers.

   Opponents also worry about whether communities have the expertise to handle
municipal electric companies, and what would happen if they fail.

   "I think a Town Meeting resolution could restate the community's obvious
interest in this bill, but I'm not sure how far it could go to address any of
the concerns - many of them legitimate - that my colleagues have," he said.

   To combat the skepticism, Kaufman said, he is filing a separate measure as
part of next year's budget that would appropriate $50,000 to the Department of
Telecommunications and Energy to perform an economic analysis of the bill's
impact on investor-owned utilities.

   Another $50,000 apiece would be granted to Lexington and four other
communities that have expressed interest in establishing a municipal electric
company for separate cost-benefit analyses. The others are Cambridge, Newton,
Plymouth, and Worcester.

   Mehr said he believes passage of the legislation could also affect another
measure set for Special Town Meeting.

   As a separate warrant article, voters will also consider a tax increment
financing agreement, called a TIF, which would encourage development of a local
facility by Shire Human Genetic Therapies Inc.

   If the town were to have its own muni, Mehr figures, Shire could save a
substantial amount in electricity costs.

   Connie Paige can be reached at cpaige@globe.com

CORRECTION-DATE: October 11, 2007

CORRECTION:

   Because of an editing error, an Oct. 4 Globe NorthWest story about a pending
Lexington Town Meeting vote included an incorrect headline. The Special Town
Meeting vote, scheduled for Oct. 10, was to endorse passage of a legislative
bill allowing communities to set up municipal electric companies.

   10/10/2007

   Because of an editing error, a story in Thursday's NorthWest section about a
Lexington Town Meeting vote that will be held tonight had an incorrect headline.
The Special Town Meeting will vote on whether to endorse passage of a
legislative bill allowing communities to set up municipal electric companies.
Also, because of incorrect information provided by NStar, the story
mischaracterized the arrangement between Lexington and NStar for a parking lot
in the town. NStar leases land it owns to the town, and Lexington says the town
has spent its own money to turn the land into a lot.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2007


                              437 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                          September 20, 2007 Thursday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NORTHWEST; Pg. Reg1

LENGTH: 751 words

HEADLINE: Shire deal might create 650 jobs

BYLINE: Connie Paige Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   GLOBE NORTHWEST 1 / LEXINGTON

   Town Meeting next month will consider allowing international
biopharmaceutical giant Shire HGT to expand its local facilities, a move
officials believe will bolster sagging municipal revenue.

   In addition to boosting property taxes, the proposed deal could bring
hundreds of new highly paid employees and a $600,000 bonus to the town from
Shire HGT, a division of Shire Pharmaceuticals that produces human genetics
therapies.

   "It's an excellent opportunity," said Jeanne Krieger, chairwoman of the
selectmen, after the panel voted last week to have a Special Town Meeting on
Oct. 10 consider a 20-year Tax Increment Financing, or TIF, agreement with
Shire.

   But even if Town Meeting approves the proposal, which local officials said
will not be finalized for about a week, there are still hurdles.

   Shire spokesman Matthew Cabrey said the company is "not yet committed" to the
plan. The state must "put together a separate package of tax incentives, job
training, and other tools that would convince Shire that, yes, this is the best
move for the organization and, frankly, a good move forward for the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts."

   Selectmen are scheduled to hold an informational meeting Oct. 1 about the
warrant article, which will specify the amount of the proposed tax break. The
TIF law requires the break to amount to more than 5 percent of all value added
to the property above the current assessment. The Shire-related property is now
assessed at $892,000, according to Rob Addelson, the town comptroller.

   Cabrey said Shire, which has a facility at 125 Spring St., recently signed a
long-term lease for an adjacent property at 300 Patriot Place, in Lexington
Technology Park. If local and state tax incentives come through, the company
plans to spend $250 million in buildings and $144 million in capital
improvements to build 552,000 square feet of space for manufacturing, research,
and development, and administrative support on Patriot Way, with an opening
projected for 2011, he said.

   The "majority" of 650 new jobs the company plans to create would be located
in Lexington, he said, with those employees receiving an average annual salary
of $100,000.

   Cabrey said Shire, which employs 600 in a manufacturing facility in Cambridge
and another 700 worldwide, hopes to break ground in Lexington by January.

   That depends, however, on negotiating a favorable deal with the state, Cabrey
said. While the state already can offer some tax breaks, the company is waiting
for lawmakers to pass a bill offering more business advantages to the
life-sciences industry, he said.

   The bill gained attention this summer when the Globe revealed that a former
Patrick administration official, Robert Coughlin, met with biotechnology
executives to develop lucrative tax breaks for the industry at the same time he
was entering into discussions with a biotechnology trade group to become its
next president.

   A Shire executive reportedly was among those who attended one of the meetings
with Coughlin, a former economic undersecretary, before the Massachusetts
Biotechnology Council hired him on Aug. 11. During the meeting in his Beacon
Hill office, Coughlin reportedly invited the executives to submit draft language
that could be included in legislation for the industry's tax credits.

   Local officials said this week that Coughlin's action, which reportedly led
to a state Ethics Commission investigation, did not stall their consideration of
the TIF, and Cabrey agreed.

   "That has not influenced the process from our perspective at all," Cabrey
said.

   State Representative Jay Kaufman, a Democrat who represents Lexington and
parts of other local communities, said the bill is "a top priority for the
governor, as it is for me. Both he and I are very optimistic about its chances."

   Kaufman said he could not predict how soon the bill will get the nod. He also
said Governor Deval Patrick has "made it abundantly clear that Shire is at the
top of the list" of companies to receive the tax breaks "when that bill passes."

   Shire makes the drug Elaprase, used for Hunter's syndrome, a rare genetic
disorder found only in boys that causes dwarfism; enlarged head, forehead, and
brow; respiratory and cardiac problems; and other serious symptoms that can lead
to premature death.

   Another of the company's drugs, Replagal, is not yet approved for use by the
federal Food and Drug Administration for Fabry disease, a rare genetic disorder
causing similar problems.

   Connie Paige can be reached at cpaige@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2007


                              438 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                           September 18, 2007 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 256  words

HEADLINE: Gene-therapy experiment likely didn't kill woman, but not ruled out

BYLINE: Andrew Bridges, Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A virus used in a gene therapy experiment likely didn't cause the death of a
Downstate woman suffering from rheumatoid arthritis, although it can't be
completely ruled out, government health advisers said Monday.

   Advisers to the National Institutes of Health said that a massive fungal
infection is near the top of the list of likely culprits in Jolee Mohr's death.

   Mohr, 36, died at University of Chicago Medical Center on July 24, several
weeks after receiving the second injection of trillions of genetically altered
viruses at the Arthritis Center in Springfield as part of a gene therapy study
for rheumatoid arthritis.

   Doctors have since struggled to determine how she died, though a massive
Histoplasma capsulatum infection appears to be a leading cause. Advisers to the
National Institutes of Health met Monday to hear autopsy results and other
evidence to determine what role -- if any -- the injected virus also may have
played.

   The genetically engineered virus was used as a vector or vehicle to carry a
new gene into Mohr's body, helping it to make a protein that would ease her
arthritis pain. Mohr had suffered from arthritis since her 20s.

   ''We can't to 100 percent certainty exclude the vector but as was presented,
the data would suggest that it's unlikely to be playing a role,'' said Dr.
Howard Federoff of Georgetown University Medical Center, chairman of the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee. Federoff said the fungal infection, called
histoplasmosis, was ''near the top'' of the lists of likely causes for Mohr's
death.

GRAPHIC:
Color Photo: Jolee Mohr ;

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2007


                              439 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           September 18, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 858 words

HEADLINE: Death in Gene Therapy Treatment Is Still Unexplained

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   A federal committee concluded yesterday that it was too early to tell whether
an experimental gene therapy treatment for rheumatoid arthritis contributed to
the death of a 36-year-old woman in July.

     But the committee, set up by the National Institutes of Health to help
oversee gene therapy clinical trials, raised questions about the process used to
enroll the woman in the study. And the woman's husband said he thought his wife
should not have been recruited.

     ''The biggest question I have is  would my wife still be alive today if she
hadn't participated in this study?'' Robb Mohr of Taylorville, Ill., said in
brief, tearful remarks about his wife, Jolee. ''I have it in my heart that she'd
still be here.''

     If Ms. Mohr's death is eventually tied to the gene therapy, it could set
back a field that has already had its share of failures and black eyes,
including the death in 1999 of a teenager, Jesse Gelsinger, in a gene therapy
test at the University of Pennsylvania.

     Jolee Mohr, who had a 5-year-old daughter, died on July 24 at the
University of Chicago Medical Center, three weeks after trillions of genetically
engineered viruses were injected into her right knee as a test of an
experimental treatment for rheumatoid arthritis. The type of virus used as a
gene carrier has widely been considered safe and is being used in 35 other
trials.

     Autopsy data presented at  the committee meeting  yesterday in Bethesda,
Md., suggested that the main cause of death was a fungal infection,
histoplasmosis, that had gone out of control, destroying her organs. Ms. Mohr
also suffered from internal bleeding, with a pool of blood in her abdomen that
was so large that it displaced her kidneys and other organs.

     The results indicated that the virus did not directly kill her. But a major
question for the committee, known as the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, was
whether the gene therapy suppressed her immune system, allowing the fungus to
run wild. The gene therapy was meant to cause cells in her knee joint to produce
an anti-inflammatory protein identical to the one in Enbrel, a widely used
arthritis drug. Enbrel can leave patients more susceptible to infections.

     But Ms. Mohr was also taking regular injections of Humira, a drug similar
to Enbrel that has also been linked to infections, including histoplasmosis. She
was also on two other immune-suppressing drugs.

     Studies found that the genetically engineered virus had spread to Ms.
Mohr's liver and spleen. That raised the possibility that the immune-suppressing
protein was produced outside the joint.

     H. Stewart Parker, the president of Targeted Genetics, said after the
meeting that the levels of virus in the liver and spleen had been tiny,
strengthening the company's view that its therapy was not at fault.

     Referring to adeno-associated virus, the type used in the gene therapy, Ms.
Parker said, ''Anybody who knows anything about A.A.V. would be shocked if it
had anything to do with anything.''

     The company has always said that the injection into the joint produces
minuscule amounts of immune-suppressing protein compared with taking a drug like
Humira through injection into the bloodstream.

     Some committee members seemed to agree. ''It certainly would not have
killed the patient,'' Dr. Hildegund C. J. Ertl, a vaccine researcher at the
Wistar Institute in Philadelphia, said of the virus leak  to the liver and
spleen.

     But Alan C. Milstein, a lawyer for Mr. Mohr, said after the meeting that it
was suspicious that Ms. Mohr, who had been taking Humira for a long time, had a
problem only after receiving the gene therapy injection.

     Testing continues on Ms. Mohr's blood and other tissues. But some panel
members said the role of the gene therapy in Ms. Mohr's death might never be
definitively determined.

     Some members said Ms. Mohr might not have been given enough time to
consider whether to enroll in the trial. And they said the fact that she was
recruited by her rheumatologist might have led her to believe she would benefit
from the trial, even though its main purpose was to gather information.

     Mr. Mohr said it was ''still beyond my belief'' that his wife had been
recruited, since, he said, she had never missed work because of her arthritis.
If she were still alive and walked into the room, he told the panel, ''besides
gawking at her beauty you would never know anything was wrong with her.''

     Moreover, the autopsy showed no active disease in the right knee joint,
though some arthritis specialists said that such active disease could be hard to
detect when a patient was taking drugs. Ms. Mohr had received 10 injections of
steroids into that knee in the last few years, a sign that her other drugs had
not provided full relief. She also had surgery late  last year  for problems in
her toes caused by the arthritis.

     Dr. Arthur W. Nienhuis, president of the American Society of Gene Therapy,
told the committee that researchers in the field should pay more attention to
informed consent.

     ''No regulations were violated in this case,''  Dr. Nienhuis said. ''But
perhaps we should hold ourselves to a higher standard.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2007


                              440 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                           September 18, 2007 Tuesday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A04

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 705 words

HEADLINE: Role of Gene Therapy In Death Called Unclear;
NIH Panel: No Evidence of Direct Link

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Postmortem tests on an Illinois woman who died mysteriously in July after
getting an experimental gene treatment show no evidence that she was killed
directly by the genetically altered viruses she was given, a committee of
experts was told yesterday.

   But many questions remain, and further tests will have to be done to see if
the treatment somehow contributed to her death, perhaps by leaving her
vulnerable to a runaway fungal infection, the National Institutes of Health
panel concluded.

   "This is clearly a complex case," said Howard J. Federoff, executive dean of
Georgetown Medical Center and chairman of the NIH Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, which is investigating in concert with outside experts.

   By December, he said, he hopes to be able to say "what role, if any" was
played by the trillions of viruses that were injected into the woman, Jolee
Mohr, 36, as part of an experiment being run by Targeted Genetics, a Seattle
biotechnology company. But it is possible, Federoff and others said, that the
question will never be  answered.

   The Food and Drug Administration has placed the experiment on hold, and the
case is being watched closely by  leaders of other gene therapy experiments,
dozens of which are using similar viruses.

   Autopsy results and tests on blood and tissue specimens indicate that Mohr
died in large part from a massive infection caused by Histoplasma capsulatum, a
fungus common in the Mississippi and Ohio River valleys. She also had extensive
bleeding in her abdomen, perhaps caused by that infection. An enormous clot
accumulated there and caused organ damage that contributed to her death.

   Mohr's symptoms began the day her right knee was injected with the viruses,
which were engineered to suppress the immune system reaction that causes
rheumatoid arthritis, a disease that had dogged her for many years. Three weeks
later, she died, leaving behind a  5-year-old daughter.

   A spokeswoman for Targeted Genetics said the company was gratified by several
of the test results. Perhaps most important, the viruses -- which were
gene-altered so as not to multiply -- appear not to have replicated or spread in
large numbers through Mohr's body.

   Still unknown is whether they produced larger-than-intended doses of their
immune-suppressing product, or whether the treatment in some other way affected
Mohr's ability to fight the infection.

   Mohr's husband, Robb,  told the panel that his wife was only mildly affected
by her arthritis and was not properly warned of the experiment's risks. "How she
ever got signed up is still beyond my belief," he said.

   If not for the experimental therapy, he said, "I think she'd still be here."

   Members of the NIH panel and other experts at the meeting said that Mohr may
be right but that, for now, the scientific evidence falls short of that
assertion.

   In one telltale sign that immune suppression played a role, the fungal cells
in her tissues were not walled off by  granulomas, as they typically are in
patients with normal immune systems. But panelists noted that the
immune-suppressing protein made by the gene-altered viruses is virtually
identical to one in an FDA-approved arthritis medicine that Mohr was also taking
-- which is known to increase the risk of fungal and other infections.

   Some panelists echoed Robb Mohr's concerns about the way his wife was signed
up for the study. They noted that, although no regulation prohibits the
practice, it can be ethically problematic when a patient's personal physician
recruits the patient, as was the case with Mohr. Patients routinely overestimate
the chances that an experimental treatment will help them, and this "therapeutic
misconception" is even more likely when the recruiter is the patient's personal
doctor, studies show.

   Mohr's physician also signed her up immediately, rather than having her take
the materials home to consider -- also less than ideal, experts said. And there
was no mention in the informed consent document that her doctor was being paid
by Targeted Genetics for every patient he enlisted.

   Panelists said it is still a matter of debate within the bioethics community
whether physicians ought to tell patients when they have a financial stake in a
medical experiment they are recruiting for.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2007


                              441 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                           September 16, 2007 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A29

LENGTH: 855  words

HEADLINE: An experiment gone wrong?; Downstate woman dies during testing, and
doctors don't know why

BYLINE: Carla K. Johnson and Lindsey Tanner, Associated Press

DATELINE: TAYLORVILLE, Ill.

BODY:

   A few hours before she died this summer at the age of 36, Jolee Mohr lay in a
Chicago hospital so swollen by internal bleeding and her failing kidneys that
her husband decided against bringing their 5-year-old daughter to say goodbye.
The girl wouldn't have recognized her mother.

   Robb Mohr couldn't bring himself to watch her die, and he spent his wife's
last hours talking with her helpless and puzzled doctors. One vowed to get to
the bottom of the illness, and there were several clues to go on.

   The most unusual was this: Jolee Mohr got sick the day after her right knee
was injected with trillions of genetically engineered viruses in a voluntary
experiment to find out if gene therapy might be a safe way to ease the pain of
rheumatoid arthritis. She was dead three weeks later.

   The sponsor of this nationwide experiment, Targeted Genetics Corp. of
Seattle, has halted the work and 127 patients are being evaluated, according to
a company spokeswoman. No other problems have been reported, and the company
says patients were adequately informed of the treatment's risks.

   'AN AVOIDABLE DEATH'

   U.S. health officials are investigating Mohr's death, and the case is
expected to be discussed Monday by advisers to the National Institutes of Health
at a meeting in Bethesda, Md.

   ''To me, it's an avoidable death,'' Robb Mohr said at his home in
Taylorville, just southeast of Springfield. ''And you're going to have to really
show me a lot of stuff to convince me that it wasn't.''

   There have been more than 800 gene therapy studies involving 5,000 U.S.
patients since the NIH approved the nation's first human gene transfer study in
1989. Yet there are no approved therapies despite 17 years of research, and the
only major success -- a cure for the rare inherited immune disorder known as
''bubble boy disease'' -- came with a high cost: leukemia linked in 2003 to the
virus that delivered the treatment.

   Still, the 1999 death of Arizona teenager Jesse Gelsinger is the only
reported fatality that has been definitively linked with a U.S. gene therapy
study, an NIH spokesman said. And Dr. Theodore Friedmann, who once headed the
NIH committee that oversees gene therapy experiments, said developments in
medicine often come with problems, even death.

   ''There's no question that this event is tragic for the family and the woman
involved,'' Friedmann said. ''It does simply point to the fact that we have a
lot more to learn.''

   WARNED OF UNKNOWN SIDE EFFECTS

   When Dr. Robert Trapp of the Arthritis Center in Springfield told Jolee Mohr
about the gene therapy study, she had lived with rheumatoid arthritis for 14
years, her husband said. She kept the pain, stiffness and swelling in her joints
under control with medication, and she rarely missed time at her data entry job
with the Illinois secretary of state.

   The study used a genetically engineered virus that can infect cells without
causing human disease. In simple terms, the virus is used as a vehicle to carry
a new gene into the body. Targeted Genetics hopes the gene will help the body
make a protein that would ease arthritis pain.

   To enroll in the study, every patient had to have some form of inflammatory
arthritis. Jolee Mohr had faith in Trapp, her doctor for seven years, her
husband said.

   ''You trust your physician. He's your doctor. You trust him like you do your
minister,'' Robb Mohr said.

   Bioethicists talk of a ''therapeutic misconception'' -- a belief among
patients in early-stage research that they will get better. Jolee Mohr thought
the experimental treatment might relieve the chronic pain in her right knee, her
husband said, though this stage of the study was simply to find out if the
treatment was safe.

   Jolee Mohr signed a 15-page consent form Feb. 12.

   The form mentioned some scary possibilities. It said that the genetically
altered viruses in the study -- called tgAAC94 -- ''could spread to other parts
of your body. The risks of this are not known at this time.''

   And on page 9, it said unknown side effects could result in ''pain,
discomfort, disability or, in rare circumstances, death.''

   RECEIVED HIGHEST DOSE

   Mohr was randomly assigned to get the highest dosing level. By all accounts,
everything was fine after the first shot, in February. But she got sick the day
after her second injection, on July 2, vomiting and running a fever.

   ''She got the injection on the second, we were in the emergency room on the
seventh, she was admitted on the 12th,'' Robb Mohr said. He pointed on a
calendar to July 18, the date of his wife's 200-mile ambulance ride from a
Springfield hospital to Chicago; July 23, when he agreed to a ''do not
resuscitate'' order and, finally, July 24, the date she died.

   Trapp did not respond to several requests for an interview.

   Targeted Genetics says Mohr might have died of a fungal infection that could
be blamed on anti-arthritis drugs she was taking, CEO H. Stewart Parker said.

   She noted that key tests have not yet been done that could link Mohr's death
to the gene therapy study; a spokesman at University of Chicago, which is
handling the tests, said they are under way but that several are needed to
determine the cause of death.

GRAPHIC:
Photo: The Mohr family -- Robb, his wife, Jolee, and their daughter, Toree --
are shown in this undated photo. Jolee Mohr died in July, three weeks after
taking an experimental treatment for rheumatoid arthritis. ;

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2007


                              442 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 Sun-Times Media, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                           September 16, 2007 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A29

LENGTH: 855  words

HEADLINE: An experiment gone wrong?; Downstate woman dies during testing, and
doctors don't know why

BYLINE: Carla K. Johnson and Lindsey Tanner, Associated Press

DATELINE: TAYLORVILLE, Ill.

BODY:

   A few hours before she died this summer at the age of 36, Jolee Mohr lay in a
Chicago hospital so swollen by internal bleeding and her failing kidneys that
her husband decided against bringing their 5-year-old daughter to say goodbye.
The girl wouldn't have recognized her mother.

   Robb Mohr couldn't bring himself to watch her die, and he spent his wife's
last hours talking with her helpless and puzzled doctors. One vowed to get to
the bottom of the illness, and there were several clues to go on.

   The most unusual was this: Jolee Mohr got sick the day after her right knee
was injected with trillions of genetically engineered viruses in a voluntary
experiment to find out if gene therapy might be a safe way to ease the pain of
rheumatoid arthritis. She was dead three weeks later.

   The sponsor of this nationwide experiment, Targeted Genetics Corp. of
Seattle, has halted the work and 127 patients are being evaluated, according to
a company spokeswoman. No other problems have been reported, and the company
says patients were adequately informed of the treatment's risks.

   'AN AVOIDABLE DEATH'

   U.S. health officials are investigating Mohr's death, and the case is
expected to be discussed Monday by advisers to the National Institutes of Health
at a meeting in Bethesda, Md.

   ''To me, it's an avoidable death,'' Robb Mohr said at his home in
Taylorville, just southeast of Springfield. ''And you're going to have to really
show me a lot of stuff to convince me that it wasn't.''

   There have been more than 800 gene therapy studies involving 5,000 U.S.
patients since the NIH approved the nation's first human gene transfer study in
1989. Yet there are no approved therapies despite 17 years of research, and the
only major success -- a cure for the rare inherited immune disorder known as
''bubble boy disease'' -- came with a high cost: leukemia linked in 2003 to the
virus that delivered the treatment.

   Still, the 1999 death of Arizona teenager Jesse Gelsinger is the only
reported fatality that has been definitively linked with a U.S. gene therapy
study, an NIH spokesman said. And Dr. Theodore Friedmann, who once headed the
NIH committee that oversees gene therapy experiments, said developments in
medicine often come with problems, even death.

   ''There's no question that this event is tragic for the family and the woman
involved,'' Friedmann said. ''It does simply point to the fact that we have a
lot more to learn.''

   WARNED OF UNKNOWN SIDE EFFECTS

   When Dr. Robert Trapp of the Arthritis Center in Springfield told Jolee Mohr
about the gene therapy study, she had lived with rheumatoid arthritis for 14
years, her husband said. She kept the pain, stiffness and swelling in her joints
under control with medication, and she rarely missed time at her data entry job
with the Illinois secretary of state.

   The study used a genetically engineered virus that can infect cells without
causing human disease. In simple terms, the virus is used as a vehicle to carry
a new gene into the body. Targeted Genetics hopes the gene will help the body
make a protein that would ease arthritis pain.

   To enroll in the study, every patient had to have some form of inflammatory
arthritis. Jolee Mohr had faith in Trapp, her doctor for seven years, her
husband said.

   ''You trust your physician. He's your doctor. You trust him like you do your
minister,'' Robb Mohr said.

   Bioethicists talk of a ''therapeutic misconception'' -- a belief among
patients in early-stage research that they will get better. Jolee Mohr thought
the experimental treatment might relieve the chronic pain in her right knee, her
husband said, though this stage of the study was simply to find out if the
treatment was safe.

   Jolee Mohr signed a 15-page consent form Feb. 12.

   The form mentioned some scary possibilities. It said that the genetically
altered viruses in the study -- called tgAAC94 -- ''could spread to other parts
of your body. The risks of this are not known at this time.''

   And on page 9, it said unknown side effects could result in ''pain,
discomfort, disability or, in rare circumstances, death.''

   RECEIVED HIGHEST DOSE

   Mohr was randomly assigned to get the highest dosing level. By all accounts,
everything was fine after the first shot, in February. But she got sick the day
after her second injection, on July 2, vomiting and running a fever.

   ''She got the injection on the second, we were in the emergency room on the
seventh, she was admitted on the 12th,'' Robb Mohr said. He pointed on a
calendar to July 18, the date of his wife's 200-mile ambulance ride from a
Springfield hospital to Chicago; July 23, when he agreed to a ''do not
resuscitate'' order and, finally, July 24, the date she died.

   Trapp did not respond to several requests for an interview.

   Targeted Genetics says Mohr might have died of a fungal infection that could
be blamed on anti-arthritis drugs she was taking, CEO H. Stewart Parker said.

   She noted that key tests have not yet been done that could link Mohr's death
to the gene therapy study; a spokesman at University of Chicago, which is
handling the tests, said they are under way but that several are needed to
determine the cause of death.

GRAPHIC:
Photo: The Mohr family -- Robb, his wife, Jolee, and their daughter, Toree --
are shown in this undated photo. Jolee Mohr died in July, three weeks after
taking an experimental treatment for rheumatoid arthritis.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2011


                              443 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2007 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           September 16, 2007 Sunday
                                Bulldog Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1327 words

HEADLINE: Mom's death casts pall on gene therapy study ;
Young woman's rapid decline is a mystery; federal officials are investigating.
She fell ill one day after an experimental injection.

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE:  TAYLORVILLE, ILL.

BODY:

   A few hours before she died this summer at age 36, Jolee Mohr lay in a
Chicago hospital so swollen by internal bleeding and failing kidneys that her
husband decided against bringing their 5-year-old daughter to say goodbye. The
girl wouldn't have recognized her mother.

   Robb Mohr couldn't bring himself to watch her die. He spent his wife's last
hours talking with her helpless and puzzled doctors. One vowed to get to the
bottom of the illness, and there were several clues to go on.

   The most unusual was this: Jolee Mohr got sick the day after her right knee
was injected with trillions of genetically engineered viruses in a voluntary
experiment to find out if gene therapy might be a safe way to ease the pain of
rheumatoid arthritis. She was dead three weeks later.

   The sponsor of this nationwide experiment, Targeted Genetics Corp. of
Seattle, has halted the work and 127 patients are being evaluated, according to
a company spokeswoman. No other problems have been reported, and the company
thinks patients have been adequately informed of the treatment's risks.

   U.S. health officials are investigating Mohr's death, and the case is
expected to be discussed Monday by advisors to the National Institutes of Health
during a meeting in Bethesda, Md. There's a lot at stake, including answers for
Robb Mohr, and the interests of Targeted Genetics. But there also are questions
about how medical studies are done and how much study volunteers are told of the
risks.

   "To me, it's an avoidable death," Mohr said during an interview at his home
amid the cornfields of central Illinois. "And you're going to have to really
show me a lot of stuff to convince me that it wasn't."

   There have been more than 800 gene therapy studies involving 5,000 U.S.
patients since the NIH approved the nation's first human gene transfer study in
1989. Yet there are no approved therapies despite 17 years of research, and the
only major success -- a cure for the rare inherited immune disorder known as
"bubble boy" disease -- came with a high cost: leukemia linked in 2003 to the
virus that delivered the treatment.

   Still, the 1999 death of Arizona teenager Jesse Gelsinger is the only
reported fatality that has been definitively linked with a U.S. gene therapy
study, an NIH spokesman said. And Dr. Theodore Friedmann, who once headed the
NIH committee that oversees gene therapy experiments, said developments in
medicine often came with problems, even death.

   Even if gene therapy is found to be the cause of Jolee Mohr's death,
Friedmann said, the method remains promising.

   "There's no question that this event is tragic for the family and the woman
involved," he said. "It does simply point to the fact that we have a lot more to
learn."

   When Dr. Robert Trapp of the Arthritis Center in Springfield, Ill., told
Jolee Mohr about the gene therapy study, she had lived with rheumatoid arthritis
for 14 years, her husband said. She treated the pain, stiffness and swelling in
her joints with medication, and rarely missed time at her data entry job for the
Illinois secretary of state.

   The study used a genetically engineered virus that can infect cells without
causing human disease. In simple terms, the virus is used as a vehicle to carry
a new gene into the body. Targeted Genetics hopes the gene will help the body
make a protein that would ease arthritis pain.

   To enroll in the study, every patient had to have some form of inflammatory
arthritis. Jolee Mohr had faith in Trapp, her doctor for seven years, her
husband said.

   "You trust your physician. He's your doctor. You trust him like you do your
minister," Robb Mohr said.

   Bioethicists talk of a "therapeutic misconception" -- a belief among patients
in early-stage research that they will get better. Jolee Mohr thought the
experimental treatment might relieve the chronic pain in her right knee, her
husband said, though this stage of the study was simply to find out if the
treatment was safe.

   Jolee Mohr signed a 15-page consent form Feb. 12.

   The form mentioned some scary possibilities. It said that the genetically
altered virus in the study -- called tgAAC94 -- "could spread to other parts of
your body. The risks of this are not known at this time."

   An altered virus can "damage the DNA in the cells of your body by inserting
itself into your genes," it went on. "If this happens, it could put you at risk
for developing cancer."

   And on Page 9, it said unknown side effects could result in "pain,
discomfort, disability or, in rare circumstances, death."

   Mohr was randomly assigned to get the highest dosing level. By all accounts,
everything was fine after the first shot in February. But she got sick the day
after her second injection, on July 2, vomiting and running a fever.

   "She got the injection on the second, we were in the emergency room on the
seventh, she was admitted on the 12th," Robb Mohr said. He pointed on a calendar
to July 18, the date of his wife's 200-mile ambulance ride from a Springfield
hospital to Chicago; July 23, when he agreed to a "do not resuscitate" order
and, finally, July 24, the date she died.

   Trapp, who did not respond to several requests for an interview, enrolled
"seven or eight" patients in the gene therapy study, according to his attorney,
David Drake. He described Trapp's enrollment procedures only as "standard," and
he declined to comment on how much money Trapp's clinic received from Targeted
Genetics, fees meant to reimburse costs.

   Trapp, 59, has not faced state disciplinary action, and his license is
active. In 2002, he settled out of court with a patient who sued him for
negligence after she developed eye problems known to be a side effect of an
arthritis drug he had prescribed.

   The investigation into Mohr's death could have steep consequences for
Targeted Genetics. The company, which employs 70, has no products on the market.
Several years ago, it cut workers and several programs.

   "A very exciting lead product with the possibility to meet significant unmet
need could be jeopardized," said Chief Executive H. Stewart Parker when asked
what was at stake for the company.

   She said the company believed that the study was conducted with the "highest
level" of responsibility and that it followed federal guidelines.

   Targeted Genetics thinks Mohr might have died of a fungal infection that
could be blamed on anti-arthritis drugs she was taking, Parker said. She noted
that key tests had not yet been done that could link Mohr's death to the gene
therapy study. A spokesman at the University of Chicago, which is handling the
tests, said that they were underway but that several were needed to determine
the cause of death.

   Mohr's family asked the university to lead the investigation into her death,
but the FDA is also investigating, spokeswoman Karen Riley said.

   The NIH began developing guidelines on gene therapy in the mid-1970s and
formed the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee to review studies, procedures and
safety.

   Mohr's death tops the agenda for the committee's regularly scheduled
quarterly meeting Monday in Bethesda, Md. University of Chicago doctors will
present autopsy results, though the cause of death and what role the gene
therapy might have played are not expected to be ready by then.

   Robb Mohr will be there.

   "I think it's great that there's companies out there wanting to help people,
but I also think there's companies out there that are trying to make millions of
dollars on people before they can truly understand what's going on," he said.

   Two days before she fell ill, the family went boating. The last family
snapshot of Jolee was taken on the boat by their daughter, Toree, as Jolee beams
at the young photographer.

   "My wife has never looked so beautiful," Mohr said.

   "She had nothing to gain from this study," he said. "Why would a 36-year-old
mother of a 5-year-old that's going to kindergarten want to participate in
something just to see how safe it is on her body? Nothing adds up."

   AP medical writer Lindsey Tanner reported from Chicago.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: SEEKING ANSWERS: "You trust your physician. He's your doctor.
You trust him like you do your minister," says Jolee's husband, Robb Mohr, with
Toree and their dog, Packer.  PHOTOGRAPHER:Seth Perlman Associated Press PHOTO:
JOLEE MOHR: In her last photo, taken two days before she fell ill, by daughter
Toree, 5.  PHOTOGRAPHER:

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2007


                              444 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                Copyright 2007 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                           September 11, 2007 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                                  Main Edition

SECTION: METRO NEWS; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 289 words

HEADLINE: Emory gets $5.4 million for lung transplant center

BYLINE: HELENA OLIVIERO; Staff

BODY:

   A $5.4 million gift from the founder of Monster.com will help researchers at
Emory University fight lung disease.

   The grant from Andrew McKelvey will help pay for research and new
laboratories at the Andrew McKelvey Lung Transplantation Center at the Emory
University School of Medicine.

   The center was started in 1993. It was named for McKelvey in 2001 after he
gave the center $20 million. McKelvey is founder and chief executive officer of
TMP Worldwide, which owns the Internet career portal Monster.com.

   "His support has been remarkable for us," said Dr. E. Clinton Lawrence,
director of the center.

   Lawrence said the center, the state's only lung transplant program, likely
will perform 26 or 27 lung transplants this year --- doubling the number the
center performed in 2001.

   Lawrence said McKelvey's latest gift also will help pay for research designed
to help damaged lungs with stem cell therapy or gene therapy and ultimately
eliminate the need for lung transplants for some patients. About one in four
patients waiting for a lung transplant dies before the organ becomes available.

   Even when patients finally receive a lung transplant, recipients --- who face
a 50 percent survival rate over five years --- face the bleakest odds of all
transplant recipients because their bodies often reject the new organ.

   Lawrence said researchers are making major advances in improving "transplant
tolerance" by developing drugs to keep the body from rejecting transplanted
organs and cells.

   Lawrence said McKelvey suffers from the pulmonary disease sarcoidosis.

   The lung transplant center receives referrals from throughout the Southeast.
As of Jan. 31,

   Emory specialists had performed 200 adult and pediatric lung transplants,
Emory officials said.

CORRECTION-DATE: September 13, 2007

CORRECTION:

   A Tuesday Metro section story about Andrew McKelvey giving Emory University's
lung Transplantation program a gift of $5.4 million should have said that
McKelvey is the founder of Monster Worldwide, the parent company of Monster.com.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2007


                              445 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2007 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                           September 11, 2007 Tuesday
                                 Metro Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 193 words

HEADLINE: Medtronic seeks gene therapy for heart ailment

BODY:

   Medtronic Inc., the world's largest maker of electronic heart devices,
invested $3.75 million in NanoCor Therapeutics Inc. to develop a gene therapy
for congestive heart failure.

   Fridley-based Medtronic may double the investment if goals are met, NanoCor,
of Chapel Hill, N.C., said Monday in a prepared statement.

   Congestive heart failure occurs when the heart is unable to supply adequate
blood and oxygen to the body.

   The transaction will give Medtronic rights to license NanoCor's congestive
heart failure therapeutics, according to the statement. Costs to treat
heart-failure patients in the United States are estimated at $40 billion a year
and are Medicare's largest expense, said analyst Timothy Nelson at Piper Jaffray
& Co. in Minneapolis. Five million Americans have the condition, NanoCor said.

   The gene therapy will be delivered with devices made by NanoCor's affiliate
Asklepios BioPharmaceutical Inc., according to the statement. Medtronic also
acquired rights to develop a device created by Asklepios to treat the central
nervous system, NanoCor said.

   Medtronic shares rose 8 cents Monday to $53.92. They have gained 16 percent
in the past 12 months.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2007


                              446 of 783 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2007 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                           September 11, 2007 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 739 words

HEADLINE: TWO-MINUTE DRILL

BYLINE: A Tribune staff, wire report

BODY:

   Ex-Fox Sports Broadcaster Charged

   PEORIA, Ill. - One-time NFL player and former Fox Sports broadcaster Bill
Maas was charged Monday with drug possession and weapons charges stemming from a
July roadside safety check.

   The 45-year-old was charged with two felony counts of unlawful possession of
a controlled substance after Illinois State Police found nearly 6 grams of
cocaine in his Hummer and 0.2 grams of Ecstasy, Tazewell County State's Attorney
Stewart Umholtz said.

   Maas also was charged with a misdemeanor count of unlawful use of a weapon
after police found a loaded handgun in the vehicle, Umholtz said. A hearing date
has been set for Oct. 10.

   State police asked to search Maas' Hummer after he appeared nervous during a
July 6 safety check along Illinois Route 116, authorities have said.

   If convicted on all counts, a judge could sentence Maas to up to three years
in prison, Umholtz said.

   PRO WRESTLING

   'Pacman' 'Helps' Win Tag-Team Title

   NASHVILLE, Tenn. - Adam "Pacman" Jones can call himself a pro wrestling
tag-team world champion, even though his only wrestling move was to cover a
wrestler knocked out by someone else.

   The suspended Tennessee cornerback has a legal agreement with the Titans to
avoid any physical move that could leave him injured. So Jones left the dirty
work to tag-team partner Ron "The Truth" Killings in TNA Wrestling's "No
Surrender" pay-per-view Sunday night against Kurt Angle and Sting.

   Jones twice refused to tag in and join the staged match.

   By the time Jones finally tagged in and got into the ring, Angle put a move
on Sting that allowed Jones to cover the wrestler for the victory.

   COLLEGE FOOTBALL

   Michigan QB To Miss Irish Game

   ANN ARBOR, Mich. - Injured Michigan quarterback Chad Henne will not play
against Notre Dame.

   Wolverines coach Lloyd Carr did not provide a timetable for Henne's return,
listing him Monday as week-to-week. The senior was knocked out of the second
half of Saturday's 39-7 loss to Oregon.

   Freshman Ryan Mallett will start against the Fighting Irish on Saturday at
home in a matchup of storied teams with 0-2 records.

   Carr declined to confirm Saturday's ABC-TV report that Michigan trainer Paul
Schmidt said Henne had a lower-leg injury.


   ARKANSAS: Pittsburgh athletic director Jeff Long will replace Frank Broyles
in the same position at Arkansas, a person with knowledge of Long's decision
said.

   Broyles is retiring as the Razorbacks athletic director at the end of this
year, and a person familiar with Long's decision said he will leave Pitt to take
over at Arkansas. The person spoke on condition of anonymity because the
announcement had not been made.

   Arkansas would not confirm Long's hiring, but spokesman Tysen Kendig said a
news conference was set for this afternoon regarding the athletic program.

   SOCCER

   Ronaldo's Therapy Draws Questions

   MILAN, Italy - The Italian Olympic Committee's anti-doping prosecutor has
indicated he may open an investigation into a genetic therapy being used to
treat the injured thigh of AC Milan forward Ronaldo.

   "I'm waiting for news, and it's not been said that we won't open an inquiry,"
prosecutor Ettore Torri told the ANSA news agency Monday.

   Ronaldo is being treated in Brazil under the supervision of national team
physician Jose Luis Runco. The therapy, called growth factor, uses a natural
protein to stimulate cell proliferation. The practice is banned in Italy.

   ELSEWHERE

   Bolts Prospects Fall To Atlanta

   TRAVERSE CITY, Mich. - Tampa Bay's prospect team lost its third consecutive
game, falling to Atlanta 6-4.

   Radek Smolenak had his second three-point game of the tournament with a goal
and two assists to help the Lightning erase a 2-0 deficit and build a 4-3 lead
heading into the third on goals by Daine Todd, Mitch Fadden and Vladimir
Mihalik. But Atlanta scored three times in the third period to earn the comeback
victory.

   Riku Helenius stopped 32 shots. Tampa Bay plays its final game today at 2
against Dallas.


   COLLEGE GOLF: At Chattanooga, Tenn., University of South Florida sophomore
Raj Nahal carded a two-round total of 144 at the Scenic City Invitational,
leading the Bulls to a 10th-place tie after the first day of play at the Council
Fire Golf Club.

   Individually, Tripp Harris of Tennessee-Chattanooga and Stefan Wiedergruen of
Charlotte are tied for the lead at 133.

   A Tribune staff, wire report

   Photo: Adam Jones

   Copyright © 2007, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2007


                              447 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                           September 10, 2007 Monday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTHSCIENCE; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 549 words

HEADLINE: White Coat Notes

BYLINE: Excerpts from the Globe's blog on the Boston-area medical community.

BODY:

   Conflict-of-interest rules

   Boston University School of Medicine and Boston Medical Center last week
announced a strict new conflict-of-interest policy that will place hard limits
on interactions between doctors and representatives from medical device makers
and pharmaceutical companies.

   Both institutions now ban all clinicians from accepting personal gifts from
industry, and meals funded by companies - often a staple at teaching hospitals -
are no longer allowed on campus. Also, doctors who serve on committees that pick
which drugs the hospital will use are not allowed to have any financial
relationship, including consulting agreements, with companies that might benefit
from those decisions.

   "This policy promotes the independence of our clinicians and establishes the
highest professional standard of rigor and integrity in the care of our
patients," BMC president Elaine Ullian said in a statement.

   LIZ KOWALCZYK

   Less invasive heart surgery

   Researchers at Boston University and Children's Hospital Boston have won a
five-year, $5 million grant to make complex heart repairs possible without
open-heart surgery.

   Working with California medical instrument maker Microfabrica Inc., Pierre
Dupont of BU's School of Engineering, and cardiac surgeon Dr. Pedro del Nido of
Children's will develop robotic instruments that can reach the heart through
small incisions in the chest and heart walls.

   "The goal is to develop techniques where we are not only making just small
incisions but actually working to repair defects inside the heart while the
heart is still beating," del Nido said in an interview.

   ELIZABETH COONEY

   Advocate joins state as adviser

   Geoffrey Wilkinson, executive director of the Massachusetts Public Health
Association, is leaving his advocacy position to become a senior adviser to
Massachusetts Public Health Commissioner John Auerbach.

   Wilkinson, who has led the association of state and local public-health
officials for more than five years, said in an e-mail that he expects to be
involved in helping the state Department of Public Health develop a more
centralized regional system for public health. Now, the state has separate
boards of health in its 351 cities and towns, with varying degrees of expertise.

   STEPHEN SMITH

   UMass lures top talent

   University of Massachusetts Medical School has hired two leading RNA
researchers to join a group best known for Nobel Prize-winner Craig C. Mello.

   Victor R. Ambros, who discovered molecules called microRNAs that are
important in gene regulation, is leaving Dartmouth Medical School for UMass, and
Melissa J. Moore, noted for her work with gene splicing and messenger RNA, is
coming from Brandeis University.

   "Wow, they got the A Team," Phillip A. Sharp, an MIT Nobel laureate, said in
an interview last week. Moore previously worked in his lab and Ambros worked in
the lab next door.

   ELIZABETH COONEY

   New gene therapy method

   Scientists at MIT have created a new way to carry genes into cells that they
believe will be safer than the viruses commonly used to deliver gene therapy.

   Gene therapy inserts new genes into patients' cells in the hope of fighting
genetic disorders or cancer and other diseases. Viruses have been the vehicles
for the new genes in clinical trials, but two people have died during trials
since 1999.

   ELIZABETH COONEY

GRAPHIC: Jordan Green / MIT Victor R. Ambros and Melissa J. MooreA piece of a
biodegradable polymer used for gene delivery. Miniaturized instruments such as
this tissue-nibbling device (shown next to a pencil) could improve heart
surgery.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2007


                              448 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   USA TODAY

                           September 6, 2007 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 3C

LENGTH: 1207 words

HEADLINE: Cubs' Lee finds hope through sorrow;
All-Star on crusade to find cure for daughter's rare retinal disease

BYLINE: Mike Dodd

BODY:

   CHICAGO -- In the midst of a solid season that has been essential to the
Chicago Cubs' expedition to the top of the National League Central Division,
first baseman Derrek Lee has waged a campaign with even higher personal stakes.

   The 2005 NL batting champion, who turns 32 today, has helped raise more than
$1million for Project 3000, a program he co-founded to fund research and raise
awareness of a rare genetic eye disease that has stricken his 4-year-old
daughter.

   One year ago next week, Lee received news that instantly turned his life
upside down, making his injuries and the Cubs' dismal 2006 season seem
inconsequential. His only child, Jada, was virtually blind in her right eye.

   "You can't even explain how bad a day that was. It almost felt like you're in
a movie; that stuff doesn't happen to you," Lee says, describing the emotions of
last Sept.14. "But it was happening to us, and it was just a gut shot."

   That morning, Jada had complained her eye hurt as lights flickered on and off
from a brief power failure. As she and her mother, Christina, were going out of
the country the next day, the Lees decided to take Jada to the doctor as a
precaution, and the condition was discovered.

   Subsequent tests diagnosed the condition as Leber's Congenital Amaurosis
(LCA), a genetic disease that affects the retina. "They told us there was no
treatment, no cure," Lee says.

   Lee choked back tears as he announced to the media Sept.17 he was leaving the
team for the remainder of the season to deal with the family crisis. Then, he
told his teammates in a private, emotional meeting.

   "It was tough on everybody. When D. Lee sat in front of this room here and
told us all about it, it just brought tears to my eyes," says Cubs closer Ryan
Dempster, who was also Lee's teammate with the Florida Marlins.

   Refusing to take no for an answer

   In many respects, it is part of a professional athlete's makeup to succeed
even as everyone says he will fail. No surprise, then, the Lees refused to
accept they were totally powerless.

   They visited Edwin Stone, an internationally known vision researcher and
director of the University of Iowa's Carver Family Center for Macular
Degeneration. Then they decided to take the crusade for a cure public even if it
meant revealing personal medical information about their child.

   "Most people spend several months to grieve over the diagnosis," Stone says.
"The very same day they came to see me for the first time, they said, 'Can we go
up to see the lab and what can we do to help?' ... I don't think one in 100
people would have been able to do that."

   Cubs pitcher Kerry Wood adds, "They were told by doctors, 'There's nothing
you can do; there's nothing you can do,' and they didn't take that for an
answer. They found the right people that have been doing research on this."

   Lee says the family decision to go public was difficult. Although he's
comfortable speaking with reporters and accepting his role as a team leader, the
couple guard their privacy. His wife, through him, declined to be interviewed.
They have not made photographs of Jada available to any publications.

   "The decision was based around Jada," he says. "By going public, she'd have
to deal with attention that she probably wouldn't otherwise, but we just felt
the positives outweighed the negatives. And already we feel like we're right on
that."

   Lee and Boston Celtics co-owner Wyc Grousbeck, whose son has LCA, helped form
Project 3000, so-called for the number of Americans believed to have the
disease.

   With the help of several of Lee's current and former teammates, it passed the
$1million mark in fundraising in July. Among the contributions:

   *Wood's annual charity bowling event raised about $330,000.

   *San Diego Padres catcher Michael Barrett pledged $50,000 plus $10,000 for
every home run he hits this year. He has nine.

   *Dempster pledged $50,000 plus $1,000 per save this year (25).

   *Florida Marlins pitcher Dontrelle Willis pledged $10,000 plus $100 per
strikeout (125).

   "It speaks volumes for what type of guy he is," Wood says of the support from
those who know Lee best.

   Project 3000 aims to obtain a genetic profile from each person affected by
the disease in the USA. That will help identify additional genes that cause the
disorder, a necessary step to find a cure. The program will also provide
affected individuals and their families with more information and hope.

   "There's been a fivefold increase in the number of samples mailed in from
around the country since this project started last September," says Stone,
adding the center has samples from about 750 of the 3,000.

   Researchers have used gene replacement to restore some vision to dogs with a
comparable condition, and some humans with LCA were given gene therapy this
summer, although it's too early to know the results of this treatment.

   A different outlook on the game

   Lee says the goal for Jada is to regain her sight, and he believes it's
realistic.

   "They're making tremendous progress," he says. "It can't be overnight,
obviously, but I believe some time in my lifetime, they'll be able to reverse
the disease."

   The vision in his daughter's left eye is good and remaining stable, he says.
"She's kind of an unusual case. Usually it affects both eyes simultaneously,"
Lee says.

   He says Jada is "doing great." His teammates say she's as cute and
rambunctious as any 4-year-old.

   Her dad is having another productive season for the Cubs, batting .309 with
17 home runs and 72 RBI. His clutch hits have been big in the playoff race, such
as the two-out, two-run homer in the bottom of the eighth that gave Chicago a
6-5 victory and series win against Houston on Sunday.

   The home run production is down from recent years -- excluding 2006, when Lee
was limited to 50 games by a broken wrist -- but the standings take precedence.

   "It's about winning, not your numbers," says Lee, named Wednesday as the
Cubs' nominee for baseball's Roberto Clemente Award for on-field performance and
commitment to the community. "Are my numbers what I would have wanted them to
be? No. But I'm having fun this year winning."

   He admits his daughter's diagnosis has affected his outlook of the game.

   "Honestly, it's more of a job now," Lee says. "You don't come here with no
cares in the world. I just really make a point to come here and get as much
focus as I can and do the job as best I can. ...

   "It's hard to leave the house now. It's hard to go on a road trip," he adds.
"But I understand in the big scheme of things I'm helping more by playing. And
the better I play, maybe it'll help a little bit more, so I try to bring as much
focus as I can out to the field."

LCA at a glance

   The 4-year-old daughter of Chicago Cubs first baseman Derrek Lee has Leber's
Congenital Amaurosis (LCA), a rare genetic eye disease that affects the retina
and causes severe vision loss or blindness.

   The retina contains photoreceptor cells that sense light and send signals to
the brain to form an image. In LCA patients, the retina doesn't send those
signals.

   Digital photographs taken of the back of patients' eyes demonstrate subtle
differences between the normal retina, top, and the LCA retina, below. There is
a slight reduction in size of the blood vessels in the LCA retina and a slight
reduction in the image quality.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Color, Jerry Lai, US Presswire
PHOTO, B/W, John Gress, for USA TODAY
PHOTO, B/W, Andie Giafaglione-Orellana

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2007


                              449 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                            September 2, 2007 Sunday
                                TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE MEDICINE AND TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-6

LENGTH: 1039 words

HEADLINE: MYSTERIES SURROUND HOW DISEASE WORKS

BYLINE: Mark Roth, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette {SERIES} OUT OF CONTROL THE DIABETES
CRISIS IN WESTERN PENNSYLVANIA

BODY:

   Researchers are making progress in unraveling the complexities of diabetes
complications, but they still have a long hill to climb.

   For now, much of the work is confined to studying cells in the lab or
experimenting with animal models of the disease.

   One key finding in recent years is that much of the damage to blood vessels
in diabetes is probably being caused by oxygen compounds known as "free
radicals."

   That damage can cause vessels in the kidneys to stop filtering toxins and
creating urine. It can cause vessels in the retina of the eye to leak fluid or
hemorrhage, clouding vision. And it can reduce the blood flowing to peripheral
nerves, causing some deterioration.

   A brand new study by Dr. Antonio Ceriello of Warwick University in the United
Kingdom and colleagues at the University of Oklahoma shows how high levels of
blood glucose seem to rapidly create a persistent output of these oxygen
radicals.

   When the glucose combines with proteins in the cellular energy-producing
factories known as mitochondria, he discovered, they reset the mechanism that
produces oxygen radicals so that it stays in the "high" position even after
blood sugar levels are lowered.

   But there is hope. Dr. Ceriello and his colleagues found that antioxidants
such as vitamin C or a blood pressure medication called telmisartan were able to
block the oxidative damage in some patients.

   Boosting an antioxidant

   Dr. Robert Stanton, of the Joslin Diabetes Center in Boston, has found in
animal and lab studies that diabetes patients may suffer from the lack of a
natural creator of antioxidants called NADPH.

   That, in turn, seems to be driven by reduced levels of an enzyme that is
critical for making NADPH, and his group is hoping to find drugs that might
boost the enzyme to normal levels.

   Restoring NADPH might not only lessen the oxygen damage to the lining of
blood vessels, he said, but it also might produce more of a substance called
nitric oxide, which helps relax blood vessels and improve blood flow.

   Nitric oxide is also a key substance in the research of Dr. Mark S. Segal, a
kidney scientist at the University of Florida.

   Once the lining of blood vessels has been damaged, the body recruits
specialized white blood cells to go to the site of the injury and repair it. In
diabetic patients, however, those cells can't function properly because they are
too rigid, Dr. Segal found.

   When he bathed the cells in nitric oxide in the lab, however, they became
flexible again, leading him to believe that restoring proper nitric oxide levels
in those cells could be crucial for repairing the vascular damage.

   While many of these research projects are years away from human clinical
trials, one gene therapy experiment at the University of Pittsburgh hopes to
start safety testing on human volunteers next year.

   It isn't directed at diabetes exclusively, but it could help many of those
patients, because it is aimed at blocking the severe pain that often accompanies
peripheral nerve damage.

   The project is headed by Dr. Joseph Glorioso III, the William S. McEllroy
Professor of Biochemistry at Pitt, whose team found a way to insert genes for a
natural pain killer called enkephalin into the nerve cells of rats.

   Patients with chronic nerve damage often suffer excruciating pain because the
nerves become hypersensitive to touch and temperature, and while opiates like
morphine can dull the pain for a while, people quickly develop a tolerance for
the painkillers and need increasing doses.

   But in the rats that received the genes for the natural painkiller, "the cool
thing about this is that it doesn't develop tolerance in the animals, the way
morphine and other systemic drugs do."

   Dr. Glorioso's team also has developed a way of inserting a receptor in the
nerves for a substance called glycine, raising the possibility that one day,
people may be able to wear glycine-secreting patches to temporarily block pain.

   The Pitt research doesn't attack the nerve damage directly, but that's
exactly where Dr. Mark Yorek at the University of Iowa is focusing.

   He is driven partly by the belief that nerve damage in diabetes is an
underappreciated problem.

   More than half of diabetes patients end up with some kind of nerve damage,
Dr. Yorek said. It often starts with pain or tingling, but then leads to
numbness, "which makes patients think the problem is getting better, when in
fact it's getting worse."

   The numbness often means the nerves are literally pulling away from the
surface of the skin, which creates particular problems in the feet, not only
because those nerve signals have to travel a longer way, but because "people
don't look at the bottoms of their feet, which is how wounds get started. Even a
simple thing like cutting toenails can be a problem."

   Once an injury occurs, it can take a long time to heal because of poor blood
flow and because the high blood sugar creates a "breeding ground for bacteria,"
he said.

   Dr. Yorek and others have discovered that the very process the body uses to
get rid of extra blood glucose creates a substance called sorbitol, which can
attack the lining of the nerves.

   Treating 'fat rats'

   To investigate which drugs might reduce that damage, Dr. Yorek has done
experiments with a breed of morbidly obese lab animals known as Zucker rats.

   The Zucker rats, which are twice as heavy as normal rats, lack the ability to
stop eating, and as a result, they develop high blood pressure, heart problems
and the rat equivalent of type 2 diabetes.

   Dr. Yorek's team found it could block much of the nerve damage in Zucker rats
by using either a blood pressure medication known as an ACE inhibitor or a
cholesterol-lowering drug called a statin, but it also discovered that those
treatments and others had much less effect on reversing nerve and vessel damage
in the rats if it already had occurred.

   And that poses a problem for human drug trials, Dr. Yorek said. Most trials
involve patients who already have complications, and because of cost, they often
last less than a year.

   His animal studies suggest it may be hard to get good results that way.

   "Once you have neuropathy in the patients you're studying," he said, "it's
already pretty advanced, and trying to improve their status in a year, I fear
the outcome will be marginal."

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2007


                              450 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                Copyright 2007 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                             August 19, 2007 Sunday
                                  Main Edition

SECTION: @ISSUE; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 1877 words

HEADLINE: HUMAN ENGINEERING: 'Immortal, not invulnerable';
Q&A / JOHN HARRIS, philosopher and author

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   Here is an edited transcript of an AJC telephone interview with British
philosopher John Harris, author of "Enhancing Evolution: The Ethical Case for
Making People Better."

   Q. Something about the very phrase "designer children" makes people recoil.
We may want our kids to have certain hair or eye color or physical attributes,
but given the ability to select these things, many people, maybe even most
people, say they would not do so. What is the ethical barrier at work here?

   A. As I put it in my book, the best way I can express it is: If it's not
wrong to wish for a bonny, bouncing, brown-eyed baby girl, how can it become
wrong, if you have the technology, the power, to play fairy godmother to
yourself and grant your own wish? Now many people wish for certain things in a
really full-hearted sense, hoping that they might come true. Many people pray
for things in a full-hearted sense, hoping that their prayer might be answered.
What if we have the power to answer our own prayers? How does it become wrong to
exercise that power? I don't believe it does. If the wish isn't wrong, then
implementing it isn't wrong.

   Q. Why do so many people feel such hesitation about this, then?

   A. Well, I think they're superstitious. They're worried about intervening
into fate. They're worried about playing God. But nobody worries about playing
God when they go to the hospital. You have to remember: People fall ill, they
naturally die prematurely. None of us wants to die prematurely. We don't mind
asking our doctors --- or asking our drug companies, when they're making
important drugs or vaccines to protect us from what would otherwise naturally
occur --- we don't mind playing God in those contexts. I think the whole idea of
picking and choosing which interventions in the natural world are playing God
and which are not, is absurd. It's completely inconsistent. There's no coherent
answer to that question. What we have to ask is not is this playing God, or is
this interfering with nature. What we have to answer is, is it better or worse?
Is it good or bad?

   Q. You devote a chapter in the book to immortality, and one of your arguments
is that, if humans could find a way to live for, say, a thousand years, there's
no reason they shouldn't do so.

   A. Immortality is just sort of a catchy word I use to mean life extension. If
I'm right in claiming that the duty to save life is simply the duty to postpone
death --- and what else could it be? --- then life extension has the same moral
force as life saving. And we all believe in life saving, so how could we all not
believe in life extension? The point of this is to apply logic or rationality to
our common-sense beliefs, which are often very sound. To say, if we believe
this, shouldn't we also believe that? Don't the same good reasons for believing
in life saving apply to life extension, and I believe they do.

   Q. You talk in the book about life spans of, what, 1,200 years?

   A. We don't die of old age. We die of the diseases of old age. So if you can
treat the diseases of old age, there is in principle no reason to die. It is
almost, not quite, but almost as simple as that. The figure of 1,200 was
calculated originally by [University of Idaho gerontologist] Steve Austad in
this way: If you don't die of the diseases of old age, you're immortal but not
invulnerable. That is to say, you can still be killed if somebody puts a bullet
in your head or runs you over with a 10-ton truck. You're going to be dead.
You're still vulnerable, but you are immortal.

   Now, if you calculate the death rate of 11-year-olds, which was Steve
Austad's rather ingenious plot --- 11-year-olds still die, but they don't die of
the diseases of childhood and they don't die of the diseases of old age. So if
you take out those two big killers, you'll still have a death rate, but it'll be
much less than that for children or for people in old age. The original
calculation was, if you take the death rate of American 11-year-olds through,
you know, falling off their bicycles or being killed in road accidents or things
like that, then you'd get an average life expectancy of 1,200 years.

   Q. With Barry Bonds becoming the all-time home run leader, Americans are
thinking lately about performance-enhancing drugs. You seem to come down on the
side that says such drugs are not a bad thing.

   A. I think they're a neutral thing. Like Viagra, which is another
performance-enhancing drug, I don't think it's wrongful to take it. If you're
making money or reputation on the grounds that you're not taking it --- i.e., if
you're cheating --- then it's the cheating that's wrongful, not the fact that
you're taking the drug. Having sex, for example, with a consenting adult partner
is not wrongful, but if you're cheating on someone you're committed to
emotionally, that's what's wrongful.

   So in the case of performance-enhancing drugs, while they're outlawed by
particular sports, the wrong of taking them is the wrong of cheating on your
fellow competitors who are abiding by the rules. But if the rules were changed
to accommodate performance-enhancing drugs, then that objection would disappear.

   The only remaining objection would be whether the performance-enhancing drugs
were so harmful to the person who took them that it would be against good public
policy to permit them to take those drugs, just as many states believe that it's
against good public policy to permit people to take recreational drugs of other
sorts. I don't take a position on the public policy issue. I'm just saying that,
if we can safely enhance performance, that's not in itself wrongful.

   Q. A lot of people would disagree with you on that. Don't such drugs alter
the nature of competition and of achievement?

   A. It does alter the nature of competition to a certain extent, but then, so
does having a personal trainer, which not everybody can afford. So does being
able, if you're an endurance athlete, to have high-altitude training, and that's
an expensive thing to be able to do. It is also performance-enhancing to have
specialized advice on diet, and all the other things that athletes do. And of
course to have access to the physiotherapy and the care for your inevitable
injuries to get you back to performing as soon as possible.

   So all of these things help athletes in performing well. Chemicals are just
another, if you like, thing in that arsenal. I don't say that it's not open to
sports to ban chemical enhancements, just as it would be open to sports to ban
high-tech tennis rackets or --- if there is such a thing, because I don't really
understand baseball --- high-tech baseball bats that hit the ball farther.

   Q. Is there an essential difference between using technology to cure people
vs. using it to enhance them?

   A. My ultimate answer to that question is there isn't. There is a continuum,
and it's like many things: Sometimes when you can't see a clear place to draw a
line, it means that no line can be drawn. Sometimes it means that the line can
be drawn in many places. In this case, I think there is a continuum which shows
us no clear conceptual or moral place to draw a line. We all believe in saving
life. But when we save life, we postpone death. We just postpone death. We move
the point of death from one place to another place. When we treat illness, that
is inevitably an enhancement.

   I use reading glasses, as many in your audience of middle age and onwards
will. Our sight naturally fails as we grow older. When we use spectacles, that's
an enhancement technology. People say, "Ah, but that just restores normal
functioning." And I point out that we also use binoculars and telescopes and
microscopes. And they don't restore normal functioning. They enhance the
functioning of the eye. They magnify things to enable us to see things that we
could not see with the naked eye, not in a million years. Nobody, I think,
believes that we cross a moral divide when we move from reading glasses to
binoculars. And I don't think so, either.

   Many of the most powerful enhancement technologies on the horizon,
particularly those using stem cells --- which is regenerative medicine, they
actually make cells, give cells the capacity to regrow, and damaged tissue the
capacity to regrow --- many of these technologies will operate as therapies for
people with damaged tissues, whether through disease or injuries, but they will
operate as enhancements for people with normal tissue.

   So the very same thing that might enable the brain to regenerate itself after
Parkinson's disease or Alzheimer's set on, or to regenerate itself after a head
injury which has caused brain damage, those very same procedures used in a
healthy brain might enhance its functioning. That's what I mean by a continuum.
You're doing the same thing but in a different context: In one context it's a
therapy, and in another context, an enhancement.

   Q. You assert that human enhancement is not just morally defensible but that
it's a moral duty. Would you explain?

   A. We all accept --- it's differently described, sometimes as the Golden Rule
--- do unto others as you would have them do unto you; sometimes as beneficence
--- the duty to help others if we can; sometimes as the "rule of rescue" --- to
rescue those in peril of their lives or in peril of their health.

   All of these moral imperatives, which are pretty universal --- universal
through religions, universal through absence of religion --- have to do with the
duty to help people and prevent harm to people. Again, I believe this is a
continuum. The same duty that leads us to prevent harm leads us also to help.
Insofar as enhancements are good for people, enable people to do things that
they want to do and do not harm others, then I believe there is a moral
imperative to help people do those things.

   Q. At some point, breakthroughs in genetic engineering and gene therapy will
make it possible to enhance humans in a very significant way. Will we be ready
to accept those challenges when they come?

   A. We live in a reactive world. We tend to react to events. Most people, and
most of all politicians, don't like anticipating too far ahead. They like to go
with the flow. They like to react --- react decisively and masterfully and all
of that, but react. I think we need to think in advance about what our attitude
toward all these things should be. I don't know whether we will be ready. Some
things we should oppose. I'm not saying that all things that we might do to
change human nature would be good. I'm saying those which would constitute
enhancements, i.e., those which would make it better for us, improve our powers
and capacities. I'm a very slow, poor thinker. I would like to have a much
better mind than I do. If I could take a drug or a treatment or a therapy or,
indeed, use a linkup with a computer that would help me do that, I would
willingly do so. It takes me hours, it takes me years to think about the issues
that I'm trying to struggle with, and I wish I could do it faster and better.

   Q. That's one of the central issues in this discussion. Would you still be
you?

   A. Either I would be a better me, or I would be a better somebody else. And
either way, that would be a good thing. It's rational to want to change for the
better, even if that would mean that I eventually would not be me.

GRAPHIC: Photo: JON KRAUSE / NewsArt</ImageData* <ImageData*
Photo: John Harris argues in his new book that it's only logical and consistent
for people to use every scientific breakthrough they can to stay alive and
improve how they feel. Performance-enhancing drugs are fine as long as they're
not lied about, for instance.</ImageData*

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2007


                              451 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                             August 19, 2007 Sunday
                                 FOURTH EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E7

LENGTH: 673 words

HEADLINE: Is it safe? Probably not. Here's why.

BYLINE: Mark Kasen

BODY:

   "Is it safe?"

   The famous question asked of Dustin Hoffman in "Marathon Man," his movie with
Lawrence Olivier, may not send Wall Street's players rushing to the dentist, but
it is the question of the moment.

   First, what in the heck happened?

   Well, it's not really that tough, as we've looked at the problem in this
column for months now. The Street believed that some great program would allow
investors to avoid risk while making terrific returns - 10 percent to 15 percent
and greater. All along, fewer stocks moved up with the popular averages, sending
a hollow bull market to its present dilemma.

   Interest rates are still low on a historical basis, but investors using
enormous leverage are in trouble on a hysterical basis. In other words, some
traders have decided that it's time to panic.

   We all understand that panic selling traditionally is an ally of the stock
buyer. Dramatically plunging prices ultimately will lead to a major low point,
as everyone gnashes their teeth, trying to gauge "the" time to move.

   Unfortunately, while we all may understand that bottoms are carved out when
volume surges and prices are in a free fall, it's always tough to guess when
enough is enough.

   The first and best aid in helping one to be prepared for the lows relates to
what an investor did before everything began to fall. If you chased the market
up to its highs, your objectivity will be severely strained.

   If, on the other hand, you had the sense to restrain your optimism, lower
prices only serve to confirm your view that the "greater fool theory" has never
worked very well. (In brief, that theory suggests that someone who makes a
questionable investment does so with the belief that he will be able to sell it
later at a profit to someone who's even more foolish.)

   Next, whether you had good sense before the top or not, you might want to
think about what makes sense for the country's economic future. For example,
while some are trying to guess which hedge fund or money market fund is in
trouble, it would be helpful to be able to think instead about where money will
be spent when the dust clears.

   Some experts are thinking about tech stocks, especially those that have been
depressed and out of favor. Others are considering biotech, pointing to the
aging of America's population and the search for breakthroughs in areas ranging
from diabetes to cancer to respiratory illnesses and a whole host of diseases
that might be challenged through new genetic therapies.

   Then there are the emerging markets: China, India, and others. The associated
countries' economies are growing at a phenomenal pace, and many analysts believe
that expansion will continue into the next decade. Perhaps that's true, but
buying before panic is ripe can still be a painful process. Remember, the United
States was on the verge of a fabulous century in the 1930s, but that didn't stop
the Great Depression.

   Remember this: There is no simple formula for success in the marketplace. The
hedge funds once again have delivered this point successfully to Wall Street's
hyped-up traders. Good sense always trumps fantasy and hysteria. That's true
when the prices are going up, just as much as when the prices are going down.

   No one doubts that the current breakdown will end any differently than ever
before in the history of markets. When the sellers exhaust their supply, the
market will turn. Watch for enormous volume, exasperation, despair and then
capitulation. Maybe the news will be worse; that's likely. Maybe the news
stories will be dismal; that's likely. Maybe everyone will throw in the towel in
unison; that's likely. In any event, the market will turn at some point; that's
likely.

   Keep in mind the answer to Lawrence Olivier's question: It's never safe, not
completely, not assuredly, not certainly. Still, bear markets end - not with the
unjustified confidence that investors embrace at tops, but with the misguided
conviction that the system will collapse.

   ---

   Mark Kasen is a St. Louis educator and longtime stock trader focusing on
economics and markets.

NOTES:  COMMENTARY

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
 PHOTO - Traders on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange. Bloomberg News

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2007


                              452 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                            August 18, 2007 Saturday
                                  1ST Edition

SECTION: ZONE WEST - WEST INDY STAR; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 3468 words

HEADLINE: Calendar

BODY:

   TODAY

   Art and Exhibits

   Dyer Creations Photo Art, 9 a.m. to noon. Citizens Bank: Avon, 100 N. Ind.
267. Photographs by Camby artist Diana Dyer. Free. Call (317) 366-1284.

   Joan Washburn, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana St.
The artist of the month displays her quilts. Free. Call (317) 745-2604.

   Mixed Media, 8:30 a.m. to noon. Citizens Bank: Plainfield, 2402 E. Main St.
Oil paintings, watercolors and mixed media by Avon artist Chris Ardelean. Free.
Call (317) 839-9899.

   Squeak, Squawk, and Muse, 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. B-Java Coffee & Tea, 5510
Lafayette Road, Indianapolis. Mixed media artwork by Lynn Dugan. Free. Call
(317) 280-1236.

   Attractions

   Colts Rally, noon to 2 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura Park Way,
Plainfield. Celebrate the Indianapolis Colts' Super Bowl victory and upcoming
season with karaoke, Hank's Hottie appearance, giveaways and interactive games.
Toy Factory performs on the Futura Park Stage from noon to 2 p.m. Presented by
97.1 HANK FM. Call (317) 203-4555.

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway Grounds Tours, 9:30 a.m., 11:15 a.m., 1:15 p.m.
and 3 p.m. Indianapolis Motor Speedway, 4790 W. 16th St. Ninety-minute guided
tour -- 9:30 and 11:15 a.m., and 1:15 and 3 p.m. -- offers in-depth view of the
Speedway's evolution. Tour includes walk-through of Hall of Fame Museum and ride
around 2.5-mile oval in tour bus. $25, children 6-15 $10, 5 and younger free
(includes admission to Hall of Fame Museum). Call Mary Geiss, (317) 492-6747,
visit www.indianapolismotorspeedway.com/news/story.php?story_id=7890 or e-mail
mgeiss@brickyard.com

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway tours, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Indianapolis Motor
Speedway Hall of Fame Museum, 4790 W. 16th St. View racing memorabilia from the
Indianapolis 500, Allstate 400 at the Brickyard, United States Grand Prix and
more. Also, re-created look of 1950s-era Gasoline Alley, complete with wooden
garages and roadster. New exhibit features photos, stories and memorabilia of
the first five decades of the 500 Festival. Call (317) 484-6784.

   Street Performers, 1 to 4 p.m. and 6 to 9 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura
Park Way, Plainfield. Magicians, face painters, jugglers, mimes, character
artist, fire eaters and stilt walkers throughout the center. Call (317)
203-4555.

   Dance Performance

   The Hunchback of Notre Dame, 8 p.m. Pike Performing Arts Center, 6701
Zionsville Road, Indianapolis. Gregory Hancock Dance Theatre production of
Victor Hugo's dark tale with a contemporary flair. $25, $20 students and
seniors. Call (317) 216-5455 or visit www.pikepac.org.

   DJs and Clubs

   8 Seconds Saloon, 6 to 10 p.m. 8 Seconds Saloon and Tremors Club, 111 N.
Lynhurst Drive, Indianapolis. DJ before live music events and between sets. DJ
also at Tremors 9 p.m. to 3 a.m. $5. Call (317) 486-1569.

   Fairs and Major Events

   Clermont Old Fashion Day, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. Clermont Lions Club Park, 3201 N.
Tansel Road. Parade starts at 11 a.m. and features State Sen. Mike Delph as
grand marshal with music by Ben Davis High School marching band. Parade starts
at the corner of Ind. 136 and Raceway Road, proceeds east on Ind. 136 to Tansel
Road, turns south on Tansel Road to the Lions Club Park. Parade ends at park,
where vendor booths are set up. Free. Call Nancy Baxter, (317) 299-9237.

   SandBlast, 3 p.m. Ellis Park, 900 E. Main St., Danville. Carnival rides and
games, three on three basketball tournament, baseball and softball clinics and a
concert featuring Crossover, Bended Knee and Higher Ground. Hosted by Sandlot
Ministries and sponsored by Hendricks Regional Health. Only those participating
in the basketball tournament need to register. Free. Call Matt McLaren, (317)
745-2255, visit www.sandlotministries.com or e-mail info@sandlotministries.com

   Farmers Markets

   Farmer's Market, 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. Crestwood Village West, 230 Welcome Way
Blvd., Indianapolis. Shop for fresh fruits and vegetables and craft items, with
entertainment by the Dixie Kats. Beef stew and biscuits available for $3. Call
(317) 271-6475.

   Films

   "High School Musical 2" Viewing Party, 7 p.m. Pike Freshman Center, 6801
Zionsville Road, Indianapolis. Pike YMCA premiere of Disney's "High School
Musical 2." Activities include food, games and prizes. Call (317) 347-8600.

   Food and Drink

   Lunch at the Airport, 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. Hendricks County Airport, 2749 Gordon
Graham Blvd., Danville. Drawings for free airplane rides. Lunch provided. Rain
date is Aug. 19. $5 for lunch. Call (317) 745-4422.

   Fundraisers and Charity Drives

   Danville Police Department Fundraiser, Bailey's Jury Room, 20 W. Main Street,
Danville. A ribfest, luau and fundraiser for the Danville Police Department
features music, games and raffles. Families may dine outside, must be 21 to eat
inside. Call (317) 745-6424.

   Health

   Caring for Your Newborn, 9:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. Hendricks Regional Health
Danville, 1000 E. Main St. One-day class taken before the baby's birth focuses
on the care of a newborn including bathing, cord care, diapering, carseats and
immunizations. Other topics include feeding (breast and bottle) bonding and
normal newborn behavior. A pediatrician will discuss newborn topics and answer
questions. Grandparents and caregivers are welcome to attend. Registration
required. Free; $20 for those not delivering at HRH. Call (317) 745-8485 or
visit www.hendricksregional.org.

   Parkinson's Symposium, 1 to 5 p.m. Wayne Township Emergency Services
Building, 400 N. High School Road, Indianapolis. Parkinson's Awareness
Association of Central Indiana symposium features guest speaker Dr. Thyagarajan
Subramanian, who will discuss "Cell Transplantation and Gene Therapy."
Registration required. $15, $5 discount for dues paying PAACI members. Call
(317) 255-1993.

   Prenatal Exercise Program, 9 to 10 a.m. Connection Pointe Christian Church,
1800 N. Green St., Brownsburg. Low-impact aerobic exercise class, taught by a
certified prenatal aerobics instructor, is intended for pregnant women who want
to stay physically fit during pregnancy. Mothers may also attend up to 12 weeks
postpartum. Participants must have physician's signed consent. Registration
required. $1.50 per class. Call (317) 745-8485 or visit
www.hendricksregional.org.

   Hobbies, Crafts and Clubs

   National Toy Truck 'N Construction Show & Auction, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Adam's
Mark Hotel, 2544 Executive Drive, Indianapolis. Toy trucks & toy construction
equipment for sale. Includes display of miniature "working city" with remote
controlled trucks and construction toys. Call (800) 533-8293 or visit
www.toyfarmer.com or www.toytrucker.com.

   Karaoke

   Billy O'Neal's Pub & Eatery, 9 p.m. 7445 W. 10th St., Indianapolis. Call
(317) 273-8076.

   Gatsby's Pub & Grill, 9 p.m. 6335 Intech Commons Drive, Indianapolis. Host:
Michael. Free. Call (317) 275-2205.

   JD's Pub, 10 p.m. 6920 Eagle Highlands Way, Indianapolis. Free. Call (317)
280-1982.

   Kazablanka, 9 p.m. 5801 Rockville Road, Indianapolis. With drawings. Free.
Call (317) 244-7638.

   Kids Programs and Shows

   American Girl Club, 11 a.m. Wayne Branch Library, 198 S. Girls School Road,
Indianapolis. Children 7-13 may bring their favorite dolls and tell stories,
create projects and learn about their dolls. Free. Call (317) 275-4530 or visit
www.imcpl.org.

   HIP Kids Rock The Town @ Club HIP, 7 to 10 p.m. Club HIP, 8399 E. U.S. 36,
Avon. Hip-hop, karaoke, food, games and contests. Participants may wear
glow-in-the-dark clothing for "all in the dark" event. Proceeds benefit Project
Angel, which provides assistance to needy Hendricks County children. Hosted by
HIP Studios. $5. Call (317) 281-7136.

   Parents Night Out, 6:30 to midnight. HIP Studios, 150 W. Clinton St.,
Danville. Parents have a night out while their children, ages 5 and older, have
activities, games, art and snacks. Registration required. $25 per child,
siblings half price. Call (317) 946-4357 or (317) 362-5331.

   Parents Night Out, 6:30 to midnight. HIP Studios, 1122 N. Ind. 267, Avon.
Children 5 and older partake in activities, games, art projects, snacks and a
movie while their parents have an evening out. Registration required. $25 per
child, half off for siblings. Call (317) 946-4357 or(317) 362-5331.

   Yu-Gi-Oh Competition, 1 to 4:30 p.m. Wayne Branch Library, 198 S. Girls
School Road, Indianapolis. Children 9-16 bring Yu-Gi-Oh cards and duel with
others. Free. Call (317) 275-4530 or visit www.imcpl.org.

   Live Music

   Ben Davis Marching Giants: The Secret, (Other) 5 p.m. Ben Davis High School,
1200 N. Girls School Road, Indianapolis. See what the band has been working on
during the summer. Free. Call (317) 243-5523.

   Hummel Park Summer Concert Series: Lonsway & Malow, (Country and Western)
6:30 p.m. Hummel Park, 1500 S. Center St., Plainfield. Country duo. Opening act
performs at 6:30, followed by the headliner. $7 in advance, $10 at event. Call
(317) 839-9151 or visit www.guilfordtownship.com.

   KikAxe Live, (Rock) 9 p.m. Big Dog Saloon and Sports Bar, 2929 Kentucky Ave.,
Indianapolis. Call (317) 244-1223.

   My Delilah, 9:30 p.m. Kelly's Pub Too, 5341 W. 10th St., Indianapolis. Free.
Call (317) 244-5822.

   Sleepy and the B Sides, (Rock) 9 p.m. Dog House Sports Bar, 18 Whittington
Drive, Brownsburg. $2 to $5. Call (317) 858-1066.

   The Sonshiners Quartet, (Gospel/Religious) 6 to 8 p.m. Poplar Grove Methodist
Church, 6413 N. Baltimore Road, Wilbur. The Sonshiners Quartet will be at Poplar
Grove, Wilbur,, Saturday, August 18, 6-8 p.m. Contact Pastor Joni Nester for
more information at 317625 5855. Call Pastor Joni Nester , (317) 625-5855.

   Meetings

   Habitat for Humanity of Hendricks County, 10 to 11:30 a.m. Avon-Washington
Township Public Library, 498 N. Ind. 267. Find out about owning a Habitat for
Humanity of Hendricks County Home. Call (317) 272-1405 or e-mail
hchfh@sbcglobal.net

   Other Spectator Sports

   Demolition Derby, 6 p.m. Hendricks County 4-H Fairgrounds, 1900 E. Main St.,
Danville. Twenty-seventh annual event. Cars, trucks and compacts hit it hard and
bend metal. Gates open at 4:30 p.m. $10, children 6-12 $5, 5 and younger free.
Call (317) 892-4765.

   E.T. Bracket Series, 10 a.m. O'Reilly Raceway Park, 10267 E. U.S. 136,
Clermont. Drag racing. $10, children 12 and younger free. Call (317) 291-4090 or
visit www.irponline.com.

   Import Truck Bash, 9 a.m. O'Reilly Raceway Park, 10267 E. U.S. 136, Clermont.
Xpl?d Sport Compact Racing Series, car show and swap meet. $10 in advance,
children $5, $15 at the door. Call (317) 291-4090 or visit www.irponline.com.

   Pets and Animals

   A Kit & Kaboodle or A Kaboodle of Kits, 12:30 to 4:30 p.m. Pet Supplies Plus,
7190 Rockville Road, Indianapolis. Cats Haven cat and kitten adoption event. Cat
carriers given to the first four cats or kittens finding homes. Event includes
cake, punch and lemonade. Call (317) 241-1400.

   Pet Adoption Event, 2 to 4 p.m. Pet Supplies Plus, 7190 Rockville Road,
Indianapolis. See dogs available for adoption through Greyhound Pets of America.
Call (317) 475-9603.

   Recreation and Fitness

   Class Sign-Ups, 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Starz Dance Factory, 5250 E. US 36, Suite
430, Avon. Sign-up for classes that begin Sept. 4. Ages 3 to 19 learn tap,
ballet, tumbling, jazz, hip-hop dance cheer dance and social dance. Adults
hip-hop classes also offered. Registration required. Call (317) 403-2475 or
e-mail starzdance@sbcglobal.net

   Indiana Cubs Baseball Tryouts, 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. Brownsburg High School, 1000
S. Odell St. Ages 12-18 try out for the 2008 summer season. Call (317) 852-2258
or visit www.indianacubs.com.

   Kids, Youth and Adults Martial Arts Class, noon to 1 p.m. Plainfield
Recreation and Aquatic Center, 651 Vestal Road. Taught by Rex Hammersley of
Hammer Martial Arts. Call Hammersley, (317) 718-9883.

   SUNDAY

   Art and Exhibits

   Joan Washburn, 2 to 5 p.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana St. The
artist of the month displays her quilts. Free. Call (317) 745-2604.

   Attractions

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway Grounds Tours, 9:30 a.m., 11:15 a.m., 1:15 p.m.
and 3 p.m. Indianapolis Motor Speedway, 4790 W. 16th St. Ninety-minute guided
tour -- 9:30 and 11:15 a.m., and 1:15 and 3 p.m. -- offers in-depth view of the
Speedway's evolution. Tour includes walk-through of Hall of Fame Museum and ride
around 2.5-mile oval in tour bus. $25, children 6-15 $10, 5 and younger free
(includes admission to Hall of Fame Museum). Call Mary Geiss, (317) 492-6747,
visit www.indianapolismotorspeedway.com/news/story.php?story_id=7890 or e-mail
mgeiss@brickyard.com

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway tours, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Indianapolis Motor
Speedway Hall of Fame Museum, 4790 W. 16th St. View racing memorabilia from the
Indianapolis 500, Allstate 400 at the Brickyard, United States Grand Prix and
more. Also, re-created look of 1950s-era Gasoline Alley, complete with wooden
garages and roadster. New exhibit features photos, stories and memorabilia of
the first five decades of the 500 Festival. Call (317) 484-6784.

   Street Performers, 1 to 4 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura Park Way,
Plainfield. Magicians, face painters, jugglers, mimes, character artist, fire
eaters and stilt walkers throughout the center. Call (317) 203-4555 .

   Discussions and Chats

   Bullies in the Workplace, 9:40 to 10:20 a.m. Whitelick Presbyterian Church,
2530 N. Hendricks County Road 600 East, Avon. Adults discuss bullying at work.
Part of the Sunday Morning Coffee Conversations. Call (317) 852-2840.

   Hobbies, Crafts and Clubs

   National Toy Truck 'N Construction Show & Auction, 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Adam's
Mark Hotel, 2544 Executive Drive, Indianapolis. Toy trucks & toy construction
equipment for sale. Includes display of miniature "working city" with remote
controlled trucks and construction toys. Call (800) 533-8293 or visit
www.toyfarmer.com or www.toytrucker.com.

   Karaoke

   Gatsby's Pub & Grill, 8 p.m. 6335 Intech Commons Drive, Indianapolis. Host:
Michael. Free. Call (317) 275-2205.

   Other Spectator Sports

   Import Truck Bash, 9 a.m. O'Reilly Raceway Park, 10267 E. U.S. 136, Clermont.
Xpl?d Sport Compact Racing Series, car show and swap meet. $10 in advance,
children $5, $15 at the door. Call (317) 291-4090 or visit www.irponline.com.

   Parks and Nature

   Sunday Morning Bird Walk, 9 to 11 a.m. Eagle Creek Park Nature Center, 7840
W. 56th St., Indianapolis. All ages look for birds. Rain or shine. Registration
required. Free with $2 per biker/hiker park admission, $4 per vehicle admission.
Call (317) 327-7275 or visit www.indyparks.org.

   Pets and Animals

   A Kit & Kaboodle or A Kaboodle of Kits, 12:30 to 4:30 p.m. Pet Supplies Plus,
7190 Rockville Road, Indianapolis. Cats Haven cat and kitten adoption event. Cat
carriers given to the first four cats or kittens finding homes. Event includes
cake, punch and lemonade. Call (317) 241-1400.

   Cat Haven Pet Adoption Event, 2 to 4 p.m. Pet Supplies Plus, 7190 Rockville
Road, Indianapolis. Meet with Cat Haven volunteers and see foster kittens and
cats available for adoption. Call (317) 241-1400.

   MONDAY

   Art and Exhibits

   Dyer Creations Photo Art, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Citizens Bank: Avon, 100 N. Ind.
267. Photographs by Camby artist Diana Dyer. Free. Call (317) 366-1284.

   Joan Washburn, 9 a.m. to 8 p.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana St.
The artist of the month displays her quilts. Free. Call (317) 745-2604.

   Mixed Media, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Citizens Bank: Plainfield, 2402 E. Main
St. Oil paintings, watercolors and mixed media by Avon artist Chris Ardelean.
Free. Call (317) 839-9899.

   Squeak, Squawk, and Muse, 6 a.m. to 5 p.m. B-Java Coffee & Tea, 5510
Lafayette Road, Indianapolis. Mixed media artwork by Lynn Dugan. Free. Call
(317) 280-1236.

   Attractions

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway tours, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Indianapolis Motor
Speedway Hall of Fame Museum, 4790 W. 16th St. View racing memorabilia from the
Indianapolis 500, Allstate 400 at the Brickyard, United States Grand Prix and
more. Also, re-created look of 1950s-era Gasoline Alley, complete with wooden
garages and roadster. New exhibit features photos, stories and memorabilia of
the first five decades of the 500 Festival. Call (317) 484-6784.

   Grand Openings and Open Houses

   Hendricks County Extension Chorus Open House, 7 p.m. Hendricks County Senior
Center, 1201 Sycamore Lane, Danville. Fellowship and refreshments for women
interested in singing three-part harmony with an active chorus. Call (317)
839-7656 or(317) 839-9780.

   Health

   Prenatal Exercise Program, 9 to 10 a.m. Connection Pointe Christian Church,
1800 N. Green St., Brownsburg. Low-impact aerobic exercise class, taught by a
certified prenatal aerobics instructor, is intended for pregnant women who want
to stay physically fit during pregnancy. Mothers may also attend up to 12 weeks
postpartum. Participants must have physician's signed consent. Registration
required. $1.50 per class. Call (317) 745-8485 or visit
www.hendricksregional.org.

   Sibling Preparation, 6 to 8 p.m. Hendricks Regional Health Danville, 1000 E.
Main St. Two-hour class to prepare children, ages 3 and older, to be a big
brother or big sister. A parent or other adult must attend with the child.
Registration required. Free; $10 for those not delivering at HRH. Call (317)
745-8485 or visit www.hendricksregional.org.

   Karaoke

   Kelly's Pub Too, 9 p.m. 5341 W. 10th St., Indianapolis. Free. Call (317)
244-5822.

   Kids Programs and Shows

   Family Story Celebration at Wayne, 6:30 p.m. Wayne Branch Library, 198 S.
Girls School Road, Indianapolis. Stories, songs and activities for families with
children ages 1-10. Free. Call (317) 275-4530 or visit www.imcpl.org.

   Fun-Fitness, 9 to 10 a.m. Plainfield Christian Church, 800 Dan Jones Road.
Fitness program for ages 5-12 is run simultaneously with PCC's women's aerobic
class. Moderate running, calisthenics, group games, relays, contests, daily
devotion time, nutrition counseling and a healthy snack. Nursery offered for
ages 1-4. $2 per visit. Call (317) 707-3089.

   What's Bugging You, 4 p.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana St. Ages
7-12 explore the insect kingdom with fun facts, creepy crafts and snacks.
Registration required. Free. Call (317) 745-2604.

   Meetings

   Board of Zoning Appeals, 7 p.m. Plainfield Municipal Building, 206 W. Main
St.

   Recreation and Fitness

   25th Annual "Fore the Kids" Golf Tournament and Silent Auction, 11 a.m.
Brickyard Crossing Golf Resort & Inn, 4400 W. 16th St., Indianapolis.
Registration and silent auction, 11 a.m. Shotgun start, 12:30 p.m. Dinner
provided by Buca di Beppo at 6 p.m. Proceeds benefit the Boys & Girls Clubs of
Indianapolis. Registration required. $375, $1500 per team. Call (317) 920-4700.

   Adult and Senior Volleyball, 9 a.m. to noon. Thatcher Park, 4649 W. Vermont
St., Indianapolis. Ongoing volleyball play every Monday through September. $3.
Call (317) 327-7275 or visit www.indyparks.org.

   Adult Open Volleyball (Ages 30 and Older), noon to 3 p.m. Municipal Gardens
Park, 1831 Lafayette Road, Indianapolis. Adults play volleyball every Monday and
Wednesday through Sept. 30. $3. Call (317) 327-7275 or visit www.indyparks.org.

   Aerobics Class, 9 to 10 a.m. Plainfield Christian Church, 800 Dan Jones Road.
Total body aerobic exercise to Christian music includes a combination of step
aerobics and body toning with weights. For all fitness levels. Child care
available for $1 per session. Ongoing. Call David Verhonik, (317) 707-3089.

   Open Youth Basketball (Ages 18 and Younger), 1:30 to 4:30 p.m. Riverside
Park, 2420 E. Riverside Drive, Indianapolis. Free. Call (317) 327-7275 or visit
www.indyparks.org.

   Support Groups

   DivorceCare, 7 to 9 p.m. Crossroads Church of Avon, 7209 E. Hendricks County
Road 100 South. A free weekly seminar and support group for people who are
separated or divorced. Child care is provided. Call (317) 838-9100.

   Workshops and Classes

   Digital Movie Making, 6 p.m. Brownsburg Public Library, 450 S. Jefferson St.
Learn to make videos, short films and home movies using Microsoft Movie Maker.
Registration required. Call (317) 852-3167.

   Microsoft Outlook XP Level 1, 6 to 8 p.m. Plainfield-Guilford Township Public
Library, 1120 Stafford Road. First day of class that meets Mondays through Sept.
17. Part of the Office Proficiency Computer Skills class where students become
proficient in the software with hands-on instruction. Register by Aug. 14.
Registration required. $69. Call (317) 839-6602.

   TUESDAY

   Art and Exhibits

   Dyer Creations Photo Art, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Citizens Bank: Avon, 100 N. Ind.
267. Photographs by Camby artist Diana Dyer. Free. Call (317) 366-1284.

   Joan Washburn, 9 a.m. to 8 p.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana St.
The artist of the month displays her quilts. Free. Call (317) 745-2604.

   Mixed Media, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Citizens Bank: Plainfield, 2402 E. Main
St. Oil paintings, watercolors and mixed media by Avon artist Chris Ardelean.
Free. Call (317) 839-9899.

   Please send information about events to calendar@indystar.com Clearly
indicate the name of your event in the subject field and include the event date,
sponsoring organization, time, place, price and contact phone number.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2007


                              453 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                             August 17, 2007 Friday
                                  1ST Edition

SECTION: ZONE WEST - HENDRICKS COUNTY STAR; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 5206 words

HEADLINE: Calendar

BODY:

   TODAY

   Art and Exhibits

   Dyer Creations Photo Art, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. Citizens Bank: Avon, 100 N. Ind.
267. Photographs by Camby artist Diana Dyer. Free. Call (317) 366-1284.

   Joan Washburn, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana St.
The artist of the month displays her quilts. Free. Call (317) 745-2604.

   Mixed Media, 8:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. Citizens Bank: Plainfield, 2402 E. Main St.
Oil paintings, watercolors and mixed media by Avon artist Chris Ardelean. Free.
Call (317) 839-9899.

   Squeak, Squawk, and Muse, 6 a.m. to 5 p.m. B-Java Coffee & Tea, 5510
Lafayette Road, Indianapolis. Mixed media artwork by Lynn Dugan. Free. Call
(317) 280-1236.

   Attractions

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway Grounds Tours, 9:30 a.m., 11:15 a.m., 1:15 p.m.
and 3 p.m. Indianapolis Motor Speedway, 4790 W. 16th St. Ninety-minute guided
tour -- 9:30 and 11:15 a.m., and 1:15 and 3 p.m. -- offers in-depth view of the
Speedway's evolution. Tour includes walk-through of Hall of Fame Museum and ride
around 2.5-mile oval in tour bus. $25, children 6-15 $10, 5 and younger free
(includes admission to Hall of Fame Museum). Call Mary Geiss, (317) 492-6747,
visit www.indianapolismotorspeedway.com/news/story.php?story_id=7890 or e-mail
mgeiss@brickyard.com

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway tours, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Indianapolis Motor
Speedway Hall of Fame Museum, 4790 W. 16th St. View racing memorabilia from the
Indianapolis 500, Allstate 400 at the Brickyard, United States Grand Prix and
more. Also, re-created look of 1950s-era Gasoline Alley, complete with wooden
garages and roadster. New exhibit features photos, stories and memorabilia of
the first five decades of the 500 Festival. Call (317) 484-6784.

   Street Performers, 6 to 9 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura Park Way,
Plainfield. Magicians, face painters, jugglers, mimes, character artist, fire
eaters and stilt walkers throughout the center. Call (317) 203-4555 .

   Dance Participation

   Friday Night Open Dance Party, 7:30 to 10 p.m. Starlite Ballroom, 5720 Guion
Road, Indianapolis. Lesson at 7:30 p.m., dancing at 8:30 p.m. $5 (lesson $10).
Call (317) 299-4740.

   Dance Performance

   The Hunchback of Notre Dame, 8 p.m. Pike Performing Arts Center, 6701
Zionsville Road, Indianapolis. Gregory Hancock Dance Theatre production of
Victor Hugo's dark tale with a contemporary flair. $25, $20 students and
seniors. Call (317) 216-5455 or visit www.pikepac.org.

   DJs and Clubs

   Kelly's Pub Too, 9:30 p.m. 5341 W. 10th St., Indianapolis. Call (317)
244-5822.

   Farmers Markets

   Farmers Market and Music, 3 to 7 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura Park Way,
Plainfield. Farmers Market with produce, honey, kettle corn, cookies, wine and
flowers from 3 to 7 p.m. Live jazz from 4 to 7 p.m. At Futura Park and Stage.
Call (317) 203-4555.

   Films

   Movie Premiere Night, 6:30 p.m. High School Musical 2 Premiere: Westside:
Northfield at Heartland Crossing, 8509 Wheatfield Drive, Camby. Hosted by Radio
Disney 98.3. Family fun games and "High School Musical" trivia. Win "High School
Musical 2" prize packages and other Radio Disney prizes. The movie will be
telecast at 8 p.m. on the big screen. Seating is first come, first serve.
Tickets are available at the neighborhood. Free. Visit
www.RadioDisney.com/Indianapolis.

   Hobbies, Crafts and Clubs

   National Toy Truck 'N Construction Show & Auction, 3 to 6 p.m. Adam's Mark
Hotel, 2544 Executive Drive, Indianapolis. Toy trucks & toy construction
equipment for sale. Includes display of miniature "working city" with remote
controlled trucks and construction toys. Call (800) 533-8293 or visit
www.toyfarmer.com or www.toytrucker.com.

   Karaoke

   Winners Circle Lounge, 9 p.m. 4880 Crawfordsville Road, Indianapolis. Call
(317) 248-1099.

   Kids Programs and Shows

   Fun-Fitness, 9 to 10 a.m. Plainfield Christian Church, 800 Dan Jones Road.
Fitness program for ages 5-12 is run simultaneously with PCC's women's aerobic
class. Moderate running, calisthenics, group games, relays, contests, daily
devotion time, nutrition counseling and a healthy snack. Nursery offered for
ages 1-4. $2 per visit. Call (317) 707-3089.

   Preschool Art, 9 to 9:45 a.m. HIP Studios Brownsburg, 1460 N. Green St.,
Suite 600. This class is not currently in session. Registration required. $12
per class, $40 per month. Call (317) 294-2171.

   Live Music

   KikAxe Live, (Rock) 9 p.m. Big Dog Saloon and Sports Bar, 2929 Kentucky Ave.,
Indianapolis. Call (317) 244-1223.

   L.A. Guns, (Rock) 9 p.m. 8 Seconds Saloon and Tremors Club, 111 N. Lynhurst
Drive, Indianapolis. Call (317) 486-1569.

   Music on the Veranda Series: Andy Katt & Men in Tux, (Swing/Big Band) 7 p.m.
Chateau Thomas Winery, 6291 Cambridge Way, Plainfield. Outdoor concert. Men in
tuxes playing big band sounds. Free. Call (317) 837-9463.

   Simon DTour Live! Featuring Bobby Valentino, (R&B/Soul) noon to 6 p.m.
Lafayette Square Mall, 3919 Lafayette Road, Indianapolis. Presented by ABC
Family, a live concert and lifestyle event that connects teens with some of
their favorite pop stars and retail brands. Free. Call (317) 299-0033 or visit
www.simondtour.com.

   Other Spectator Sports

   Bicycle Racing, 7:30 to 10 p.m. Major Taylor Velodrome and Skate Park, 3639
Cold Spring Road, Indianapolis. Bicycle racing on a sloped concrete velodrome.
Nine races per evening. Free. Call (317) 327-8356 or visit
www.majortaylorvelo.com.

   Import Truck Bash, 10 a.m. O'Reilly Raceway Park, 10267 E. U.S. 136,
Clermont. Xpl?d Sport Compact Racing Series, car show and swap meet. $10 in
advance, children $5, $15 at the door. Call (317) 291-4090 or visit
www.irponline.com.

   Parks and Nature

   New Moon Friday, 9 p.m. McCloud Nature Center, 8518 N. Hughes Road, North
Salem. At dusk. Gaze at stars through professional telescopes. Participants
welcome to bring own telescopes or binoculars. Presented by Indiana Astronomical
Society. Free. Call (765) 676-5437.

   Preschool Playtime, 1 to 2 p.m. McCloud Nature Center, 8518 N. Hughes Road,
North Salem. Water activities provided for children 3-5 with adult. Free. Call
(765) 676-5437.

   Recreation and Fitness

   Aerobics Class, 9 to 10 a.m. Plainfield Christian Church, 800 Dan Jones Road.
Total body aerobic exercise to Christian music includes a combination of step
aerobics and body toning with weights. For all fitness levels. Child care
available for $1 per session. Ongoing. Call David Verhonik, (317) 707-3089.

   Class Sign-Ups, 6 to 8 p.m. Starz Dance Factory, 5250 E. US 36, Suite 430,
Avon. Sign-up for classes that begin Sept. 4. Ages 3 to 19 learn tap, ballet,
tumbling, jazz, hip-hop dance cheer dance and social dance. Adults hip-hop
classes also offered. Registration required. Call (317) 403-2475 or e-mail
starzdance@sbcglobal.net

   Indianapolis Hiking Club: Brisk Road Hike, 8 a.m. Eagle Creek Park, 7840 W.
56th St., Indianapolis. Meet in the parking lot just inside the 56th Street
entrance for a six-, eight- or 10-mile road hike. Arrive 15 minutes early.
Guests welcome. In the event of inclement weather, check with the leader.
Parking fee. Call (317) 849-7006 or visit www.indyhike.org.

   Jumpstart Breakfast, 6 to 8 a.m. Ellis Park, 900 E. Main St., Danville. Meet
at train station. Part of the March Around the Park, an eight-month event that
encourages healthy lifestyles. Walkers, the "trail of the day" starts at 7 a.m.
Registration required. Free. Call Danville Parks & Recreation Department, (317)
745-3015, or visit www.danvilleindiana.org.

   Open Youth Basketball (Ages 18 and Younger), 1:30 to 4:30 p.m. Riverside
Park, 2420 E. Riverside Drive, Indianapolis. Free. Call (317) 327-7275 or visit
www.indyparks.org.

   Workshops and Classes

   Computer Savvy Seniors Level 1, 9 a.m. to noon. Plainfield-Guilford Township
Public Library, 1120 Stafford Road. First day of five-week class for ages 55 and
older, that meets on Fridays through Sept. 14. Class covers basic skills to
operate a computer. Register by Aug. 10. Registration required. $89. Call (317)
839-6602.

   SATURDAY

   Art and Exhibits

   Dyer Creations Photo Art, 9 a.m. to noon. Citizens Bank: Avon, 100 N. Ind.
267. Photographs by Camby artist Diana Dyer. Free. Call (317) 366-1284.

   Joan Washburn, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana St.
The artist of the month displays her quilts. Free. Call (317) 745-2604.

   Mixed Media, 8:30 a.m. to noon. Citizens Bank: Plainfield, 2402 E. Main St.
Oil paintings, watercolors and mixed media by Avon artist Chris Ardelean. Free.
Call (317) 839-9899.

   Squeak, Squawk, and Muse, 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. B-Java Coffee & Tea, 5510
Lafayette Road, Indianapolis. Mixed media artwork by Lynn Dugan. Free. Call
(317) 280-1236.

   Attractions

   Colts Rally, noon to 2 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura Park Way,
Plainfield. Celebrate the Indianapolis Colts' Super Bowl victory and upcoming
season with karaoke, Hank's Hottie appearance, giveaways and interactive games.
Toy Factory performs on the Futura Park Stage from noon to 2 p.m. Presented by
97.1 HANK FM. Call (317) 203-4555 .

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway Grounds Tours, 9:30 a.m., 11:15 a.m., 1:15 p.m.
and 3 p.m. Indianapolis Motor Speedway, 4790 W. 16th St. Ninety-minute guided
tour -- 9:30 and 11:15 a.m., and 1:15 and 3 p.m. -- offers in-depth view of the
Speedway's evolution. Tour includes walk-through of Hall of Fame Museum and ride
around 2.5-mile oval in tour bus. $25, children 6-15 $10, 5 and younger free
(includes admission to Hall of Fame Museum). Call Mary Geiss, (317) 492-6747,
visit www.indianapolismotorspeedway.com/news/story.php?story_id=7890 or e-mail
mgeiss@brickyard.com

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway tours, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Indianapolis Motor
Speedway Hall of Fame Museum, 4790 W. 16th St. View racing memorabilia from the
Indianapolis 500, Allstate 400 at the Brickyard, United States Grand Prix and
more. Also, re-created look of 1950s-era Gasoline Alley, complete with wooden
garages and roadster. New exhibit features photos, stories and memorabilia of
the first five decades of the 500 Festival. Call (317) 484-6784.

   Street Performers, 1 to 4 p.m. and 6 to 9 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura
Park Way, Plainfield. Magicians, face painters, jugglers, mimes, character
artist, fire eaters and stilt walkers throughout the center. Call (317) 203-4555
.

   Dance Performance

   The Hunchback of Notre Dame, 8 p.m. Pike Performing Arts Center, 6701
Zionsville Road, Indianapolis. Gregory Hancock Dance Theatre production of
Victor Hugo's dark tale with a contemporary flair. $25, $20 students and
seniors. Call (317) 216-5455 or visit www.pikepac.org.

   DJs and Clubs

   8 Seconds Saloon, 6 to 10 p.m. 8 Seconds Saloon and Tremors Club, 111 N.
Lynhurst Drive, Indianapolis. DJ before live music events and between sets. DJ
also at Tremors 9 p.m. to 3 a.m. $5. Call (317) 486-1569.

   Fairs and Major Events

   Clermont Old Fashion Day, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. Clermont Lions Club Park, 3201 N.
Tansel Road. Parade starts at 11 a.m. and features State Sen. Mike Delph as
grand marshal with music by Ben Davis High School marching band. Parade ends at
park, where vendor booths are set up. Free. Call Nancy Baxter, (317) 299-9237.

   SandBlast, 3 p.m. Ellis Park, 900 E. Main St., Danville. Carnival rides and
games, three on three basketball tournament, baseball and softball clinics and a
concert featuring Crossover, Bended Knee and Higher Ground. Hosted by Sandlot
Ministries and sponsored by Hendricks Regional Health. Only those participating
in the basketball tournament need to register. Free. Call Matt McLaren, (317)
745-2255, visit www.sandlotministries.com or e-mail info@sandlotministries.com

   Farmers Markets

   Farmer's Market, 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. Crestwood Village West, 230 Welcome Way
Blvd., Indianapolis. Shop for fresh fruits and vegetables and craft items, with
entertainment by the Dixie Kats. Beef stew and biscuits available for $3. Call
(317) 271-6475.

   Films

   "High School Musical 2" Viewing Party, 7 p.m. Pike Freshman Center, 6801
Zionsville Road, Indianapolis. Pike YMCA premiere of Disney's "High School
Musical 2." Activities include food, games and prizes. Call (317) 347-8600.

   Food and Drink

   Lunch at the Airport, 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. Hendricks County Airport, 2749 Gordon
Graham Blvd., Danville. Drawings for free airplane rides. Lunch provided. Rain
date is Aug. 19. $5 for lunch. Call (317) 745-4422.

   Fundraisers and Charity Drives

   Danville Police Department Fundraiser, Bailey's Jury Room, 20 W. Main Street,
Danville. A ribfest, luau and fundraiser for the Danville Police Department
features music, games and raffles. Families may dine outside, must be 21 to eat
inside. Call (317) 745-6424.

   Health

   Caring for Your Newborn, 9:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. Hendricks Regional Health
Danville, 1000 E. Main St. One-day class taken before the baby's birth focuses
on the care of a newborn including bathing, cord care, diapering, carseats and
immunizations. Other topics include feeding (breast and bottle) bonding and
normal newborn behavior. A pediatrician will discuss newborn topics and answer
questions. Grandparents and caregivers are welcome to attend. Registration
required. Free; $20 for those not delivering at HRH. Call (317) 745-8485 or
visit www.hendricksregional.org.

   Parkinson's Symposium, 1 to 5 p.m. Wayne Township Emergency Services
Building, 400 N. High School Road, Indianapolis. Parkinson's Awareness
Association of Central Indiana symposium features guest speaker Dr. Thyagarajan
Subramanian, who will discuss "Cell Transplantation and Gene Therapy."
Registration required. $15, $5 discount for dues paying PAACI members. Call
(317) 255-1993.

   Prenatal Exercise Program, 9 to 10 a.m. Connection Pointe Christian Church,
1800 N. Green St., Brownsburg. Low-impact aerobic exercise class, taught by a
certified prenatal aerobics instructor, is intended for pregnant women who want
to stay physically fit during pregnancy. Mothers may also attend up to 12 weeks
postpartum. Participants must have physician's signed consent. Registration
required. $1.50 per class. Call (317) 745-8485 or visit
www.hendricksregional.org.

   Hobbies, Crafts and Clubs

   National Toy Truck 'N Construction Show & Auction, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Adam's
Mark Hotel, 2544 Executive Drive, Indianapolis. Toy trucks & toy construction
equipment for sale. Includes display of miniature "working city" with remote
controlled trucks and construction toys. Call (800) 533-8293 or visit
www.toyfarmer.com or www.toytrucker.com.

   Karaoke

   Billy O'Neal's Pub & Eatery, 9 p.m. 7445 W. 10th St., Indianapolis. Call
(317) 273-8076.

   Gatsby's Pub & Grill, 9 p.m. 6335 Intech Commons Drive, Indianapolis. Host:
Michael. Free. Call (317) 275-2205.

   JD's Pub, 10 p.m. 6920 Eagle Highlands Way, Indianapolis. Free. Call (317)
280-1982.

   Kazablanka, 9 p.m. 5801 Rockville Road, Indianapolis. With drawings. Free.
Call (317) 244-7638.

   Kids Programs and Shows

   American Girl Club, 11 a.m. Wayne Branch Library, 198 S. Girls School Road,
Indianapolis. Children 7-13 may bring their favorite dolls and tell stories,
create projects and learn about their dolls. Free. Call (317) 275-4530 or visit
www.imcpl.org.

   HIP Kids Rock The Town @ Club HIP, 7 to 10 p.m. Club HIP, 8399 E. U.S. 36,
Avon. Hip-hop, karaoke, food, games and contests. Participants may wear
glow-in-the-dark clothing for "all in the dark" event. Proceeds benefit Project
Angel, which provides assistance to needy Hendricks County children. Hosted by
HIP Studios. $5. Call (317) 281-7136.

   Parents Night Out, 6:30 to midnight. HIP Studios, 150 W. Clinton St.,
Danville. Parents have a night out while their children, ages 5 and older, have
activities, games, art and snacks. Registration required. $25 per child,
siblings half price. Call (317) 946-4357 or (317) 362-5331.

   Parents Night Out, 6:30 to midnight. HIP Studios, 1122 N. Ind. 267, Avon.
Children 5 and older partake in activities, games, art projects, snacks and a
movie while their parents have an evening out. Registration required. $25 per
child, half off for siblings. Call (317) 946-4357 or(317) 362-5331.

   Yu-Gi-Oh Competition, 1 to 4:30 p.m. Wayne Branch Library, 198 S. Girls
School Road, Indianapolis. Children 9-16 bring Yu-Gi-Oh cards and duel with
others. Free. Call (317) 275-4530 or visit www.imcpl.org.

   Live Music

   Ben Davis Marching Giants: The Secret, (Other) 5 p.m. Ben Davis High School,
1200 N. Girls School Road, Indianapolis. See what the band has been working on
during the summer. Free. Call (317) 243-5523.

   Hummel Park Summer Concert Series: Lonsway & Malow, (Country and Western)
6:30 p.m. Hummel Park, 1500 S. Center St., Plainfield. Country duo. Opening act
performs at 6:30, followed by the headliner. $7 in advance, $10 at event. Call
(317) 839-9151 or visit www.guilfordtownship.com.

   KikAxe Live, (Rock) 9 p.m. Big Dog Saloon and Sports Bar, 2929 Kentucky Ave.,
Indianapolis. Call (317) 244-1223.

   My Delilah, 9:30 p.m. Kelly's Pub Too, 5341 W. 10th St., Indianapolis. Free.
Call (317) 244-5822.

   Sleepy and the B Sides, (Rock) 9 p.m. Dog House Sports Bar, 18 Whittington
Drive, Brownsburg. $2 to $5. Call (317) 858-1066.

   The Sonshiners Quartet, (Gospel/Religious) 6 to 8 p.m. Poplar Grove Methodist
Church, 6413 N. Baltimore Road, Wilbur. The Sonshiners Quartet will be at Poplar
Grove, Wilbur,, Saturday, August 18, 6-8 p.m. Contact Pastor Joni Nester for
more information at 317625 5855. Call Pastor Joni Nester , (317) 625-5855.

   Other Spectator Sports

   Demolition Derby, 6 p.m. Hendricks County 4-H Fairgrounds, 1900 E. Main St.,
Danville. Twenty-seventh annual event. Cars, trucks and compacts hit it hard and
bend metal. Gates open at 4:30 p.m. $10, children 6-12 $5, 5 and younger free.
Call (317) 892-4765.

   E.T. Bracket Series, 10 a.m. O'Reilly Raceway Park, 10267 E. U.S. 136,
Clermont. Drag racing. $10, children 12 and younger free. Call (317) 291-4090 or
visit www.irponline.com.

   Import Truck Bash, 9 a.m. O'Reilly Raceway Park, 10267 E. U.S. 136, Clermont.
Xpl?d Sport Compact Racing Series, car show and swap meet. $10 in advance,
children $5, $15 at the door. Call (317) 291-4090 or visit www.irponline.com.

   Pets and Animals

   A Kit & Kaboodle or A Kaboodle of Kits, 12:30 to 4:30 p.m. Pet Supplies Plus,
7190 Rockville Road, Indianapolis. Cats Haven cat and kitten adoption event. Cat
carriers given to the first four cats or kittens finding homes. Event includes
cake, punch and lemonade. Call (317) 241-1400.

   Pet Adoption Event, 2 to 4 p.m. Pet Supplies Plus, 7190 Rockville Road,
Indianapolis. See dogs available for adoption through Greyhound Pets of America.
Call (317) 475-9603.

   Recreation and Fitness

   Class Sign-Ups, 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Starz Dance Factory, 5250 E. US 36, Suite
430, Avon. Sign-up for classes that begin Sept. 4. Ages 3 to 19 learn tap,
ballet, tumbling, jazz, hip-hop dance cheer dance and social dance. Adults
hip-hop classes also offered. Registration required. Call (317) 403-2475 or
e-mail starzdance@sbcglobal.net

   Indiana Cubs Baseball Tryouts, 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. Brownsburg High School, 1000
S. Odell St. Ages 12-18 try out for the 2008 summer season. Call (317) 852-2258
or visit www.indianacubs.com.

   Kids, Youth and Adults Martial Arts Class, noon to 1 p.m. Plainfield
Recreation and Aquatic Center, 651 Vestal Road. Taught by Rex Hammersley of
Hammer Martial Arts. Call Hammersley, (317) 718-9883.

   SUNDAY

   Art and Exhibits

   Joan Washburn, 2 to 5 p.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana St. The
artist of the month displays her quilts. Free. Call (317) 745-2604.

   Attractions

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway Grounds Tours, 9:30 a.m., 11:15 a.m., 1:15 p.m.
and 3 p.m. Indianapolis Motor Speedway, 4790 W. 16th St. Ninety-minute guided
tour -- 9:30 and 11:15 a.m., and 1:15 and 3 p.m. -- offers in-depth view of the
Speedway's evolution. Tour includes walk-through of Hall of Fame Museum and ride
around 2.5-mile oval in tour bus. $25, children 6-15 $10, 5 and younger free
(includes admission to Hall of Fame Museum). Call Mary Geiss, (317) 492-6747,
visit www.indianapolismotorspeedway.com/news/story.php?story_id=7890 or e-mail
mgeiss@brickyard.com

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway tours, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Indianapolis Motor
Speedway Hall of Fame Museum, 4790 W. 16th St. View racing memorabilia from the
Indianapolis 500, Allstate 400 at the Brickyard, United States Grand Prix and
more. Also, re-created look of 1950s-era Gasoline Alley, complete with wooden
garages and roadster. New exhibit features photos, stories and memorabilia of
the first five decades of the 500 Festival. Call (317) 484-6784.

   Street Performers, 1 to 4 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura Park Way,
Plainfield. Magicians, face painters, jugglers, mimes, character artist, fire
eaters and stilt walkers throughout the center. Call (317) 203-4555 .

   Discussions and Chats

   Bullies in the Workplace, 9:40 to 10:20 a.m. Whitelick Presbyterian Church,
2530 N. Hendricks County Road 600 East, Avon. Adults discuss bullying at work.
Part of the Sunday Morning Coffee Conversations. Call (317) 852-2840.

   Hobbies, Crafts and Clubs

   National Toy Truck 'N Construction Show & Auction, 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Adam's
Mark Hotel, 2544 Executive Drive, Indianapolis. Toy trucks & toy construction
equipment for sale. Includes display of miniature "working city" with remote
controlled trucks and construction toys. Call (800) 533-8293 or visit
www.toyfarmer.com or www.toytrucker.com.

   Karaoke

   Gatsby's Pub & Grill, 8 p.m. 6335 Intech Commons Drive, Indianapolis. Host:
Michael. Free. Call (317) 275-2205.

   Other Spectator Sports

   Import Truck Bash, 9 a.m. O'Reilly Raceway Park, 10267 E. U.S. 136, Clermont.
Xpl?d Sport Compact Racing Series, car show and swap meet. $10 in advance,
children $5, $15 at the door. Call (317) 291-4090 or visit www.irponline.com.

   Parks and Nature

   Sunday Morning Bird Walk, 9 to 11 a.m. Eagle Creek Park Nature Center, 7840
W. 56th St., Indianapolis. All ages look for birds. Rain or shine. Registration
required. Free with $2 per biker/hiker park admission, $4 per vehicle admission.
Call (317) 327-7275 or visit www.indyparks.org.

   Pets and Animals

   A Kit & Kaboodle or A Kaboodle of Kits, 12:30 to 4:30 p.m. Pet Supplies Plus,
7190 Rockville Road, Indianapolis. Cats Haven cat and kitten adoption event. Cat
carriers given to the first four cats or kittens finding homes. Event includes
cake, punch and lemonade. Call (317) 241-1400.

   Cat Haven Pet Adoption Event, 2 to 4 p.m. Pet Supplies Plus, 7190 Rockville
Road, Indianapolis. Meet with Cat Haven volunteers and see foster kittens and
cats available for adoption. Call (317) 241-1400.

   MONDAY

   Art and Exhibits

   Dyer Creations Photo Art, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Citizens Bank: Avon, 100 N. Ind.
267. Photographs by Camby artist Diana Dyer. Free. Call (317) 366-1284.

   Joan Washburn, 9 a.m. to 8 p.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana St.
The artist of the month displays her quilts. Free. Call (317) 745-2604.

   Mixed Media, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Citizens Bank: Plainfield, 2402 E. Main
St. Oil paintings, watercolors and mixed media by Avon artist Chris Ardelean.
Free. Call (317) 839-9899.

   Squeak, Squawk, and Muse, 6 a.m. to 5 p.m. B-Java Coffee & Tea, 5510
Lafayette Road, Indianapolis. Mixed media artwork by Lynn Dugan. Free. Call
(317) 280-1236.

   Attractions

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway tours, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Indianapolis Motor
Speedway Hall of Fame Museum, 4790 W. 16th St. View racing memorabilia from the
Indianapolis 500, Allstate 400 at the Brickyard, United States Grand Prix and
more. Also, re-created look of 1950s-era Gasoline Alley, complete with wooden
garages and roadster. New exhibit features photos, stories and memorabilia of
the first five decades of the 500 Festival. Call (317) 484-6784.

   Grand Openings and Open Houses

   Hendricks County Extension Chorus Open House, 7 p.m. Hendricks County Senior
Center, 1201 Sycamore Lane, Danville. Fellowship and refreshments for women
interested in singing three-part harmony with an active chorus. Call (317)
839-7656 or(317) 839-9780.

   Health

   Prenatal Exercise Program, 9 to 10 a.m. Connection Pointe Christian Church,
1800 N. Green St., Brownsburg. Low-impact aerobic exercise class, taught by a
certified prenatal aerobics instructor, is intended for pregnant women who want
to stay physically fit during pregnancy. Mothers may also attend up to 12 weeks
postpartum. Participants must have physician's signed consent. Registration
required. $1.50 per class. Call (317) 745-8485 or visit
www.hendricksregional.org.

   Sibling Preparation, 6 to 8 p.m. Hendricks Regional Health Danville, 1000 E.
Main St. Two-hour class to prepare children, ages 3 and older, to be a big
brother or big sister. A parent or other adult must attend with the child.
Registration required. Free; $10 for those not delivering at HRH. Call (317)
745-8485 or visit www.hendricksregional.org.

   Karaoke

   Kelly's Pub Too, 9 p.m. 5341 W. 10th St., Indianapolis. Free. Call (317)
244-5822.

   Kids Programs and Shows

   Family Story Celebration at Wayne, 6:30 p.m. Wayne Branch Library, 198 S.
Girls School Road, Indianapolis. Stories, songs and activities for families with
children ages 1-10. Free. Call (317) 275-4530 or visit www.imcpl.org.

   Fun-Fitness, 9 to 10 a.m. Plainfield Christian Church, 800 Dan Jones Road.
Fitness program for ages 5-12 is run simultaneously with PCC's women's aerobic
class. Moderate running, calisthenics, group games, relays, contests, daily
devotion time, nutrition counseling and a healthy snack. Nursery offered for
ages 1-4. $2 per visit. Call (317) 707-3089.

   What's Bugging You, 4 p.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana St. Ages
7-12 explore the insect kingdom with fun facts, creepy crafts and snacks.
Registration required. Free. Call (317) 745-2604.

   Meetings

   Board of Zoning Appeals, 7 p.m. Plainfield Municipal Building, 206 W. Main
St.

   Recreation and Fitness

   25th Annual "Fore the Kids" Golf Tournament and Silent Auction, 11 a.m.
Brickyard Crossing Golf Resort & Inn, 4400 W. 16th St., Indianapolis.
Registration and silent auction, 11 a.m. Shotgun start, 12:30 p.m. Dinner
provided by Buca di Beppo at 6 p.m. Proceeds benefit the Boys & Girls Clubs of
Indianapolis. Registration required. $375, $1500 per team. Call (317) 920-4700.

   Adult and Senior Volleyball, 9 a.m. to noon. Thatcher Park, 4649 W. Vermont
St., Indianapolis. Ongoing volleyball play every Monday through September. $3.
Call (317) 327-7275 or visit www.indyparks.org.

   Adult Open Volleyball (Ages 30 and Older), noon to 3 p.m. Municipal Gardens
Park, 1831 Lafayette Road, Indianapolis. Adults play volleyball every Monday and
Wednesday through Sept. 30. $3. Call (317) 327-7275 or visit www.indyparks.org.

   Aerobics Class, 9 to 10 a.m. Plainfield Christian Church, 800 Dan Jones Road.
Total body aerobic exercise to Christian music includes a combination of step
aerobics and body toning with weights. For all fitness levels. Child care
available for $1 per session. Ongoing. Call David Verhonik, (317) 707-3089.

   Open Youth Basketball (Ages 18 and Younger), 1:30 to 4:30 p.m. Riverside
Park, 2420 E. Riverside Drive, Indianapolis. Free. Call (317) 327-7275 or visit
www.indyparks.org.

   Support Groups

   DivorceCare, 7 to 9 p.m. Crossroads Church of Avon, 7209 E. Hendricks County
Road 100 South. A free weekly seminar and support group for people who are
separated or divorced. Child care is provided. Call (317) 838-9100.

   Workshops and Classes

   Digital Movie Making, 6 p.m. Brownsburg Public Library, 450 S. Jefferson St.
Learn to make videos, short films and home movies using Microsoft Movie Maker.
Registration required. Call (317) 852-3167.

   Microsoft Outlook XP Level 1, 6 to 8 p.m. Plainfield-Guilford Township Public
Library, 1120 Stafford Road. First day of class that meets Mondays through Sept.
17. Part of the Office Proficiency Computer Skills class where students become
proficient in the software with hands-on instruction. Register by Aug. 14.
Registration required. $69. Call (317) 839-6602.

   TUESDAY

   Art and Exhibits

   Dyer Creations Photo Art, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Citizens Bank: Avon, 100 N. Ind.
267. Photographs by Camby artist Diana Dyer. Free. Call (317) 366-1284.

   Joan Washburn, 9 a.m. to 8 p.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana St.
The artist of the month displays her quilts. Free. Call (317) 745-2604.

   Mixed Media, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Citizens Bank: Plainfield, 2402 E. Main
St. Oil paintings, watercolors and mixed media by Avon artist Chris Ardelean.
Free. Call (317) 839-9899.

   Squeak, Squawk, and Muse, 6 a.m. to 5 p.m. B-Java Coffee & Tea, 5510
Lafayette Road, Indianapolis. Mixed media artwork by Lynn Dugan. Free. Call
(317) 280-1236.

   Attractions

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway tours, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Indianapolis Motor
Speedway Hall of Fame Museum, 4790 W. 16th St. View racing memorabilia from the
Indianapolis 500, Allstate 400 at the Brickyard, United States Grand Prix and
more. Also, re-created look of 1950s-era Gasoline Alley, complete with wooden
garages and roadster. New exhibit features photos, stories and memorabilia of
the first five decades of the 500 Festival. Call (317) 484-6784.

   Dance Participation

   Indy Dancers, 7 to 10:30 p.m. 8 Seconds Saloon and Tremors Club, 111 N.
Lynhurst Drive, Indianapolis. Dance a variety of social dances to DJ music.
Singles welcome. $10, $5 members. Call (317) 767-5665 or visit
www.indydancers.com.

   DJs and Clubs

   El Toro Cantina, 5 to 10 p.m. 1008 E. Main St., Brownsburg. Free. Call (317)
858-3101.

   Health

   Nutrition During & After Cancer Treatment, 6 to 8 p.m. Hendricks Regional
Health Avon, 8244 E. U.S. 36.

   Hobbies, Crafts and Clubs

   Card Club, 10:30 a.m. Plainfield Recreation and Aquatic Center, 651 Vestal
Road. Play card and board games including bridge, pinochle, euchre, Trivial
Pursuit and Scrabble. Free with admission. Call (317) 839-7665.

   Knitting Workshop, 6 to 8 p.m. Mooresville Public Library, 220 W. Harrison
St. Knitters of all skill levels work on knitting projects with Joyce Hickerson.
Registration required. Free. Call (317) 831-7323.

   Karaoke

   Dog House Sports Bar, 9 p.m. 18 Whittington Drive, Brownsburg. Free. Call
(317) 858-1066.

   Gatsby's Pub & Grill, 9 p.m. 6335 Intech Commons Drive, Indianapolis. Host:
Michael. Free. Call (317) 275-2205.

   Joe's Grille Plainfield, 8 to midnight. 120 N. Perry Road. Free. Call (317)
837-9772.

   Winners Circle Lounge, 7 p.m. 4880 Crawfordsville Road, Indianapolis. Free.
Call (317) 248-1099.

   Kids Programs and Shows

   Kindermusik (Ages 3-6), 10:45 a.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana
St. A 45-minute demonstration of songs and activities from Kindermusik, a music-
and movement-based program that enhances the total development of children.
Registration required. Free. Call (317) 745-2604 or visit www.dpl.lib.in.us.

   Kindermusik (Ages Newborn to 3), 9:30 a.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S.
Indiana St. Registration required. Free. Call (317) 745-2604 or visit
www.dpl.lib.in.us.

   Kindermusik (Newborn to Age 6 and Family), 6 p.m. Danville Public Library,
101 S. Indiana St. Registration required. Free. Call (317) 745-2604 or visit
www.dpl.lib.in.us.

   PAWS to Read, 5 p.m. and 6 p.m. Brownsburg Public Library, 450 S. Jefferson
St. Children practice reading skills by reading to a certified therapy dog.
Registration required. Call (317) 852-3167.

   PreschoolTime at Decatur, 10:30 a.m. Decatur Branch Library, 5301 Kentucky
Ave., Indianapolis. Stories and activities for babies up to 2 years with adult.
Free. Call (317) 275-4330 or visit www.imcpl.org.

   Please send information about events to calendar@indystar.com Clearly
indicate the name of your event in the subject field and include the event date,
sponsoring group, time, place, price and contact phone number.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2007


                              454 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                             August 17, 2007 Friday
                                  1ST Edition

SECTION: ZONE WEST - WEST INDY STAR; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 2840 words

HEADLINE: Calendar

BODY:

   TODAY

   Art and Exhibits

   Dyer Creations Photo Art, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. Citizens Bank: Avon, 100 N. Ind.
267. Photographs by Camby artist Diana Dyer. Free. Call (317) 366-1284.

   Joan Washburn, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana St.
The artist of the month displays her quilts. Free. Call (317) 745-2604.

   Mixed Media, 8:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. Citizens Bank: Plainfield, 2402 E. Main St.
Oil paintings, watercolors and mixed media by Avon artist Chris Ardelean. Free.
Call (317) 839-9899.

   Squeak, Squawk, and Muse, 6 a.m. to 5 p.m. B-Java Coffee & Tea, 5510
Lafayette Road, Indianapolis. Mixed media artwork by Lynn Dugan. Free. Call
(317) 280-1236.

   Attractions

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway Grounds Tours, 9:30 a.m., 11:15 a.m., 1:15 p.m.
and 3 p.m. Indianapolis Motor Speedway, 4790 W. 16th St. Ninety-minute guided
tour -- 9:30 and 11:15 a.m., and 1:15 and 3 p.m. -- offers in-depth view of the
Speedway's evolution. Tour includes walk-through of Hall of Fame Museum and ride
around 2.5-mile oval in tour bus. $25, children 6-15 $10, 5 and younger free
(includes admission to Hall of Fame Museum). Call Mary Geiss, (317) 492-6747,
visit www.indianapolismotorspeedway.com/news/story.php?story_id=7890 or e-mail
mgeiss@brickyard.com

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway tours, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Indianapolis Motor
Speedway Hall of Fame Museum, 4790 W. 16th St. View racing memorabilia from the
Indianapolis 500, Allstate 400 at the Brickyard, United States Grand Prix and
more. Also, re-created look of 1950s-era Gasoline Alley, complete with wooden
garages and roadster. New exhibit features photos, stories and memorabilia of
the first five decades of the 500 Festival. Call (317) 484-6784.

   Street Performers, 6 to 9 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura Park Way,
Plainfield. Magicians, face painters, jugglers, mimes, character artist, fire
eaters and stilt walkers throughout the center. Call (317) 203-4555 .

   Dance Participation

   Friday Night Open Dance Party, 7:30 to 10 p.m. Starlite Ballroom, 5720 Guion
Road, Indianapolis. Lesson at 7:30 p.m., dancing at 8:30 p.m. $5 (lesson $10).
Call (317) 299-4740.

   Dance Performance

   The Hunchback of Notre Dame, 8 p.m. Pike Performing Arts Center, 6701
Zionsville Road, Indianapolis. Gregory Hancock Dance Theatre production of
Victor Hugo's dark tale with a contemporary flair. $25, $20 students and
seniors. Call (317) 216-5455 or visit www.pikepac.org.

   DJs and Clubs

   Kelly's Pub Too, 9:30 p.m. 5341 W. 10th St., Indianapolis. Call (317)
244-5822.

   Farmers Markets

   Farmers Market and Music, 3 to 7 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura Park Way,
Plainfield. Farmers Market with produce, honey, kettle corn, cookies, wine and
flowers from 3 to 7 p.m. Live jazz from 4 to 7 p.m. At Futura Park and Stage.
Call (317) 203-4555.

   Films

   Movie Premiere Night, 6:30 p.m. High School Musical 2 Premiere: Westside:
Northfield at Heartland Crossing, 8509 Wheatfield Drive, Camby. Hosted by Radio
Disney 98.3. Family fun games and "High School Musical" trivia. Win "High School
Musical 2" prize packages and other Radio Disney prizes. The movie will be
telecast at 8 p.m. on the big screen. Seating is first come, first serve.
Tickets are available at the neighborhood. Free. Visit
www.RadioDisney.com/Indianapolis.

   Hobbies, Crafts and Clubs

   National Toy Truck 'N Construction Show & Auction, 3 to 6 p.m. Adam's Mark
Hotel, 2544 Executive Drive, Indianapolis. Toy trucks & toy construction
equipment for sale. Includes display of miniature "working city" with remote
controlled trucks and construction toys. Call (800) 533-8293 or visit
www.toyfarmer.com or www.toytrucker.com.

   Karaoke

   Winners Circle Lounge, 9 p.m. 4880 Crawfordsville Road, Indianapolis. Call
(317) 248-1099.

   Kids Programs and Shows

   Fun-Fitness, 9 to 10 a.m. Plainfield Christian Church, 800 Dan Jones Road.
Fitness program for ages 5-12 is run simultaneously with PCC's women's aerobic
class. Moderate running, calisthenics, group games, relays, contests, daily
devotion time, nutrition counseling and a healthy snack. Nursery offered for
ages 1-4. $2 per visit. Call (317) 707-3089.

   Preschool Art, 9 to 9:45 a.m. HIP Studios Brownsburg, 1460 N. Green St.,
Suite 600. This class is not currently in session. Registration required. $12
per class, $40 per month. Call (317) 294-2171.

   Live Music

   KikAxe Live, (Rock) 9 p.m. Big Dog Saloon and Sports Bar, 2929 Kentucky Ave.,
Indianapolis. Call (317) 244-1223.

   L.A. Guns, (Rock) 9 p.m. 8 Seconds Saloon and Tremors Club, 111 N. Lynhurst
Drive, Indianapolis. Call (317) 486-1569.

   Music on the Veranda Series: Andy Katt & Men in Tux, (Swing/Big Band) 7 p.m.
Chateau Thomas Winery, 6291 Cambridge Way, Plainfield. Outdoor concert. Men in
tuxes playing big band sounds. Free. Call (317) 837-9463.

   Simon DTour Live! Featuring Bobby Valentino, (R&B/Soul) noon to 6 p.m.
Lafayette Square Mall, 3919 Lafayette Road, Indianapolis. Presented by ABC
Family, a live concert and lifestyle event that connects teens with some of
their favorite pop stars and retail brands. Free. Call (317) 299-0033 or visit
www.simondtour.com.

   Other Spectator Sports

   Bicycle Racing, 7:30 to 10 p.m. Major Taylor Velodrome and Skate Park, 3639
Cold Spring Road, Indianapolis. Bicycle racing on a sloped concrete velodrome.
Nine races per evening. Free. Call (317) 327-8356 or visit
www.majortaylorvelo.com.

   Import Truck Bash, 10 a.m. O'Reilly Raceway Park, 10267 E. U.S. 136,
Clermont. Xpl?d Sport Compact Racing Series, car show and swap meet. $10 in
advance, children $5, $15 at the door. Call (317) 291-4090 or visit
www.irponline.com.

   Parks and Nature

   New Moon Friday, 9 p.m. McCloud Nature Center, 8518 N. Hughes Road, North
Salem. At dusk. Gaze at stars through professional telescopes. Participants
welcome to bring own telescopes or binoculars. Presented by Indiana Astronomical
Society. Free. Call (765) 676-5437.

   Preschool Playtime, 1 to 2 p.m. McCloud Nature Center, 8518 N. Hughes Road,
North Salem. Water activities provided for children 3-5 with adult. Free. Call
(765) 676-5437.

   Recreation and Fitness

   Aerobics Class, 9 to 10 a.m. Plainfield Christian Church, 800 Dan Jones Road.
Total body aerobic exercise to Christian music includes a combination of step
aerobics and body toning with weights. For all fitness levels. Child care
available for $1 per session. Ongoing. Call David Verhonik, (317) 707-3089.

   Class Sign-Ups, 6 to 8 p.m. Starz Dance Factory, 5250 E. US 36, Suite 430,
Avon. Sign-up for classes that begin Sept. 4. Ages 3 to 19 learn tap, ballet,
tumbling, jazz, hip-hop dance cheer dance and social dance. Adults hip-hop
classes also offered. Registration required. Call (317) 403-2475 or e-mail
starzdance@sbcglobal.net

   Indianapolis Hiking Club: Brisk Road Hike, 8 a.m. Eagle Creek Park, 7840 W.
56th St., Indianapolis. Meet in the parking lot just inside the 56th Street
entrance for a six-, eight- or 10-mile road hike. Arrive 15 minutes early.
Guests welcome. In the event of inclement weather, check with the leader.
Parking fee. Call (317) 849-7006 or visit www.indyhike.org.

   Jumpstart Breakfast, 6 to 8 a.m. Ellis Park, 900 E. Main St., Danville. Meet
at train station. Part of the March Around the Park, an eight-month event that
encourages healthy lifestyles. Walkers, the "trail of the day" starts at 7 a.m.
Registration required. Free. Call Danville Parks & Recreation Department, (317)
745-3015, or visit www.danvilleindiana.org.

   Open Youth Basketball (Ages 18 and Younger), 1:30 to 4:30 p.m. Riverside
Park, 2420 E. Riverside Drive, Indianapolis. Free. Call (317) 327-7275 or visit
www.indyparks.org.

   Workshops and Classes

   Computer Savvy Seniors Level 1, 9 a.m. to noon. Plainfield-Guilford Township
Public Library, 1120 Stafford Road. First day of five-week class for ages 55 and
older, that meets on Fridays through Sept. 14. Class covers basic skills to
operate a computer. Register by Aug. 10. Registration required. $89. Call (317)
839-6602.

   SATURDAY

   Art and Exhibits

   Dyer Creations Photo Art, 9 a.m. to noon. Citizens Bank: Avon, 100 N. Ind.
267. Photographs by Camby artist Diana Dyer. Free. Call (317) 366-1284.

   Joan Washburn, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana St.
The artist of the month displays her quilts. Free. Call (317) 745-2604.

   Mixed Media, 8:30 a.m. to noon. Citizens Bank: Plainfield, 2402 E. Main St.
Oil paintings, watercolors and mixed media by Avon artist Chris Ardelean. Free.
Call (317) 839-9899.

   Squeak, Squawk, and Muse, 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. B-Java Coffee & Tea, 5510
Lafayette Road, Indianapolis. Mixed media artwork by Lynn Dugan. Free. Call
(317) 280-1236.

   Attractions

   Colts Rally, noon to 2 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura Park Way,
Plainfield. Celebrate the Indianapolis Colts' Super Bowl victory and upcoming
season with karaoke, Hank's Hottie appearance, giveaways and interactive games.
Toy Factory performs on the Futura Park Stage from noon to 2 p.m. Presented by
97.1 HANK FM. Call (317) 203-4555 .

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway Grounds Tours, 9:30 a.m., 11:15 a.m., 1:15 p.m.
and 3 p.m. Indianapolis Motor Speedway, 4790 W. 16th St. Ninety-minute guided
tour -- 9:30 and 11:15 a.m., and 1:15 and 3 p.m. -- offers in-depth view of the
Speedway's evolution. Tour includes walk-through of Hall of Fame Museum and ride
around 2.5-mile oval in tour bus. $25, children 6-15 $10, 5 and younger free
(includes admission to Hall of Fame Museum). Call Mary Geiss, (317) 492-6747,
visit www.indianapolismotorspeedway.com/news/story.php?story_id=7890 or e-mail
mgeiss@brickyard.com

   Indianapolis Motor Speedway tours, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Indianapolis Motor
Speedway Hall of Fame Museum, 4790 W. 16th St. View racing memorabilia from the
Indianapolis 500, Allstate 400 at the Brickyard, United States Grand Prix and
more. Also, re-created look of 1950s-era Gasoline Alley, complete with wooden
garages and roadster. New exhibit features photos, stories and memorabilia of
the first five decades of the 500 Festival. Call (317) 484-6784.

   Street Performers, 1 to 4 p.m. and 6 to 9 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura
Park Way, Plainfield. Magicians, face painters, jugglers, mimes, character
artist, fire eaters and stilt walkers throughout the center. Call (317) 203-4555
.

   Dance Performance

   The Hunchback of Notre Dame, 8 p.m. Pike Performing Arts Center, 6701
Zionsville Road, Indianapolis. Gregory Hancock Dance Theatre production of
Victor Hugo's dark tale with a contemporary flair. $25, $20 students and
seniors. Call (317) 216-5455 or visit www.pikepac.org.

   DJs and Clubs

   8 Seconds Saloon, 6 to 10 p.m. 8 Seconds Saloon and Tremors Club, 111 N.
Lynhurst Drive, Indianapolis. DJ before live music events and between sets. DJ
also at Tremors 9 p.m. to 3 a.m. $5. Call (317) 486-1569.

   Fairs and Major Events

   Clermont Old Fashion Day, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. Clermont Lions Club Park, 3201 N.
Tansel Road. Parade starts at 11 a.m. and features State Sen. Mike Delph as
grand marshal with music by Ben Davis High School marching band. Parade ends at
park, where vendor booths are set up. Free. Call Nancy Baxter, (317) 299-9237.

   SandBlast, 3 p.m. Ellis Park, 900 E. Main St., Danville. Carnival rides and
games, three on three basketball tournament, baseball and softball clinics and a
concert featuring Crossover, Bended Knee and Higher Ground. Hosted by Sandlot
Ministries and sponsored by Hendricks Regional Health. Only those participating
in the basketball tournament need to register. Free. Call Matt McLaren, (317)
745-2255, visit www.sandlotministries.com or e-mail info@sandlotministries.com

   Farmers Markets

   Farmer's Market, 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. Crestwood Village West, 230 Welcome Way
Blvd., Indianapolis. Shop for fresh fruits and vegetables and craft items, with
entertainment by the Dixie Kats. Beef stew and biscuits available for $3. Call
(317) 271-6475.

   Films

   "High School Musical 2" Viewing Party, 7 p.m. Pike Freshman Center, 6801
Zionsville Road, Indianapolis. Pike YMCA premiere of Disney's "High School
Musical 2." Activities include food, games and prizes. Call (317) 347-8600.

   Food and Drink

   Lunch at the Airport, 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. Hendricks County Airport, 2749 Gordon
Graham Blvd., Danville. Drawings for free airplane rides. Lunch provided. Rain
date is Aug. 19. $5 for lunch. Call (317) 745-4422.

   Fundraisers and Charity Drives

   Danville Police Department Fundraiser, Bailey's Jury Room, 20 W. Main Street,
Danville. A ribfest, luau and fundraiser for the Danville Police Department
features music, games and raffles. Families may dine outside, must be 21 to eat
inside. Call (317) 745-6424.

   Health

   Caring for Your Newborn, 9:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. Hendricks Regional Health
Danville, 1000 E. Main St. One-day class taken before the baby's birth focuses
on the care of a newborn including bathing, cord care, diapering, carseats and
immunizations. Other topics include feeding (breast and bottle) bonding and
normal newborn behavior. A pediatrician will discuss newborn topics and answer
questions. Grandparents and caregivers are welcome to attend. Registration
required. Free; $20 for those not delivering at HRH. Call (317) 745-8485 or
visit www.hendricksregional.org.

   Parkinson's Symposium, 1 to 5 p.m. Wayne Township Emergency Services
Building, 400 N. High School Road, Indianapolis. Parkinson's Awareness
Association of Central Indiana symposium features guest speaker Dr. Thyagarajan
Subramanian, who will discuss "Cell Transplantation and Gene Therapy."
Registration required. $15, $5 discount for dues paying PAACI members. Call
(317) 255-1993.

   Prenatal Exercise Program, 9 to 10 a.m. Connection Pointe Christian Church,
1800 N. Green St., Brownsburg. Low-impact aerobic exercise class, taught by a
certified prenatal aerobics instructor, is intended for pregnant women who want
to stay physically fit during pregnancy. Mothers may also attend up to 12 weeks
postpartum. Participants must have physician's signed consent. Registration
required. $1.50 per class. Call (317) 745-8485 or visit
www.hendricksregional.org.

   Hobbies, Crafts and Clubs

   National Toy Truck 'N Construction Show & Auction, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Adam's
Mark Hotel, 2544 Executive Drive, Indianapolis. Toy trucks & toy construction
equipment for sale. Includes display of miniature "working city" with remote
controlled trucks and construction toys. Call (800) 533-8293 or visit
www.toyfarmer.com or www.toytrucker.com.

   Karaoke

   Billy O'Neal's Pub & Eatery, 9 p.m. 7445 W. 10th St., Indianapolis. Call
(317) 273-8076.

   Gatsby's Pub & Grill, 9 p.m. 6335 Intech Commons Drive, Indianapolis. Host:
Michael. Free. Call (317) 275-2205.

   JD's Pub, 10 p.m. 6920 Eagle Highlands Way, Indianapolis. Free. Call (317)
280-1982.

   Kazablanka, 9 p.m. 5801 Rockville Road, Indianapolis. With drawings. Free.
Call (317) 244-7638.

   Kids Programs and Shows

   American Girl Club, 11 a.m. Wayne Branch Library, 198 S. Girls School Road,
Indianapolis. Children 7-13 may bring their favorite dolls and tell stories,
create projects and learn about their dolls. Free. Call (317) 275-4530 or visit
www.imcpl.org.

   HIP Kids Rock The Town @ Club HIP, 7 to 10 p.m. Club HIP, 8399 E. U.S. 36,
Avon. Hip-hop, karaoke, food, games and contests. Participants may wear
glow-in-the-dark clothing for "all in the dark" event. Proceeds benefit Project
Angel, which provides assistance to needy Hendricks County children. Hosted by
HIP Studios. $5. Call (317) 281-7136.

   Parents Night Out, 6:30 to midnight. HIP Studios, 150 W. Clinton St.,
Danville. Parents have a night out while their children, ages 5 and older, have
activities, games, art and snacks. Registration required. $25 per child,
siblings half price. Call (317) 946-4357 or (317) 362-5331.

   Parents Night Out, 6:30 to midnight. HIP Studios, 1122 N. Ind. 267, Avon.
Children 5 and older partake in activities, games, art projects, snacks and a
movie while their parents have an evening out. Registration required. $25 per
child, half off for siblings. Call (317) 946-4357 or(317) 362-5331.

   Yu-Gi-Oh Competition, 1 to 4:30 p.m. Wayne Branch Library, 198 S. Girls
School Road, Indianapolis. Children 9-16 bring Yu-Gi-Oh cards and duel with
others. Free. Call (317) 275-4530 or visit www.imcpl.org.

   Live Music

   Ben Davis Marching Giants: The Secret, (Other) 5 p.m. Ben Davis High School,
1200 N. Girls School Road, Indianapolis. See what the band has been working on
during the summer. Free. Call (317) 243-5523.

   Hummel Park Summer Concert Series: Lonsway & Malow, (Country and Western)
6:30 p.m. Hummel Park, 1500 S. Center St., Plainfield. Country duo. Opening act
performs at 6:30, followed by the headliner. $7 in advance, $10 at event. Call
(317) 839-9151 or visit www.guilfordtownship.com.

   KikAxe Live, (Rock) 9 p.m. Big Dog Saloon and Sports Bar, 2929 Kentucky Ave.,
Indianapolis. Call (317) 244-1223.

   My Delilah, 9:30 p.m. Kelly's Pub Too, 5341 W. 10th St., Indianapolis. Free.
Call (317) 244-5822.

   Sleepy and the B Sides, (Rock) 9 p.m. Dog House Sports Bar, 18 Whittington
Drive, Brownsburg. $2 to $5. Call (317) 858-1066.

   Please send information about events to calendar@indystar.com Clearly
indicate the name of your event in the subject field and include the event date,
sponsoring group, time, place, price and contact phone number.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2007


                              455 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                             August 17, 2007 Friday
                                Regional Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A10

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 745 words

HEADLINE: Fungus Infected Woman Who Died After Gene Therapy

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The 36-year-old Illinois woman who died last month after being treated with
an experimental gene therapy was infected with a fungus that usually causes only
a mild illness. But the infection spun out of control and ravaged her organs,
suggesting that her immune system was seriously impaired, said a doctor who is
part of the medical investigation.

   The woman's body was also teeming with a cold-sore virus that the body
normally keeps in check, another indication of a faltering immune system. And
because of a tear inside her abdomen -- perhaps caused by infection, perhaps by
injury -- she had an internal blood clot the size of a watermelon.

   No formal cause of death has been declared for Jolee Mohr, who died July 24.
Mohr had been generally healthy until July 2, when trillions of genetically
engineered viruses were injected into her right knee in an experimental
treatment for her rheumatoid arthritis.

   The injected viruses were genetically modified so they would suppress the
immune system -- which is responsible for the inflammation of rheumatoid
arthritis -- only in her knee. Doctors hope that tests on tissue specimens and
blood samples will tell whether the treatment's effects somehow spread from the
joint to other parts of Mohr's body.

   The picture will be complicated, however, because Mohr was also taking
conventional immune-suppressing drugs for her arthritis. One of those in
particular, adalimumab, whose brand name is Humira, is known to make patients
susceptible to histoplasmosis, the kind of fungal infection that Mohr had.
Inexplicably, Mohr suddenly became ill in July even though she had been taking
that drug for years and the fungus that causes histoplasmosis is ubiquitous in
the area where she lived.

   "It's a major mystery," said Kyle Hogarth, who heads the intensive care unit
at the University of Chicago Medical Center, where Mohr was transferred days
before she died.

   The company behind the medical experiment, Targeted Genetics of Seattle, has
said that the treatment has an excellent safety record and that none of the more
than 100 other volunteers who got the injections suffered anything more than
short-lived side effects.

   Hogarth and about 20 other doctors and scientists are investigating the death
with help from experts in an immune system factor called tumor necrosis
factor-alpha, or TNF-alpha, which is suppressed by the experimental genetic
treatment and by Humira.

   The autopsy was done with particular care, using sterile techniques more
commonly associated with surgery on the living because of the importance of
getting good clinical evidence, Hogarth said.

   "Think 'CSI,' without the criminal implications," he said, adding that he
suspects it will take one to two months to complete the tests.

   The fungus found throughout Mohr's body is Histoplasma capsulatum. It is
common in airborne dust and bird droppings in the Mississippi and Ohio river
valleys and generally causes a mild respiratory illness when inhaled. But in
people whose immune systems are compromised -- because of AIDS or cancer
chemotherapy, for example -- the fungal cells can spread to other organs and
blossom quickly into fatal infections.

   "It was in her liver. In the blood. It was essentially everywhere," Hogarth
said.

   It is not known whether Mohr's infection was recently acquired or was old and
recently reactivated. In healthy people, the immune system walls off the fungal
cells in structures called granulomas, whose integrity is maintained by
TNF-alpha. When TNF-alpha is suppressed, the granulomas can dissolve and release
the still-living fungi.

   Experts in gene therapy are eagerly awaiting the test results. A link to the
death would be a painful setback for the research field, which attempts to treat
diseases by giving people new genes.

   "Gene therapy holds a great deal of potential," said Arthur Nienhuis of St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, who is president of the American
Society of Gene Therapy. He noted that after more than a decade of failures and
a handful of instances in which gene-based treatments caused leukemia in
volunteers, the approach has recently produced what appear to be its first
cures. More than a dozen children born with genetically defective immune systems
are now living normal lives because of injections of new genes.

   A Targeted Genetics spokeswoman declined to comment on the autopsy findings,
saying the company will make a full presentation at a National Institutes of
Health meeting on Sept. 17.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2007


                              456 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                             August 17, 2007 Friday
                                Regional Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A22

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 329 words

HEADLINE: Watching Over Clinical Trials

BODY:

   The death of Jolee Mohr, a participant in a gene therapy trial,  was a
horrible tragedy  ["Death Points to Risks in Research," front page, Aug. 6]. We
in the biotechnology industry are terribly saddened by her family's loss.

   Biotechnology innovations, such as gene therapy, have tremendous potential to
extend and save the lives of patients suffering from a variety of diseases. As
with all clinical trials, gene therapy research must be regulated in a rigorous
but efficient manner that ensures patient safety and expedites the delivery of
innovative therapies to  patients who so desperately need them.

   To that end, in 2000,  the Biotechnology Industry Organization successfully
urged harmonizing  proposed National Institutes of Health  guidelines with
existing U.S. Food and Drug Administration  regulations overseeing the reporting
of serious adverse events  during clinical trials. The FDA  can at any time
during  a clinical study require the sponsor to provide full information on all
observed adverse events. FDA regulations also cover events in which the medical
official overseeing the study does not think  the serious adverse event was
caused by the therapy under study. Under these regulations, reporting of such
unrelated adverse events should be submitted in an information amendment or
annual report from the study's sponsor.

   Since the NIH had no  regulations on this issue and sought comments from
stakeholders, our proposal in 2000 was not a "rule" change, as reported in your
story, but simply a recommendation to make NIH guidelines consistent with
existing FDA regulations.

   There is nothing in the tragic facts of this case, as reported in the media,
that makes this harmonization relevant to Mrs. Mohr's death. The cause of her
untimely death, and whether it resulted from the experimental treatment, is
under investigation by the FDA and is, as yet, undetermined.

   JAMES C. GREENWOOD

   President and Chief Executive

   Biotechnology Industry Organization

   Washington

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2007


                              457 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Cincinnati Enquirer (Ohio)

                            August 16, 2007 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1047 words

HEADLINE: Three join forces on cancer

BYLINE: Peggy O'Farrell pofarrell@enquirer.com

BODY:

   New center could attract millions in federal funding

   Three of the region's heavy hitters in cancer research and treatment are
teaming up to improve the spectrum of cancer care from childhood through
adulthood.

   Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University Hospital and the
University of Cincinnati have committed $60 million in seed money over the next
five years to establish a joint cancer center.

   The center will focus on research and treatment with the goal of one day
earning special designation from the National Cancer Institute, said David
Stern, dean of UC's College of Medicine.

   That national designation could mean hundreds of millions of dollars in
federal research money down the road.

   "This is going to be a real step forward in cancer care," Stern said. UC has
committed to raise up to $200 million more for the center, he said.

   The center will help move research findings from the lab to the bedside more
quickly in keeping with directives from the National Institutes of Health.

   One benefit will likely be more detailed information about childhood cancer
survivors.

   Following them as they reach adulthood will likely be a key focus of the
center, said Arnold Strauss, chairman of pediatrics at UC's College of Medicine
and director of the Cincinnati Children's Research Foundation.

   Survival rates for pediatric cancers have improved dramatically since the
1980s, he said, but childhood cancers have lingering health effects.

   Childhood cancer survivors have a greater risk of developing second cancers
when they are adults. The cancer treatments themselves can also have side
effects that manifest as survivors age, Strauss said.

   The center will also help the three institutions recruit high-profile
researchers and clinicians, which planners hope will translate to better patient
care.

   The center's formation is being spearheaded by Stern; Strauss; James
Anderson, president and CEO of Children's; and James Kingsbury, executive
director and vice president of University Hospital.

   The seed money will pay for recruiting new clinicians and researchers as well
as upgrading existing facilities at UC, Children's and University.

   The community won't in the near future see a new building go up to house the
center, Kingsbury said.

   Pediatric patients will still undergo treatment at Children's, and adults
will still get treatment at University Hospital, its Barrett Center or UC
Physicians.

   What consumers won't see is the cooperation between doctors and researchers
as they share information and ideas that could one day lead to new treatments
for children and adults with cancer.

   The center is still in the formative stages, Anderson said.

   "We see it as an exciting opportunity, a chance to strengthen the pediatrics
side and to strengthen and grow the adult side as well," he said. "There's a lot
of common ground in the cancer arena that isn't age-dependent. The science side
of it is the same."

   Organizers will also work toward having the new center designated a
Comprehensive Cancer Center by the National Cancer Institute.

   Earning the designation will take several years as focus areas are developed,
Strauss said.

   Researchers and clinicians at the center will focus on four scientific
programs: hormonal malignancies, molecular oncology, pediatric oncology and
cancer susceptibility.

   To earn the national designation, staff will need to share research and
treatment protocols.

   "This type of collaboration is critical if we want to become a premier
national cancer research institution," Strauss said.

   With the designation, the cancer center would be in line to win more federal
research grants and have the national standing to recruit higher-profile
researchers and clinicians, he said.

   The three institutions already have a strong relationship, Anderson said.

   Most of the specialty physicians at Children's are on the faculty at UC's
College of Medicine. University Hospital is UC's primary teaching hospital.

   The joint cancer center will include 142 faculty members from UC and
Children's who now receive about $32 million in cancer-related grants.

   Ohio's cancer death rate is 208 per 100,000 population. That's higher than
the 194 per 100,000 nationally, according the American Cancer Society.

   The partnership

   Participants will kick in $60 million

   over five years to establish a joint cancer center. Contributions include:

   $30 million from Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center

   $20 million

   from the University of Cincinnati

   $10 million

   from University HospitalParticipants will kick in $60 million

   over five years to establish a joint cancer center. Contributions include:

   $30 million from Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center

   $20 million from the University of Cincinnati

   $10 million from University Hospital

   Cancer center partners

   Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University Hospital and the
University of Cincinnati are establishing a joint cancer center for treatment
and research.

   Children's is a nationally recognized leader in children's cancer research,
with more than 1,000 patients enrolled in 200-plus research studies. The
hospital has budgeted $20 million for cancer research for the current fiscal
year.

   University Hospital treats about 15 percent of cancer patients in the region,
making it the top adult cancer hospital in Greater Cincinnati and Northern
Kentucky. The hospital logs about 20,000 patient visits per year for cancer
treatment, and about 1,800 cancer surgeries per year. University Hospital
operates the Barrett Center, a cancer treatment and research center.

   The University of Cincinnati is building up its cancer research program
through both its cell and cancer biology department and the Genome Research
Institute. Faculty are administering 70 cancer clinical trials open to national
enrollment and awaiting approval for another 16 trials. Some 200 adults are
enrolled either in active or follow-up trials.

   Key cancer research areas

   Cincinnati Children's: Current priorities are gene therapy, targeted virus
therapies for neuroblastoma and targeted radiation therapies for several cancer
types.

   UC: Recent developments include identifying a protein marker linked to the
development of pancreatic cancer and the use of MRI scans to detect early signs
of cancers in the opposite breast in women newly diagnosed with breast cancer.

GRAPHIC: David Stern, dean, UC's College of Medicine

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2007


                              458 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                            August 16, 2007 Thursday
                                  1ST Edition

SECTION: ZONE WEST - HENDRICKS COUNTY STAR; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 3154 words

HEADLINE: Calendar

BODY:

   TODAY

   Art and Exhibits

   Dyer Creations Photo Art, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Citizens Bank: Avon, 100 N. Ind.
267. Photographs by Camby artist Diana Dyer. Free. Call (317) 366-1284.

   Joan Washburn, 9 a.m. to 8 p.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana St.
The artist of the month displays her quilts. Free. Call (317) 745-2604.

   Mixed Media, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Citizens Bank: Plainfield, 2402 E. Main
St. Oil paintings, watercolors and mixed media by Avon artist Chris Ardelean.
Free. Call (317) 839-9899.

   Squeak, Squawk, and Muse, 6 a.m. to 5 p.m. B-Java Coffee & Tea, 5510
Lafayette Road, Indianapolis. Mixed media artwork by Lynn Dugan. Free. Call
(317) 280-1236.

   Attractions

   Book Discussions, Signings and Readings

   Patrick Rothfuss, 7 p.m. Wayne Branch Library, 198 S. Girls School Road,
Indianapolis. Author Rothfuss will discuss his book "The Name of the Wind." Call
(317) 275-4530.

   Dance Participation

   Dance Lessons, 7 p.m. 8 Seconds Saloon and Tremors Club, 111 N. Lynhurst
Drive, Indianapolis. Call (317) 486-1569.

   Square Dancing For Seniors, 12:30 to 2:30 p.m. Indianapolis Senior Center,
708 E. Michigan St. $4. Call (317) 263-6272.

   DJs and Clubs

   8 Seconds Saloon, 6 p.m. to 3 a.m. 8 Seconds Saloon and Tremors Club, 111 N.
Lynhurst Drive, Indianapolis. DJ also at Tremors 9 p.m. to 3 a.m. $5 (women free
until midnight), $5 for Tremors. Call (317) 486-1569.

   Legends, 9 p.m. Legends Bar and Grill, 1100 N. Ind. 267, Avon. Free. Call
(317) 272-9040.

   Hobbies, Crafts and Clubs

   Card Club, 10:30 a.m. Plainfield Recreation and Aquatic Center, 651 Vestal
Road. Play card and board games including bridge, pinochle, euchre, Trivial
Pursuit and Scrabble. Free with admission. Call (317) 839-7665.

   Kids Programs and Shows

   Baby Steps Story Time at Wayne, 10:30 a.m. Wayne Branch Library, 198 S. Girls
School Road, Indianapolis. For babies up to 23 months with adult. Free. Call
(317) 275-4530 or visit www.imcpl.org.

   Live Music

   Benito & Friends, (Rock) 9:30 p.m. Kelly's Pub Too, 5341 W. 10th St.,
Indianapolis. Call (317) 244-5822.

   Gray Lines of Perfection, The Miracle of You, My Summer, The Constants,
Forever at Last, (Metal/Punk) 7 p.m. The Attic, 115 N. Center St., Plainfield.
$7. Call (317) 838-0894.

   Mark Reed Band, (Rock) 8:30 p.m. Kazablanka, 5801 Rockville Road,
Indianapolis. Free. Call (317) 244-7638.

   Open Stage, 9 p.m. Dog House Sports Bar, 18 Whittington Drive, Brownsburg.
Free. Call (317) 858-1066.

   Summer Concert Series: Stereo Deluxe and Extra Blue Kind, (Country and
Western) 7 to 9 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura Park Way, Plainfield. Bring
lawn chairs and blankets. With giveaways. Free. Call (317) 203-4555.

   Meetings

   Men's Club Breakfast, 9 a.m. Crestwood Village West, 230 Welcome Way Blvd.,
Indianapolis. Guest speaker is Gen. Stuart Goodwin, of the Indiana War Memorial
Museum. Call (317) 271-6475.

   Pets and Animals

   Microchip Clinic, 6 to 8 p.m. Speck's Pet Supply, 7577 E. U.S. 36, Avon. Pets
get microchips implanted for identification purposes. $25 (includes
registration). Call Julie Bates, (317) 213-0208, or visit
www.hcfriendsoftheshelter.org.

   Recreation and Fitness

   Aerobics (All Ages), 6:30 to 7:30 p.m. Municipal Gardens Park, 1831 Lafayette
Road, Indianapolis. Step, tone and stretch with high or low impact aerobics.
Meets Tuesdays and Thursdays through Sept. 30. $3. Call (317) 327-7275 or visit
www.indyparks.org.

   Indianapolis Hiking Club: Easy at Eagle Creek, 9:30 a.m. Eagle Creek Park,
7840 W. 56th St., Indianapolis. Meet at the Marina parking lot in Eagle Creek
for a moderate paced five-mile trail hike. Arrive 15 minutes early. Guests
welcome. In the event of inclement weather, check with the leader. Parking fee.
Call leader, (317) 388-0498, or visit www.indyhike.org.

   Indianapolis Hiking Club: Speedway Express, 6 p.m. Chase Bank, 5253 W. 16th
St., Indianapolis. Meet in the northwest corner of the parking lot for a
five-mile hike with shorter options. Arrive 15 minutes early. Guests welcome. In
the event of inclement weather, check with the leader. Call (317) 291-6454 or
visit www.indyhike.org.

   Jamal Abdullah's Martial Arts Program, 7 to 8 p.m. Riverside Park, 2420 E.
Riverside Drive, Indianapolis. All ages learn three martial arts styles: Wo Ying
Chuan, Wado Ryu and Ta' O Yen Fu. Includes instruction in basic fighting
techniques. Call for cost. Call (317) 327-7275 or visit www.indyparks.org.

   Kids Taekwondo Class, 6:30 to 7:15 p.m. Plainfield Recreation and Aquatic
Center, 651 Vestal Road. Taught by Rex Hammersley of Hammer Martial Arts. Call
Rex Hammersley, (317) 718-9883.

   Open Youth Basketball (Ages 18 and Younger), 1:30 to 4:30 p.m. Riverside
Park, 2420 E. Riverside Drive, Indianapolis. Free. Call (317) 327-7275 or visit
www.indyparks.org.

   Scuba Diving, 8:30 to 10:30 p.m. Krannert Park, 605 S. High School Road,
Indianapolis. Divers Supply West Indy hosts class for ages 12 and older. Prices
based on type of instruction. Call Mike, (317) 297-2822.

   Senior Aerobics, 10 to 11 a.m. Municipal Gardens Park, 1831 Lafayette Road,
Indianapolis. Ages 55 and older meet new friends, stretch and learn senior line
dance. Meets every Tuesday and Thursday. $1. Call (317) 327-7275 or visit
www.indyparks.org.

   Youth and Adult Martial Arts Class, 7:15 to 8:15 p.m. Plainfield Recreation
and Aquatic Center, 651 Vestal Road. Taught by Rex Hammersley of Hammer Martial
Arts. Call Hammersley, (317) 718-9883.

   Socializing and Dating

   Senior Bingo, 11 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. Municipal Gardens Park, 1831 Lafayette
Road, Indianapolis. Bring store bought items to the table and play bingo for the
items others have brought. Meets Thursdays through Sept. 30. Free. Call (317)
327-7275 or visit www.indyparks.org.

   Spoken Word

   Open Mic, 10 p.m. to 1 a.m. Claude & Annie's, 5162 Pike Plaza Road,
Indianapolis. Poetry and spoken word. Hosted by "Lady D" Elegance. Call (317)
298-8124.

   Support Groups

   DivorceCare, 7 p.m. Connection Pointe Christian Church, 1800 N. Green St.,
Brownsburg. Support and recovery for those affected by separation or divorce. In
Room 203. Call (317) 852-2255, ext. 244.

   Workshops and Classes

   Kiwanis Club of Plainfield, noon. Kristy's Cafe, 414 W. Main St., Plainfield.
Free. Call Frank Davis, (317) 839-3007.

   Sushi, 5:30 p.m. Brownsburg Public Library, 450 S. Jefferson St. Learn how to
make California and cucumber rolls, other types of sushi as well as things about
Japanese culture. No raw fish involved. Participants will take home their own
sushi rolling mat. Registration required. $3. Call (317) 852-3167.

   Westlake Toastmasters, 6:30 p.m. Westlake Church of Christ, 612 N. High
School Road, Indianapolis. Practical and face-to-face learning program for
experienced professionals and beginning speakers. Call (317) 752-5746 or visit
http://westlake.freetoasthost.com/.

   FRIDAY

   Art and Exhibits

   Dyer Creations Photo Art, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. Citizens Bank: Avon, 100 N. Ind.
267. Photographs by Camby artist Diana Dyer. Free. Call (317) 366-1284.

   Joan Washburn, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana St.
The artist of the month displays her quilts. Free. Call (317) 745-2604.

   Mixed Media, 8:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. Citizens Bank: Plainfield, 2402 E. Main St.
Oil paintings, watercolors and mixed media by Avon artist Chris Ardelean. Free.
Call (317) 839-9899.

   Squeak, Squawk, and Muse, 6 a.m. to 5 p.m. B-Java Coffee & Tea, 5510
Lafayette Road, Indianapolis. Mixed media artwork by Lynn Dugan. Free. Call
(317) 280-1236.

   Attractions

   Street Performers, 6 to 9 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura Park Way,
Plainfield. Magicians, face painters, jugglers, mimes, character artist, fire
eaters and stilt walkers throughout the center. Call (317) 203-4555 .

   Dance Participation

   Friday Night Open Dance Party, 7:30 to 10 p.m. Starlite Ballroom, 5720 Guion
Road, Indianapolis. Lesson at 7:30 p.m., dancing at 8:30 p.m. $5 (lesson $10).
Call (317) 299-4740.

   Dance Performance

   The Hunchback of Notre Dame, 8 p.m. Pike Performing Arts Center, 6701
Zionsville Road, Indianapolis. Gregory Hancock Dance Theatre production of
Victor Hugo's dark tale with a contemporary flair. $25, $20 students and
seniors. Call (317) 216-5455 or visit www.pikepac.org.

   DJs and Clubs

   Kelly's Pub Too, 9:30 p.m. 5341 W. 10th St., Indianapolis. Call (317)
244-5822.

   Farmers Markets

   Farmers Market and Music, 3 to 7 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura Park Way,
Plainfield. Farmers Market with produce, honey, kettle corn, cookies, wine and
flowers from 3 to 7 p.m. Live jazz from 4 to 7 p.m. At Futura Park and Stage.
Call (317) 203-4555.

   Films

   Movie Premiere Night, 6:30 p.m. High School Musical 2 Premiere: Westside:
Northfield at Heartland Crossing, 8509 Wheatfield Drive, Camby. Hosted by Radio
Disney 98.3. Family fun games and "High School Musical" trivia. Win "High School
Musical 2" prize packages and other Radio Disney prizes. The movie will be
telecast at 8 p.m. on the big screen. Seating is first come, first serve.
Tickets are available at the neighborhood. Free. Visit
www.RadioDisney.com/Indianapolis.

   Hobbies, Crafts and Clubs

   National Toy Truck 'N Construction Show & Auction, 3 to 6 p.m. Adam's Mark
Hotel, 2544 Executive Drive, Indianapolis. Toy trucks & toy construction
equipment for sale. Includes display of miniature "working city" with remote
controlled trucks and construction toys. Call (800) 533-8293 or visit
www.toyfarmer.com or www.toytrucker.com.

   Karaoke

   Winners Circle Lounge, 9 p.m. 4880 Crawfordsville Road, Indianapolis. Call
(317) 248-1099.

   Kids Programs and Shows

   Fun-Fitness, 9 to 10 a.m. Plainfield Christian Church, 800 Dan Jones Road.
Fitness program for ages 5-12 is run simultaneously with PCC's women's aerobic
class. Moderate running, calisthenics, group games, relays, contests, daily
devotion time, nutrition counseling and a healthy snack. Nursery offered for
ages 1-4. $2 per visit. Call (317) 707-3089.

   Preschool Art, 9 to 9:45 a.m. HIP Studios Brownsburg, 1460 N. Green St.,
Suite 600. This class is not currently in session. Registration required. $12
per class, $40 per month. Call (317) 294-2171.

   Live Music

   KikAxe Live, (Rock) 9 p.m. Big Dog Saloon and Sports Bar, 2929 Kentucky Ave.,
Indianapolis. Call (317) 244-1223.

   L.A. Guns, (Rock) 9 p.m. 8 Seconds Saloon and Tremors Club, 111 N. Lynhurst
Drive, Indianapolis. Call (317) 486-1569.

   Music on the Veranda Series: Andy Katt & Men in Tux, (Swing/Big Band) 7 p.m.
Chateau Thomas Winery, 6291 Cambridge Way, Plainfield. Outdoor concert. Men in
tuxes playing big band sounds. Free. Call (317) 837-9463.

   Simon DTour Live! Featuring Bobby Valentino, (R&B/Soul) noon to 6 p.m.
Lafayette Square Mall, 3919 Lafayette Road, Indianapolis. Presented by ABC
Family, a live concert and lifestyle event that connects teens with some of
their favorite pop stars and retail brands. Free. Call (317) 299-0033 or visit
www.simondtour.com.

   Other Spectator Sports

   Bicycle Racing, 7:30 to 10 p.m. Major Taylor Velodrome and Skate Park, 3639
Cold Spring Road, Indianapolis. Bicycle racing on a sloped concrete velodrome.
Nine races per evening. Free. Call (317) 327-8356 or visit
www.majortaylorvelo.com.

   Import Truck Bash, 10 a.m. O'Reilly Raceway Park, 10267 E. U.S. 136,
Clermont. Xpl?d Sport Compact Racing Series, car show and swap meet. $10 in
advance, children $5, $15 at the door. Call (317) 291-4090 or visit
www.irponline.com.

   Parks and Nature

   New Moon Friday, 9 p.m. McCloud Nature Center, 8518 N. Hughes Road, North
Salem. At dusk. Gaze at stars through professional telescopes. Participants
welcome to bring own telescopes or binoculars. Presented by Indiana Astronomical
Society. Free. Call (765) 676-5437.

   Preschool Playtime, 1 to 2 p.m. McCloud Nature Center, 8518 N. Hughes Road,
North Salem. Water activities provided for children 3-5 with adult. Free. Call
(765) 676-5437.

   Recreation and Fitness

   Aerobics Class, 9 to 10 a.m. Plainfield Christian Church, 800 Dan Jones Road.
Total body aerobic exercise to Christian music includes a combination of step
aerobics and body toning with weights. For all fitness levels. Child care
available for $1 per session. Ongoing. Call David Verhonik, (317) 707-3089.

   Class Sign-Ups, 6 to 8 p.m. Starz Dance Factory, 5250 E. US 36, Suite 430,
Avon. Sign-up for classes that begin Sept. 4. Ages 3 to 19 learn tap, ballet,
tumbling, jazz, hip-hop dance cheer dance and social dance. Adults hip-hop
classes also offered. Registration required. Call (317) 403-2475 or e-mail
starzdance@sbcglobal.net

   Indianapolis Hiking Club: Brisk Road Hike, 8 a.m. Eagle Creek Park, 7840 W.
56th St., Indianapolis. Meet in the parking lot just inside the 56th Street
entrance for a six-, eight- or 10-mile road hike. Arrive 15 minutes early.
Guests welcome. In the event of inclement weather, check with the leader.
Parking fee. Call (317) 849-7006 or visit www.indyhike.org.

   Jumpstart Breakfast, 6 to 8 a.m. Ellis Park, 900 E. Main St., Danville. Meet
at train station. Part of the March Around the Park, an eight-month event that
encourages healthy lifestyles. Walkers, the "trail of the day" starts at 7 a.m.
Registration required. Free. Call Danville Parks & Recreation Department, (317)
745-3015, or visit www.danvilleindiana.org.

   Open Youth Basketball (Ages 18 and Younger), 1:30 to 4:30 p.m. Riverside
Park, 2420 E. Riverside Drive, Indianapolis. Free. Call (317) 327-7275 or visit
www.indyparks.org.

   Workshops and Classes

   Computer Savvy Seniors Level 1, 9 a.m. to noon. Plainfield-Guilford Township
Public Library, 1120 Stafford Road. First day of five-week class for ages 55 and
older, that meets on Fridays through Sept. 14. Class covers basic skills.
Register by Aug. 10. Registration required. $89. Call (317) 839-6602.

   SATURDAY

   Art and Exhibits

   Dyer Creations Photo Art, 9 a.m. to noon. Citizens Bank: Avon, 100 N. Ind.
267. Photographs by Camby artist Diana Dyer. Free. Call (317) 366-1284.

   Joan Washburn, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Danville Public Library, 101 S. Indiana St.
The artist of the month displays her quilts. Free. Call (317) 745-2604.

   Mixed Media, 8:30 a.m. to noon. Citizens Bank: Plainfield, 2402 E. Main St.
Oil paintings, watercolors and mixed media by Avon artist Chris Ardelean. Free.
Call (317) 839-9899.

   Squeak, Squawk, and Muse, 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. B-Java Coffee & Tea, 5510
Lafayette Road, Indianapolis. Mixed media artwork by Lynn Dugan. Free. Call
(317) 280-1236.

   Attractions

   Colts Rally, noon to 2 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura Park Way,
Plainfield. Celebrate the Indianapolis Colts' Super Bowl victory and upcoming
season with karaoke, Hank's Hottie appearance, giveaways and interactive games.
Toy Factory performs on the Futura Park Stage from noon to 2 p.m. Presented by
97.1 HANK FM. Call (317) 203-4555 .

   Street Performers, 1 to 4 p.m. and 6 to 9 p.m. Metropolis Mall, 2499 Futura
Park Way, Plainfield. Magicians, face painters, jugglers, mimes, character
artist, fire eaters and stilt walkers throughout the center. Call (317) 203-4555
.

   Dance Performance

   The Hunchback of Notre Dame, 8 p.m. Pike Performing Arts Center, 6701
Zionsville Road, Indianapolis. Gregory Hancock Dance Theatre production of
Victor Hugo's dark tale with a contemporary flair. $25, $20 students and
seniors. Call (317) 216-5455 or visit www.pikepac.org.

   DJs and Clubs

   8 Seconds Saloon, 6 to 10 p.m. 8 Seconds Saloon and Tremors Club, 111 N.
Lynhurst Drive, Indianapolis. DJ before live music events and between sets. DJ
also at Tremors 9 p.m. to 3 a.m. $5. Call (317) 486-1569.

   Fairs and Major Events

   Clermont Old Fashion Day, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. Clermont Lions Club Park, 3201 N.
Tansel Road. Parade starts at 11 a.m. and features State Sen. Mike Delph as
grand marshal with music by Ben Davis High School marching band. Parade ends at
park, where vendor booths are set up. Free. Call Nancy Baxter, (317) 299-9237.

   SandBlast, 3 p.m. Ellis Park, 900 E. Main St., Danville. Carnival rides and
games, three on three basketball tournament, baseball and softball clinics and a
concert featuring Crossover, Bended Knee and Higher Ground. Hosted by Sandlot
Ministries and sponsored by Hendricks Regional Health. Only those participating
in the basketball tournament need to register. Free. Call Matt McLaren, (317)
745-2255, visit www.sandlotministries.com or e-mail info@sandlotministries.com

   Farmers Markets

   Farmers Market, 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. Crestwood Village West, 230 Welcome Way
Blvd., Indianapolis. Shop for fresh fruits and vegetables and craft items, with
entertainment by the Dixie Kats. Beef stew and biscuits available for $3. Call
(317) 271-6475.

   Films

   "High School Musical 2" Viewing Party, 7 p.m. Pike Freshman Center, 6801
Zionsville Road, Indianapolis. Pike YMCA premiere of Disney's "High School
Musical 2." Activities include food, games and prizes. Call (317) 347-8600.

   Food and Drink

   Lunch at the Airport, 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. Hendricks County Airport, 2749 Gordon
Graham Blvd., Danville. Drawings for free airplane rides. Lunch provided. Rain
date is Aug. 19. $5 for lunch. Call (317) 745-4422.

   Fundraiser

   Danville Police Department Fundraiser, Bailey's Jury Room, 20 W. Main Street,
Danville. A ribfest, luau and fundraiser for the Danville Police Department
features music, games and raffles. Families may dine outside, must be 21 to eat
inside. Call (317) 745-6424.

   Health

   Caring for Your Newborn, 9:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. Hendricks Regional Health
Danville, 1000 E. Main St. One-day class taken before the baby's birth focuses
on the care of a newborn including bathing, cord care, diapering, carseats and
immunizations. Other topics include feeding (breast and bottle) bonding and
normal newborn behavior. A pediatrician will discuss newborn topics and answer
questions. Grandparents and caregivers are welcome to attend. Registration
required. Free; $20 for those not delivering at HRH. Call (317) 745-8485 or
visit www.hendricksregional.org.

   Parkinson's Symposium, 1 to 5 p.m. Wayne Township Emergency Services
Building, 400 N. High School Road, Indianapolis. Parkinson's Awareness
Association of Central Indiana symposium features guest speaker Dr. Thyagarajan
Subramanian, who will discuss "Cell Transplantation and Gene Therapy."
Registration required. $15, $5 discount for dues paying PAACI members. Call
(317) 255-1993.

   Prenatal Exercise Program, 9 to 10 a.m. Connection Pointe Christian Church,
1800 N. Green St., Brownsburg. Low-impact aerobic exercise class. Mothers may
also attend up to 12 weeks postpartum. Participants must have physician's signed
consent. Registration required. $1.50 per class. Call (317) 745-8485 or visit
www.hendricksregional.org.

   Hobbies, Crafts and Clubs

   National Toy Truck 'N Construction Show & Auction, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Adam's
Mark Hotel, 2544 Executive Drive, Indianapolis. Toy trucks & toy construction
equipment for sale. Includes display of miniature "working city" with remote
controlled trucks and construction toys. Call (800) 533-8293 or visit
www.toyfarmer.com or www.toytrucker.com.

   Please send information about events to calendar@indystar.com Clearly
indicate the name of your event in the subject field and include the event date,
sponsoring organization, time, place, price and contact phone number.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2007


                              459 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            August 14, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 0; Science Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1892 words

HEADLINE: The Beam of Light That Flips a Switch That Turns On the Brain

BYLINE: By INGFEI CHEN

BODY:

   It sounds like a science-fiction version of stupid pet tricks: by toggling a
light switch, neuroscientists can set fruit flies a-leaping and mice a-twirling
and stop worms in their squiggling tracks.

     But such feats, unveiled in the past two years, are proof that a new
generation of genetic and optical technology can give researchers unprecedented
power to turn on and off targeted sets of cells in the brain, and to do so by
remote control.

     These novel techniques  will  bring an ''exponential change'' in the way
scientists learn about neural systems, said Dr. Helen Mayberg, a clinical
neuroscientist at Emory University, who is not involved in the research but has
seen videos of the worm experiments.

     ''A picture is worth a thousand words,'' Dr. Mayberg said.

     Some day, the remote-control technology might even serve as a treatment for
neurological and psychiatric disorders.

     These clever techniques involve genetically tinkering with nerve cells to
make them respond to light.

     One of the newest, fastest strategies co-opts a photosensitive protein
called channelrhodopsin-2 from pond scum to allow precise laser control of the
altered cells on a millisecond timescale. That speed mimics the natural
electrical chatterings of the brain, said Dr. Karl Deisseroth, an assistant
professor of bioengineering at Stanford.

     ''We can start to sort of speak the language of the brain using optical
excitation,'' Dr. Deisseroth said. The brain's functions ''arise from the
orchestrated participation of all the different cell types, like in a
symphony,'' he said.

     Laser stimulation can serve as a musical conductor, manipulating the
various kinds of neurons in the brain to  reveal which important roles they
play.

     This light-switch technology promises to accelerate scientists' efforts in
mapping which clusters of the brain's 100 billion neurons warble to each other
when a person, for example, recalls a memory or learns a  skill. That quest is
one of the greatest challenges facing neuroscience.

     The channelrhodopsin switch is ''really going to blow the lid off the whole
analysis of brain function,'' said George Augustine, a neurobiologist at Duke
University in Durham, N.C.

     Dr. Deisseroth, who is also a psychiatrist who treats patients with autism
or severe depression, has ambitious goals. Brain cells in those disorders show
no damage, yet something is wrong with how they talk to one another, he said.

     ''The high-speed dynamics of the system are probably off,'' Dr. Deisseroth
said.  He wants to learn whether, in these neuropsychiatric diseases, certain
neurons falter or go haywire,  and then to find a way to tune patients' faulty
circuits.

     A first step is establishing that it is possible to tweak a brain circuit
by remote control and observe the corresponding behavioral changes in freely
moving lab animals. On a recent Sunday at Stanford, Dr. Deisseroth and  Feng
Zhang, a graduate student, hovered over a dark brown mouse placed inside a white
plastic tub. Through standard gene-manipulating tricks, the rodent had been
engineered to produce channelrhodopsin only in one particular kind  of neuron
found throughout the brain,  to no apparent ill effect.

     Mr. Zhang had implanted a tiny metal tube into the right side of the
mouse's partly shaved head.

     Now he carefully threaded a translucent fiber-optic cable not much wider
than a thick human hair into that tube, positioned over the area of the cerebral
cortex that controls movement.

     ''Turn it on,''  Dr. Deisseroth said.

     Mr. Zhang adjusted a key on a nearby laser controller box, and the
fiber-optic cable  glowed with blue light. The mouse started skittering in a
left-hand spin, like a dog chasing its tail.

     ''Turn it off, and then you can see him stand up,'' Dr. Deisseroth
continued. ''And now turn it back on, and you can see it's circling.''

     Because the brain lacks pain receptors, the mouse felt no discomfort from
the fiber optic, the scientists said, although it looked a tad confused.
Scientists have long known that using electrodes to gently zap one side of a
mouse's motor cortex will make it turn the opposite way. What is new here is
that for the first time, researchers can perturb specific neuron types using
light,  Dr. Deisseroth said.

     Electrode stimulation is the standard tool for rapidly driving nerve cells
to fire. But in brain tissue, it is unable to target single types of neurons,
instead rousing the entire neural neighborhood.

     ''You activate millions of cells, or thousands at the very least,'' said
Ehud Isacoff,  a professor of neurobiology at the University of California,
Berkeley. All variety of neurons are intermixed in the cortex,  he said.

     Neuroscientists have long sought a better alternative than electrode
stimulation. In the past few years, some have jury-rigged  ways to excite brain
cells by using light; one technique used at Yale made headless fruit flies flap
away. But these methods had limitations. They worked slowly, they could not
target specific neurons or they required adding a chemical agent.

     More recently, Dr. Isacoff, with Dirk Trauner, a chemistry professor at the
University of California, Berkeley, and other colleagues engineered a high-speed
neural switch by refurbishing a channel protein that anchors in the cell
membrane of most human brain cells. The scientists tethered to the protein a
light-sensitive synthetic molecular string that has glutamate, a
neurotransmitter, dangling off the end.

     Upon absorbing violet light, the string plugs the glutamate into the
protein's receptor and sparks a neuron's natural activation process: the channel
opens, positive ions flood inside, and the cell unleashes an electrical impulse.

     In experiments published in May in the journal Neuron, the Berkeley team
bred zebrafish that carried the artificial glutamate switch within neurons that
help sense touch.

     ''If I were a fish, and somebody poked me in the side,'' (in this case,
with a fine glass tip),  Dr. Isacoff said, ''I would escape.'' But when the
translucent fish were strobed with violet light, the overstimulated creatures no
longer detected being prodded. Blue-green light reversed the effect.

     One advantage of the Berkeley approach,  Dr. Isacoff said, is that it can
be adapted for many types of proteins so  they could be activated by light. But
for the method to work, scientists must periodically douse cells with the
glutamate string.

     In contrast, Dr. Deisseroth's laboratory at Stanford has followed nature's
simpler design, borrowing a light-sensitive protein instead of making a
synthetic one.

     In 2003, Georg Nagel, a biophysicist then at the Max Planck Institute of
Biophysics in Frankfurt, and colleagues characterized channelrhodopsin-2 from
green algae. This channel protein lets positive ions stream into cells when
exposed to blue light. It functioned even when inserted into human kidney cells,
the researchers showed.

     Neuroscientists realized that this pond scum protein might be used to
hot-wire a neuron with light.  In 2005, Edward Boyden, then a graduate student
at Stanford, Mr. Zhang and Dr. Deisseroth, joining with the German researchers,
demonstrated that the idea worked. And in separate research published last
spring, Mr. Zhang and Dr. Boyden, now at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, each found a way to also silence neurons:  a bacterial protein
called halorhodopsin, when placed in a brain cell, can cause the cell to shut
down in response to yellow light.

     The Stanford-Germany team put both the ''on'' and ''off'' toggles into the
motor neurons or muscle cells of transgenic roundworms. Blue light made the
creatures contract their muscles and pull back; yellow let them relax their
muscles and inch forward.

     Dr. Augustine and associates at Duke next collaborated with Dr. Deisseroth
to create transgenic mice with channelrhodopsin in different brain cell
populations. By quickly scanning with a blue laser across brain tissue, they
stimulated cells containing the switch. They simultaneously monitored for
responses in connecting neurons, by recording from an electrode or using sensor
molecules that light up.

     ''That way, you can build up a two-dimensional or, in principle, even a
three-dimensional map'' of the neural circuitry as it functions,  Dr. Augustine
said.

     Meanwhile, other researchers are exploring light-switch technology for
medical purposes.  Jerry Silver, a neuroscientist at Case Western Reserve
University in Cleveland, and colleagues are testing whether they can restore the
ability to breathe independently in rats with spinal cord injuries, by inserting
channelrhodopsin into specific motor neurons and pulsing the neurons with light.

     And in Detroit, investigators at Wayne State University used blind mice
lacking photoreceptors in their eyes and injected a virus carrying the
channelrhodopsin gene into surviving retinal cells. Later, shining a light into
the animals' eyes, the scientists detected electrical signals registering in the
visual cortex. But they are still investigating whether the treatment actually
brings back vision, said Zhuo-Hua Pan, a neuroscientist.

     At Stanford, Dr. Deisseroth's group has identified part of a brain circuit,
in the hippocampus, that is underactive in rats, with some symptoms resembling
depression. The neural circuit's activity -- and the animals' -- perked up after
antidepressant treatment, in findings reported last week  in the journal
Science. Now the team is examining whether they can lift the rats' low-energy
behavior by using channelrhodopsin to rev up the sluggish neural zone.

     But human depression is complex, probably involving several brain areas; an
easy fix is not expected. The light-switch technologies  are not likely to be
used for depression or other disorders in people any time soon.   One concern is
making sure that frequent light exposure does not harm neurons.

     Another challenge -- except in eye treatments -- is how to pipe light into
neural tissue. Dr. Deisseroth's spinning mouse demonstration suggests that fiber
optics could solve that issue. Such wiring would be no more invasive, he said,
than deep brain stimulation using implanted electrodes, currently a treatment
for Parkinson's disease.

     An even bigger obstacle, however, is that  gene therapy, a technology that
is still unproven, would be needed to slip light-switch genes into a patient's
nerve cells. Clinical trials are now testing other gene therapies against
blindness and Parkinson's in human patients.

     But even if those succeed, introducing a protein like channelrhodopsin from
a nonmammal species could set off a dangerous immune reaction in humans, warned
Dr. Howard Federoff, a neuroscientist at Georgetown University and chairman of
the National Institutes of Health committee that reviews all  gene-therapy
clinical trial protocols in the United States.

     In the near term, Dr. Deisseroth predicts that the remote-control
technology will lead to new insights from animal studies about how diseases
arise, and help generate other treatment ideas.

     Such research benefits  could extend beyond the realm of neuroscience:  The
Stanford group has sent  DNA copies of the ''on'' and ''off'' light-switch genes
to more than 175 researchers eager to try them in all stripes of electrically
excitable cells, from insulin-releasing pancreas cells to heart cells.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: WIRING Karl Deisseroth and fiber-optic wires with laser light.
(Photograph by THOR SWIFT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. F1)
''LIGHT CHARGE'' Light stimulation every 200 milliseconds generates electrical
activity, right, in an area of the brain associated with depression.
(Photographs by RAAG AIRAN AND KARL DEISSEROTH/STANFORD UNIVERSITY)
''ON-OFF'' In an optical switch in a mammalian neuron, red marks synapses and
green shows photosensitive protein on the cell membrane. (Photographs by KIM
THOMPSON, VIVIANA GRADINARU AND KARL DEISSEROTH/STANFORD UNIVERSITY)
''STOPPING ON YELLOW A'' genetically modified C. elegans worm stopped in
response to yellow light (bottom left) that inhibits its neural activity.
(Photographs by THE NEW YORK TIMES
 VIDEO STILLS FROM FENG ZHANG AND KARL DEISSEROTH)(Source: Nature)(pg. F4)

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2007


                              460 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Cincinnati Enquirer (Ohio)

                             August 13, 2007 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1105 words

HEADLINE: St. Susanna helps pastor fight Lou Gehrig's disease

BYLINE: Sheila McLaughlin smclaughlin@enquirer.com

BODY:

   MASON - His quick gait has slowed. A hefty physique that hovered around 280
pounds and once pushed a sweatshirt to its limits has withered by about 100
pounds.

   The strong voice that filled St. Susanna Church at daily Mass and on Sundays
with sermons and prayers has softened a bit. And sometimes the words start to
slur.

   Little by little, just three months after he was diagnosed, ALS - amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis - has started to take from the Rev. Dan Schuh.

   People have told him what they would do if they were in his shoes: deliver a
letter of resignation to the archbishop on the spot.

   Not Father Dan.

   He goes back to what he told his two grown children on April 30 when they
stood crying outside the neurologist's office, the day they learned their father
had ALS.

   "I'm not quite dead yet," he said, interjecting some levity with a line from
the movie "Monty Python and the Holy Grail." "Every time somebody gets too
serious about it, that's the line that comes out."

   The 56-year-old Fort Thomas native - a widowed grandfather of six who went
from being a Kroger manager in Dayton, Ohio, to a Roman Catholic priest four
years ago - has told the archbishop he's not going anywhere for now.

   There's too much to be done at St. Susanna, and he wants to stay on as long
as he can.

   He landed there as assistant pastor after he was ordained in May 2003.

   Now he heads the Mason church, which, with 3,200 families, is among the five
largest in the Archdiocese of Cincinnati's 19 counties.

   The diagnosis came in April. But the symptoms of ALS - a usually progressive
muscle-robbing condition that's often called Lou Gehrig's disease - started to
appear in November.

   Father Dan noticed his arms - the same ones that at 54 could still swing a
decent bat in the over-35 softball league - had become weaker. His legs felt
heavy. He fell down on a walk. He remembers "plain as day" the Sunday Mass in
January when he dropped a consecrated Host and could barely stand back up after
he stooped to retrieve it from the floor.

   He started using a stool at Mass because he became tired. He finds some
meaning in having to keep his hands planted on the altar now, instead of raising
them during Mass - a traditional gesture when priests offer prayers on behalf of
their congregation.

   "The altar is a sign of Christ. And there I am, leaning on Christ," Father
Dan said.

   Still, Father Dan can't help but wonder if he has let his parish down. A
congregation counts on its pastor to be the mouthpiece when it comes time to
drum up money for building projects. St. Susanna is in the middle of a drive to
raise $7 million to add a small chapel and finish the undercroft of the new
church, add eight classrooms to the school, build a second gym and make other
improvements to parish buildings.

   Only half of the money has been raised. "It's a frustration. I just have this
sense, had I been more on my game, I could have helped them so much more. There
is a sense of being unfinished. It kind of weighs heavy," Father Dan said.

   But the congregation has rallied around Father Dan, trying to make life
easier.

   Jeannine Frank, the parish office manager, goes to every doctor's
appointment, serving as Father Dan's "second set of ears." She fields all the
offers of help. Parishioners have donated a chair lift, wheelchair, walker and
cane and promised a hospital bed if it's needed.

   A group of parishioners paid for Father Dan, his son Joe, daughter Becky
Nevels and their families to go on vacation to Top Sail Island, N.C., last
month. The trip was bittersweet. Everybody wondered if it was the last time he
would be well enough to do something like that, Father Dan said.

   Eldon Walker and the men in the church's Christ Renews His Parish program
surprised Father Dan with a used golf cart in May to help him get back and forth
from the sprawling church on U.S. 42 to the parish office and hall about two
blocks away at Fourth Avenue.

   Donations came in so quickly to pay for the $2,350 golf cart that Walker and
the others stopped collecting money after a day and a half. The once-white cart,
repainted fire-engine red, has been dubbed the Father Danmobile. It will come in
handy at the church's festival Sept. 7 and 8.

   Walker and his group kept the golf cart a secret from Father Dan until it was
finished because they knew he wouldn't approve of the gift.

   "We could have talked to him about it for weeks on end, and he would never
agree to do it because that's not who and what he is about. He's about other
people, not himself," Walker said.

   That trait became even more apparent on June 20, when the congregation held a
Healing Mass on Father Dan's behalf. Father Dan rose from his trusty stool and
began anointing others who wanted a special blessing.

   "He's got so many people praying for him," said parishioner Lynn Olmsted.
"You think, if just this one time, let this miracle be right here in front of
us."

   Church members feel a special bond with Father Dan because he can relate to
their lives, she said.

   "He's done the husband thing. He's done the father thing. He's done the
grandfather thing," Olmsted said.

   Father Dan entered Mount St. Mary's Seminary of the West in Mount Washington
in 1997 - five years after his wife Gail died from complications of Hodgkin's
disease, and after his kids went off on their own.

   Now, Father Dan just wants to get on with his plan, his new vocation. He
hopes his ALS burns itself out, like it does in about 5 percent of cases. Or,
maybe it will plateau to a place where his symptoms don't get any worse.

   Doctors can't say for sure what to expect. Each ALS case progresses
differently.

   Father Dan doesn't feel cheated.

   "I'm realizing I need to be grateful for the things that I can do," he said.
"And I can do a lot of stuff."

   About ALS

   Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative
disease that attacks nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord, resulting in
muscle weakness and atrophy.

   It commonly strikes people between the ages of 40 and 70, and as many as
30,000 Americans have the disease.

   Lou Gehrig first brought national and international attention to the disease
in 1939 when he abruptly retired from baseball after being diagnosed with ALS.

   There is no cure for the disease, although research into stem cell and gene
therapy is showing some promise. Riluzole, the only FDA-approved drug to treat
ALS, slightly increases survival time.

   Treatment primarily is limited to dealing with symptoms such as diminished
lung capacity and swallowing, mobility and speech problems.

   Source: The ALS Association

   The Enquirer / Joseph Fuqua II

   The Rev. Dan Schuh speaks at St. Susanna Church in Mason. Schuh has Lou
Gehrig's disease.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2007


                              461 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                             August 12, 2007 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 179  words

HEADLINE: Husband asking why wife, 36, died in drug study arthritis study

BYLINE: Carla K. Johnson, Associated Press

BODY:

   A Downstate man wants to know exactly why his 36-year-old wife died of
internal bleeding and organ failure at a Chicago hospital after taking part in
medical research on an experimental drug she hoped would help her rheumatoid
arthritis.

   The July 24 death of Jolee Mohr of Taylorville prompted the government to
suspend a Seattle company's gene therapy study -- and begin a review of the
safety of 28 others around the country that used or are using the same virus,
called adeno-associated virus or AAV.

   Robb Mohr said his wife thought the drug would help her, even though the
research was to determine the drug's safety, rather than its effectiveness. She
died 22 days after receiving her second injection of the experimental drug.

   Targeted Genetics Corp. halted the study, and more than 100 patients involved
are being evaluated.

   The University of Chicago Medical Center, where Jolee Mohr died, is also
investigating her death..

   FDA officials were not aware of any serious side effects in any of the AAV
studies but, as a precaution, are reviewing the ones still treating patients.

CORRECTION-DATE: August 13, 2007

CORRECTION:

   - A story in Sunday's Sun-Times implied Jolee Mohr died after receiving
therapy at the University of Chicago Medical Center. In fact, Mohr received her
treatment Downstate at the Springfield Clinic. By the time she was transferred
to the University of Chicago on July 19, she was already suffering multiple
organ failure.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2007


                              462 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 Sun-Times Media, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                             August 12, 2007 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 179  words

HEADLINE: Husband asking why wife, 36, died in drug study arthritis study

BYLINE: Carla K. Johnson, Associated Press

BODY:

   A Downstate man wants to know exactly why his 36-year-old wife died of
internal bleeding and organ failure at a Chicago hospital after taking part in
medical research on an experimental drug she hoped would help her rheumatoid
arthritis.

   The July 24 death of Jolee Mohr of Taylorville prompted the government to
suspend a Seattle company's gene therapy study -- and begin a review of the
safety of 28 others around the country that used or are using the same virus,
called adeno-associated virus or AAV.

   Robb Mohr said his wife thought the drug would help her, even though the
research was to determine the drug's safety, rather than its effectiveness. She
died 22 days after receiving her second injection of the experimental drug.

   Targeted Genetics Corp. halted the study, and more than 100 patients involved
are being evaluated.

   The University of Chicago Medical Center, where Jolee Mohr died, is also
investigating her death..

   FDA officials were not aware of any serious side effects in any of the AAV
studies but, as a precaution, are reviewing the ones still treating patients.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2011


                              463 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                             August 12, 2007 Sunday
                                 FOURTH EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 134 words

HEADLINE: Woman dies after treatment in gene study

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: CHICAGO

BODY:

   A woman who died while participating in a gene therapy study was experiencing
multiple organ failure when she got to the hospital, a spokesman said.

   The woman, Jolee Mohr, 36, died July 24, 22 days after receiving her second
injection of an experimental drug made of genetically engineered viruses she
hoped would help her arthritis.

   Robb Mohr said he believed his wife thought the drug would help her, even
though the research was to determine the drug's safety, not its effectiveness.
The University of Chicago Medical Center, where Jolee Mohr died, is
investigating the cause of death.

   Targeted Genetics Corp. of Seattle has halted the study, and more than 100
patients involved are being evaluated, said company spokeswoman Stacie Byars. It
is too early to speculate on the cause of Mohr's death, Byars said.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2007


                              464 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            August 11, 2007 Saturday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A33

LENGTH: 700 words

HEADLINE: Informing, understanding, consenting

BODY:

   Jolee Mohr died of massive organ failure in a Chicago hospital last month.
She was 36, a resident of Springfield, Ill., and the mother of a 5-year-old
daughter.

   Ms. Mohr was participating in gene therapy research. The drug tested on her
is being developed by Seattle-based Targeted Genetics Corp. as a treatment for
rheumatoid arthritis, a debilitating but not fatal disease.

   Ms. Mohr's husband told the Washington Post after her death that she had
hoped the therapy would relieve her pain. The actual purpose of the study,
however, was to test the therapy's safety, not its effectiveness.

   The inconsistency between Ms. Mohr's beliefs and the study's purpose is a
reminder of the need for patient protections in medical research. The
relationship between doctors and patients is inherently unequal. When patients
become research subjects the inequality is greater. Most people don't realize,
for example, that doctors often are paid for recruiting patients for medical
studies. And pharmaceutical companies obviously stand to gain if their drugs are
approved for use.

   Patients who volunteer for research benefit indirectly by helping to advance
the frontiers of science. But some believe that they also are getting access to
a state-of-the-art drug or treatment.

   That's not always the case. Many drug studies fail. Even when they succeed,
they don't always produce significantly better drugs than those already
available.

   This in no way diminishes the value of research; it is absolutely vital to
continued medical progress. But Ms. Mohr's death - the official cause has not
yet been fully established - raises the important issue of rights and
responsibilities: the right of patients to understand fully the risks they are
accepting; the responsibility of researchers to explain those risks clearly and
to protect their subjects from unnecessary harm.

   The death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger during a gene therapy trial in 1999
led to a congressional investigation. It found that Mr. Gelsinger had not been
informed of earlier problems with the drug being tested on him and had not been
told of a significant financial conflict of interest involving the lead
researcher.

   After Mr. Gelsinger's death, the federal government created an Office for
Human Research Protections. Professional organizations created accreditation
programs for researchers. But Congress should ask if those measures go far
enough. The question is especially urgent in light of changes in medical
research.

   Increasingly, drug trials are run through doctors' offices, rather than in
large universities. More and more research is funded by drug companies. Both
factors have had an impact on patient protections.

   Take review boards, the groups of independent experts who must approve the
design of a study before it can proceed. They used to be made up primarily of
doctors from universities or government agencies. But a new phenomenon has
appeared: review boards hired on a contract basis for individual projects. The
U.S. Food and Drug Administration is responsible for accrediting these boards,
but the concept itself seems to have built-in conflicts of interest: Review
boards for hire that raise too many questions may be less likely to attract
future business.

   Review boards approve informed consent statements that spell out risks and
benefits for patients who participate. Patient advocates have long complained
that the documents are so complicated that neither patients nor their families
fully understand them or the true nature of the risks they are accepting.

   The statement that Ms. Mohr signed, for example, ran 15 pages and was packed
with technical language outlining how the therapy was supposed to work.

   Ms. Mohr was recruited for the study by her regular rheumatologist. In that
role, he would be expected to recommend the best possible treatments for his
patient. But he also was serving as a paid researcher.

   Patients who enroll in medical research must be given complete, accurate
information about the potential risks and benefits they face. Researchers must
make sure that patients understand what they've been told. The cases of Ms. Mohr
and many others suggest that's not happening. Congress should revisit the issue.

NOTES:  Our View  | Research OPINION

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2007


                              465 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            August 9, 2007 Thursday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: Pg. Reg2

LENGTH: 2028 words

HEADLINE: COMMUNITY BRIEFING

BODY:

   GLOBE NORTHWEST 1

   ACTON

   HELP FOR KATRINA VICTIMS -- The Citizen Action

   Team needs drivers to pick up and deliver computer

   equipment for Hurricane Katrina victims as soon as

   possible. The equipment is located at FedEx Kinko's

   locations in Boston, Cambridge, Brookline, North

   Attleborough, Quincy, and Norwood and must be

   delivered to Acton, where it will be packed and sent

   to schools, community centers, and clinics in the Gulf

   region. The action team is looking for packers in

   Acton, drivers with large vehicles to pick up equipment,

   and cash donations. Sports equipment and

   school supplies also are needed. For more information,

   contact Terra at terra@citizenactionteam.org

   --Jennifer Fenn Lefferts

   ARLINGTON

   FACE LIFT FOR BUZZELL--The renovation of Buzzell

   Field is underway, with all the playing fields razed

   over the last month. The community park will include

   new softball fields, an improved basketball

   court, and a playground. Also proposed is a new

   grading and drainage design to prevent flooding and

   a new irrigation system. Accessible walkways also are

   being added, along with wood-fiber surfacing and

   sand in the playground area. Landscape architect

   Larson Associates of Arlington is constructing the

   park, expected to be completed by September, and

   the field will be ready for use in summer 2008. The

   Park and Recreation Department needs two growing

   seasons before reopening the park. -- Melissa Beecher

   AYER

   TECHNOLOGY NEEDS AIRED -- The town is seeking

   bids to conduct a comprehensive technology assessment

   that will allow Ayer to use existing computers

   more effectively. According to the work proposal

   submitted late last month, the town hopes to review

   all of its systems, including comprehensive permit

   tracking, accounting, assessor software, and security.

   The technology revamp is expected to be completed

   within the next year. -- Melissa Beecher

   BEDFORD

   STEEL RISES -- Bedford High School's ongoing addition

   and renovation project is on schedule. A steel

   skeleton erected at the front of the building is for the

   improved library and main office. The $51 million

   project is expected to be completed by December

   2008. Staff members are scheduled to return to

   school Aug. 29, and a ribbon-cutting ceremony for

   the new science labs, multipurpose space, and classrooms

   will be held Aug. 30 at 7:30 a.m.

   --Melissa Beecher

   BELMONT

   WEB GUIDES AVAILABLE--This summer, the Belmont

   Public Library has continued its popular program

   called CyberTeen Guides. Teenagers volunteer

   at the library and put their intuitive grasp of computers

   to work with patrons. For young and older residents

   alike, the students offer free one-on-one training

   sessions. The training is usually available Tuesday

   through Thursday, from 10 a.m. to noon. The library

   has WiFi service, so computer users can access the

   Internet at no charge. For more information, call

   617-993-2870. -- Dan Tuohy

   BILLERICA

   LOCK CAR DOORS -- Police are warning residents to

   avoid becoming victims in the rising numbers of car

   breaks this summer by locking vehicle doors. Between

   January and July, Sergeant Roy Frost said,

   there were 85 motor vehicle breaks, as well as 231

   acts of vandalism. The town is on alert because it

   underwent a similar crime wave last summer, when

   94 car breaks and 214 acts of vandalism were reported.

   This summer police are investigating a vandalism

   spree involving damage to residential mailboxes. On

   June 28, a large number of receptacles were damaged

   or burned in west Billerica, and on July 17, a similar

   incident occurred in the Pinehurst section, according

   to Frost. He asked that anyone having information

   about the crimes contact him at 978-671-0900, ext.

   120. Frost said federal charges could be brought

   against the vandals when and if they are apprehended.

   -- Joyce Pellino Crane

   BOXBOROUGH

   BOCCIE ANYONE? -- Boxborough has two new boccie

   courts open to the public at Liberty Field. The idea for

   the courts was promoted by the Council on Aging and

   funded with help from the Friends of the Council on

   Aging and the Boxborough Minutemen. The town's

   Highway Department built the courts during off-peak

   time for highway projects and completed them in

   early July. The courts are now open for use, with a

   formal opening to be held sometime this fall.

   --Jennifer Fenn Lefferts

   BURLINGTON

   SURGEON NAMED TO PANEL -- Dr. Michael Rosenblatt,

   a surgeon and director of trauma services at

   Lahey Clinic in Burlington, has been named one of 12

   judges for the Malcolm Baldridge National Quality

   Award, an annual award granted by President Bush

   to recognize US businesses, healthcare centers, educational

   institutions, and nonprofit organizations for

   performance excellence. Congress created the award

   in 1987. Rosenblatt, who was appointed to the panel

   by US Secretary of Commerce Carlos M. Gutierrez,

   previously spent four years as an examiner and senior

   examiner for the program, evaluating applicants and

   advising the judges. He has worked at Lahey Clinic

   since 1993. -- Eric Moskowitz

   CARLISLE

   VOTER DEADLINES -- The last day for residents to

   register to vote in the Sept. 4 primary for the congressional

   seat being vacated by Martin Meehan is Aug.

   15. The town clerk's office will be open until 8 that

   evening. The last day to receive an absentee ballot is

   Aug. 31, at 5 p.m. Town Clerk Charlene Hinton said

   residents typically have until the day before an election

   to request an absentee ballot, but Labor Day falls

   the day before the primary, so Town Hall will be

   closed. --Jennifer Fenn Lefferts

   CONCORD

   ACADEMY BIDS FOR FARMLAND -- The Board of

   Selectmen has postponed discussing possible purchase

   of the Arena Farms property off Route 2 until

   Aug. 20. The board was scheduled to vote Monday

   but decided to postpone action until the Concord-

   Carlisle Regional School Committee has a chance to

   discuss the property, said Town Manager Chris Whelan.

   The land is for sale, and Concord Academy is

   interested in purchasing it. Under state law, the town

   has the right of first refusal because the site has been

   used for agriculture. Concord Academy has offered

   $3.6 million for the 12 acres. Several town officials

   have said the price is too high.

   --Jennifer Fenn Lefferts

   HARVARD

   EMERGENCY CORPS IN WORKS -- The Board of

   Health will be overseeing the formation of a Health

   and Homeland Security Network to ensure readiness

   in the event of a large-scale disaster. Volunteers are

   needed to implement an emergency dispensing site

   in town. Medical professionals, clergy, and legal

   advisers who live in town will be asked for assistance

   by the Health Department. For more information,

   residents should contact health officials at 978-456-

   4106. -- Melissa Beecher

   LEXI NGTON

   TAX DEAL CLOSER --Next month the town is scheduled

   to finish negotiations on the size of a possible tax

   break for Shire Human Genetic Therapies Inc. The

   tax increment financing, or TIF, would lower the

   company's taxes for a defined period. Selectmen

   voted, 5 to 0, last month to open the negotiations. If

   they reach agreement, selectmen hope to have Town

   Meeting vote on the deal Oct. 10. Shire could relocate

   up to 550 jobs and add 680 new ones in the next eight

   years at the facility, proposed for Raytheon Co.'s former

   headquarters at the juncture of routes 2 and 128

   at the Lexington Technology Park. -- Connie Paige

   LIT TLETON

   GARAGE CAFÉ PROPOSED -- The owner of the Nashoba

   Garage on King Street hopes to open a café next

   door. The proposal by Jim Apostolakes goes before

   the Planning Board tonight at 7 at the Littleton Town

   Offices. Apostolakes said the restaurant would be

   open from 6 a.m. to 8 p.m. weekdays and specialize in

   sandwiches. He said the café would likely have a car

   theme to complement the garage, which has been

   there since 1914. -- Jennifer Fenn Lefferts

   MEDFORD

   CARE PACKAGES FOR TROOPS --Monday is the last

   day to drop off candy, toiletries, and used DVDs at the

   Veterans Services Department, on the first floor of

   City Hall. The agency is planning to send care packages

   to Medford men and women who are serving in

   the military, and workers are looking for a variety of

   donated items. ''Our soldiers love to get letters of

   support, and colorings from kids, too,'' said the department's

   senior clerk, Marlene Aborn. For more

   information, call the office at 781-393-2503.

   --Christine McConville

   NORTH READING

   ENERGY COMMITTEE FORMING--Town officials are

   looking for volunteers to form an ad hoc energy

   committee, said Town Manager Greg Balukonis. The

   committee will quantify the town's energy use and

   find ways to cut its energy bill, he said. The committee

   will have nine members, five citizens and four

   town representatives. The Board of Selectmen is

   expecting to start making appointments to the committee

   in September, according to Balukonis.

   --Laura Colarusso

   STONEHAM

   FREE CASH, BUDGET ON WARRANT -- The warrant

   for the special Town Meeting Aug. 16 to resolve budget

   issues closed July 31 and includes only one other

   item, a citizen petition calling for a discussion on the

   town's use of free cash. The primary debate will be

   about balancing the budget and distributing $1.3

   million in revenue from an increase in the fee for

   trash collection. The School Department stands to

   receive $800,000 of that, which would save some

   popular school programs such as high school sports.

   Town Clerk John J. Hanright reminds residents that

   the meeting begins at 7 p.m. at Town Hall, 30 minutes

   earlier than usual. If that Thursday is a typical

   summer's night, voters may have to sweat out a hot

   debate because the Town Hall auditorium has no air

   conditioning. -- Dan Tuohy

   WINCHESTER

   HOSPITAL OFFERS E-GREETINGS -- Winchester Hospital

   recently launched an e-greetings feature on its

   website, winchesterhospital.org/egreetings. The free

   service allows patients' friends and family to send

   electronic greetings during their hospital stay. The

   service was created by Winchester Hospital's corporate

   communications department in conjunction

   with Medicity, a clinical software company. After

   greetings are sent online, hospital volunteers will

   print and distribute the messages.

   --Melissa Beecher

   WOBURN

   SIX ON SCHOOL BOARD BALLOT -- Six candidates

   filed for five openings on the School Committee,

   meaning there will be no need for a preliminary

   election Sept. 18. The six candidates who filed are

   incumbents Patricia E. Chisholm, Joseph T. Crowley

   Jr., Christopher Kisiel, Denis M. Russell, and John M.

   Wells, and newcomer Laurel Francoeur. The top two

   vote-getters in the Nov. 6 general election will win

   four-year terms, while the third-, fourth-, and fifthhighest

   vote-getters will win two-year terms. School

   Committee chairman Michael P. Mulrenan and committee

   member Margarette Masotta are in the middle

   of their four-year terms. According to city officials, 11

   candidates would be needed to trigger a preliminary

   election. -- Eric Moskowitz

   AROUND THE REGION

   CHELMSFORD

   OPEN SPACE UPDATE -- Phil Stanway, lead steward of

   the town's Open Space Stewardship Program, recently

   presented selectmen with an overview of projects

   completed so far this year. Stanway listed 34 accomplishments,

   including the installation of a 20-

   foot-long bridge at Red Wing Farm on Maple Road

   that was part of an Eagle Scout project. The group is

   continuing to work on properties belonging to the

   Chelmsford Land Trust, and created a website, The-

   Chelmsfordian.com, providing information and dates

   for upcoming projects. -- Joyce Pellino Crane

   LOWELL

   ETHICS CHARGE SETTLED -- Edmund F. Tarmey,

   former Lowell Regional Water Utility executive director,

   will pay a $2,500 fine to the State Ethics Commission

   for violating the state's conflict of interest law,

   under a settlement approved last month. According

   to the commission, Tarmey acted on two contracts to

   purchase furniture from a company that employed

   his brother as a sales representative. The total value

   of the furniture was approximately $26,000, the

   commission said. -- Russell Contreras

   TYNGSBOROUGH

   NEW CHIEF SETTLES IN -- Just over a month after

   taking over as police chief, William F. Mulligan said

   he has been meeting with each member of his force to

   gauge their personal career interests and goals, as

   well as to share his own philosophies. Mulligan arrived

   July 1 from Merrimack, N.H., where he had

   been police chief since 2002. He said no organizational

   changes are planned. The department has one

   deputy chief, 22 officers, and six dispatchers. Its fiscal

   2008 budget, which began July 1, is $2.1 million,

   according to Mulligan. -- Joyce Pellino Crane

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2007


                              466 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            August 9, 2007 Thursday
                                 SECOND EDITION

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 441 words

HEADLINE: New cancer treatments in store at Anderson Woman's wish o Patient who
died in 2004 wanted to bring Dallas center's therapies here.

BYLINE: By Terry Hillig ST. LOUIS POST-DISPATCH

DATELINE: MARYVILLE

BODY:

   New, leading-edge cancer treatments will soon be available at Anderson
Hospital, thanks in large part to a young woman who grew up in the Edwardsville
area and died in 2004 of colon cancer.

   The hospital's new, $5.1 million cancer center, scheduled to open next month,
will include an affiliate clinic of the Dallas-based Mary Crowley Cancer
Research Center, a leading institution in research and clinical trials of new
cancer therapies.

   Allison Cassens, who died at age 33 in 2004, was a patient of the Crowley
Center in Dallas. Her mother, Linda Cassens, said it was her dream to bring the
center's leading-edge therapies to the area where she grew up.

   Based at the Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas, the Crowley Center
has nine affiliate clinics nationwide, but the closest one is in Dayton, Ohio.

   The nonprofit Crowley Center focuses on nontoxic cancer treatments, including
gene therapies, cell therapies and vaccines. Since its inception in 1992, it has
performed more than 140 clinical trials and treated more than 3,000 patients.

   Keith Page, the hospital's president and CEO, said the clinic would offer
area cancer patients convenient access to promising new therapies.

   The center also will bring together two local oncology practices, Illinois
Oncology Ltd. and Maryville Oncology Ltd.; a breast-imaging center; a patient
resource center and library; and support services that will include social
workers and dietitians.

   Dr. John Visconti of Illinois Oncology said the investigative therapy options
would complement proven cancer therapies, relieve suffering and possibly provide
cures for some patients.

   Allison Cassens had recently moved to Dallas when she was diagnosed with
cancer in 2004.

   Cassens, who was an accomplished competitive swimmer, a former airline pilot
and former teacher in the St. Louis area, was told she had five weeks to live,
her mother said.

   But she lived for 14 months and, when she died, left a sizable estate to a
foundation she had established to advance cancer research and provide support
for cancer patients.

   "Not once did she ever complain," Linda Cassens said. "She was always
thinking about ways to help others."

   Allison Cassens left behind notes with ideas for fundraising and sketched a
logo for the foundation. Her parents and her many friends are trying to carry
out her wishes.

   The foundation is now called Allison's Friends of Hope Foundation and has
held several local fundraisers. Allison's father, Allen Cassens, presented a
$75,000 check to the Crowley Center on Wednesday.

   Linda Cassens said she was sure the hospital's affiliation with the Crowley
Center had made her daughter "one very happy angel."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
 PHOTO - Allison Cassens

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2007


                              467 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                            August 9, 2007 Thursday
                                Regional Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL COPY; Pg. A16

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 199 words

HEADLINE: Gene Doping Is Illegal

BODY:

   Joel Garreau ended his Aug. 1 Style article ["Is It Time For a Flex Plan?"]
on technological enhancements in athletes with a paragraph on a researcher being
asked to provide gene doping, then asked,  "So what are the rules?"

   The gene doping that was being requested is already banned for amateur
contestants under U.S. law. In December, President Bush signed a law prohibiting
the use of gene doping and banning from athletic competition anyone who has been
genetically modified for performance enhancement.

   The risk of gene doping is not just the possibility of competitions not being
fair if genetically enhanced athletes compete against athletes who are not
enhanced. Despite hype to the contrary, there is no clear evidence that gene
transfer will work in humans to enhance performance, but promoting the
possibility of enhancement will encourage dangerous attempts to transfer genes.
The death last month of a patient in a gene therapy trial for arthritis and the
general failure of gene therapies  suggest that athletes who undergo gene doping
risk not just their careers but their lives.

   JAYDEE HANSON

   Director for Human Genetics Policy

   International Center for

   Technology Assessment

   Washington

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2007


                              468 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                             August 6, 2007 Monday
                                 Met 2 Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

DISTRIBUTION: Virginia

LENGTH: 2053 words

HEADLINE: Death Points to Risks in Research;
One Woman's Experience in Gene Therapy Trial Highlights Weaknesses in the
Patient Safety Net

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Robb Mohr sat by his wife's hospital bed two weeks ago, trying to take it all
in. His wife, Jolee Mohr, was breathing with the help of a ventilator in a
Chicago intensive care unit -- her body bloated from internal bleeding, her
liver failing -- and no one could figure out what was wrong with her.

   Robb Mohr had his suspicions. Jolee, 36, had been feeling fine just a few
weeks earlier, save for occasional stiffness from her arthritis. Her decline had
begun the day after her right knee was injected with an experimental drug made
of genetically engineered viruses. Doctors at the hospital shared his concern.

   Jolee Mohr died from massive bleeding and organ failure July 24, leaving
behind a 5-year-old daughter and a host of questions about why she was recruited
into a gene therapy experiment whose chief goal was to test the safety of a
novel arthritis treatment that had virtually no chance of helping her.

   No one knows yet whether the treatment was to blame. Of the dozens of other
volunteers who got the injections, only Mohr suffered anything more than
short-lived side effects, said officials at Targeted Genetics Corp., the Seattle
company that makes the product. The Food and Drug Administration and the company
are investigating.

   But a close look at the events leading to Mohr's death reveals failures in
the safety net that is supposed to protect people from the risks of medical
experimentation -- and in particular, the risks of gene therapy, which for 17
years has struggled in vain to live up to its optimistic name.

   Breaches of clinical research standards and a federal oversight system that
allowed key decisions to be made behind closed doors may have helped draw Mohr
into an experiment that was not, her husband says, what she thought it was.

   "It was presented to her like this is going to make her knee better," said
Robb Mohr, an agronomist who lived with his wife of nine years in a modest
vinyl-sided ranch home near Springfield, Ill. "It was supposed to be just a
simple thing."

   Company officials vigorously defend the study, saying they were upfront about
risks, adhered to all regulations and were terribly saddened by the loss. "We're
human," said H. Stewart Parker, Targeted Genetics' chief executive. "This is not
just a patient. This is a person, and this is a horrible tragedy."

   A two-sentence paragraph halfway through a 15-page consent document that
Jolee Mohr signed warns of the possibility of "unknown side effects," including,
"in rare circumstances, death."

   Further in, after long descriptions of how the product may help, a single
sentence states: "We do not expect you to receive any direct medical benefits
from participation in this study."

   Mohr was in an early-phase study, the prime goal of which was to see whether
the treatment was safe, not to provide a therapeutic benefit. If the drug passed
muster, other studies would determine whether it was an effective treatment.

   Her rheumatologist, Robert Trapp, whose Springfield clinic got payments from
Targeted Genetics for each subject he recruited, also defended the study. "The
theory behind it seemed good, and the science seemed good," he said. "There's
nothing I knew of that could have predicted this."

   Arthritis is a disease in which the immune system attacks the joints, causing
painful inflammation and degradation. Even when treated with powerful medicines,
up to 40 percent of patients have ongoing pain in at least a few joints.

   That medical reality is an economic opportunity worth as much as $3 billion a
year, Parker has said. The company hopes to tap that market with tgAAC94, a
virus engineered to have an extra gene. Injected into a joint, the virus infects
cells and continuously produces proteins that sop up inflammatory molecules,
according to the company.

   Like other gene therapies -- hundreds of which have been tested since 1990
and all of which are still experimental -- the approach has the potential
advantage of having the body crank out its own medicine for months or years
after treatment, right where it is needed.

   That sounded good to Mohr when Trapp, one of 20 U.S. doctors testing tgAAC94,
invited her to join the study on Feb. 12.

   There would be two injections, months apart, he explained. The first might be
real, or it might be a placebo, but the second would definitely be the test
product. She signed up immediately, and Trapp drew several tubes of blood to get
the study going.

   Two fundamental rules of clinical research were violated that day, experts
said. First, consent forms are to be taken home and considered, not signed on
first sight. Second, when a patient's own doctor is a principal investigator in
a study, someone else is supposed to make the proposal.

   "Because of the relationship . . . you have to worry that they won't listen
carefully enough to the risks," said Hank Greely, director of the Center for Law
and the Biosciences at Stanford University. Patients, he said, may think, "
'After all, if my doctor is doing this, it must be good for me.' That can be
difficult to overcome with words in a consent form."

   Trapp said he thoroughly explained the risks to Mohr.

   Jonathan Moreno, an expert in the ethics of medical experiments at the
University of Pennsylvania, said the consent form used by Targeted Genetics to
outline the drug's potential dangers was thick with technical descriptions and
thin on explaining "what's really going to happen."

   "Even a smart person would have a very hard time figuring out what they're
talking about," said Moreno, who examined the form at the request of The
Washington Post.

   The form was approved by one of the growing number of for-hire review boards
that contract with biotechnology companies to ensure studies meet
patient-protection standards. Targeted Genetics noted that the review firm it
used is accredited and accepted by the FDA. But the use of private boards, as
opposed to those run by universities or government agencies, has raised alarms
among some medical ethicists since a for-profit review board risks losing repeat
business if it is too tough on its clients.

   Mohr's first shot, administered on Feb. 26, had no noticeable effect, and she
wondered whether she got the placebo. But she was excited that the next one
would be the real thing, Robb Mohr said.

   That happened on July 2, a Monday. She was tired and out of sorts after a
weekend of boating with her husband and daughter, but she had gone to her
data-entry job at the secretary of state's office in Springfield and later to
Trapp's office.

   He recorded her temperature at 99.6, then gave her the shot.

   "The next day she woke up and didn't feel good at all. By afternoon she
started vomiting," Robb Mohr recalled. "By evening her temperature had shot up
to 101."

   She spent July Fourth feverish and vomiting. Her family physician told her it
was probably just a virus.

   When her symptoms worsened and her temperature hit 104.1 on Saturday, she
went to the emergency room. Tests indicated a possible infection and signs of
liver damage, but she was sent home for more care from her family doctor,
according to Robb Mohr and medical records.

   Aware of the experiment, Mohr's family doctor called Trapp, who reassured him
that the virus was safe -- something Trapp said he had learned at a training
session sponsored by Targeted Genetics. But Mohr only got worse, and on Thursday
she was admitted to the hospital.

   Things went downhill fast, with Mohr's body showing signs of being ravaged by
an infection. But tests for standard bacteria and viruses came up negative. With
breathing problems and the possibility she might need a liver transplant, she
was transferred to the University of Chicago hospital.

   Suspecting a possible link to the experimental drug, the doctors in Chicago
contacted the FDA.

   Federal regulations require a company to report any serious complications
that are even "possibly" related to an experimental treatment "as soon as
possible" and no later than seven days after learning of it. But Targeted
Genetics and Trapp had at first classified the problems as not serious, and
later classified them as serious but unrelated to the treatment. So no FDA
report was made, and the study went on, with other volunteers unaware of the
problems.

   That reflects a widespread problem in clinical trials, said Adil Shamoo, a
professor at the University of Maryland School of Medicine and editor in chief
of the journal Accountability in Research.

   "There are no uniform standards for 'adverse events' reporting," Shamoo said.
"And there is no motivation to report them. . . . No one wants to show their
dirty linen."

   Dirty linen can drag down a company's bottom line, and Targeted Genetics,
like all companies, puts a lot of work into keeping that line afloat. An interim
report on tgAAC94, for example, spoke in June of "very encouraging results" and
evidence of "clinical benefit," although, by one measure the company considered
key, patients who got high, medium or low doses of the drug did the same as
those who got placebos.

   "The company was talking about lucrative markets and a promising product much
too soon," said Marcy Darnovsky, associate executive director of the Center for
Genetics and Society, an Oakland, Calif.-based public interest group that
focuses on genetic technologies.

   Company officials said the drug does show promise by some measures. "We don't
know what the best indication of efficacy is yet," said Barrie Carter, the
company's chief scientific officer.

   Finally, on July 20, a day after Mohr's emergency transport to Chicago and
four days before she died, the company sent a "serious adverse event" report to
the FDA and suspended the study, conceding that her life-threatening symptoms
were "possibly" due to the treatment.

   Three weeks after Mohr got the injection that she had hoped would cure her,
she was unconscious and beyond hope of recovery. With family and friends
gathered around, her life support was removed.

   "Basically, I told my daughter that her mommy has died and gone to live with
Jesus," Robb Mohr said. "She prays every night that Jesus will make her better
so she can come back home."

   Tests on Jolee's Mohr's tissues may tell the story of what happened, but for
now scientists say they are scratching their heads.

   One reassuring aspect of tgAAC94's engineering is that genes required for
replication have been removed, so the viruses cannot make more of themselves.
But animal studies conducted by the company have shown that the product can
escape from the joint space and travel about the body, perhaps catching the
attention of the immune system. In general, the immune system mounts much more
robust -- sometimes dangerously robust -- responses after a second exposure. In
fact, both shots Mohr got were the real thing, the company said.

   Further complicating matters, Mohr was on three conventional but potent
arthritis drugs, each of which can cause serious side effects.

   Years ago, when Targeted Genetics first sought permission to test tgAAC94 in
people, federal reviewers approved a single dose in patients who were not taking
other drugs but said they would think twice about approving multiple shots or
testing in people taking other arthritis medications. Some questioned whether
the risk of even a single shot was worth it for a non-life-threatening disease
such as arthritis, according to the minutes of meetings at the National
Institutes of Health, which used to review, in public, every proposed human gene
therapy experiment.

   After completing its initial study of single shots, Targeted Genetics sought
permission to start giving two -- and to patients taking other drugs. Whatever
discussion led up to that approval is hidden from the public because of a
federal rule change in 2000 that placed most such follow-on studies under
confidential FDA review rather than a public NIH process.

   In testimony before a congressional subcommittee in 2000, a chief executive
representing the Biotechnology Industry Organization spoke out for the rule
change, to streamline oversight and harmonize NIH and FDA regulations. Among
other things, the change gave companies up to a year to report serious adverse
events as long as the doctor overseeing the study does not think the problem is
caused by the test product.

   The chief executive was H. Stewart Parker of Targeted Genetics.

   Staff researcher Madonna Lebling contributed to this report.

GRAPHIC: IMAGE; Photo Courtesy Of Mohr Family; Jolee Mohr, with husband Robb and
daughter Toree in 2006, died after two injections of a gene therapy. The cause
is not yet known.
IMAGE

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2007


                              469 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                             August 3, 2007 Friday
                                 Met 2 Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. E01

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 1059 words

HEADLINE: Winning, Cheating Have Ancient Roots

BYLINE: Sally Jenkins

BODY:

   Maybe we shouldn't ask athletes to live up to ideals that, let's face it, are
unsupported by the chronically weak performance of human nature. Maybe it's time
to decriminalize performance-enhancing drugs, in view of the fact that the first
drug cheat was an ancient Greek and runners brought sport-doping into the modern
age in 1904 by dosing themselves with strychnine.

   Our Air Force gives fighter jocks "go-pills" to get them through long
missions, but we don't refuse to call them heroes because they're on speed. So
what's this strange amnesia that causes us to seek purity in athletes? Why
should they have to meet a higher moral standard than soldiers? Call me naive.

   Many of us are cringing at the prospect that Barry Bonds will break Hank
Aaron's home run record, starting with yours truly, because of allegations he
used performance enhancers. A record should be joyful, but this one makes us
regretful. Why should Bonds's personal health choices matter to us so much?
Because he forces us to address head-on the possibility that sports have become
utterly riddled with doping. If so, then legalizing performance enhancers may be
the most honest thing we could do. But it doesn't make anyone happy to say so.

   What's the job of an athlete really? It is to seek the limits of the human
body, for our viewing pleasure. Athletes are astronauts of the physique,
explorers. Some of them choose to explore by making human guinea pigs out of
themselves. So maybe we should quit assigning any ethical value to what they do,
and simply enjoy their feats as performance artists. Virtue was another notion
dreamed up by the Greeks, only they were a lot less confused about what they
meant by the term. Their word for virtue could also be accurately translated as
simply "excellence." As for the word "amateur," it didn't exist to them at all.

   The ancient Olympic champions were professionals who competed for huge cash
prizes as well as olive wreaths, lived on the public dole and were sometimes
recruited by competing cities seeking status. Most forms of what we would call
cheating were perfectly acceptable to them, save for game-fixing. There is
evidence that they gorged themselves on meat -- not a normal dietary staple of
the Greeks -- and experimented with herbal medications in an effort to enhance
their performances. Olympic scholar William Blake Tyrell, author of "The Smell
of Sweat: Greek Athletics, Olympics,  and Culture," has observed: "Winning was
everything. If they thought a rhinoceros horn would help them win, they would
have ground it up."

   According to Charles Yesalis, professor of health and human development at
Penn State and a longtime scholar of performance enhancement, the ancient Greek
athletes also drank wine potions, used hallucinogens and ate animal hearts or
testicles in search of potency. "We've never had clean sport," he says.

   Doping is not a modern art. It's just the medicine that's new. As a recent
story in National Geographic pointed out, performance enhancement grew with
chemistry in the mid-19th century. Athletes choked down sugar cubes dipped in
ether, brandy laced with cocaine, nitroglycerine and amphetamines. In that
context, the current scourges of steroids and blood boosters are merely a
sequential progression.

   Opponents of legalizing performance enhancers argue against it on two main
grounds: 1) it would open up a doping arms race in which athletes who could
afford the best drugs would have an unfair advantage, and 2) doping is injurious
to the health of the athletes. But the arms race is already on -- and it has
been for centuries. That genie is out of the bottle, and there's no putting it
back. As for the ill effects of performance enhancers, there is a very strong
argument to be made that legalization would actually help in risk reduction,
make it easier to control the types of risks athletes are taking.

   Furthermore, it's impossible to draw the line any more between what is an
artificial enhancement and what is a natural one. Is there a real difference
between voluntary LASIK  eye surgery, a small controlled dose of testosterone or
EPO, or sleeping in an altitude tent that produces the same effect of EPO only
without the needle?

   The next step in the sequential progression is gene therapy -- athletes will
be able to inject genes that build muscle. At which point steroids will seem as
crude as sugar cubes soaked in ether.

   The stark truth is that great athletes are fundamentally very different from
you and me. They are freaks of nature, with uncanny hand-eye coordination or
peripheral vision   randomly assigned in the gene pool. They can seem nearly a
different species. And they are quite often profoundly cold elitists whose moral
code is different from ours, too. To many of them, the performance is all and
what they find unnatural is to leave some physical possibility untapped.
"They're highly paid entertainers, and they get paid to win and that's what
they're trying to do," Yesalis says.

   In an odd way, legalizing performance enhancers might restore some candor to
what we're watching. It would end a charade and help us sort out truly criminal
behavior from that which merely offends our idealism. But personally, every time
I come to that conclusion, I find myself backing away from it, reluctant to say
it's the definitive answer.

   The price of legalization is that we give up our ideals about athletes once
and for all, and that's a painful prospect. We gave up our ideals about actors,
singers and politicians and various other kinds of professionals a long time
ago, but that doesn't mean we enjoyed doing it. "If there was drug available for
journalists, professors or lawyers, they would take it," Yesalis theorizes. "Why
do you think it would be just athletes?" That's true. But it's a sorry fact.

   Legalization is not likely to happen, because most of us prefer illusion to
reality. Games are stories we tell ourselves, and as such, we seem to need some
moral content in them, as opposed to the capricious traumas, sad erosions and
ambiguities of every day reality. Yesalis likens performance enhancers to the
special effects in a film.

   "When you go to a movie, you don't want to see how the movie was made, or the
special effects are done," he says. "The drama plays out and it has a black or
white ending. You just want to be entertained and happy or sad your team won."

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2007


                              470 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              July 30, 2007 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 67 words

HEADLINE: Corrections: For the Record

BODY:

   An article on Friday about the death of a patient in a gene therapy study run
by Targeted Genetics misstated the number of patients the company has treated
using the same type of virus to deliver genes to cells in the body. It is more
than 300 -- not more than 500, which is the number of patients treated using
that type of virus in all gene therapy clinical trials, not just those run by
the company.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2007


                              471 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                             July 28, 2007 Saturday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A09

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 818 words

HEADLINE: Suspended Gene Therapy Test Had Drawn Early Questions

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   A gene therapy experiment that has triggered a federal investigation after
the death of a patient on Tuesday raised a variety of concerns when it was first
proposed to federal reviewers in 2003.

   Unlike the vast majority of such proposals, all of which aim to treat
diseases by giving patients new genes, the plan to inject trillions of
genetically engineered viruses into the joints of patients with arthritis was
flagged for a special public review by the federal Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, part of the National Institutes of Health.

   At that Sept. 17, 2003, meeting, representatives of the sponsoring company,
Targeted Genetics Corp. of Seattle, listened as a panel of experts wondered
aloud why such a novel and possibly risky approach was to be offered to patients
who were not especially ill, including some who had not even tried standard
treatments.

   Reviewers questioned the justification for the study, given that animal
studies had found only a "limited correlation" between the treatment and any
improvements in subjects' condition. And they asked for more assurance that the
engineered viruses were not going to spread around the body or cause untoward
immune system reactions in patients.

   Some also expressed concern that the informed consent document the
researchers planned to use to describe the risks and benefits to participating
patients was not upfront enough about the fact that the study was unlikely to
help them and was designed merely to test the new approach's safety.

   "Emphasizing this information might encourage potential subjects to think
more critically about their participation," one reviewer said, according to the
meeting minutes.

   The proposed 32-patient phase-1 study eventually went forward with no serious
side effects, said Barrie Carter, the company's chief scientific officer.

   That led to federal approval of an expanded phase of the study, this time at
20 locations around the country. About 100 patients had received the treatment
-- none with any serious side effects, Carter said -- when one became
inexplicably ill late last week.

   The study was suspended immediately. The patient died four days later.

   Company officials yesterday said they are still looking into the cause of
death. So is the Food and Drug Administration. No details have been released,
including how many doses the patient received. The death may be unrelated to the
treatment, but the close timing warrants a full investigation, company and
government officials said.

   Carter and Pervin Anklesaria, Targeted Genetics's head of therapeutic
development, said yesterday that the company had gone ahead with the studies
only after addressing the NIH reviewers' concerns.

   The company officials said there was a rationale for including only mildly
affected and previously untreated patients at first: Any side effects could be
attributed to the new therapy and not to whatever medicine they might have been
taking.

   They acknowledged that some animals had shown improvement in joints on the
opposite side of the body from those injected -- an observation that had raised
reviewers' concerns that the viruses might be spreading throughout the body,
with possible ill effects in the long run. But Carter said that phenomenon has
been seen with many kinds of arthritis treatments and remains unexplained.

   Most important, both said, tests on animals -- and more recently on some
patients -- have all failed to find evidence that the viruses, which produce a
protein that can block the arthritis-related inflammation, escape from the joint
where they are injected.

   Mark A. Kay, a Stanford University professor who has led gene therapy trials
that, like the arthritis study, used "adeno-associated viruses," said he was
surprised by the death, given the virus's safety record.

   In the one instance of trouble in his studies, he said, a patient's immune
system attacked his own liver cells after those cells became infected with the
virus, causing a "mild and self-limited" decline in liver function.

   "I don't think people should panic," Kay said. "It's devastating, and my
heart goes out to the family. But people have to sit back and see what happened
before jumping to conclusions."

   Theodore Friedmann, director of the gene therapy program at the University of
California at San Diego School of Medicine, chaired the committee that reviewed
the initial 2003 arthritis proposal. He said he does not recall the meeting, but
he said the field, despite its occasional setbacks, needs to get over its
long-standing "hangdog attitude."

   "It's a difficult technology. It's early. It's immature still. But it is
attacking some very nasty diseases," Friedmann said, "and in some cases, it is
having a benefit."

   On a day when all stocks dropped sharply, shares of Targeted Genetics fell 42
cents yesterday to $1.65 in Nasdaq Stock Market composite trading, the lowest
price since the stock was first sold to the public in May 1994.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2007


                              472 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                              July 27, 2007 Friday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1515 words

HEADLINE: Hospitals create fund to boost inventions Ties to business draw
criticism

BYLINE: Christopher Rowland Globe Staff

BODY:

   Boston's largest Harvard-affiliated hospitals are setting up a $35 million
venture capital fund, an aggressive effort to push their inventions out of the
laboratory and into the market.

   Massachusetts General Hospital and Brigham and Women's Hospital, through
their nonprofit corporate parent, Partners HealthCare, launched the Partners
Innovation Fund this year with an initial installment of about $3 million and
plan to reach the target size within 10 years.

   The first investment the fund made was small, between $200,000 and $500,000,
and in a product of modest medical importance: removable tattoo ink. Partners
says investments in drugs and devices targeting disease will follow.

   "The main goal is to get the technology to the right place faster and not
have early science languishing because you can't find $200,000," said
Christopher H. Colecchi, vice president of research ventures and licensing at
Partners, who oversees the venture fund.

   The Partners fund is part of a trend at US research hospitals, many of which
are hunting for ways to bring nascent medical technology to market. Venture
funds operated by hospitals have multiplied from a handful 10 years ago to
several dozen now, specialists said.

   Critics said the fund and others like it inappropriately blur the lines
between academia and business, create economic incentives that could undermine
researchers' objectivity, and expose the assets of nonprofit hospitals to a high
degree of financial risk. But hospitals say they can prevent conflicts of
interest through disclosure and limits on what researchers can do if they hold
stakes in companies.

   Large venture funds are already being operated by nonprofit institutions such
as Baylor College of Medicine in Dallas, Cleveland Clinic, and Ascension Health,
the Catholic healthcare chain based in St. Louis that is the nation's largest
nonprofit hospital system.

   The trend is born of necessity, say hospitals, because funding has grown
scarce. Pharmaceutical and medical device companies are less likely to gamble on
unproven concepts. Venture capital firms that have historically provided seed
money, meanwhile, are less interested in small deals. And public investors,
burned too many times, have diminished interest in early-stage IPOs.

   "In the early '80s, if you had some cancer data on a couple of mice, you
could go public. You can't do that any more. Now you need to take it a lot
further," said Mark P. Carthy, general partner at Oxford Bioscience Partners, a
Boston venture capital firm.

   So, some nonprofit hospitals are filling the breach by assuming investment
risk themselves in for-profit ventures, which use the hospital funding to push
inventions along and make them more attractive to outside investors. Often they
continue pre-clinical drug research on a drug or medical device, expand trials
in animals, or begin building a safety profile.

   The first investment from the new Partners venture capital fund was in
Freedom-2 Inc., a company that plans to market a removable tattoo ink that was
partly developed at Mass. General. The ink can be removed with cosmetic lasers
that were invented at Mass. General.

   "It really is the beginning of a new era of partnerships between the
corporate world and the university world, which has heretofore had many
firewalls," said Martin Schmieg, CEO of Freedom-2. "I think we're really seeing
universities opening up to these new corporate collaborations, and I think it's
going to be good for all parties."

   Mass. General's lead doctor in the development of cosmetic laser systems, Dr.
Rox Anderson, has earned tens of millions of dollars for Mass. General in
royalties paid by Palomar Medical Technologies Inc., a Burlington laser
manufacturer. He also collaborated closely with scientists at Brown University
and Duke University to discover the Freedom-2 process. Anderson bristles at the
suggestion that Mass. General's economic interests could influence treatment.

   "I have a full-time day job, which is called taking care of people, I'm not a
businessman," he said.

   But some ethicists say hospitals should leave the commercialization of
inventions to others.

   "There are many times when overlapping boundaries can pose conflicts of
interest," said Tufts University professor Sheldon Krimsky, who studies
corporate influence on academia. Financial motives could influence the selection
of treatment, while giving short shrift to alternatives, he said.

   The risks were perhaps most glaringly illustrated in 1999, when an Arizona
teenager died during an experimental gene therapy trial at the University of
Pennsylvania. The university's star gene therapy researcher, James M. Wilson,
held equity interests in a company that funded Wilson's experiments, which
caused the death of Jesse Gelsinger. The university and Wilson said they had
taken steps to mitigate conflicts of interest, but the financial motive behind
Wilson's work was criticized by ethics specialists after Gelsinger's death. Penn
paid a US Department of Justice settlement of $517,000, and Penn, Wilson, and
others reached an undisclosed civil settlement with Gelsinger's family.
"Academic medical centers are supposed to be in the position of acquisition of
knowledge, not getting into profit-making business," said Adil E. Shamoo, a
biomedical ethicist at the University of Maryland who cofounded an advocacy
group with Gelsinger's father. "You are influencing everybody to move into the
gray zone of what is ethical and what is unethical."

   Financial risks, too, have been an issue in such investments in the past.
Krimsky recalled when Boston University sunk $85 million into a Cambridge
biotechnology start-up called Seragen in the 1980s and 1990s; the university
agreed to stop investing and reduce its stake in the company under pressure from
then-Attorney General Scott Harshbarger - who said it was imprudent for a
nonprofit institution like BU to invest so heavily in a risky biotech company.

   The head of Harshbarger's division of public charities at the time, Richard
C. Allen, said the small size of the Partners Innovation Fund investments,
particularly in relation to its massive endowment of more than $1 billion, puts
it in much safer territory.

   "BU got itself into a majority holding of one speculative venture," said
Allen, who is a partner specializing in nonprofit corporations at the Boston law
firm Casner & Edwards. "By being the majority holder, they couldn't get out, and
they had to keep pouring in more money," he said.

   Partners said it can safely manage potential conflicts of interest, and that
it is only investing small amounts of seed money to help spinoff companies get
going. Mass. General and Brigham and Women's do not permit doctors to oversee
clinical trials if they or their hospital own an equity stake in the commercial
sponsor.

   Hospitals, companies, and government have long hunted for the best ways to
bring medical innovations out of academia and into the marketplace - what
industry executives describe as moving treatments from "bench to bedside."

   The federal Bayh-Dole Act, passed in 1980, gave universities, medical
schools, and inventors control of the intellectual property rights of inventions
that were discovered using federal grant money, including money from the
National Institutes of Health. Boston's academic medical centers collectively
lead the nation in NIH grants, with about $1.3 billion a year. Mass. General and
Brigham and Women's are the two largest recipients in Boston, with $540 million.

   Traditionally, the most common way to transfer NIH-funded discoveries to
private companies under Bayh-Dole has been through licensing deals, which result
in fees and royalties being paid to hospitals by companies that manufacture and
market the products. Hospitals also commonly have taken equity stakes in
start-up companies, but usually in lieu of accepting licensing fees and
royalties. Such arrangements have been common for spinning off potential
products at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard's third teaching
center in Boston, as well as the Partners hospitals. To infuse spinoffs with
cash, Beth Israel also has matched outside investors and philanthropists with
specific projects, said Mark Chalek, Beth Israel Deaconess chief of business
ventures.

   "We look at it as a `venture philanthropy' approach," Chalek said. Beth
Israel does not invest venture capital in start-ups, which is a rarer approach,
he said.

   The Baylor College of Medicine in Dallas has operated a venture fund, BCM
Technologies, for more than two decades and lists a long string of spinoff
companies on its website. Caroline Popper, president of BCM Technologies, said
she doesn't see any greater potential for conflicts of interest just because a
scientist and a hospital own equity in a firm, instead of simply receiving
consulting fees or licensing royalties.

   "Who's to say if someone has a conflict because they are getting cold, hard
cash through licensing, or if they want potential stock value?" she said. "These
are serious issues, and they require serious management."

   Christopher Rowland can be reached at crowland@globe.com

GRAPHIC: Dr. Rox Anderson says business doesn't affect his work.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2008


                              473 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2007 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              July 27, 2007 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 256 words

HEADLINE: The Nation;
FDA halts gene study after death of patient

BYLINE: From the Associated Press

DATELINE:  WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The government has suspended a Seattle company's gene therapy study -- and is
reviewing the safety of 28 others around the country -- after learning that a
patient died this week.

   The Food and Drug Administration didn't reveal the cause of death or any
details about the patient, who had enrolled in a study of gene therapy for
advanced arthritis.

   The agency said it was investigating what role, if any, therapy played in the
death, which occurred Tuesday.

   Twenty-eight other gene therapy studies have been reported to the FDA that
used, or are using, the same virus, called adeno-associated virus or AAV.

   The FDA said Thursday that it was not aware of any serious side effects in
any of those studies, but that as a precaution, officials were reviewing all the
ones still actively treating patients.

   Targeted Genetics Corp. notified the FDA of the patient's illness and
subsequent death.

   The company had enrolled more than 100 people in the study without similar
problems, but this patient became ill after a second injection of the therapy
directly into an arthritic joint, the FDA said.

   The therapy uses AAV to deliver a gene that in turn blocks tumor necrosis
factor, a substance that fuels the joint inflammation behind crippling forms of
arthritis. Drugs that block TNF already are widely used to treat rheumatoid
arthritis and other conditions, but a gene therapy approach is novel.

   "We are deeply saddened by the death of an individual enrolled in our
clinical trial," company president H. Stewart Parker said in a statement issued
Thursday.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2007


                              474 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              July 27, 2007 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 396 words

HEADLINE: Patient in Experimental Gene Therapy Study Dies, F.D.A. Says

BYLINE: By DENISE GRADY and ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   A patient has died in a study of an experimental gene therapy, the Food and
Drug Administration reported yesterday. The agency said it was investigating the
death to determine whether the treatment was to blame.

     The case could be another setback for gene therapy, a field with a troubled
history and numerous treatment failures, including the death of a teenager in
1999 in an experiment.

     The new therapy being tested, made by Targeted Genetics of Seattle, is a
virus-based product injected directly in the joints in hope of relieving active
inflammatory arthritis. That chronic condition can affect multiple joints and
organs, and it is quite different from the wear-and-tear arthritis that commonly
occurs with aging.

     The patient became ill soon after receiving a second injection, the drug
agency said. The date is not exactly clear, but the illness was recognized as a
''serious adverse event'' last Friday, and the agency immediately suspended the
study. That means no more injections can be given. The patient died on Tuesday.

     Targeted Genetics and the drug agency said they would not describe the
patient's symptoms or the manner of death until the investigation had been
completed. The company and  the agency emphasized that it was not known whether
the treatment had a role or the death was a coincidence. The agency said the
timing was cause for concern.

     H. Stewart Parker, chief executive of Targeted Genetics, said, ''The
patient was dosed one dose and had no issues and came back several months later
and coincident with the dosing had an S.A.E.''

     S.A.E. is an abbreviation for serious adverse event.

     Ms. Parker said the company had used the same type of virus to carry
various genes  into more than 500 patients and had not seen similar problems.
''These patients are all on several different medications,'' she said. ''They
certainly have disease characteristics.''

     The drug agency said it was reviewing all other studies  using the same
virus, which is called an adeno-associated virus, though it had not heard of
similar problems.

     Dr. Theodore Friedmann, a professor of pediatrics and head of the gene
therapy program at the University of California, San Diego, said  the A.A.V.
system used in the experiment was widely regarded as safe.

     But, Dr. Friedmann added,  ''We'll probably come to learn it does some
harmful things in some settings.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: July 30, 2007

CORRECTION:

   An article on Friday about the death of a patient in a gene therapy study run
by Targeted Genetics misstated the number of patients the company has treated
using the same type of virus to deliver genes to cells in the body. It is more
than 300 -- not more than 500, which is the number of patients treated using
that type of virus in all gene therapy clinical trials, not just those run by
the company.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2007


                              475 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                              July 27, 2007 Friday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 991 words

HEADLINE: Virus linked to cancer in mice In Seattle o Patient dies while
participating in gene therapy trial that used the same virus. At stake o
Treatment that holds hope for battling such genetic diseases as cystic fibrosis.

BYLINE: By Tina Hesman Saey and Amy Maxmen ST. LOUIS POST-DISPATCH

BODY:

   A research group led by scientists from Washington University and St. Louis
University released a study today showing that a genetically altered virus used
in human gene therapy trials causes liver cancer in mice.

   The findings follow the announcement Thursday that a patient in Seattle died
earlier this week after being treated with the same virus. The cause of the
patient's death is unknown, but the Food and Drug Administration is reviewing
whether 29 human trials using the virus should be allowed to continue.

   The treatment, using a virus called adeno-associated virus, is considered one
of the most promising avenues for battling genetic diseases such as cystic
fibrosis and muscular dystrophy.

   "The bottom line is we need more research so that we can really define the
risk," said Mark Sands, a Washington University researcher who led the cancer
study.

   In 2000, researchers at Washington University noticed that the mice they
successfully treated for a liver disease using the adeno-associated virus were
developing tumors. The virus had already been approved for use in clinical
studies on humans.

   Sands relayed the findings to the Food and Drug Administration, which
oversees gene therapy trials, said Karen Riley, an agency spokeswoman. The FDA
convened a safety panel to discuss those results and other safety concerns in
March 2001.

   "We decided that the safety profile was acceptable and should continue to be
evaluated in clinical trials," Riley said.

   Sands then pursued a new study, this time to verify whether the virus was
directly responsible for causing cancer. About half of the mice treated with the
virus got cancer. The results appear today in the journal Science.

   "No one is more disappointed about these data than I am," Sands said. "With
gene therapy we can cure this disease in mice. But I can't ignore the data. We
were anxious to repeat our findings, hoping that the tumors were an artifact,
but it's not," Sands said.

   In gene therapy, healthy genes are inserted into a person with a genetic
disease. One way to insert the gene is through a genetically engineered virus,
which is injected into the patient. The healthy gene then makes proteins that
reverse the disease.

   The death in Seattle raises new questions about whether the virus should be
used in human trials. The patient died after receiving a second injection of the
gene therapy virus while being treated for arthritis during a clinical trial by
Targeted Genetics Corp. The company has treated about 100 people in the trial
without adverse affects, the FDA said Thursday.

   While it remains unclear whether the virus played a role in the patient's
death, the cancer finding is reason enough to step back from human studies, said
Ronald Munson, a medical ethicist at the University of Missouri-St. Louis.

   "Safety should be established in animals before it is tried in humans,"
Munson said. "I think therapy using this version of the virus should not go
forward until we understand what has happened."

   Still, several scientists, including Sands, say they aren't ready to abandon
the virus in human studies, given its potential.

   "The problem is that no one else has seen the same thing" as Sands, said Nick
Muzyczyka, professor at the University of Florida and scientific adviser at
Applied Genetic Technologies Corp. in Alachua, Fla. The company is conducting
two gene-therapy trials using adeno-associated viruses and has several gene
therapy treatments in development.

   Meanwhile, Dr. Valder Arruda of the University of Pennsylvania deliberately
attempted to use the virus to cause cancer in mice that were already predisposed
to the disease. But the mice remained healthy.

   While Arruda said he believes Sands' data, the technique is so complex that
the virus alone may not be the problem, noting other complicating factors, such
as the age of the animal.

   Arruda and his colleagues began treating people for hemophilia with the virus
in 2001. They have also been treating 30 dogs for hemophilia with the virus,
some for more than five years. Thus far, neither the six humans nor the dogs
have gotten cancer.

   Medical research comes with a certain amount of risk, scientists say. For
some reason, gene therapy is given less room for error, said Dr. Markus Grompe,
director of the Oregon Stem Cell Center in Portland.

   "In general we have a tendency to not accept any side effects of gene therapy
," Grompe said. "If we had that attitude we would have never figured out bone
marrow transplants; many people died in those trials. The key is how many other
options do you have."

   Gene therapy has been used to cure only one disease, an immune system
disorder called severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID. Most people know it
as "bubble boy disease." When three children in a French study developed
leukemia linked to the virus used in gene therapy, treatment was halted. Now
only children with no other alternative are given gene therapy to treat the
disease.

   The first high-profile death in a gene therapy trial happened in 1999 at the
University of Pennsylvania. A young man named Jesse Gelsinger died after his
immune system reacted badly to the virus used in the trial.

   But some people facing miserable lives and early deaths at the hands of
disease may think that taking a chance on developing cancer later is worth the
risk, said Ana Iltis, an associate professor at the Center for Health Care
Ethics at St. Louis University.

   At the very least, patients need to know exactly what risks they face before
deciding whether to go through gene therapy, she said.

   Gene therapy is a promising technology with frustrating problems, Munson
said, adding that once researchers work out the kinks, gene therapy can save
many lives.

   "I think gene therapy has such significant benefits that the problems it
faces, though complicated, shouldn't be enough to stop it," he said. "I don't
think this is the end of gene therapy at all. It's just another problem that
needs to be examined and resolved."

NOTES:  GENE THERAPY TRIALS

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC
 GRAPHIC - GENE THERAPY USING AN ALTERED VIRUS Mark Williams | Post-Dispatch

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2007


                              476 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                              July 27, 2007 Friday
                                 FIRST EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1000 words

HEADLINE: Virus linked to cancer in mice In Seattle o Patient dies while
participating in gene therapy trial that used the same virus. At stake o
Treatment that holds hope for battling such genetic diseases as cystic fibrosis.

BYLINE: By Tina Hesman Saey ST. LOUIS POST-DISPATCH

BODY:

   and Amy Maxmen

   A research group led by scientists from Washington University and St. Louis
University released a study today showing that a genetically altered virus used
in human gene therapy trials causes liver cancer in mice.

   The findings follow the announcement Thursday that a patient in Seattle died
earlier this week after being treated with the same virus. The cause of the
patient's death is unknown, but the Food and Drug Administration is reviewing
whether 29 human trials using the virus should be allowed to continue.

   The treatment, using a virus called adeno-associated virus, is considered one
of the most promising avenues for battling genetic diseases such as cystic
fibrosis and muscular dystrophy.

   "The bottom line is we need more research so that we can really define the
risk," said Mark Sands, a Washington University researcher who led the cancer
study.

   In 2000, researchers at Washington University noticed that the mice they
successfully treated for a liver disease using the adeno-associated virus were
developing tumors. The virus had already been approved for use in clinical
studies on humans.

   Sands relayed the findings to the Food and Drug Administration, which
oversees gene therapy trials, said Karen Riley, an agency spokeswoman. The FDA
convened a safety panel to discuss those results and other safety concerns in
March 2001.

   "We decided that the safety profile was acceptable and should continue to be
evaluated in clinical trials," Riley said.

   Sands then pursued a new study, this time to verify whether the virus was
directly responsible for causing cancer. About half of the mice treated with the
virus got cancer. The results appear today in the journal Science.

   "No one is more disappointed about these data than I am," Sands said. "With
gene therapy we can cure this disease in mice. But I can't ignore the data. We
were anxious to repeat our findings, hoping that the tumors were an artifact,
but it's not," Sands said.

   In gene therapy, healthy genes are inserted into a person with a genetic
disease. One way to insert the gene is through a genetically engineered virus,
which is injected into the patient. The healthy gene then makes proteins that
reverse the disease.

   The death in Seattle raises new questions about whether the virus should be
used in human trials. The patient died after receiving a second injection of the
gene therapy virus while being treated for arthritis during a clinical trial by
Targeted Genetics Corp. The company has treated about 100 people in the trial
without adverse affects, the FDA said Thursday.

   While it remains unclear whether the virus played a role in the patient's
death, the cancer finding is reason enough to step back from human studies, said
Ronald Munson, a medical ethicist at the University of Missouri-St. Louis.

   "Safety should be established in animals before it is tried in humans,"
Munson said. "I think therapy using this version of the virus should not go
forward until we understand what has happened."

   Still, several scientists, including Sands, say they aren't ready to abandon
the virus in human studies, given its potential.

   "The problem is that no one else has seen the same thing" as Sands, said Nick
Muzyczyka, professor at the University of Florida and scientific adviser at
Applied Genetic Technologies Corp. in Alachua, Fla. The company is conducting
two gene-therapy trials using adeno-associated viruses and has several gene
therapy treatments in development.

   Meanwhile, Dr. Valder Arruda of the University of Pennsylvania deliberately
attempted to use the virus to cause cancer in mice that were already predisposed
to the disease. But the mice remained healthy.

   While Arruda said he believes Sands' data, the technique is so complex that
the virus alone may not be the problem, noting other complicating factors, such
as the age of the animal.

   Arruda and his colleagues began treating people for hemophilia with the virus
in 2001. They have also been treating 30 dogs for hemophilia with the virus,
some for more than five years. Thus far, neither the six humans nor the dogs
have gotten cancer.

   Medical research comes with a certain amount of risk, scientists say. For
some reason, gene therapy is given less room for error, said Dr. Markus Grompe,
director of the Oregon Stem Cell Center in Portland.

   "In general we have a tendency to not accept any side effects of gene therapy
," Grompe said. "If we had that attitude we would have never figured out bone
marrow transplants; many people died in those trials. The key is how many other
options do you have."

   Gene therapy has been used to cure only one disease, an immune system
disorder called severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID. Most people know it
as "bubble boy disease." When three children in a French study developed
leukemia linked to the virus used in gene therapy, treatment was halted. Now
only children with no other alternative are given gene therapy to treat the
disease.

   The first high-profile death in a gene therapy trial happened in 1999 at the
University of Pennsylvania. A young man named Jesse Gelsinger died after his
immune system reacted badly to the virus used in the trial.

   But some people facing miserable lives and early deaths at the hands of
disease may think that taking a chance on developing cancer later is worth the
risk, said Ana Iltis, an associate professor at the Center for Health Care
Ethics at St. Louis University.

   At the very least, patients need to know exactly what risks they face before
deciding whether to go through gene therapy, she said.

   Gene therapy is a promising technology with frustrating problems, Munson
said, adding that once researchers work out the kinks, gene therapy can save
many lives.

   "I think gene therapy has such significant benefits that the problems it
faces, though complicated, shouldn't be enough to stop it," he said. "I don't
think this is the end of gene therapy at all. It's just another problem that
needs to be examined and resolved."

   amaxmen@post-dispatch.com | 314-340-8250

NOTES:  Gene therapy trials

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2007


                              477 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                              July 27, 2007 Friday
                                 Met 2 Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A12

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 375 words

HEADLINE: Patient in Gene Therapy Study Dies

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   A patient in a gene therapy experiment died on Tuesday in what may have been
a reaction to a novel treatment for arthritis, federal health officials said
late yesterday.

   The precise cause of death remains unexplained. But the event immediately
revived memories of a similar tragedy in 1999, when teenager Jesse Gelsinger
succumbed in a gene therapy test in which researchers were eventually shown to
have violated safety rules.

   That disaster was a major setback for the field, which for more than 15 years
has sought to treat diseases by giving people new genes. The only documented
successes -- in a handful of children -- were undermined when the treatment was
found to have caused cancer in some.

   Food and Drug Administration officials said they were notified by
Seattle-based Targeted Genetics last Friday that a patient had experienced a
"serious adverse event," regulatory code for a potentially life-threatening
condition. The agency immediately shut down the study pending more information.
Four days later, the patient died.

   The company said 127 people were enrolled in the trial at 20 U.S. research
centers. Treatment involves injections of viruses engineered to produce special
proteins that can suppress the inflammatory reaction that underlies arthritis.

   The company had gained FDA permission last year to increase the viral dose in
the study. The company's chief scientific officer, Barrie Carter, said he could
not release any details about the patient.

   The adeno-associated virus, or AAV, used in the experiment is different from
that used in the Gelsinger study at the University of Pennsylvania. In recent
years, AAV has gained popularity as a safer alternative to other gene-delivery
viruses, some of which can cause cancer or dangerous immune-system reactions.

   To date, about 600 people have enrolled in 29 gene therapy tests with AAV,
according to FDA records. The number of serious reactions in those studies was
not immediately available.

   Targeted Genetics previously reported that the treatment seemed safe and "may
lead to improvements" in joint swelling and tenderness. The company announced
the death late yesterday on its Web site under the headline: "Targeted Genetics
Provides Update on Inflammatory Arthritis Phase I/II Trial."

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2007


                              478 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                              July 9, 2007 Monday
                                 CITY-D Edition

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE; Inq Col Faye Flam; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1048 words

HEADLINE: Carnal Knowledge | A quick quiz to determine how keenly you're attuned
to the science of sex - and whether that's a good thing.

BYLINE: By Faye Flam; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   The past year brought us more shocking insights into the world of sex: from
the secret lives of Komodo dragons to new hope for erectile dysfunction, from
progress in the long-standing puzzle about human/Neanderthal sex to scientific
confirmation of the tricks of pickup artists.

   Have you been paying attention? Here's our second annual sex-and-science quiz
to test your Carnal Knowledge.

   1. In the course of some scientific investigations, scientists recently found
they could make heterosexual male snakes attempt to have gay sex. How did they
do it?a. They sprayed captive snakes with a recently declassified "gay bomb,"
designed by the Department of Defense to induce homosexual behavior in enemy
troops.

   b. They isolated a snake pheromone from female snakes and tested its potency
by dabbing it on males.

   c. For six months they fed the snakes soy products, including tofu and soy
milk, known to cause feminization.

   2. The recent census found that in the U.S., only 49 percent of women were
living with spouses, compared with 53 percent of men. Why do single women
outnumber single men?

   a. A recent study blamed the long-running HBO hit Sex and the City for
discouraging women from marrying.

   b. A group of women living in Arizona have taken to marrying four or more
husbands, thus leaving too few men for the rest of us.

   c. Men die earlier than women, often from accidents, homicide, suicide and
heart attacks.

   3. Tests show that women prefer the scent of a man with potentially
compatible immune genes known as the MHC complex. Which of the following
interferes with women's scent preferences?a. More than 10 hours a week of
cell-phone use.

   b. Oral contraceptives.

   c. Money. It smells good on any man.

   d. Men wearing too-short shorts and committing other serious fashion don'ts.

   4. Which of these constituted the biggest male/female differences seen on a
University of Wisconsin survey?a. Women talk more than twice as much as men.

   b. Men talk as much as women, but women are right twice as often as men.

   c. Men can throw a baseball farther, masturbate more, and are more likely to
desire sex with a total stranger.

   5. At the Chester Zoo in England, a Komodo dragon named Flora made the news
last year for what?a. Laying eggs that hatched into baby Komodo dragons, even
though she was still a virgin.

   b. Biting then-Prime Minister Tony Blair while he received a special
"behind-the-scenes" zoo tour.

   c. Escaping her enclosure for an entire night, during which she attempted to
mate with several crocodiles and an alligator named Dirty Harry.

   6. Which of these effects of eating too much soy was substantiated
scientifically?a. Soy can shrink men's penises and cause straight men to become
gay (it's also the secret ingredient in the recently declassified "gay bomb").

   b. Soy can make men's penises grow and cause gay men to become straight.

   c. Soy can reduce the incidence of several types of cancer.

   d. None of the above.

   7. When hermaphroditic sea worms meet, how do they figure out which one is
going to take on the male role and which will play the female?a. They look each
other up and down and determine that the smaller, more "feminine" one should
take the female role.

   b. A dangerous, sometimes brutal fight breaks out in which the winner acts as
the male.

   c. They compare penises and let the one with the longer member act as the
male.

   d. They take turns.

   8. Scientists recently figured out the identity of some flea-sized parasites
riding on deep-sea anglerfish. What are they?a. A sexually transmitted infection
similar to crabs in humans.

   b. Parasites that inject an aphrodisiac chemical into her bloodstream to make
her want to reproduce and create homes for more parasites.

   c. Male anglerfish, which are 500,000 times smaller than females.

   9. How do male sea urchins compete with one another for the chance to
procreate?a. They stab one another with their spines.

   b. They tell hilarious jokes in a subtle language similar to whale song.

   c. They make faster or longer-lived sperm than the next guy.

   d. They line up and attempt to show off their beauty.

   10. What new erectile-dysfunction treatment proved safe in a recent clinical
trial?a. The Atkins Diet combined with a regular cardio exercise.

   b. Three cans of Red Bull and a shot of vodka.

   c. The original Paris Hilton sex video.

   d. Gene therapy, in which doctors inject a gene called hMaxi-K directly into
the penis.

   11. Who do male chimps find most attractive?a. Young nubile female chimps -
the equivalent of 18-year-old girls.

   b. The least promiscuous females, so the males don't have to worry about
being cheated on.

   c. The most elderly females in the troop. The grandmothers and
great-grandmothers get the males crazy with lust.

   d. Other males. Chimps are notorious homosexuals.

   12. How are scientists planning to determine whether early Homo sapiens
interbred with Neanderthals?a. By sequencing the Neanderthal genome using bits
of DNA scraped from bones.

   b. By looking for fossilized condoms at Neanderthal sites and H. sapiens
sites.

   c. By looking for signs of Neanderthal skeletons in compromising positions at
H. sapiens sites.

   d. By retrieving Neanderthal DNA trapped in amber, using cloning technology
to bring some Neanderthals to life, and then setting them loose in New York's
nightclub scene.

   13. Which of the following is a tactic for picking up women recommended in
The Mystery Method and later shown to work in a psychology experiment?a. Being
picky.

   b. Driving a Porsche.

   c. Paying for multiple rounds of drinks.

   d. Making the bed.

   14. Which of the following does zoologist Robin Baker consider a real side
effect of male masturbation?a. It causes blindness.

   b. It drains energy.

   c. It can cause a permanent decrease in sperm count.

   d. It can temporarily increase fertility by cleaning out old, tired sperm to
be replaced by new, fresh ones.

   And the answers. 1. b, 2. c, 3. b, 4. c, 5. a, 6. d, 7. b, 8. c, 9. c, 10. d,
11. c, 12. a, 13. a, 14. d.

   Your score. 10-14 correct: You are either a faithful reader or extremely
science savvy, or both.

   5-9 correct: You're probably a faithful reader and very science savvy but
were tripped up by the trick questions.

   0-5 correct: Congratulations, your sex life was so great that you didn't have
time to read the paper.

   Contact columnist Faye Flam

   at 215-854-4977 or fflam@phillynews.com.


LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2007


                              479 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              July 8, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1097 words

HEADLINE: Tinkering With Humans

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SALETAN.

   William Saletan writes Slate's ''Human Nature'' column and is the author of
''Bearing Right: How Conservatives Won the Abortion War.''

BODY:

   THE CASE AGAINST

     PERFECTION

     Ethics in the Age of

     Genetic Engineering.

     By Michael J. Sandel.

     162 pp. Harvard University

     Press. $18.95.

   Three years ago in The Atlantic, the Harvard philosopher Michael Sandel wrote
a critique of genetic engineering titled ''The Case Against Perfection.'' Now he
has turned it into a book. The title is the same, but the text has changed, and
sections have been added. That's what human beings do. We try to improve things.

     Sandel worries that this urge to improve can get us into trouble. Steroids,
growth hormones, genetic engineering and other enhancements ''pose a threat to
human dignity'' and ''diminish our humanity,'' he argues. That's the way
ethicists talk: things are good or bad, human or inhuman. The book's subtitle
encapsulates this project: ''Ethics in the Age of Genetic Engineering.'' But
genetic engineering is too big for ethics. It changes human nature, and with it,
our notions of good and bad. It even changes our notions of perfection. The
problem with perfection in the age of self-transformation isn't that it's bad.
The problem is that it's incoherent.

     Sandel's critique is refreshingly sophisticated. Opponents of eugenic
technologies usually complain that they're unsafe, coercive, exploitative,
nontherapeutic or unavailable to the poor. Sandel rebuts these objections,
pointing out that they're selectively applied and can be technically resolved.
His deeper worry is that some kinds of enhancement violate the norms embedded in
human practices. Baseball, for example, is supposed to develop and celebrate an
array of talents. Steroids warp the game. Parents are supposed to cultivate
children through unconditional as well as conditional love. Selecting a baby's
sex betrays that relationship.

     How do we know these norms exist? Because when they're violated, something
in us rebels. When parents choose their children's sex, we recoil. When baseball
players use steroids, we frown. We, the audience, embody and express the norm.

     But audiences, too, can change. Look what happened to Broadway musicals.
Thanks to sound amplification, ''audiences inevitably grew less alert, more
passive,'' Sandel observes. Musicals became less verbally clever, but we no
longer cared. We were ''rehabituated.'' Sandel laments this, but it's not clear
why. If everything has changed -- the practice, the audience, the norms -- what
basis for complaint remains?

     When norms change, you can always find old fogeys who grouse that things
aren't the way they used to be. In the case of football, Sandel finds a retired
N.F.L. player to support his contention that today's bulked-up linemen are
''degrading to the game'' and to players' ''dignity.'' But eventually, the old
fogeys die out, and the new norms solidify. Sandel recalls a scene from the
movie ''Chariots of Fire,'' set in the years before the 1924 Olympics, in which
a runner was rebuked for using a coach. Supposedly, this violated the spirit of
amateur competition. Today, nobody blinks at running coaches. The standpoint
from which people used to find them unseemly is gone.

     To defend the old ways against the new, Sandel needs something deeper: a
common foundation for the various norms in sports, arts and parenting. He thinks
he has found it in the idea of giftedness. To some degree, being a good parent,
athlete or performer is about accepting and cherishing the raw material you've
been given to work with. Strengthen your body, but respect it. Challenge your
child, but love her. Celebrate nature. Don't try to control everything.

     Why should we accept our lot as a gift? Because the loss of such reverence
would change our moral landscape. ''If genetic engineering enabled us to
override the results of the genetic lottery,'' Sandel worries, we might lose
''our capacity to see ourselves as sharing a common fate.'' Moreover, ''if
bioengineering made the myth of the 'self-made man' come true, it would be
difficult to view our talents as gifts for which we are indebted rather than
achievements for which we are responsible.''

     Well, yes. In such a world, it would be hard to see ourselves as slaves to
the genetic lottery or to a common fate because that perception would no longer
be true. But why defend a perception against a truth? It's a particularly
awkward posture for a philosopher like Sandel, who infers norms and virtues from
the way people live. Once gene therapy becomes routine, the case against genetic
engineering will sound as quaint as the case against running coaches.

     If the genetic lottery were better than the self-made man, we might prefer
the old truth to the new one. But Sandel's egalitarian fatalism already feels a
bit 20th-century. The older half of me shares his dismay that some parents feel
blamed for carrying babies with Down syndrome to term. But my younger half
cringes at his flight from the ''burden of decision'' and ''explosion of
responsibility'' that come with our expanding genetic power. Given a choice
between a world of fate and blamelessness and a world of freedom and
responsibility, I'll take the latter. Such a world may be, as Sandel says, too
daunting for the humans of today. But not for the humans of tomorrow.

     Sandel thinks this vision of freedom is flawed. Part of freedom, he argues,
''consists in a persisting negotiation with the given.'' To abolish the given by
re-engineering not only our world but also ourselves would ''leave us with
nothing to affirm or behold outside our own will.'' This is a profound insight.
But it's not fatal to freedom. It's fatal to perfection.

     In a world without givens, a world controlled by bioengineering, we would
dictate our nature as well as our practices and norms. We would gain
unprecedented power to redefine the good. In so doing, we would strip perfection
of its independence. Its meaning would evolve as our nature and our ideals
evolved. The more successfully we engineered I.Q. and muscle-to-fat ratio, the
more central these measures would become to our idea of perfection. We already
see this phenomenon in our shift of educational emphasis from character to
academic testing. We might create a world of perfect SATs, E.R.A.'s and
C.E.O.'s. But it would never be a perfect world, because the point of perfection
is that its definition doesn't bend to our will.

     This is the real problem with self-engineering. It seizes control of
humanity so radically that humanity can no longer judge it. We can't be certain
it's diminishing us. But we can't be certain it's perfecting us, either. Sandel
got it half right, which ain't bad. Nobody's perfect.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing: (Drawing by Daniel Horowitz)

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2007


                              480 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                             July 5, 2007 Thursday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E08

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 1543 words

HEADLINE: To China For a U.S. Cancer Drug?;
Researchers Say Gene Treatment Was Stolen and Rushed to Market

BYLINE: Ariana Eunjung Cha; Washington Post Foreign Service

DATELINE: BEIJING

BODY:

   Every few days, Houston businessman Richard Weissenborn receives injections
of a radical new cancer drug at a hospital here.

   The treatment aims to check his head and neck cancers by replacing mutant
genes with good copies. The treatment is still experimental in the United
States, but in China, it was approved for marketing after a few years of
testing.

   The Chinese scientists behind the drug, Gendicine, see it as a milestone in
the country's efforts to catch up with the West, proof that China can develop
some of the world's most advanced medicine.

   But a company in the United States says the Chinese drug is basically stolen
property, rushed to market with inadequate testing and in violation of patent
rights.

   The dispute is the latest clash between the two countries in the broad field
known as intellectual property. China in recent decades has prospered largely
because of a talent for copying. The country duplicates goods others created but
figures out how to make them more cheaply.

   For years, that tactic focused on items like watches, purses and DVDs. But
increasingly, China is moving up the value chain, copying such high-value goods
and services as architectural techniques, cars and drugs.

   The dispute over the gene-therapy drug is especially revealing in that
scientific innovation is a pillar of American business. If other countries can
learn to beat the United States to market with drugs and other technologically
advanced goods, that could spell economic trouble in America.

   According to Peng Zhaohui, founder of SiBiono GeneTech, which created the
gene-therapy cancer drug and put it on the market in the breakneck span of seven
years, the treatment is the latest accomplishment of Chinese genetic
engineering, built on information publicly available in medical literature.

   American scientists tell a different story.

   David Nance, chief executive of Introgen Therapeutics of Austin, said
SiBiono's drug is the same one that he and an American colleague developed 15
years ago. He said that while Introgen's drug was making its way past U.S.
research hurdles, SiBiono stole the technology and rushed it to market, thereby
infringing on Introgen's patents.

   Introgen says it holds 258 worldwide patents, four of them in China. No
lawsuit has been filed. Nance declined to comment about specific patents or to
describe the company's Chinese patent position in detail, citing possible future
litigation.

   Peng, a former University of California at Los Angeles medical researcher,
denies that his company is infringing on any patents held by Nance's company.

   "In the West, there are still people who are suspicious about this first
gene-therapy product and have doubts about its origins and clinical practices.
But after 50 years of fighting cancer, humans haven't had any obvious
advancement in treatment other than this," Peng said.

   "It is absolutely untrue that our drugs are the same," Peng added. "There's a
huge difference -- the only thing that is the same is the name" of the
cancer-related gene the two companies target with their therapies.

   Meanwhile, the drug is beginning to transform the way cancer patients are
treated in China, offering an alternative to traditional treatments with harsh
side effects, such as surgery and chemotherapy. As of last month, more than
5,000 patients had been treated with the drug.

   Weissenborn, 64, has traveled to Beijing three times to receive the Chinese
gene-therapy treatment. He's a believer in the drug and is angry it is not
available in the United States.

   "If I died today, I have already prolonged my life and have a quality of life
that I could not have with any other cancer treatment," he said.

   Outside China, gene therapy is considered a provocative and important theory,
but efforts to develop treatments using it have been troubled.

   Many diseases, cancer included, arise when genes develop mutations that warp
their normal function. Perhaps half of all cancers include abnormal copies of a
crucial gene known as p53, the body's "guardian gene." It plays a central role
in detecting abnormal growth and ordering cells undergoing it to commit suicide.
When p53 itself becomes disabled by mutations, though, cells can more easily
turn cancerous.

   Various approaches are being developed to exploit this knowledge to battle
cancer. One is to use gene therapy to insert normal copies of the p53 gene into
cancer cells.

   But it has turned out to be difficult, in practice, to get functioning genes
into cells from outside the body. Research in the United States slowed down
temporarily in 1999 when a teenage patient at the University of Pennsylvania
died in a poorly run gene-therapy trial and then again when three children in
France were stricken with a leukemia-like condition after receiving experimental
treatments.

   Jack A. Roth, head of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery at the M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center at the University of Texas at Houston, helped pioneer the
technology that both Introgen and SiBiono use. He said the Food and Drug
Administration has been reviewing this type of gene therapy for more than seven
years.

   "The approval process is a frustrating business. It's not only very slow but
unpredictable," said Roth, who helped found Introgen.

   Introgen's Nance said the company may apply for FDA approval to market a
gene-therapy cancer treatment as early as the end of this year. Like Peng, he
cautioned against too much optimism about the drug.

   "We don't promise a cure," Nance said. "It's different in every patient --
some respond and get rid of their cancer, and some respond to a degree. Some
patients just don't respond at all."

   Even as Western researchers proceeded slowly because of problems in
gene-therapy trials, SiBiono plowed ahead in China. The company's studies, most
of them published only in Chinese medical literature, showed significant
benefits, if not cures, from the p53 treatment. But skeptics said it was unclear
whether initial results, such as tumor shrinkage, would lead to longer life for
patients. Other researchers have said the initial trials had too few patients,
fewer than 200.

   Savio Woo, chairman of gene and cell medicine at the Mount Sinai School of
Medicine in New York, has visited SiBiono's scientists in the southern city of
Shenzhen. He said the company's work superficially "looks spic and span; on
paper it looks fine." But Woo said he remains concerned because raw data for the
trial had not been shared. "No one knows how clinical trials are done in China,"
he said. "Do they have quality control?"

   Indeed, a broad scandal regarding food and drug safety has been unfolding in
China in recent years, and the former head of China's drug-regulatory agency --
the same agency that approved Gendicine for marketing -- was sentenced to death
recently for taking bribes.

   By the time most patients arrive at the Beijing-Haidian Hospital Gene Therapy
Center, the only one that accepts foreigners, they've exhausted other
treatments.

   Weissenborn had been told the only way to get rid of the cancer in his throat
was radical surgery that would carve off part of his face. Arve Johnsen, 34, a
fisherman from Oslo with brain cancer, was told he had a 3 percent chance of
surviving the next five years. Deborah Weatherby-Falk, a nurse from Vancouver,
had a recurrent tumor between her left eye and nose, a tricky place to operate.

   Weatherby-Falk, an intensive-care nurse, read every medical journal article
about the treatment she could get her hands on before she got on the plane.

   "I understand the criticisms," Weatherby-Falk said. "I came despite them."

   A handful of foreign patients, fewer than 100, get the injections shipped via
courier to their homes. Most seek treatment from the Haidian clinic's director,
Li Dinggang, a former Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine researcher. So
far, more than 310 foreigners and 550 Chinese nationals have been treated with
the gene-therapy drug here.

   Li combines gene therapy with traditional treatments like surgery,
chemotherapy and radiation along with Chinese herbal remedies. He estimates that
about 70 percent of his patients obtain positive results but warns that no one
knows why some patients benefit and others don't.

   "I have to tell patients the truth," Li said. "Their cancer condition is very
late. In this condition, they can come to China, but no one can guarantee
anything."

   Since the treatment is still considered experimental in most places,
insurance won't cover it. Patients must wire a $10,000 cash deposit, to be
applied against the $20,000 cost of a two-month course of treatment, before they
set foot in the clinic.

   Weissenborn first arrived last fall, when his cancer had spread from his
tongue to his throat and lymph nodes. He had trouble swallowing and was losing
weight. He considered suicide and alternative treatments from Mexico. "I would
believe a witch doctor if he said he could help me at that time," Weissenborn
said.

   A broker that specializes in matching cancer patients with experimental
treatments led him to Li's clinic. Doctors reading medical scans told him that
after two courses of treatment, his cancer had disappeared.

   He came back in March for a checkup, though, and the doctors told him his
cancer had returned.

   Researcher Richard Drezen in New York contributed to this report.

GRAPHIC: IMAGE; Istock
IMAGE; By Ariana Eunjung Cha -- The Washington Post; Li Dinggang, director of
the Beijing-Haidian Hospital's Gene Therapy Center, checks on patient Richard
Weissenborn of Houston.
IMAGE; Photos By Ariana Eunjung Cha -- The Washington Post; Deborah
Weatherby-Falk of Vancouver is treated by a Chinese nurse. "I understand the
criticisms," Weatherby-Falk said. "I came despite them." At right, Richard
Weissenborn checks a clear PET scan from January, after treatment in Beijing
with the drug Gendicine; later, his cancer returned.
IMAGE; Photos By Ariana Eunjung Cha -- The Washington Post; Deborah
Weatherby-Falk of Vancouver is treated by a Chinese nurse. "I understand the
criticisms," Weatherby-Falk said. "I came despite them." At right, Richard
Weissenborn checks a clear PET scan from January, after treatment in Beijing
with the drug Gendicine; later, his cancer returned.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2007


                              481 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                              June 29, 2007 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 66

LENGTH: 425  words

HEADLINE: Tribune science writer won Pulitzer in 1987

BYLINE: Art Golab, The Chicago Sun-Times

BODY:

   PETER GORNER

   Often when Chicago Tribune science writer Peter Gorner was at home
researching a story, he would turn down invitations to go out to social events.
Looking up from an organic chemistry book he was studying, he would say to his
wife, "Don't you know I've got 3 million readers I'm responsible to?"

   The hard work and study paid off in a Pulitzer Prize for explanatory
journalism in 1987 for a series Mr. Gorner wrote with Jeff Lyon on the promises
of gene therapy.

   Mr. Gorner, 64, died Wednesday of lung cancer at Northwestern Memorial
Hospital.

   "Peter was a beautiful writer and a very gifted thinker," said Ann Marie
Lipinski, senior vice president and editor of the Tribune.

   Lipinski first met Mr. Gorner when she was a summer intern in 1978. He was
"an established superstar but was as kind and generous with advice for me as
with more-senior colleagues," she said.

   Mr. Gorner also shared his wisdom with students at Columbia College, where he
taught science writing for more than a decade.

   "I saw the impact he had on students, and they walked taller after leaving
his class," said Rose Economou, a professor of broadcast journalism at Columbia.

   "He gave them the tools not only to be a great journalist, but a responsible
journalist."

   Though a self-taught expert in astronomy, genetic science, archeology and
other scientific fields, Mr. Gorner's initial interest was in music. His father,
a pianist on network radio shows, discouraged him, saying, "You gotta make a
living, kid," according to his wife, Jacqueline.

   Still, though Mr. Gorner studied journalism and speech at the University of
Missouri and Northwestern, he also found time to study clarinet and saxophone
with world-class teachers.

   Starting at the Tribune in 1965, Mr. Gorner made his initial reputation as a
classical music writer and critic. He took a year off to study classical music
after being sponsored for a Rockefeller Foundation Grant by Chicago Sun-Times
music critic Robert C. Marsh.

   But by the early 1970s, after being given a general interest column called
FYI, he began to indulge his passion for science. "He loved dinosaurs, he loved
astronomy, he was always interested in science; now he had an outlet where he
could talk to people about these things," his wife said.

   Other survivors include two sons, Jeremy, a Tribune reporter, and Peter
David, and his mother, Virginia.

   Visitation will be from 1:30 to 2 p.m. Monday at Weinstein Funeral Homes, 111
Skokie Blvd., Wilmette, followed by a funeral service. Burial will be in
Memorial Park, 9900 Gross Point Rd., Skokie.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2007


                              482 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                              June 24, 2007 Sunday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NORTHWEST; Pg. Reg1

LENGTH: 855 words

HEADLINE: Drug firm eyes expansion - Shire seeks tax breaks from state and town

BYLINE: Melissa Beecher Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   GLOBE NORTHWEST 1 / LEXINGTON

   An international pharmaceutical company is eyeing Lexington as its new center
of operations for genetic therapies, promising hundreds of high-paying jobs and
a $394 million investment over the next four years.

   But Shire Pharmaceuticals is not looking to shoulder the burden of expansion
alone. Representatives for the drug firm have their sights set on a
multimillion-dollar tax benefit package from Beacon Hill and a tax increment
financing, or TIF, agreement from the town.

   It would be the first time such a deal would be granted in Lexington, and
local officials are carefully weighing their options.

   Shire representatives presented the ambitious plan to the Lexington Board of
Selectmen last week.

   The publicly traded company, founded in the United Kingdom in 1986,
researches and manufactures drugs across the globe. The division of Shire that
is looking to expand to Lexington is Human Genetic Therapies, which researches
treatments of rare genetic diseases. Specifically, the Lexington plant would
produce at least two drugs: Elaprase, which treats Hunter syndrome, and
Replagal, which is used to treat Fabry disease.

   Shire currently has four sites in Cambridge, but is quickly outgrowing those
locations, said Matthew Cabrey, spokesman for Shire.

   Cabrey said although Shire considered four states for an expansion site,
Lexington is ideal, given the current industrial park configuration, the town's
educated workforce, and proximity to routes 2 and 128.

   "We are in the latter stages of our due diligence process and really zeroing
in on Lexington," said Cabrey. "After conversations with local and state
officials, we feel that negotiations are headed in the right direction. Shire is
proud to call Massachusetts home and we expect to continue to call Massachusetts
home."

   The company already leases one building in the Lexington Technology Park, 125
Spring St., which is part of the former Raytheon and Nitromed facility. If tax
incentives are approved, Shire would build two more buildings totaling 370,000
square feet in the park. The company would keep its Alewife manufacturing site
in Cambridge as a backup for drug production and sublease its three other
Cambridge sites.

   The usual concerns about noise, traffic, and zoning should not be issues
given the site is in an industrial park off two highways, according to Cabrey.
Trucking traffic would also be at a minimum because medicines are manufactured
in bulk and finished elsewhere.

   "We see this expansion as a tremendous opportunity for Shire, Lexington, and
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to establish a long-term partnership," said
Cabrey.

   Pat Sacco, the company's facilities and engineering operations manager,
estimates the expansion could mean the creation of 680 new full-time jobs in
Lexington by 2015, while keeping the 550 existing full-time in Cambridge.
Average salary, Sacco said, would be around $100,000.

   Shire projects it will spend $250 million to modify existing and construct
new buildings, and $144 million on capital equipment, property infrastructure,
and building mechanical systems.

   The new buildings could take advantage of a TIF agreement, which gives tax
breaks for redevelopment of an area. In order to be eligible for such an
agreement, businesses must add jobs to the Massachusetts economy and build new
facilities that increase the value of the space to the town.

   Town Manager Carl Valente said Lexington has already initiated the
application process for a TIF pact with the state, but ultimately it will be
Town Meeting that decides whether Shire will be given a break at the local
level. Valente said town officials worry that if they give the TIF to Shire,
other businesses will demand it. They also hope that another business may be
interested in the site and not require a tax break, Valente said.

   "Our goal has been to build the commercial tax base, but the question is if
we need a TIF to be competitive with a Bedford, Burlington, or Waltham. We need
to ask the question if we need a TIF to encourage business to come to
Lexington," said Valente. "This decision will set a precedent, and it needs to
be weighed carefully."

   On the state level, Shire officials say they are interested in taking up
Governor Deval Patrick on his proposal to invest $1 billion in Massachusetts
Life Science Initiative, which would bring more biotech jobs to the state. Shire
is also seeking funding through the Massachusetts Opportunity Relocation and
Expansion Programs and the Massachusetts Economic Develop Incentive Program.

   Jeanne Krieger, chairwoman of the Lexington Board of Selectmen, told the
Shire representatives Monday night that she is confident a deal could be reached
that would benefit all parties.

   "We would very much like to reduce the dependency on residential property
tax," said Krieger. "This is a partnership we would very much like to pursue."

   Lexington officials expect to reach a decision by the end of the summer as to
whether a TIF agreement should be awarded to Shire.

   Company officials said they hope to have an agreement with state leaders in a
month.

   Melissa Beecher can be reached at mbeecher@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2007


                              483 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                              June 24, 2007 Sunday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NORTHWEST; Pg. Reg3

LENGTH: 369 words

HEADLINE: Drug company eyes expansion to Lexington Shire seeks tax breaks from
state and town LEXINGTON

BYLINE: Melissa Beecher Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   GLOBE WEST 2

   An international pharmaceutical company is eyeing Lexington as its new center
of operations for genetic therapies, promising hundreds of high-paying jobs and
a $394 million investment over the next four years.

   But Shire Pharmaceuticals is not looking to shoulder the burden of expansion
alone. Its representatives have their sights set on a multimillion-dollar tax
benefit package from Beacon Hill and a tax increment financing, or TIF,
agreement from the town.

   It would be the first time such a deal would be granted in Lexington, and
local officials are carefully weighing their options.

   Shire representatives presented the ambitious plan to the Lexington selectmen
last week.

   The publicly traded company researches and manufactures drugs across the
globe. The division of Shire that is looking to expand to Lexington is Human
Genetic Therapies, which researches treatments of rare genetic diseases. The
Lexington plant would produce at least two drugs: Elaprase, which treats Hunter
syndrome, and Replagal, which is used to treat Fabry disease.

   Shire currently has four sites in Cambridge, but is quickly outgrowing those
locations, said Matthew Cabrey, spokesman for Shire.

   The company already leases one building in the Lexington Technology Park, 125
Spring St., which is part of the former Raytheon and Nitromed facility. If tax
incentives are approved, Shire would build two more buildings totaling 370,000
square feet in the park. The company would keep its Alewife manufacturing site
in Cambridge as a backup for drug production and sublease its three other
Cambridge sites.

   Pat Sacco, the company's facilities and engineering operations manager,
estimates the expansion could mean the creation of 680 new full-time jobs in
Lexington by 2015, while keeping the 550 existing full-time in Cambridge.
Average salary, Sacco said, would be around $100,000.

   Shire projects it will spend $250 million to modify existing and construct
new buildings, and $144 million on capital equipment, property infrastructure,
and building mechanical systems.

   The new buildings could take advantage of a TIF agreement, which gives tax
breaks for redevelopment of an area.

   Melissa Beecher can be reached at mbeecher@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2007


                              484 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                              June 24, 2007 Sunday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NORTHWEST; Pg. Reg3

LENGTH: 369 words

HEADLINE: Drug company eyes expansion to Lexington Shire seeks tax breaks from
state and town LEXINGTON

BYLINE: Melissa Beecher Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   GLOBE WEST 3

   An international pharmaceutical company is eyeing Lexington as its new center
of operations for genetic therapies, promising hundreds of high-paying jobs and
a $394 million investment over the next four years.

   But Shire Pharmaceuticals is not looking to shoulder the burden of expansion
alone. Its representatives have their sights set on a multimillion-dollar tax
benefit package from Beacon Hill and a tax increment financing, or TIF,
agreement from the town.

   It would be the first time such a deal would be granted in Lexington, and
local officials are carefully weighing their options.

   Shire representatives presented the ambitious plan to the Lexington selectmen
last week.

   The publicly traded company researches and manufactures drugs across the
globe. The division of Shire that is looking to expand to Lexington is Human
Genetic Therapies, which researches treatments of rare genetic diseases. The
Lexington plant would produce at least two drugs: Elaprase, which treats Hunter
syndrome, and Replagal, which is used to treat Fabry disease.

   Shire currently has four sites in Cambridge, but is quickly outgrowing those
locations, said Matthew Cabrey, spokesman for Shire.

   The company already leases one building in the Lexington Technology Park, 125
Spring St., which is part of the former Raytheon and Nitromed facility. If tax
incentives are approved, Shire would build two more buildings totaling 370,000
square feet in the park. The company would keep its Alewife manufacturing site
in Cambridge as a backup for drug production and sublease its three other
Cambridge sites.

   Pat Sacco, the company's facilities and engineering operations manager,
estimates the expansion could mean the creation of 680 new full-time jobs in
Lexington by 2015, while keeping the 550 existing full-time in Cambridge.
Average salary, Sacco said, would be around $100,000.

   Shire projects it will spend $250 million to modify existing and construct
new buildings, and $144 million on capital equipment, property infrastructure,
and building mechanical systems.

   The new buildings could take advantage of a TIF agreement, which gives tax
breaks for redevelopment of an area.

   Melissa Beecher can be reached at mbeecher@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2007


                              485 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                              June 24, 2007 Sunday
                               FIVE STAR EDITION

SECTION: ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT; MAGNIFY: MAGAZINE REVIEW; Pg. F-4

LENGTH: 182 words

HEADLINE: MENTAL_FLOSS KEEPS BRAIN HEALTHY

BYLINE: Sharon Eberson

BODY:

   I pass this along from the May-June 2007 issue of mental_floss, the magazine
"where knowledge junkies go to get their fix."

   The mag offers an "easy" five-step program on how to become a superhero:

   1. Tommy John Surgery: Think the "Six-Million Dollar Man or Woman."

   2. Hyaluronan Injections: Achieve Gumby-like flexibility.

   3. Hearwear: "Hear all evil" with devices designed for the "Future of
Hearing" exhibition in London.

   4. Gene Therapy: If you're not born an X-person, this is "one of the more
popular (and creepier) ways people are looking to achieve super strength."

   5. Brain Implants: Cyberkinetics Neuro technology, an American company, has
successfully tested an aspirin-sized, implantable brain computer.

   For the writers out there, this month's issue has Tom Wolfe declaring "four
things a story had to have to be considered part of the revolution" of New
Journalism (dialogue and fiction-like attention to detail are two.)

   If you love lists, quizzes and potential party conversation -- or just want
to know why the Dalai Lama loves his Doc Martens -- you'll find that and more in
mental_floss.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: No Caption

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2007


                              486 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                             June 23, 2007 Saturday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 500 words

HEADLINE: WEEKLY REVIEW

BYLINE: Compiled by Dan Kincaid from reports by The Republic and wire services.

BODY:

   Here's a recap of recent health and science news.

   BIRTH CENTER CLOSING: The Bethany Birth Center, where women have natural
childbirth in Phoenix amid a homey environment, is closing June 30.

   The center, 3660 W. Bethany Home Road, opened in 1993 and has handled more
than 2,000 deliveries.

   But mounting malpractice insurance premiums and a dwindling number of
midwives on staff led to the decision to close, said Dr. Scott Schapker, whose
father, Dr. Alan Schapker, started the center and the companion Bethany Women's
Healthcare practice. The practice will remain open, providing obstetric and
gynecological care.

   Malpractice insurance just for the birth center is about $200,000 a year,
according to the center's office manager.

   WEST NILE CASE: A West Valley man has tested positive for the West Nile
virus, the first human case of the mosquito-borne illness in Arizona this year,
health officials announced Thursday.

   The 60-year-old was released from a Valley hospital and is recovering.

   Mosquitoes in Chandler, Phoenix, Avondale, and in Coconino, Yuma and Yavapai
counties also have tested positive for the virus.

   UNDER ARIZONA: A sheet of molten rock roughly 10 miles thick spreads
underneath much of the American Southwest, about 250 miles below Tucson. From
the surface, you can't see it, smell it or feel it.

   But Arizona geophysicists Daniel Toffelmier and James Tyburczy detected the
molten layer with a comparatively new and overlooked technique for exploring the
deep Earth that uses magnetic eruptions on the sun. Their findings were
presented in Thursday's issue of the journal Nature.

   PARKINSON'S RESEARCH: An experimental treatment for Parkinson's disease
seemed to improve symptoms -- dramatically so, for one 59-year-old man --
without causing side effects in an early study of a dozen patients.

   The gene therapy treatment involved slipping billions of copies of a gene
into the brain to calm overactive brain circuitry. The small study focused on
testing the safety of the procedure rather than its effectiveness. The results
were reported in this week's issue of the British medical journal Lancet.

   HORMONE UPDATE: Five years after a landmark study scared millions of women
off hormones for menopause symptoms, new research suggests the pills may offer
some heart benefits for certain younger women who start taking them in their
50s.

   Women who took estrogen suffered less hardening of the arteries than those
who took dummy pills, researchers reported in Thursday's New England Journal of
Medicine.

   It was the latest study in recent months to suggest that women who take
hormones at the start of menopause seem to gain some health benefits beyond
relief from hot flashes. That is in sharp contrast to women who raise their
health risks when they take hormones in their 60s and 70s.

   In general, experts' advice hasn't changed: Use hormones only as needed to
treat hot flashes, sleeplessness and other symptoms at the start of menopause.
And use the lowest possible dose for the shortest possible time.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2007


                              487 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                              June 22, 2007 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 214  words

HEADLINE: Preliminary study promising for Parkinson's sufferers

BYLINE: Malcolm Ritter, Associated Press

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   NEW YORK -- An experimental treatment for Parkinson's disease seemed to
improve symptoms without causing side effects in a study of a dozen patients.

   The gene therapy treatment involved slipping billions of copies of a gene
into the brain to calm overactive brain circuitry.

   The small study focused on testing the safety of the procedure rather than
its effectiveness, and experts cautioned it's too soon to draw conclusions about
how well it works. But they called the results promising.

   ''We still have quite a bit more testing to do,'' said Dr. Michael Kaplitt of
Weill Cornell Medical College in New York, an author of the study.

   Kaplitt and collaborators report their results in this week's issue of the
British medical journal The Lancet.

   They're not alone in trying gene therapy for Parkinson's. In April, another
team told a medical meeting that its experiments, which delivered a different
kind of gene to a different part of the brain, also appeared safe and gave a
preliminary hint of benefit.

   Kaplitt, who has a financial interest in Neurologix Inc., which paid for the
research, noted that the 12 patients in the study still have Parkinson's
symptoms. The amount of medication they were already taking for their symptoms
didn't change significantly in the year after the surgery.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2007


                              488 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 The Columbus Dispatch
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                              June 22, 2007 Friday
                               Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 946 words

HEADLINE: OSU SCIENTIST'S GENE THERAPY;
Technique may aid Parkinson's patients;
Small study showed improved muscle function

BYLINE: Mike Lafferty, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   Parkinson's patients showed remarkable improvement after undergoing gene
therapy delivered to their brains through a virus, according to a new study.

   The technique was pioneered by an Ohio State University scientist and
described in the current issue of the British medical journal The Lancet.

   Patients in the small study improved an average of 25 percent to 30 percent
in muscle function. And some patients improved by as much as 65 percent.

   Parkinson's, a chronic, progressive disease, affects about 1 million
Americans, causing muscle tremors of the hands, arms, legs and jaw. The disease
affects speech as well as balance and stability.

   Parkinson's disease occurs when a person no longer produces certain
neurotransmitters such as dopamine. In patients, one gene in particular, called
GAD, fails to promote the manufacture of a neurotransmitter chemical called
GABA, which helps keep neurons from firing too much, causing tremors.

   Gene therapy involves replacing the broken gene with functioning copies that
program cells to make whatever protein or other body chemical is needed.

   "It's like a car without brake fluid. This area of the brain goes out of
control. We're putting the brake fluid back in," said Dr. Matthew During, a
molecular biologist and cancer geneticist at Ohio State and lead author of the
paper.

   If further tests are successful, During said, the technique could be in use
by 2010 to treat a variety of neurological diseases, including Alzheimer's,
Huntington's disease, Lou Gehrig's and depression.

   "We're even considering obesity," During said.

   Jack Warner, a 69-year-old Whitehall resident who hosts an East Side
Parkinson's support group, said the disease causes rigidity and shaking.

   "I've fallen a couple of times and busted my butt real good," he said.

   Medication has helped, Warner said, but the disease is beginning to affect
his driving.

   During and Dr. Michael Kaplitt, of the Weill Cornell Medical College,
developed the technique to deliver the genes using a harmless variety of virus.
The technique is now widely used.

   Genetic material is inserted into a virus, which is used like a Trojan horse
to get into cells. Once inside, the genes replicate.

   In this case, the virus contains the GAD gene.

   Kaplitt performed the study at New York Presbyterian Hospital from 2003 to
2005. The therapy was performed on 12 patients who were 50 to 67 years old and
had Parkinson's for at least five years.

   Each patient received between 3.5 billion and 35 billion virus particles in a
small area on one side of the brain.

   Improvement began after about three months and has continued, During said.
One male patient now rides a bicycle.

   In future trials, genes will be placed in both sides of the brain. During
said he expects improvement to be even more dramatic.

   Some of the trials might take place at Ohio State, he said.

   Dr. Fredy J. Revilla, a neurologist at the University of Cincinnati Medical
Center, said the initial study showed the technique is safe.

   "It's interesting that there was some improvement in symptoms. However, these
results have to be taken with caution because there was no control group," he
said.

   "It's a procedure that could have a lot of potential but first there has to
be larger study with a control group."

   Progress can't come too soon for Ed Nies, of Loveland, Ohio.

   "When the drugs are working, good people don't realize I have Parkinson's,"
he said.

   But Nies worries about the future and whether he will end up in a wheelchair.
Gene therapy, he said, offers hope to speed scientific progress that seems
agonizingly slow.

   mlafferty@dispatch.com

   Box Story: About Parkinson's disease

   What is it?

   Parkinson's belongs to a group of conditions called movement disorders. It is
chronic and progressive, meaning its symptoms grow worse and last over time.
Some of the common symptoms of Parkinson's are tremors of the hands, arms, legs
or jaw; rigidity or stiffness of the limbs and trunk; slowness of movement; and
postural instability or impaired balance and coordination.

   How many people have it?

   As many as 1 million Americans have Parkinson's. Doctors diagnose Parkinson's
in about 40,000 Americans each year, and thousands more cases go undetected.
Incidence of Parkinson's increases with age, but an estimated 15 percent of
cases are diagnosed before a patient is 50.

   What are the causes?

   As is the case with many neurological disorders, the cause of Parkinson's is
not known.

   Is it inherited?

   Although the vast majority of Parkinson's cases are not directly inherited,
researchers have discovered several genes that can cause the disease in a small
number of families.

   What happens?

   Parkinson's occurs when a group of cells, in an area of the brain called the
substantia nigra, begin to malfunction and eventually die. These cells produce a
chemical called dopamine, which is a neurotransmitter, or chemical messenger,
that regulates the activity of parts of the brain that control movement
initiation and coordination. When Parkinson's occurs, these cells begin to die
at a faster rate and the amount of dopamine produced in the brain decreases,
leaving a person unable to control movement normally.

   How is it treated?

   There is no known cure for Parkinson's. Physicians treat it with medications
that treat the symptoms of the disease. Surgical options, such as deep brain
stimulation, might help alleviate a person's symptoms if and when they stop
responding favorably to medication.

   Is it fatal?

   Parkinson's is a progressive disorder, and although it is not considered to
be fatal, symptoms do worsen over time and make life difficult.

   For more information, go to the Parkinson's Disease Foundation Web site at
www.pdf.org.

   Source: Parkinson's Disease Foundation

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2007


                              489 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2007 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                              June 22, 2007 Friday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 186 words

HEADLINE: PROMISING TOOL VS. PARKINSON'S

BYLINE: BY JORDAN LITE DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER With News Wire Services

BODY:

   GIVING SOME HOPE to people with Parkinson's disease, a study published today
showed an aggressive experimental treatment improved patients' symptoms - in one
case, dramatically.

   The small safety trial showed that the gene therapy injected into 12
patients' brains caused no major side effects, scientists reported in the
journal The Lancet.

   But although the trial wasn't meant to test for effectiveness, it
demonstrated improvement up to a year later in Parkinson's symptoms such as
tremors, stiffness and freezing, said study author Dr. Michael Kaplitt of New
York-Presbyterian Hospital Weill Cornell.

   "I'm elated," said Nathan Klein, 59, of Port Washington, L.I., who said his
symptoms are infrequent but that he continues to take drugs for the disease.
"It's unbelievable."

   Kaplitt, who treats many people by inserting a deep-brain stimulator into
patients' heads, said the gene therapy increases production of the chemical
GABA, which affects movement.

   Larger trials are needed to determine whether the treatment is effective, and
for which patients it could work best, Kaplitt and other doctors said.

   jlite@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2007


                              490 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                              June 22, 2007 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A News; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 679 words

HEADLINE: Promise in Parkinson's test;
Surgical delivery of genetic matter to brain reduces disease symptoms

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER, Staff, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

BODY:

   Scientists surgically introduced a gene directly into the brains of a small
group of people with advanced Parkinson's disease, obtaining significant
improvement in symptoms and opening the door to future gene therapy treatments
for Parkinson's and other neurological disorders.

    The experiment involved drilling into the brains of 12 people and delivering
a fluid containing a gene for an enzyme that controls levels of a brain chemical
cells use to communicate with each other.

    While the small experiment is far from providing proof of a new treatment
for the disease, the fact that it was done safely helps pave the way for other
trials using either gene therapy or stem cells to treat Parkinson's and other
brain diseases, said Clive Svendsen, a University of Wisconsin-Madison
neuroscientist who was not part of the study.

    "This is proof of concept," Svendsen said. "It is helpful for everybody in
the field. It is looking very encouraging."

    Gene therapy and related trials for brain disorders such as Parkinson's are
on the rise, said Svendsen, who is testing genetically engineered stem cells on
animals.

    He noted that another unpublished gene therapy trial for Parkinson's also
has found that the approach was safe, at least initially.

    The new work was published today in the British medical journal The Lancet.

    For the new study, researchers genetically engineered the non-infectious
adeno-associated virus and infused it into the brains of the patients. The gene
that had been added to the virus increases levels of the enzyme glutamic acid
decarboxylase, which, in turn, helps control levels of the neurotransmitter
known as GABA.

    In people with Parkinson's, GABA levels are reduced in the brain region
known as the subthalamic nucleus, resulting in too much brain cell activity
there. GABA helps turn down the overactivity, said study co-author Andrew
Feigin, a researcher with the Feinstein Institute for Medical Research in New
York.

    "If you can quiet down the subthalamic nucleus, you can improve symptoms,"
Feigin said.

    Feigin noted that the approach does not offer a cure for the disease.

    "This is not making dopamine cells grow back or preventing them from dying,"
he said.

    Indeed, the study was not even designed to test the effectiveness of gene
therapy, but rather its feasibility. The authors said there were no adverse
events related to the gene therapy and concluded that the approach was safe and
tolerable.

    Yet, there was a significant improvement in symptoms, on average about 27%
better after a year, Feigin said. Normally, there would be a worsening of
symptoms over that time period, he said.

    And because there was not a placebo arm of the study, it is possible that
the improvement could be due to a placebo effect, he said.

    What now is needed is a larger randomized study with a placebo group. That
is being planned by Neurologix, the New Jersey company that funded the initial
trial.

    However, Paul Nausieda, director of the Regional Parkinson's Center at
Aurora Sinai Medical Center in Milwaukee, questioned whether such a drastic
approach was needed. He said most patients with Parkinson's can manage their
disease with drug treatments.

    "These very aggressive treatments are hard to justify," Nausieda said. "This
is the installation of a foreign genetic material into the nervous system. What
are the five-year repercussions of that?"

   WHAT IS PARKINSON'S DISEASE?

    * In Parkinson's, brain cells that make the neurotransmitter dopamine die
off.

    * This leads to a variety of movement problems such as tremors, rigidity,
slowness of movement and balance difficulties.

    * Most patients respond to drugs that increase dopamine levels, but the
drugs can become less effective over time.

    And the study? "This is proof of concept. It is helpful for everybody in the
field. It is looking very encouraging."

    - Clive Svendsen, University of Wisconsin-Madison neuroscientist

   Copyright 2007, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2007


                              491 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              June 22, 2007 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 569 words

HEADLINE: Small Gene Study Shows Help for Parkinson's

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   An experimental gene therapy for Parkinson's disease seemed to improve
symptoms  without causing side effects in an early study of 12 patients, an
article this week in The Lancet, the British medical journal, reports.

     The treatment involved slipping billions of copies of a gene into the brain
to calm overactive circuitry. The study focused on testing the procedure's
safety rather than its effectiveness.

     Experts cautioned that it was too soon to draw conclusions about how well
it worked. ''We still have quite a bit more testing to do,'' said Dr. Michael
Kaplitt of the Weill Cornell Medical College in New York, an author of the
study. ''The initial results are extremely encouraging.''

     In April, another team told a medical meeting that its experiments in gene
therapy for Parkinson's, which delivered a different gene to a different part of
the brain, also appeared safe and gave a preliminary hint of benefit.

     More than half a million Americans have Parkinson's, with symptoms like
tremors, rigidity in the limbs, slow movement and impaired balance and
coordination. Nathan Klein, 59, a television producer in Port Washington, N.Y.,
said the disease had weakened his voice, impaired his walking and made his hand
tremble so badly that he could not hold a glass of wine without spilling it all.

     Mr. Klein,  the first patient treated with the new gene therapy, in 2003,
said his symptoms had gradually subsided. Now, he said, other than his freezing
now and then when he wants to walk, the symptoms have basically disappeared.

     ''I'm elated,'' said Mr. Klein, who continues to take his regular pills for
the disease. ''It's unbelievable.''

     Dr. Kaplitt, who has a financial interest in Neurologix Inc., which paid
for the research, noted that the 12 patients still had Parkinson's symptoms. The
amount of their medications did not change significantly in the year after the
surgery.

     Current medicines can control symptoms, but they cannot stop the disease
from worsening, and they can produce side effects like uncontrollable movement.

     Some patients gain relief from deep brain stimulation, in which electrodes
are placed in the brain and connected to a programmable stimulator.

     Dr. Kaplitt's procedure was intended to achieve the same goal as that
surgery, calming circuitry that becomes overactive because it loses the normal
supply of a chemical called GABA. The treatment was created to make the brain
produce more GABA through the many extra copies of a gene.

     The Lancet paper reports that over a year patients showed no side effects
and that they showed improvements in an overall assessment of symptoms like
tremors, stiffness and trouble walking.

     A year after surgery, researchers reported, the overall improvement from
before surgery was 24 percent when measured when patients were off normal
medication, and 27 percent when they were on medication.

     Most of the effects appeared on one side of the body. Because of concerns
about safety, the researchers treated just the brain circuitry for one side of
the body.

     Dr. Karl Kieburtz of the University of Rochester Medical Center, who did
not participate in Dr. Kaplitt's work, said the lack of apparent side effects
was significant. But Dr. Kieburtz urged caution in interpreting the evidence of
benefits. Other experimental therapies that looked good at such a preliminary
stage have failed to pan out in more rigorous studies, he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2007


                              492 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                             June 19, 2007 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 328 words

HEADLINE: In Brief

BODY:

   St. Francis treatment

   improves tumor targeting

   St. Francis Hospital & Health Centers' Cancer Care Services is using a new
treatment -- called Megavoltage Cone Beam Imaging -- to allow better targeting
of some tumors.

   The system improves the precision in radiation therapy by enabling physicians
to better monitor and respond to tumor motion caused by tumor shrinkage, organ
movement and a patient's weight changes during treatment, according to Dr. Peter
Garrett, medical director of oncology services.

   The procedure, believed to be the first of its kind in the state, combines
advanced image-guided techniques and auto-assisted patient positioning to
achieve its results.

   -- Star report

   Bacteria allow deliveries

   to cells, researchers say

   Bacteria can be used to deliver "smart nanoparticles" into a cell to
precisely position sensors, drugs or DNA, according to Purdue University
researchers.

   The nanoparticles, which range in size from 40 to 200 nanometers, are
attached to the bacteria by using linked DNA molecules. The nanoparticle-laden
bacteria then transport the DNA to the nuclei of cells.

   The technology could be used for gene therapy and the early diagnosis and
treatment of disease, according to researchers at the Birck Nanotechnology
Center.

   -- Star report

   IU medical radio show

   moving to new time slot

   The Indiana University School of Medicine's weekly radio program on medical
issues is moving to a new time on WFYI-FM (90.1).

   Starting July 1, "Sound Medicine," hosted and produced by Barbara Lewis, will
air at 2 p.m. Sundays, following "Car Talk." Each week, Lewis talks with
health-care professionals about changes in medicine and health.

   -- Star report

   Innovention '07 forum

   to be held next week

   It's not too late to register for Innovention '07, the Indiana Health
Industry Forum's life-sciences event next Monday and Tuesday at the Indiana
Convention Center, 100 S. Capitol Ave.

   To register, go to the Health Industry Forum's Web site at www.ihif.org.

   -- Star report

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2007


                              493 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 19, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E-3

LENGTH: 279 words

HEADLINE: Vical may earn dividends from promising ischemia drug;
S.D. firm licenses its DNA technology

BYLINE: Terri Somers, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Vaccine maker Vical said yesterday that a Japanese licensee showed such
positive results in late-stage clinical trials of a treatment for ischemia that
an independent monitoring committee recommended it stop the trial and file for
regulatory approval of the drug.

   AnGes MG, a Japanese biotechnology company, uses San Diego-based Vical's DNA
technology to deliver a gene encoding growth factor to cells, prompting the
growth of new blood vessels to an area where a cholesterol buildup has
restricted blood flow.

   Preliminary clinical trial results from 41 patients showed a 30.4 percent
improvement in patients who were on a placebo and a 70.4 percent improvement in
those receiving the treatment.

   The independent board monitoring the trial results said it would be unethical
to keep giving people a placebo considering the positive trial results and a
lack of major safety concerns.

   "This could be the first human gene therapy product approved with our
platform," said Vijay Samant, Vical's chief executive. "And it's proof of
concept for our DNA delivery in the treatment of disease."

   Vical shares climbed 20 percent yesterday to close at $5.95 in trading that
was 13 times higher than average.

   AnGes said it will file an application to market the therapy, AMG0001, in
Japan. If the drug is approved, Vical would receive milestone payments as well
as royalties on sales.

   Merriman Curhan Ford & Co. analyst Brian McCarthy maintained a buy status for
Vical shares yesterday.

   "We believe that Vical's current price does not currently account for the
company's extensive partnership and licensing agreements, and potential for
royalty revenue generation," McCarthy wrote in a research note.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2007


                              494 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2007 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             June 16, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: METRO; HIGHER EDUCATION NOTES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 665 words

HEADLINE: Vaccine research gets La. grant;
LSU, Tulane, Xavier scientists to join project

BYLINE: By John Pope, Staff writer

BODY:

   A $5.5 million grant to develop a vaccine-research center in New Orleans has
been awarded to a gene therapist at Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center.

   Although the grant from the state Board of Regents was awarded to Alistair
Ramsay, director of the health-sciences center's Gene Therapy Program, it will
underwrite work throughout the city by scientists from Tulane and Xavier
universities as well as LSU, center Chancellor Larry Hollier said at the Friday
news conference announcing the grant.

   Ramsay will direct the center, which is designed to provide a coordinated
approach to vaccine development. It is envisioned as the cornerstone of an
intellectual and economic powerhouse that will attract eminent researchers and
grow with money from governments and industrial partners, as well as income from
patents, licenses and royalties.

   Among those working at the center will be 17 research teams from LSU Health
Sciences Center, five from Tulane and one from Xavier, LSU spokeswoman Leslie
Capo said. These groups are already studying ways to combat such afflictions as
tuberculosis, HIV, toxins in plants and bacteria, and group B streptococci.

   Ramsay, the center's principal investigator, is trying to develop vaccines
against TB and HIV.

   Other scientists working there will include John Clements, chairman of
microbiology and immunology at Tulane's Health Sciences Center; Tarun Mandal, a
pharmacology professor at Xavier; and Dr. Seth Pincus, an LSU pediatrician who
also directs the Research Institute for Children at Children's Hospital.

   Because the work will be conducted at all three universities, as well as
Children's Hospital, no central building for the initiative is planned, Capo
said.

   The grant came from the regents' Post-Katrina Support Fund Initiative, which
is designed not only to restore Louisiana's higher-education systems but also to
propel scientific education and research beyond their pre-Katrina levels, she
said.

   . . . . . . .

   PLANNING CHARITY'S REPLACEMENT: The nation's foremost health-care
philanthropy has awarded a $1.24 million grant to help plan the construction of
the facility that will replace Charity Hospital.

   The two-year grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation went to the
Medical Center of Louisiana Foundation, a nonprofit organization dedicated to
helping Charity Hospital. The Medical Center of Louisiana is the official name
for the 68-year-old hospital, which has been closed since Hurricane Katrina
slammed New Orleans nearly two years ago.

   Charity is part of a statewide network run by a branch of the LSU system.

   Working with the foundation on the project will be the Georgia Tech College
of Architecture Center for Health Care Design.

   The site for the new complex, which also would include a new Veterans Affairs
Medical Center, is expected to be a rectangle running from Tulane Avenue to
Canal Street, and from South Claiborne Avenue to a spot beyond South Galvez
Street, hospital-system spokesman Marvin McGraw said.

   No land for the complex has been bought, he said.

   . . . . . . .

   XAVIER NAMES VICE PRESIDENT: Kenneth St. Charles has been named Xavier
University's vice president for strategic advancement.

   He will be responsible for fundraising activities as well as the Alumni
Office and the University and Media Relations Office.

   St. Charles, 44, who has been at Xavier since 2005, had been associate vice
president for strategic initiatives. Before joining the staff, he had worked at
Loyola University, St. Augustine High School and Entergy Corp. He earned a
bachelor's degree from Loyola and master's and doctoral degrees from the
University of New Orleans.

   . . . . . . .

   NUNEZ CAREER FAIR: A career fair will be held June 26 from 10 a.m. to noon at
the Nunez Community College Auditorium. It will be free to the public

   More information is available at www.nunez.edu and from Carly Gervais,
Nunez's career-services coordinator, at (504) 278-7491.

   . . . . . . .

   John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3317.

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2007


                              495 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2007 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                            June 13, 2007 Wednesday
                                 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 939 words

HEADLINE: Extra scrutiny on cadaver harvesters;
FDA task force recommends more stringent controls over body parts

BYLINE: SETH BORENSTEIN, MARILYNN MARCHIONE, Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Federal regulators say they have dramatically boosted
inspections of companies that harvest cadaver body parts for transplant,
acknowledging weaknesses in government oversight of the multibillion-dollar
human tissue industry that last year was rocked by scandal.

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration said the inspections turned up no
serious problems. But an internal task force report urges agency officials to
set up a method for tracking body parts from cadaver to transplant patient - a
system that currently doesn't go that far.

   The targeted companies remove bones, tendons, cartilage, heart valves and
other non-organ parts from corpses. These tissues are used in roughly 1 million
medical procedures in the United States each year, many of them for routine knee
and back surgeries.

   If improperly screened and processed, these tissues can cause serious
infections, including HIV or hepatitis, or even death in transplant recipients.
Fears about the lax regulation of the industry arose after scandals involving
two companies and the recall of thousands of tissues, many of which were already
transplanted.

   A three-month investigation by The Associated Press last year detailed many
gaps in oversight by the FDA.

   The task force recommends steps to address some of those problems, but
operators of accredited tissue banks and others familiar with the industry say
the report doesn't go far enough to clean up the problem.

   Extended tracking system

   The FDA says it is reviewing the recommendations, which include:

   A tracking system that ends with the recipient of the transplanted tissue.
Currently, the tracking requirement ends with the doctor or hospital that does
the transplant. As a result, it has been difficult to warn patients who may have
received improperly processed cadaver parts.

   The agency says it must review the legality of enforcing such a requirement.

   "They have the legal authority, they just need the backbone to do it," said
former FDA attorney Areta Kupchyk, an expert in the tissue industry. She was
among several critics of the task force report, which was written by FDA
employees.

   Requiring companies that use tissue parts to audit their suppliers regularly.
In an interview the FDA's Dr. Jesse Goodman said his agency has reiterated to
doctors and tissue banks that they are responsible for making sure that their
suppliers comply with the law and are safe.

   Hiring a microbiologist to resolve scientific questions about tissue safety -
such as what sterilization or treatment processes are best.

   Experts in the field criticized the task force for not urging more, such as:

   Tightening standards for who can run a tissue bank, or require licensing or
background checks. Under current regulations, even convicted felons could start
such a business and would only have to register their intent with the FDA.

   Requiring inspections at the time a tissue handler first starts in the
business.

   Limiting or banning retrieval of tissue at funeral homes. Many in the
industry have urged such limits because unsterile retrieval can increase the
chances of germs being passed to recipients.

   In the meantime, Goodman, director of the FDA's Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, said the agency has inspected all 153 companies that
remove tissue from cadavers. He said future inspections would include some of
the more than 2,000 companies that prepare the tissue for use by doctors.

   In recent years, the FDA has never inspected more than a few hundred of these
businesses on an annual basis.

   Goodman, in an interview with The Associated Press, said only minor problems
were turned up from the agency's inspections and overall, "the finding there was
generally reassuring."

   Dr. Celia Witten, who oversees FDA's cellular tissue and gene therapies
office, said: "Today's report finds no significant industrywide problem in the
recovery of human tissues"

   Stolen bodies alleged

   However, some in the industry disagree. And weaknesses came to light through
recent scandals, the biggest involving Biomedical Tissue Services of New Jersey.
The company's operator faces trial along with a former New York funeral home
director on charges that they stole bodies and unlawfully dissected them. Among
the corpses that had body parts removed was Alistair Cooke, the 90-year-old
former host of PBS' Masterpiece Theater, who died of cancer.

   Seven funeral home directors have already pleaded guilty and tens of
thousands of body parts removed by BTS were recalled. About 10,000 people are
believed to have received tissues from the company.

   One victim of the BTS scandal, Alicia Dawes, who received a bone implant from
that company, said she wanted a ban on tissue recovery at funeral homes and some
kind of background check on companies that harvest cadaver tissue.

   "There is just too much money in body parts for profit," said Dawes, of
Medford, Ore. "You're going to find the same thing happening over and over."

   Dawes has not become ill from the bone that was implanted in her neck, but
she has been told to be tested for the AIDS virus and hepatitis, like thousands
of other patients who received BTS body parts.

   "If this is the end of it, they've missed some opportunities" to improve
tissue safety, Robert Rigney, head of the American Association of Tissue Banks,
said of the task force report.

   He said the task force consulted once by phone with the association, which
requires members to follow tougher standards than the FDA's. All of the scandals
and problems with tissue so far have involved companies not accredited through
the tissue bank group association, but the FDA has not required accreditation or
similar standards, he noted.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2007


                              496 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 San Francisco Chronicle
                              All Rights Reserved

                    THE SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE (California)

                              June 10, 2007 Sunday
                                 FINAL Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 1155 words

HEADLINE: Biotech pioneer defends its turf;
Genentech is busy on new therapies to combat cancer

BYLINE: Bernadette Tansey, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

   Genentech Inc. came to last week's annual cancer research meeting in Chicago
like a 30-year-old tennis champ whose victories had raised the level of the game
but who now faced a field of hungry young rivals.

   The South San Francisco biotechnology pioneer found itself eying new
companies who, inspired by its example as a cancer drug developer, are trying to
go one up on it.

   Some contenders are gaining ground. More than ever this year, investors at
the American Society of Clinical Oncology meeting in Chicago were asking how
Genentech, founded in 1976, can retain its commanding position as the developer
of groundbreaking cancer drugs, acknowledged Dr. Susan Desmond-Hellmann,
Genentech's president of product development.

   Her answer was to set the bar even higher.

   Genentech will defend its existing drugs, but will also try to invent the
next generation of cancer-fighting therapies, she said.

   "Whenever we can, we create high hurdles for our competitors,"
Desmond-Hellmann said in a wrap-up session on the last day of the conclave.

   Over the past decade, Genentech has transformed the oncology field by proving
that the biotechnology approach to cancer therapy -- designing drugs finely
targeted to block specific mechanisms in the cancer cell -- could yield
significant medical advances. The company also proved that what Desmond-Hellmann
calls Genentech's "deep science" approach could result in big commercial gains.

   Genentech is the leading seller of tumor-fighting therapies in the United
States. Total revenue in 2006 exceeded $9 billion, based mainly on sales of its
anti-cancer antibodies Rituxan, Herceptin and Avastin.

   "They have created markets that others are envious of," said Jason Kantor, an
analyst at RBC Capital Markets.

   Vying for a share of those markets, contenders have piled into the arena.
They range from small biotech companies to Pfizer Inc., the largest
pharmaceutical company in the world.

   Genentech's rivals are also pursuing targeted therapies -- medications
designed to zero in on cancer cells while largely sparing other cells, an
attempt to improve on toxic chemotherapy drugs. But the challengers face a
formidable task because Genentech has already established its drugs as the
standard of care in several common cancer types that offer the biggest markets,
including forms of breast, lung and colorectal cancer.

   "There is a huge first-mover advantage," Kantor said.

   Competitors must prove that their drugs perform better than Genentech's in
the same kinds of large, well-controlled trials the company has conducted at
significant expense.

   "That's a barrier to entry, but it's not an insurmountable barrier," Kantor
said.

   Cancer is a complex array of hundreds of disease subtypes that create many
openings for drug developers, said Dr. Charles Baum, Pfizer's head of oncology
development. And some competitors have already forged ahead of Genentech on
certain tracks.

   For its part, Genentech is seeking to expand the market for its blockbuster
drug Avastin beyond its two approved uses, in colorectal and lung cancer. In a
study presented at the Chicago meeting, Avastin also slowed the growth of kidney
cancer.

   But three other targeted drugs for kidney cancer have already been approved:
Pfizer's Sutent; Nexavar from Onyx Pharmaceuticals and Bayer; and Wyeth's
Torisel.

   Competition is producing a lineup of drugs that will jockey for a place in
the sequence of treatments given cancer patients over the course of their
disease. Genentech's drugs, while they often improve survival times, do not
produce cures. New drugs may get a foothold in the market as follow-up therapies
once a patient's illness becomes resistant to a Genentech drug, Baum said.
Therapies will be tried in combination to see if they amplify each other's
effects. Other drugs may displace a Genentech therapy as first-line treatment.

   Desmond-Hellmann said Genentech is aiming to hold the lead by staying true to
its roots as a company built on science. The ultimate aim is to deliver a cure
for one or more cancer types.

   "We're always challenging ourselves," she said. "Are we missing anything? Are
we on the cutting edge?"

   Genentech is pursuing new uses for its approved drugs, as well as exploring
new cancer mechanisms to attack. In one intriguing experimental program, the
company is linking its breast cancer antibody Herceptin to another drug with
powerful anti-cancer properties. Herceptin binds to a molecule found in the
millions on the surface of certain cancer cells. Theoretically, the "armed" form
of Herceptin would deliver the cancer-killing drug to the tumor while bypassing
normal cells.

   The company's scientific work is concentrated at its sprawling campus in
South San Francisco, where the staff of nearly 11,000 includes more than 900
research scientists and 100 post-doctoral students.

   Genentech benefits from its location near UCSF, Stanford and UC Berkeley, but
it also lures top scientists from around the world. With a research and
development budget of nearly $1.8 billion in 2006, Genentech can compete for the
candidates it wants.

   Scientists must compete internally to get R&D money for their projects and a
coveted slot in the pipeline of experimental compounds to be tested in humans.
While that applied science is under way, post-doctoral students spend their time
on pure research that may uncover cancer mechanisms.

   Desmond-Hellmann said she tracks other companies' scientific strategies, such
as cancer vaccines and gene therapy, to see if Genentech might want to jump in
at some point. The company expands its scope by collaborating with other biotech
concerns and with academic scientists.

   Genentech also mines the data and tissue samples from past clinical trials,
looking for ways to identify subsets of patients who gain more benefit from a
certain drug than others. Those clues can include specific molecules that are
more abundant in some patients' cells.

   Pfizer also looks for such "biomarkers" to lead its researchers to the best
patient group to test for each experimental drug, Pfizer's Baum noted. The
tactic could lead to shorter, less expensive trials that deliver better results
and quicker approvals.

   As the number of drug options in each cancer type grows, competition will
start to focus on features beyond their effectiveness in slowing tumor growth,
such as lower side effects or increased quality of life.

   Pills taken by mouth, such as Pfizer's Sutent, could have an edge over
biotech drugs taken by infusion, such as Avastin. Another possible Sutent
advantage is that it has been shown to work alone in kidney cancer, while
Avastin showed benefit when tested along with an older therapy, interferon, that
carries its own side effects. But the verdict could shift on such comparisons as
new trials on combinations of drugs yield results.

   The competitive fray may be challenging, but Desmond-Hellmann said she
welcomes it because it creates treatment options.

   "It's good for patients," she said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2)
(1) / Eric Luse / The Chronicle, (2) Genentech hopes its drug Avastin, left,
will be approved to fight kidney cancer. It would go up against Nexavar, which
is already on the market. / Liz Hafalia / The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2007


                              497 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   USA TODAY

                             June 7, 2007 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 13D

LENGTH: 704 words

HEADLINE: A little-known syndrome comes into focus;
Mysterious VCFS affects thousands

BYLINE: Ryan Holeywell

BODY:

   Until he was 16, Quinn Bradlee practically lived in the hospital.

   Growing up, his ailments included a hole in his heart, epilepsy, dyslexia and
a weak immune system that left him chronically sick.

   "He kept having all these terrible things wrong with him," says his mother,
Sally Quinn, a Washington Post writer. "You'd turn around one day, and whammo --
it was something else. ... You never knew where the next bomb was going to go
off. We couldn't figure out what was happening."

   The root of Bradlee's problems stumped most doctors, who said he'd probably
never be able to read, write or make friends. Finally, when he was a teenager, a
researcher diagnosed  the reason for Bradlee's mysterious medical history:
Bradlee had velo-cardio-facial syndrome, a genetic condition.

   "I thought, 'That's great, but I don't really know what the hell that is,'"
says Bradlee, who lives in Washington, D.C. His father is Ben Bradlee, former
executive editor of The Washington Post.

   Quinn Bradlee's reaction is the same many have upon learning about VCFS, the
second-most-common genetic syndrome after Down syndrome. VCFS advocates  hope to
educate people about the syndrome  to promote research and detection. Bradlee,
now 25 and  an aspiring filmmaker, will  premiere a documentary he helped make
about the syndrome at a  gala for the International Center for VCFS on Wednesday
in Washington, D.C.

   The National Institutes of Health estimates that the syndrome afflicts
130,000 Americans, and yet it is not widely known.

   Bradlee "is a nice, charming, good-looking guy, and I think most people would
have a hard time picking him out of a crowd as having a problem," says Robert
Shprintzen, the researcher who first discovered the syndrome and identified it
in Bradlee. Shprintzen is also director of the  International Center for VCFS.

   VCFS is the result of a random mutation that causes a small part of
Chromosome 22 to be deleted, Shprintzen explains. More than 180 symptoms can be
associated with VCFS, including learning disabilities, developmental delays,
psychiatric disorders, immune disorders, congenital heart disease and cleft
palate.

   Forty percent to 60% of VCFS patients are classified as mentally retarded
(Quinn Bradlee is not), though Shprintzen says they seem to look and function
better than their IQs might predict.

   Shprintzen says Bradlee has higher functioning abilities than most VCFS
patients. He attended a boarding school for students with dyslexia and  went to
Vermont's Landmark College for students with dyslexia and other learning
disabilities. He also has taken film courses at American University and the New
York Film Academy.

   Bradlee says he doesn't remember many of the complications that plagued his
childhood, adding that "they call my mom 'Doctor Quinn the Medicine Woman'
because she has all my medical records." But he says that even in adulthood, he
fights "a different battle every day." His changes in mood become exaggerated:
The slightest compliment makes him ecstatic, while criticisms make him
miserable.

   "It's completely ridiculous, but it's something I can't help," says Bradlee,
who also has minor depression.

   There is no cure for VCFS, so complications have to be addressed symptom by
symptom, often through surgery. Researchers are trying to discover biochemical
and gene therapies that could be used,  Shprintzen says.

   Nancy Robbins of Oakton, Va., says that when her daughter Allison was young,
she had breathing and speech problems and frequent infections. It was Shprintzen
who ultimately made the VCFS diagnosis. "On one hand I was so relieved to
finally have an answer of what's wrong with my child," Robbins says. "But at the
same time, you're devastated."

   Robbins says her daughter, now 12, struggles more than other children, but
her case is not too severe. "At this point, there seems to be so much potential
that I'm going to give this kid every opportunity to succeed," Robbins says.

   Bradlee says he hopes to follow in the family tradition of journalism  by
pursuing a career in filmmaking,  with a focus on documentaries. Quinn says that
after "so many horrible years of everything going wrong," Bradlee has turned a
corner.

   "I can now look at him and see that's he's going to have a life."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Joe Brier for USA TODAY
PHOTO, B/W

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2007


                              498 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                              June 5, 2007 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Health; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1172  words

HEADLINE: 'Like a little pot of gold'; Until as recently as last year, Hunter
syndrome patients had no treatment options. Now, a new drug therapy has given
them the energy to fight back

BYLINE: Lori Rackl, The Chicago Sun-Times

BODY:

   Robert Wilk, 9, knows the drill by now.

   Once a week, he checks into Children's Memorial Hospital and spends a few
hours in bed, hooked up to an intravenous line that feeds a light yellow liquid
into his bloodstream.

   The sack of fluid is giving him what his body cannot: a crucial enzyme. The
enzyme's job is to break down a chemical that, if levels build up too high, can
unleash an array of symptoms, from an oversized head, stiff joints and deafness
to mental retardation, organ problems and death.

   Hunter syndrome patients like Robert are born lacking this enzyme. Until
recently, they also lacked a treatment.

   That changed last summer when an enzyme replacement therapy called Elaprase
hit the market. It's still too soon to know how Shire Human Genetic Therapies'
pricey new medicine will fare in the long run, but patients and parents say
they're already seeing changes for the better.

   "It's like a little pot of gold hanging over there," said Robert's mother,
Beata Wilk, as she points to the medicine streaming through her son's IV. The
fourth-grader has more energy now. He has less joint pain and can move better.
His face isn't as puffy; his skin and hair, softer.

   The long-awaited treatment also comes as a welcome development for doctors,
who previously had little to offer patients with the debilitating disorder.

   "I've been doing this for 30 years," said Children's Memorial pediatrician
and geneticist Barbara Burton. "There was nothing we could do . . . just
symptomatic treatment. It's wonderful to be able to offer them something."

   An estimated 500 people in the United States have Hunter syndrome, and
they're almost all male. Mothers can be unwitting carriers and pass it down to
their sons, or it can stem from a spontaneous mutation on the X chromosome. It's
one of the so-called lysosomal storage disorders, a group of more than 40
diseases caused by an inherited deficiency of a particular enzyme.

   Burton believes sooner is better when it comes to starting Hunter patients on
Elaprase. But that's not always easy with a disease whose wide-ranging symptoms
can make it difficult to diagnose. Patients often get bounced from doctor to
doctor until someone finally puts the pieces together.

   That's why Burton is pushing for a new state law -- currently making its way
through the Illinois General Assembly -- that would expand newborn screening
tests to include several lysosomal storage disorders. The specific test for
Hunter syndrome would be added to the expanded screening panel once it's
perfected.

   "We're on the verge of being the first of any of the 50 states to test
newborns for so many of these types of disorders," Burton said. "With [Hunter
syndrome], problems like joint stiffness and short stature are difficult or
impossible to reverse, so it's extraordinarily important that we make the
diagnosis early and get treatment started as soon as possible."

   Early treatment wasn't an option for Dan Rudny, 40. After living for decades
without a medication for his illness, the West Dundee man wasted no time when
Elaprase became an option. He started weekly infusions last August, making him
the fifth person in the country to get the enzyme replacement therapy.

   "I didn't think I'd ever see the day," Rudny said. His liver and spleen are
less swollen these days. His knee pain is improving and he has more energy.
"Without it, I'd probably be in bed most of the time."

   While promising, Elaprase isn't a magic bullet. A few patients have had
serious reactions to the medication. And researchers still are looking for ways
to deliver the medicine into the central nervous system to treat the cognitive
problems and speech dysfunction that can go along with the disorder.

   Elaprase is also extremely expensive, costing upward of $350,000 a year for
some patients. Wilk's insurance picks up the tab for her son's therapy.

   "We're just so grateful there's finally something we can try," Wilk said. "We
used to have nothing. At least now, there's hope."

   NEWBORN SCREENING:

   A bill making its way through the Illinois General Assembly would

   expand newborn screening to test for genetic disorders similar to Hunter
syndrome. Once the Hunter

   syndrome test is perfected, it too would be added to the broader screening
panel that will start next year if the bill becomes law.

   The expanded newborn screening would add testing for the following diseases:

   - Krabbe

   - Pompe

   - Gaucher

   - Fabry

   - Niemann-Pick

   ACTS OF KINDNESS

   COORDINATOR'S JOB GETS PUT TO THE TEST

   No woman wants to hear that her mammogram came back abnormal and she'll need
more tests.

   This is the point when some women -- especially low-income minorities,
research has shown -- choose not to show up for further testing. These patients
simply fall through the cracks.

   Diana Salgado's job is to make sure that doesn't happen.

   Salgado last year became a breast health coordinator at Mount Sinai Hospital
on Chicago's West Side.

   The position is paid for by a grant from Avon. Salgado is supposed to help
patients navigate their way not only around the hospital, but through the often
intimidating health-care system. It's her job to track them down if they miss an
appointment. She's there to be a resource, but sometimes she's something these
women need even more: a friend.

   When a patient spent five hours at Sinai last October for a mammogram and
other tests, Salgado kept her company.

   She hung around after hours to take the woman to the cafeteria and buy her
dinner. It was cold and rainy outside, so Salgado offered to drive the woman
home, even though they live on opposite sides of town. The woman repeatedly
refused but eventually let Salgado drop her off at an L stop.

   The woman returned less than a week later for additional testing. Salgado sat
in the room with her, holding her hand.

   "She was nervous," Salgado said.

   The woman's results came back clear. She didn't need any more tests, but she
did have one last request.

   "She invited me to take a walk by the lake with her once the weather got
warmer," Salgado said. "And I will."

   WORKOUT

   THIS ONE TIME, AT BAND CAMP . . .

   What: Band Camp

   Where: Equinox Fitness Clubs

   The lowdown: There's nothing geeky about this Band Camp. Oversized rubber
bands and tubing have been used in workouts for years, but it's unusual for an
entire class to be built around them. That's what you get in this 45-minute
sculpting session. The elastic props provide lots of resistance and can tone
just about any part of the body. Stand on one end of the tube and pull the
opposite end toward your chest to work the biceps. Think lunges are tough? Try
doing them with a rubber band strapped around your legs.

   Fitness tip: When using tubing, keep the shoulders relaxed and the core
muscles engaged. Use controlled movement throughout the entire range of motion;
don't let the tubing snap back to the start position.

   SHOUT OUT

   BEST OF HEALTH BLOGS

   Parents who bought the antidepressant drug Paxil for their children have
until Aug. 31 to claim their share of a massive $64 million class-action
settlement.

   Get the details at blogs.suntimes.com/health.

   lrackl@suntimes.com

GRAPHIC:
Color Photo: Tom Cruze, Sun-Times; Kelli Zink works with the "exer-tube" at
Equinox Fitness Clubs' Band Camp. ;
Color Photo: Brian Jackson, Sun-Times; Diana Salgado helps women with abnormal
mammograms and their follow up appointments at Mt. Sinai Hospital on the West
Side.
Color Photo: Al Podgorski, Sun-Times photo; Dan Rudny, 40, has lived for decades
without medication for Hunter syndrome.
Color Photo: Al Podgorski, Sun-Times photo; Caleb Gara, 7, gets his enzyme
treatment with mom, Piper, at his side.
Color Photo: Al Podgorski, Sun-Times photo; Robert Wilk, 9, receives treatment
for Hunter syndrome at Children's Memorial Hospital in Chicago. Hunter syndrome
patients are missing a crucial enzyme, which a new treatment gives them.
Color Photo: THE RX: TIME TO RELAX: Good news for black women who use chemical
"relaxers" to straighten their hair: The products weren't associated with an
increased risk of breast cancer in a National Cancer Institute-funded study of
more than 48,000 African-American women. Those who used relaxers at least seven
times a year for a minimum of two decades had the same risk as women who used
the chemicals for less than a year.
Color Photo: THE RX: SOME LIKE IT HOT: Being in hot water is a good thing when
it comes to killing allergens. Korean researchers found that washing laundry in
hot water -- at least 140 degrees Fahrenheit  -- kills all dust mites. A measly
7 percent of dust mites get offed when laundry is washed at 104 degrees. Hotter
temps also worked better at getting rid of dog dander and pollen. ;

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007


                              499 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 Sun-Times Media, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                              June 5, 2007 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Health; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1172  words

HEADLINE: 'Like a little pot of gold'; Until as recently as last year, Hunter
syndrome patients had no treatment options. Now, a new drug therapy has given
them the energy to fight back

BYLINE: Lori Rackl, The Chicago Sun-Times

BODY:

   Robert Wilk, 9, knows the drill by now.

   Once a week, he checks into Children's Memorial Hospital and spends a few
hours in bed, hooked up to an intravenous line that feeds a light yellow liquid
into his bloodstream.

   The sack of fluid is giving him what his body cannot: a crucial enzyme. The
enzyme's job is to break down a chemical that, if levels build up too high, can
unleash an array of symptoms, from an oversized head, stiff joints and deafness
to mental retardation, organ problems and death.

   Hunter syndrome patients like Robert are born lacking this enzyme. Until
recently, they also lacked a treatment.

   That changed last summer when an enzyme replacement therapy called Elaprase
hit the market. It's still too soon to know how Shire Human Genetic Therapies'
pricey new medicine will fare in the long run, but patients and parents say
they're already seeing changes for the better.

   "It's like a little pot of gold hanging over there," said Robert's mother,
Beata Wilk, as she points to the medicine streaming through her son's IV. The
fourth-grader has more energy now. He has less joint pain and can move better.
His face isn't as puffy; his skin and hair, softer.

   The long-awaited treatment also comes as a welcome development for doctors,
who previously had little to offer patients with the debilitating disorder.

   "I've been doing this for 30 years," said Children's Memorial pediatrician
and geneticist Barbara Burton. "There was nothing we could do . . . just
symptomatic treatment. It's wonderful to be able to offer them something."

   An estimated 500 people in the United States have Hunter syndrome, and
they're almost all male. Mothers can be unwitting carriers and pass it down to
their sons, or it can stem from a spontaneous mutation on the X chromosome. It's
one of the so-called lysosomal storage disorders, a group of more than 40
diseases caused by an inherited deficiency of a particular enzyme.

   Burton believes sooner is better when it comes to starting Hunter patients on
Elaprase. But that's not always easy with a disease whose wide-ranging symptoms
can make it difficult to diagnose. Patients often get bounced from doctor to
doctor until someone finally puts the pieces together.

   That's why Burton is pushing for a new state law -- currently making its way
through the Illinois General Assembly -- that would expand newborn screening
tests to include several lysosomal storage disorders. The specific test for
Hunter syndrome would be added to the expanded screening panel once it's
perfected.

   "We're on the verge of being the first of any of the 50 states to test
newborns for so many of these types of disorders," Burton said. "With [Hunter
syndrome], problems like joint stiffness and short stature are difficult or
impossible to reverse, so it's extraordinarily important that we make the
diagnosis early and get treatment started as soon as possible."

   Early treatment wasn't an option for Dan Rudny, 40. After living for decades
without a medication for his illness, the West Dundee man wasted no time when
Elaprase became an option. He started weekly infusions last August, making him
the fifth person in the country to get the enzyme replacement therapy.

   "I didn't think I'd ever see the day," Rudny said. His liver and spleen are
less swollen these days. His knee pain is improving and he has more energy.
"Without it, I'd probably be in bed most of the time."

   While promising, Elaprase isn't a magic bullet. A few patients have had
serious reactions to the medication. And researchers still are looking for ways
to deliver the medicine into the central nervous system to treat the cognitive
problems and speech dysfunction that can go along with the disorder.

   Elaprase is also extremely expensive, costing upward of $350,000 a year for
some patients. Wilk's insurance picks up the tab for her son's therapy.

   "We're just so grateful there's finally something we can try," Wilk said. "We
used to have nothing. At least now, there's hope."

   NEWBORN SCREENING:

   A bill making its way through the Illinois General Assembly would

   expand newborn screening to test for genetic disorders similar to Hunter
syndrome. Once the Hunter

   syndrome test is perfected, it too would be added to the broader screening
panel that will start next year if the bill becomes law.

   The expanded newborn screening would add testing for the following diseases:

   - Krabbe

   - Pompe

   - Gaucher

   - Fabry

   - Niemann-Pick

   ACTS OF KINDNESS

   COORDINATOR'S JOB GETS PUT TO THE TEST

   No woman wants to hear that her mammogram came back abnormal and she'll need
more tests.

   This is the point when some women -- especially low-income minorities,
research has shown -- choose not to show up for further testing. These patients
simply fall through the cracks.

   Diana Salgado's job is to make sure that doesn't happen.

   Salgado last year became a breast health coordinator at Mount Sinai Hospital
on Chicago's West Side.

   The position is paid for by a grant from Avon. Salgado is supposed to help
patients navigate their way not only around the hospital, but through the often
intimidating health-care system. It's her job to track them down if they miss an
appointment. She's there to be a resource, but sometimes she's something these
women need even more: a friend.

   When a patient spent five hours at Sinai last October for a mammogram and
other tests, Salgado kept her company.

   She hung around after hours to take the woman to the cafeteria and buy her
dinner. It was cold and rainy outside, so Salgado offered to drive the woman
home, even though they live on opposite sides of town. The woman repeatedly
refused but eventually let Salgado drop her off at an L stop.

   The woman returned less than a week later for additional testing. Salgado sat
in the room with her, holding her hand.

   "She was nervous," Salgado said.

   The woman's results came back clear. She didn't need any more tests, but she
did have one last request.

   "She invited me to take a walk by the lake with her once the weather got
warmer," Salgado said. "And I will."

   WORKOUT

   THIS ONE TIME, AT BAND CAMP . . .

   What: Band Camp

   Where: Equinox Fitness Clubs

   The lowdown: There's nothing geeky about this Band Camp. Oversized rubber
bands and tubing have been used in workouts for years, but it's unusual for an
entire class to be built around them. That's what you get in this 45-minute
sculpting session. The elastic props provide lots of resistance and can tone
just about any part of the body. Stand on one end of the tube and pull the
opposite end toward your chest to work the biceps. Think lunges are tough? Try
doing them with a rubber band strapped around your legs.

   Fitness tip: When using tubing, keep the shoulders relaxed and the core
muscles engaged. Use controlled movement throughout the entire range of motion;
don't let the tubing snap back to the start position.

   SHOUT OUT

   BEST OF HEALTH BLOGS

   Parents who bought the antidepressant drug Paxil for their children have
until Aug. 31 to claim their share of a massive $64 million class-action
settlement.

   Get the details at blogs.suntimes.com/health.

   lrackl@suntimes.com

GRAPHIC:
Color Photo: Tom Cruze, Sun-Times; Kelli Zink works with the "exer-tube" at
Equinox Fitness Clubs' Band Camp.
Color Photo: Brian Jackson, Sun-Times; Diana Salgado helps women with abnormal
mammograms and their follow up appointments at Mt. Sinai Hospital on the West
Side.
Color Photo: Al Podgorski, Sun-Times photo; Dan Rudny, 40, has lived for decades
without medication for Hunter syndrome.
Color Photo: Al Podgorski, Sun-Times photo; Caleb Gara, 7, gets his enzyme
treatment with mom, Piper, at his side.
Color Photo: Al Podgorski, Sun-Times photo; Robert Wilk, 9, receives treatment
for Hunter syndrome at Children's Memorial Hospital in Chicago. Hunter syndrome
patients are missing a crucial enzyme, which a new treatment gives them.
Color Photo: THE RX: TIME TO RELAX: Good news for black women who use chemical
"relaxers" to straighten their hair: The products weren't associated with an
increased risk of breast cancer in a National Cancer Institute-funded study of
more than 48,000 African-American women. Those who used relaxers at least seven
times a year for a minimum of two decades had the same risk as women who used
the chemicals for less than a year.
Color Photo: THE RX: SOME LIKE IT HOT: Being in hot water is a good thing when
it comes to killing allergens. Korean researchers found that washing laundry in
hot water -- at least 140 degrees Fahrenheit  -- kills all dust mites. A measly
7 percent of dust mites get offed when laundry is washed at 104 degrees. Hotter
temps also worked better at getting rid of dog dander and pollen.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2011


                              500 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                              June 5, 2007 Tuesday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 485 words

HEADLINE: DIARY

BYLINE: From staff reports, The Plain Dealer

BODY:

   HEALTH CARE

   Clinic veteran to lead Euclid

   The Cleveland Clinic has named Robert Stall president of Euclid Hospital, the
orthopedic and rehabilitation center. Stall, who has worked for the Clinic for
nearly 24 years, will start his new job June 15. He replaces Lauren Rock, who
has become chief executive of Cleveland senior care center Montefiore. Most
recently, Stall was division administrator for the Cleveland Clinic Regional
Medical Practice, a start-up that has grown into a 440-physician regional
practice with 14 locations in Northeast Ohio and one in Toronto.

   Akron General opens Stow center

   Akron General Health System opened its second Health & Wellness Center this
week. The $32 million center in Stow houses a medically supervised fitness
center and a sports medicine and physical therapy department, which opens to the
public Thursday. A radiology diagnostics unit is expected to open June 13, while
a 24-hour emergency department is planned for July 1. Mario's Spa will provide
services in the center, which employs between 250 and 300 people.

   BIOTECH

   Copernicus product fixes mouse vision

   A research team at University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center has used DNA
nanoparticles developed by Cleveland biotechnology company Copernicus
Therapeutics Inc. to correct vision defects in a mouse model of retinitis
pigmentosa. This disease is caused by gene mutations. Copernicus nanoparticles
deliver healthy genes to eye cells, which use the good genes to produce vision
instead of the bad ones. The results of the University of Oklahoma study were
presented at the American Society of Gene Therapy meeting in Seattle last week.

   INVESTMENTS

   Riverside sells 2 European firms

   Cleveland leveraged buyout firm Riverside Co. has agreed to sell two of its
European portfolio companies. PPC Insulators goes to Seves S.p.A. in Florence,
Italy, for undisclosed terms. PPC Insulators makes high-voltage porcelain
insulators for power generation, transmission and distribution industries. The
Austrian manufacturer had 2006 sales of more than $134.5 million, operating
seven production and assembly plants in Europe, Asia and the United States that
employ 1,400 people. Riverside acquired PPC Insulators eight years ago. Seves
makes glass and composite insulators for power transmission lines, and glass
blocks for construction. The transaction is subject to antitrust approval.
Riverside also sold Polish industrial products maker Zetkama for undisclosed
terms. Riverside acquired Zetkama for its Central Europe Fund in April 1999. It
makes industrial valves and fittings, as well as specialized cast-iron used in
low-pressure industrial systems. An investor consortium associated with Avallon
MBO, a specialized private equity firm in Poland, acquired Zetkama. The sale
generated a return of 28 percent (before expenses) for Riverside investors who
received 6.8 times the cash they had invested in the 1999 acquisition.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2007


                              501 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              June 3, 2007 Sunday
                         The New York Times on the Web

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Play; HOT TOPIC; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 1708 words

HEADLINE: Outlaw DNA

BYLINE: By GRETCHEN REYNOLDS

BODY:

   It was a single line from a longer e-mail message. But when read into the
record by prosecutors at the drug trial last year of the German track coach
Thomas Springstein, it caused a sensation. ''The new Repoxygen is hard to get,''
Springstein had written. ''Please give me new instructions soon so that I can
order the product before Christmas.''

     Until that day in the courtroom, Repoxygen was an obscure gene-therapy drug
developed at a pharmaceutical lab in Oxford, England, to fight anemia. The lab
shelved the product when it seemed unlikely to be profitable. Once it was
mentioned in court in January 2006, however, Repoxygen vaulted to celebrity-drug
status in Europe. Newspapers and Web sites ran dozens of stories about the
imminent danger of the therapy. ''The moment that e-mail was presented in open
court,'' a columnist wrote in the weekend paper Scotland on Sunday, was when the
''era of genetic doping . . . arrived.''

   Repoxygen works by worming a specialized gene into its host's DNA. In the
right circumstances, the gene directs cells to start making extra erythropoietin
(EPO), a hormone that drives the production of red blood cells. More red blood
cells means more oxygen transported to muscles, which is why athletes have been
known to inject themselves with synthetic EPO. By insinuating itself into an
athlete's genetic code, Repoxygen would theoretically produce a natural stream
of the stuff.

     That presumably was its allure for Thomas Springstein, who in all
likelihood had heard the rumors that a single dose of Repoxygen was not only
undetectable but also had the capacity to alter an athlete's DNA. Once a coach
for several top German track-and-field athletes, Springstein was tried last year
for giving performance-enhancing drugs to unwitting young runners, including one
of Germany's best female hurdlers, Anne-Kathrin Elbe, who was 16 at the time.

     ''I was taken aback and speechless,'' Elbe told me in an e-mail message.
''He said that they were vitamins.''

     It's unlikely that Springstein ever got hold of Repoxygen; none was found
during a 2004 raid of his home. It's even harder to say that the ''era of
genetic doping'' is unequivocally upon us. What is clear, and what the
Springstein case reminds us, is just how impatient some coaches and athletes are
to find new and ingenious ways to cheat. First it was steroids, then EPO, then
human growth hormone -- and now the illicit grail seems to be gene therapy.
Researchers have been hounded with requests for gene therapy from sports teams
as well as individual athletes; many scientists also believe that would-be
dopers troll the Internet, searching for just the right gene-therapy study to
try to duplicate on their own. The formula for Repoxygen itself is publicly
accessible, and a few Web sites even claim to have it for sale.

     ''We filed a patent,'' says Alan Kingsman, the chief executive of Oxford
BioMedica, the lab that developed Repoxygen. ''We published our data. It's all
available to anyone who has the training to understand it.''

     So far, there have been no confirmed cases of gene doping in the United
States or anywhere else, though that could change during the 2008 Summer
Olympics in Beijing, which is when some speculate that gene doping will make its
debut. The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), which preemptively banned gene
doping in 2003, has been funding research at laboratories around the world to
develop a reliable blood or urine test to use at the Games. ''They'll freeze
samples,'' says Theodore Friedmann, a geneticist at the University of
California, San Diego, who also is head of a gene-doping advisory panel for
WADA. ''If gene doping is happening in Beijing, I believe we will be able to
tell -- if not during the competition, then later.''

     Friedmann can't say just how close WADA is to producing its gene-doping
test, and won't speculate about how foolproof it would be. At present, gene
doping is detectable only through biopsies of affected muscle tissue. Cheaters
can only hope this remains the case indefinitely.

     ''We all know people who'll take anything -- anything -- to make the
Olympic team,'' says Darren De Reuck, a running coach in Boulder, Colo., whose
athletes include his wife, Colleen, the 2004 United States Women's Olympic
Trials marathon champion. ''It doesn't matter how weird and wacky it sounds.
Playing around with genes is about as out-there as anything I've ever heard of.
So I'm sure some people will think it would be a great thing to try.''

     In the United States, the first news media reports of gene doping appeared
in the late 1990s, when word got out that ''Schwarzenegger mice'' were being
produced in the lab of H. Lee Sweeney, a molecular physiologist at the
University of Pennsylvania. Sweeney, who had been searching for treatments for
muscle-wasting diseases, focused his research on a gene that produces a protein
called IGF-1, which helps regulate growth. His experiments worked. The mice that
had been injected with an extra copy of the IGF-1 gene packed on muscle and
became as much as 30 percent stronger than before.

     After his work was publicized, Sweeney was inundated with calls from
athletes volunteering themselves as human test subjects. One high-school
football coach offered up his entire team. ''I was quite surprised, I must
admit,'' Sweeney says. ''People would try to entice me, saying things like,
'It'll help advance your research.' Some offered to pay me.''

     To this day, Sweeney receives overtures from would-be guinea pigs. ''Every
time there's a story about our research or any research similar to ours, we get
more calls,'' he says. Patiently he'll explain to the caller that, even when his
therapy is ready for human testing -- Sweeney says it will be years -- there
will be risks of infection, rejection, organ failure, possibly death. The
callers will listen, he says, and then reply, ''O.K., when can we start?''

     Other gene-therapy advances are closer to fruition. At Harvard Medical
School, Chris Evans, a professor of orthopedic surgery, has located a gene that
may treat and prevent osteoarthritis; he and his colleagues have tested it
successfully in lame horses and plan to switch to human subjects later this
year.

     ''I've had lots of people volunteer,'' he says. ''Some of them are my
friends, middle-aged weekend athletes whose knees are shot.'' But he's
anticipating that he'll eventually get requests from coaches and trainers as
well. When I ask how his therapy could affect healthy young athletes, he
replies: ''It is possible they could create stronger joints. They could train
harder without risking joint injury. But that's not the point of our research.
We're trying to treat disease.''

     The search for effective gene therapies was a primary motivation behind the
Human Genome Project, which, between 1990 and 2003, identified the 20,000-plus
genes that make up human DNA. Each of these genes expresses a protein that, in
turn, regulates cellular functions. If, for instance, you have a defective gene
for producing the muscle protein dystrophin, your muscles won't repair
themselves correctly. That's the cause of muscular dystrophy. By fixing glitches
in a person's genome, gene therapy would, in theory, cure any number of
devastating genetic diseases.

     The science is quite simple: typically, the requisite gene is introduced
into a virus that is then injected into a patient. The virus can enter the
nuclei of host cells, changing their DNA. When the cells replicate, they pass on
the new DNA as well.

     But the results have been largely disappointing. Hundreds of gene-therapy
trials have been performed on humans and animals over the past two decades. A
handful of therapies have shown moderate success, but most have done absolutely
nothing, good or bad. Some have had unintended, even disastrous consequences. In
one 1998 study, baboons were injected with a genetic compound similar to
Repoxygen designed to alter EPO production. The new gene did, indeed, produce
extra EPO -- at an unchecked pace. The baboons' circulatory systems became so
clogged with red blood cells that the animals had to be drained of excess blood.
In another study, healthy primates had an unexpected immune reaction to the
virus used to carry the EPO gene. Their bodies lost the ability to produce red
blood cells. Stricken with anemia, several of the animals had to be euthanized.

     Repoxygen is not so capricious. Unlike most experimental EPO gene therapies
, Repoxygen has a built-in gauge that recognizes when red-blood-cell counts have
fallen below a healthy level. Only then will the gene crank up EPO production.
Once normal red-blood-cell counts have been reached, the gene turns itself off.
Since athletes presumably have optimum red-blood-cell levels, Repoxygen would
likely do nothing for them, except possibly set off an immune reaction to the
virus.

     Nonetheless, dopers want it, as is apparent by underground Web sites that
advertise gene therapies for sale. In the interest of research, Olivier Rabin,
the science director of WADA, ordered some samples. ''What came was just
versions of synthetic EPO,'' he says, not gene-therapy drugs. But fraudulent
advertising doesn't seem to be a deterrent to sales.

     The Web sites are, Rabin believes, quite popular: ''No one ever said the
people willing to use gene doping will be great minds or careful scientists.''

     The unsettling dystopian aura surrounding gene doping also obscures the
fact that this isn't fantasy science: gene doping is not eugenics. It can't
create superathletes. None of the substances with which dopers will likely
experiment would completely rewrite a person's DNA; nor could dopers pass on
their altered genes to future generations. And genetic changes wouldn't
necessarily be permanent.

     If successful, gene therapy would affect performance by fractions of
seconds. But, of course, gold medals and multimillion-dollar sponsorship deals
rest on such knife-edged differences, so the dopers are sure to keep trying.

     As for Thomas Springstein, he received a 16-month suspended sentence for
supplying an illegal substance to a minor. He has been banned from the German
Track and Field Federation but is otherwise free to coach. The word is, he's
been getting offers. .

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Anne-Kathrin Elbe's former coach tried to order bootleg gene
therapy. (Photo by Omnivore)

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2007


                              502 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              June 3, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Play; HOT TOPIC; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1708 words

HEADLINE: Outlaw DNA

BYLINE: By Gretchen Reynolds

BODY:

   It was a single line from a longer e-mail message. But when read into the
record by prosecutors at the drug trial last year of the German track coach
Thomas Springstein, it caused a sensation. ''The new Repoxygen is hard to get,''
Springstein had written. ''Please give me new instructions soon so that I can
order the product before Christmas.''

     Until that day in the courtroom, Repoxygen was an obscure gene-therapy drug
developed at a pharmaceutical lab in Oxford, England, to fight anemia. The lab
shelved the product when it seemed unlikely to be profitable. Once it was
mentioned in court in January 2006, however, Repoxygen vaulted to celebrity-drug
status in Europe. Newspapers and Web sites ran dozens of stories about the
imminent danger of the therapy. ''The moment that e-mail was presented in open
court,'' a columnist wrote in the weekend paper Scotland on Sunday, was when the
''era of genetic doping . . . arrived.''

   Repoxygen works by worming a specialized gene into its host's DNA. In the
right circumstances, the gene directs cells to start making extra erythropoietin
(EPO), a hormone that drives the production of red blood cells. More red blood
cells means more oxygen transported to muscles, which is why athletes have been
known to inject themselves with synthetic EPO. By insinuating itself into an
athlete's genetic code, Repoxygen would theoretically produce a natural stream
of the stuff.

     That presumably was its allure for Thomas Springstein, who in all
likelihood had heard the rumors that a single dose of Repoxygen was not only
undetectable but also had the capacity to alter an athlete's DNA. Once a coach
for several top German track-and-field athletes, Springstein was tried last year
for giving performance-enhancing drugs to unwitting young runners, including one
of Germany's best female hurdlers, Anne-Kathrin Elbe, who was 16 at the time.

     ''I was taken aback and speechless,'' Elbe told me in an e-mail message.
''He said that they were vitamins.''

     It's unlikely that Springstein ever got hold of Repoxygen; none was found
during a 2004 raid of his home. It's even harder to say that the ''era of
genetic doping'' is unequivocally upon us. What is clear, and what the
Springstein case reminds us, is just how impatient some coaches and athletes are
to find new and ingenious ways to cheat. First it was steroids, then EPO, then
human growth hormone -- and now the illicit grail seems to be gene therapy.
Researchers have been hounded with requests for gene therapy from sports teams
as well as individual athletes; many scientists also believe that would-be
dopers troll the Internet, searching for just the right gene-therapy study to
try to duplicate on their own. The formula for Repoxygen itself is publicly
accessible, and a few Web sites even claim to have it for sale.

     ''We filed a patent,'' says Alan Kingsman, the chief executive of Oxford
BioMedica, the lab that developed Repoxygen. ''We published our data. It's all
available to anyone who has the training to understand it.''

     So far, there have been no confirmed cases of gene doping in the United
States or anywhere else, though that could change during the 2008 Summer
Olympics in Beijing, which is when some speculate that gene doping will make its
debut. The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), which preemptively banned gene
doping in 2003, has been funding research at laboratories around the world to
develop a reliable blood or urine test to use at the Games. ''They'll freeze
samples,'' says Theodore Friedmann, a geneticist at the University of
California, San Diego, who also is head of a gene-doping advisory panel for
WADA. ''If gene doping is happening in Beijing, I believe we will be able to
tell -- if not during the competition, then later.''

     Friedmann can't say just how close WADA is to producing its gene-doping
test, and won't speculate about how foolproof it would be. At present, gene
doping is detectable only through biopsies of affected muscle tissue. Cheaters
can only hope this remains the case indefinitely.

     ''We all know people who'll take anything -- anything -- to make the
Olympic team,'' says Darren De Reuck, a running coach in Boulder, Colo., whose
athletes include his wife, Colleen, the 2004 United States Women's Olympic
Trials marathon champion. ''It doesn't matter how weird and wacky it sounds.
Playing around with genes is about as out-there as anything I've ever heard of.
So I'm sure some people will think it would be a great thing to try.''

     In the United States, the first news media reports of gene doping appeared
in the late 1990s, when word got out that ''Schwarzenegger mice'' were being
produced in the lab of H. Lee Sweeney, a molecular physiologist at the
University of Pennsylvania. Sweeney, who had been searching for treatments for
muscle-wasting diseases, focused his research on a gene that produces a protein
called IGF-1, which helps regulate growth. His experiments worked. The mice that
had been injected with an extra copy of the IGF-1 gene packed on muscle and
became as much as 30 percent stronger than before.

     After his work was publicized, Sweeney was inundated with calls from
athletes volunteering themselves as human test subjects. One high-school
football coach offered up his entire team. ''I was quite surprised, I must
admit,'' Sweeney says. ''People would try to entice me, saying things like,
'It'll help advance your research.' Some offered to pay me.''

     To this day, Sweeney receives overtures from would-be guinea pigs. ''Every
time there's a story about our research or any research similar to ours, we get
more calls,'' he says. Patiently he'll explain to the caller that, even when his
therapy is ready for human testing -- Sweeney says it will be years -- there
will be risks of infection, rejection, organ failure, possibly death. The
callers will listen, he says, and then reply, ''O.K., when can we start?''

     Other gene-therapy advances are closer to fruition. At Harvard Medical
School, Chris Evans, a professor of orthopedic surgery, has located a gene that
may treat and prevent osteoarthritis; he and his colleagues have tested it
successfully in lame horses and plan to switch to human subjects later this
year.

     ''I've had lots of people volunteer,'' he says. ''Some of them are my
friends, middle-aged weekend athletes whose knees are shot.'' But he's
anticipating that he'll eventually get requests from coaches and trainers as
well. When I ask how his therapy could affect healthy young athletes, he
replies: ''It is possible they could create stronger joints. They could train
harder without risking joint injury. But that's not the point of our research.
We're trying to treat disease.''

     The search for effective gene therapies was a primary motivation behind the
Human Genome Project, which, between 1990 and 2003, identified the 20,000-plus
genes that make up human DNA. Each of these genes expresses a protein that, in
turn, regulates cellular functions. If, for instance, you have a defective gene
for producing the muscle protein dystrophin, your muscles won't repair
themselves correctly. That's the cause of muscular dystrophy. By fixing glitches
in a person's genome, gene therapy would, in theory, cure any number of
devastating genetic diseases.

     The science is quite simple: typically, the requisite gene is introduced
into a virus that is then injected into a patient. The virus can enter the
nuclei of host cells, changing their DNA. When the cells replicate, they pass on
the new DNA as well.

     But the results have been largely disappointing. Hundreds of gene-therapy
trials have been performed on humans and animals over the past two decades. A
handful of therapies have shown moderate success, but most have done absolutely
nothing, good or bad. Some have had unintended, even disastrous consequences. In
one 1998 study, baboons were injected with a genetic compound similar to
Repoxygen designed to alter EPO production. The new gene did, indeed, produce
extra EPO -- at an unchecked pace. The baboons' circulatory systems became so
clogged with red blood cells that the animals had to be drained of excess blood.
In another study, healthy primates had an unexpected immune reaction to the
virus used to carry the EPO gene. Their bodies lost the ability to produce red
blood cells. Stricken with anemia, several of the animals had to be euthanized.

     Repoxygen is not so capricious. Unlike most experimental EPO gene therapies
, Repoxygen has a built-in gauge that recognizes when red-blood-cell counts have
fallen below a healthy level. Only then will the gene crank up EPO production.
Once normal red-blood-cell counts have been reached, the gene turns itself off.
Since athletes presumably have optimum red-blood-cell levels, Repoxygen would
likely do nothing for them, except possibly set off an immune reaction to the
virus.

     Nonetheless, dopers want it, as is apparent by underground Web sites that
advertise gene therapies for sale. In the interest of research, Olivier Rabin,
the science director of WADA, ordered some samples. ''What came was just
versions of synthetic EPO,'' he says, not gene-therapy drugs. But fraudulent
advertising doesn't seem to be a deterrent to sales.

     The Web sites are, Rabin believes, quite popular: ''No one ever said the
people willing to use gene doping will be great minds or careful scientists.''

     The unsettling dystopian aura surrounding gene doping also obscures the
fact that this isn't fantasy science: gene doping is not eugenics. It can't
create superathletes. None of the substances with which dopers will likely
experiment would completely rewrite a person's DNA; nor could dopers pass on
their altered genes to future generations. And genetic changes wouldn't
necessarily be permanent.

     If successful, gene therapy would affect performance by fractions of
seconds. But, of course, gold medals and multimillion-dollar sponsorship deals
rest on such knife-edged differences, so the dopers are sure to keep trying.

     As for Thomas Springstein, he received a 16-month suspended sentence for
supplying an illegal substance to a minor. He has been banned from the German
Track and Field Federation but is otherwise free to coach. The word is, he's
been getting offers. .

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: BAD SCIENCE -- Anne-Kathrin Elbe's former coach tried to order
bootleg gene therapy. (ILLUSTRATION BY OMNIVORE)

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2007


                              503 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                              June 1, 2007 Friday
                                 CITY-D Edition

SECTION: OBITUARIES; Inq Obituaries; Pg. B09

LENGTH: 496 words

HEADLINE: Harvey Harris, gene-therapy pioneer

BYLINE: By Sally A. Downey; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Harvey Harris, 63, of Gibbsboro, a maintenance mechanic who underwent
groundbreaking gene-therapy treatment for mesothelioma, died of the disease
Saturday at St. Luke's Hospital in Jacksonville, Fla., where he had a second
home.

   Mesothelioma is an aggressive cancer caused by exposure to asbestos.

   Mr. Harris had chipped asbestos off pipes while in the Navy. In addition, he
worked for nearly 13 years at the Owens-Corning fiberglass plant in Barrington,
where he routinely handled asbestos; he also handled asbestos as a civilian
employee for 17 years at the Naval Air Station in Pensacola, Fla.

   He was diagnosed with the disease in February 2004. In March 2005, after
conventional chemotherapy had failed to work, he decided to try an experimental
treatment at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.

   He was infused with hundreds of billions of viral particles genetically
engineered to rev up his body to attack the cancer. In July, he became the first
patient in the clinical trial at HUP to get a second dose of the gene drug.
Tests done after the drug was administered showed that the cancer had not
progressed and his physician, Daniel Sterman, told him some cancer might have
cleared.

   In October 2005, Mr. Harris was featured in an Inquirer story about the
innovative treatment. The newspaper updated readers on his condition in January
2006, reporting that Mr. Harris was enjoying his grandchildren, fishing and
working in his pottery studio.

   Though he became ill again last fall, his wife, Jeanette Gaskins Harris,
said, he continued to be hopeful. At the time of his death, he was taking a
chemotherapy treatment typically used for breast cancer that has shown promise
for lung cancers.

   Mr. Harris grew up with nine siblings in Magnolia and attended Haddon Heights
High School. After serving in the Navy for two years, he was a hospital orderly
and a short-order cook before joining Owens-Corning as a maintenance mechanic.
While working, he took courses at Camden County College, Rutgers University and
the University of West Florida in subjects ranging from mathematics to art. He
had enough credits for a degree, his wife said, but kept changing his major.

   Mr. Harris raised three children in Camden with his first wife, Charlay
Harris. They later divorced. In addition to his wife of five years, Jeanette
Harris, Mr. Harris is survived by daughters Sharlay Smith and Patricia Bentley;
a son, Harvey Jr.; two brothers; three sisters; three grandchildren; and his
former wife.

   A funeral will be at 11 a.m. Monday at Grace Temple Baptist Church, 15 E.
Charleston Ave., Lawnside. Friends may call at 9 a.m. Burial will be in Berlin
Cemetery, Berlin, N.J.

   Donations may be made to the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania
Mesothelioma Fund, 3535 Market St., Suite 750, Philadelphia 19104.


   To read a previous story about Harvey Harris, go to

   http://go.philly.com/harveyharris

   Contact staff writer Sally A. Downey at 215-854-2913 or
sdowney@phillynews.com.

GRAPHIC: Photograph by: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2007


                              504 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2007 The Detroit News
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Detroit News (Michigan)

                             May 30, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 194 words

HEADLINE: Business People

BODY:

   Awards

   The National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Biomaterials awarded Dr.
Fangyu Peng , a professor at Wayne State University, Detroit, $369,180 to
continue his efforts in improving human gene therapy.

   Banking

   The National City Bank Private Client Group, Ann Arbor, appointed Kevin M.
Kramer as vice president and private banker. Kramer is responsible for
entrepreneurial clients in the Ann Arbor area.

   Communications

   Identity Marketing and Public Relations, Bingham Farms, hired Heather Blasko
as an account supervisor.

   Health care

   Retail, employer and in-home health care company Arcadia Resources Inc.,
Southfield, appointed Marvin R. Richardson to president and CEO.

   Medical

   The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, appointed James Woolliscroft as dean
of the U-M Medical School. His five-year term is effective July 1.

   Nonprofit

   The Presbyterian Villages of Michigan, Southfield, hired LaDonna Holley as
its vice president of human resources and organizational development.

   Recycling

   Midstates Fibres, Walled Lake, appointed Julie Featherston as regional
account manager for Metro Detroit. Featherston is responsible for providing
customers with custom recycling programs.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2007


                              505 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2007 The Detroit News
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Detroit News (Michigan)

                             May 30, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 194 words

BODY:

   Awards

   The National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Biomaterials awarded Dr.
Fangyu Peng , a professor at Wayne State University, Detroit, $369,180 to
continue his efforts in improving human gene therapy.

   Banking

   The National City Bank Private Client Group, Ann Arbor, appointed Kevin M.
Kramer as vice president and private banker. Kramer is responsible for
entrepreneurial clients in the Ann Arbor area.

   Communications

   Identity Marketing and Public Relations, Bingham Farms, hired Heather Blasko
as an account supervisor.

   Health care

   Retail, employer and in-home health care company Arcadia Resources Inc.,
Southfield, appointed Marvin R. Richardson to president and CEO.

   Medical

   The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, appointed James Woolliscroft as dean
of the U-M Medical School. His five-year term is effective July 1.

   Nonprofit

   The Presbyterian Villages of Michigan, Southfield, hired LaDonna Holley as
its vice president of human resources and organizational development.

   Recycling

   Midstates Fibres, Walled Lake, appointed Julie Featherston as regional
account manager for Metro Detroit. Featherston is responsible for providing
customers with custom recycling programs.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2007


                              506 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                              May 27, 2007 Sunday
                                Bulldog Edition

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. D01

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 2469 words

HEADLINE: Out of the Blue, Hope;
Modern Medicine Helps Dutch Country Children With Rare, Deadly Diseases

BYLINE: Helen O'Neill; Associated Press

DATELINE: EAST EARL, Pa.

BODY:

    Across the moonless dark of Lancaster County, where horse-drawn buggies
clatter along dusty country roads and many families shun electricity, a strange
blue light cuts harshly through the night.

   Over the cornfields it beckons, like some otherworldly force, beaming from
the bedroom window of a 100-year-old Mennonite farmhouse.

   Downstairs, flaxen-haired girls with braids read to younger children . . . a
mother in a traditional long print dress and white organdy cap rocks a
slumbering child . . . a father returning from the fields pulls up a chair to
the coal-fired stove.

   The scene is bathed in the glow of a single gas lamp.

   Upstairs, a baby sleeps in another kind of light, in a very different world.

   High-intensity blue electric rays burn down upon his crib, creating an
iridescent haze that envelops the room. The lights are suspended from a heavy
stainless steel canopy just inches above the child.

   The baby wears only a diaper and has no blankets, just starched white sheets.
Mirrors are built into one side of the crib. Fans hum loudly to keep him cool.

   With his chubby cheeks and bleached blond hair, 15-month old Bryan Martin
looks like an angel in his luminous cocoon.

   But Bryan is a very sick child.

   The whites of his eyes are yellow and his skin is an unnatural gold.

   The blue lights are saving his life.

   * * *

   In the lush, green pastures of Pennsylvania Dutch country, where life
revolves around the one-room schoolhouse, the farm and the church, and locals
speak a distinctive German dialect, the strange blue lights beam from a handful
of homes.

   To the Amish and Mennonites they mean one thing -- the presence of an
extraordinarily rare disease that seems to cruelly target their communities,
forcing afflicted children to spend 10 to 12 hours a day, undressed, under
lights.

   The children suffer from a genetic disorder that causes high levels of a
toxin called bilirubin to build up in their bodies, resulting in severe jaundice
that, if untreated, causes brain damage and death.

   Bilirubin, a natural waste product from worn-out red blood cells, is normally
broken down by an enzyme in the liver. If the enzyme is missing, bilirubin can
be checked only by the wavelengths of blue lights. Levels must be monitored
constantly. Even minor injuries or infections can cause them to rise
dramatically.

   The disease is Crigler-Najjar syndrome, named for two doctors who identified
it 55 years ago. There are about 110 known cases of Crigler's worldwide,
including about 35 in the U.S. About 20 are among the Amish and Mennonite in
Pennsylvania.

   There is no cure; Bryan's only hope for long-term survival is a liver
transplant.

   * * *

   As a Mennonite, Katie Martin embraces the teaching of her church, that sick
children are gifts from God, born to foster compassion and understanding.

   But nothing prepared her for the news that her firstborn, Derick, had
Crigler's. Several years earlier, a nephew had suffered brain damage and died of
the disease at age 3.

   "I thought it was a death sentence," she said.

   In the past, it usually was. But in 1990 a new clinic had just opened in
Strasburg specializing in children with rare diseases. There, the Martins met a
doctor who had once studied with  John Crigler, who first described the disease
with Victor Najjar in 1952. The doctor told them about bilirubin levels and the
dangers of kernicterus, the brain disorder that killed their nephew.

   Bring the baby back for blood tests every month, the doctor told them.

   And keep him under blue lights.

   So the Martins -- who are unrelated to Bryan Martin -- took their yellow baby
back to their 140-acre dairy farm in Mifflinburg and embarked on a life of
testing, monitoring and lights.

   Floyd, who also works as a welder, fashioned a stainless steel-framed canopy
to hold the lights over his son's bed. He learned all he could about
phototherapy, as the blue light treatment is called. As the boy grew, Martin
made bigger, more sophisticated frames. When his next child, Amy, was born, he
made another set of lights. When their three cousins across the hill were
stricken, he made more.

   Today, Floyd Martin's blue light beds, which cost about $1,000, are sought by
Crigler families all over the world.

   The Martins, old-order Mennonites, have electricity and a phone, but there is
no computer, television or radio in their house. They travel by horse and buggy,
except for emergencies when they hire a driver.

   They had no moral qualms about using electric lights, as some more
conservative families do.

   But the disease forced other compromises, like accepting state insurance for
their sick children, even though church rules forbid any form of government
help. Generally, the church pays for all medical care.

   "The hardest thing," says Katie Martin, a slender woman of 37 with a pale,
thin face and dark brown eyes, "was to hear them cry on cold winter nights and
not just be able to wrap them in a blanket or curl up in our bed."

   She is standing in the brightly lit cow barn, overseeing the noontime milking
of 65 Holsteins. Derick, now a strapping young man of 17, hauls long milking
tubes along a motorized pulley. Amy, 15, attaches them to the cows.

   The teenagers radiate sturdiness and health. Still, their mother eyes them
nervously.

   For years she has worried about bilirubin levels. She has cajoled her
children back under the lights on the nights they crawled out, complaining about
the heat. She has nursed them through gallbladder operations,  debilitating
fatigue and other side effects of Crigler's. She has made countless emergency
visits to the clinic.

   Now she has another worry: liver rejection. Both children have had
transplants in the past three years and for Amy recovery was complicated.
Ulcers. Lesions. Diabetes. High doses of steroids and anti-rejection therapy.
Months of hospitalization. Martin estimates that Amy's total medical costs have
amounted to  more than $1 million.

   And yet, Martin knew her daughter had no choice. Bilirubin builds up
dangerously in adolescence as skin gets  denser. And the psychological toll can
be devastating.

   For years, Martin received sad, lonely letters from a woman in England who
survived Crigler's into early adulthood. In 2004, at the age of 30, she smashed
her bed of lights. The disease killed her within a few weeks.

   Martin tells this story to panicked parents who call from around the world
when they have a yellow baby and they don't know where to turn.

   She tells them exactly how to set the lights. She tells them what drugs to
use and what to avoid. And she tells them about a special place and a doctor who
is an expert on the disease.

   "Go to Dr. Morton," she says. "He can save your child."

   * * *

   On a dewy spring morning in Strasburg, strains of Bach drift from a
post-and-beam building on a hill overlooking an alfalfa field. Inside, rays of
light wash down from rafters, silhouetting the doctor-musician as he cradles his
cello.

   For Holmes Morton, his daily dawn "concert" is a rare escape from the sadness
of sick children and the desperation of parents who come to him for miracles.

   There are no miracles, he tells them. For many rare diseases there are no
cures.

   To the families who travel from miles around, Morton's Clinic for Special
Children is itself a miracle.

   Here, on what was once an Amish farmer's field, in a building erected in
traditional barn-raising fashion by 70 local men, some of the worlds rarest
diseases are identified. Children who would never have survived in the past are
treated with special formulas and dietary regimens tailored solely to their
needs. And because the local community helps pay for the nonprofit clinic
through annual auctions, costs are far less than at a regular doctors office.

   Geneticists have long studied the Amish and Mennonites, descendants of Swiss
and German Anabaptists who settled in Pennsylvania in the 1700s. Forbidden to
marry outside their religion, the Plain People, as they are known, have a
relatively high risk of being carriers of rare diseases.

   But research generally takes place in university laboratories, far from
actual patients and their illnesses.

   At the Clinic for Special Children, laboratory director Erik Puffenberger
studies a mass spectrometer and DNA sequencing machine in one room, while across
the corridor an Amish family clusters around Morton to discuss their sick child.
Heirloom quilts decorate the walls. A horse and buggy is tethered to a hitching
post outside.

   And new genes are being identified all the time.

   "The real frontier of genetic medicine is in the everyday practice," Morton
says, as he bounces over hilly back roads in his silver Jetta, waving at bearded
farmers and straw-hatted boys.

   With his thinning hair, walrus mustache, starched white shirt and bow tie,
Morton looks every inch the genial country doctor. But the 56-year-old,
Harvard-trained pediatrician is far more. In 1989 he gave up a promising
academic career to pursue his vision of the clinic, believing that the only way
to understand rare diseases was to live in the communities where they occurred.
Today, the clinic, which is run by Morton's wife, Caroline, treats about 600
Amish and Mennonite children. Morton's work is recognized around the world.

   "These children are living with the sword of Damocles," Morton says. "They
need treatment, not just research."

   Morton is speaking not just of Crigler-Najjar syndrome, but of the many other
rare disorders seen in the clinic. Maple syrup urine disease. Glutaric aciduria.
Pigeon breast disease. Pretzel syndrome.

   Many of the disorders can be fatal -- or cruelly disfiguring -- if
undetected. Like Crigler's, many are so unusual they are simply not recognized
by general pediatricians.

   The clinic now recommends all Amish and Mennonite newborns be routinely
screened for more than 35 genetic diseases. In 2004 it discovered a gene
implicated in some cases of sudden infant death syndrome. It has established
links between rare metabolic disorders like glutaric aciduria and diseases that
are more common in the general population, like cerebral palsy.

   "God sent Dr. Morton to us," says Norman Burkholder, after leaving his mules
and plow one day to bring in his 9-year-old son. The child is dizzy and coughing
and he complains, in Pennsylvania Dutch, that his stomach hurts.

   Later the boy will be admitted to Lancaster General Hospital, where he will
spend days on a special formula prepared by Morton's clinic. The child has maple
syrup urine disease, a rare enzyme deficiency that causes his urine and ear wax
to smell like maple syrup. If he had not been properly diagnosed and the formula
had not been available, he could have slipped into a coma and died.

   As with Crigler-Najjar, there is no cure. The boy will eventually need a
liver transplant.

   * * *

   John Crigler remembers being baffled by the jaundice disease he encountered
among Amish newborns when he was a young pediatrician working with Najjar at
Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore. The babies all died.

   "There wasn't any treatment, any hope, any cure," said Crigler, now 87. "We
were just spectators. There was nothing we could do."

   Patients began living longer in the 1970s when doctors realized that the
wavelength and energy of blue light changes the nature of the bilirubin,
allowing it to be excreted from the body.

   There was even a brief time, in the late 1990s, when a cure seemed imminent.
Experiments in rats suggested that chimeraplasty, a form of gene therapy, could
also succeed in humans. The therapy is based on the use of a molecule called a
chimeraplast, a synthetic blend of DNA and the related molecule RNA, that would
trick the patient's own cells to repair themselves.

   At a conference of Crigler families in July 1999 Morton announced that the
first human trials would begin on three of his patients in Lancaster General
Hospital that fall.

   "There was such excitement," recalls Katie Martin, who was pregnant with her
third child at the time. "We thought that soon we would get rid of the blue
lights forever."

   Two months later an 18-year-old Arizonan named Jesse Gelsinger died during an
unrelated gene-therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania. Funding for
human trials dried up.

   So did hope for Derick and Amy Martin.

   Liver transplants are expensive and invasive and bring their own share of
heartache and fear. Rejection can be especially hard for teenagers like Amy,
who crave normality after years under lights.

   Amy has a smattering of freckles over pink cheeks and expressive eyes that
light up when she boasts about her horse, Paintball, or the two bucks she shot
when she went hunting with her dad. She is proud of her transplant, despite her
long recovery and all the anti-rejection medicine she must take.

   She will even lift her long white dress to show off the scar that snakes down
her chest and around her stomach.

   Amy hated the lights, hated having to sleep without a blanket, hated the
flies that crawled under the glass. Most of all she hated her eyes.

   When she woke up after her transplant, she begged for a mirror.

   Carefully, she scanned the whites for any trace of yellow.

   "Wow," she thought. "They're so blue."

   And then she thought, "I'm not a Crigler's child anymore."

   Amy's uncle and aunt, John and Miriam Martin, have witnessed her trials even
as they contemplate three transplants in their own family.

   John is Katie Martin's brother; he has the same warm brown eyes and kind
smile. His three eldest children have yellow eyes and honeyed skin.

   Dawn, 12, is the eldest, a serious child with a mothering streak.
Nine-year-old Eric is lanky and shy. Joyce, 8, is the mischievous one with the
big imagination.

   At their Mifflinburg farmhouse, Martin has built them a huge sunroom, all
windows and light. He has fixed up one of Floyd Martin's inventions in the
living room -- a 6-foot-high box of blue lights and mirrors with a door that the
children climb into after school, their heads popping out of the top. They call
it "the shuttle." He has taken them on vacation to Florida, to a family with a
Crigler's child who let them borrow blue lights.

   But the 33-year-old father cannot escape the agony of having cursed his
children with his genes.

   The new baby, Joel, doesn't have Crigler's. Nor does 20-month-old Johnny.
When they were born, John says, it seemed like a miracle.

   Now the family prays for another miracle -- a cure.

   "Now I lay me down to sleep . . . I pray the Lord my soul to keep . . . "

   Lying on their stomachs on their double bed, Dawn and Joyce chant their
prayers in singsong unison. They are in their underwear, covered by a sheet. A
heavy stainless steel canopy of lights hangs above them.

   Their father kisses them goodnight in the dark. He cannot bear to turn on the
blue lights or pull off their cover while they are still awake.

   Later, he will creep back into their room and press a switch.

   Outside, from far across the fields, a strange blue light will beckon in the
dark.

GRAPHIC: IMAGE; Photos By Carolyn Kaster -- Associated Press; Bryan Martin
sleeps under blue lights, which help keep his Crigler-Najjar syndrome in check.
Children with the deadly disease spend 10 to 12 hours a day under lights.
IMAGE; Eric Martin, 9, left, who is jaundiced from his Crigler-Najjar, holds his
healthy little brother, Johnny, 1, in the kitchen of their Mifflinburg, Pa.,
home.
IMAGE; Photos By Carolyn Kaster -- Associated Press; Dorothy Martin, a
Mennonite, looks in on her son Bryan, as he sleeps under blue lights. The boy's
only hope for long-term survival is a liver transplant. Pediatrician Holmes
Norton, left, says, "The real frontier of genetic medicine is in the everyday
practice. . . . These children are living with the sword of Damocles. They need
treatment, not just research."
IMAGE

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2007


                              507 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                              May 20, 2007 Sunday
                                 Every Edition

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. W14

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

LENGTH: 4689 words

HEADLINE: Too Much to Carry?;
Women pregnant with multiple fetuses face one of the toughest choices
imaginable: Risk the health of all, or take the lives of some

BYLINE: Liza Mundy

BODY:

   THE MEDICAL PRACTICE OF MARK EVANS IS LOCATED ON THE GROUND FLOOR OF A
MANHATTAN TOWNHOUSE, nestled discreetly among the restaurants and nail salons of
the Upper East Side. To be admitted, patients must ring a buzzer and wait for
the door to open before taking a seat inside the crowded waiting room.

   Down the hall in a tiny examining room one morning, a sonographer named
Rachel Greenbaum was sitting on a high stool next to an ultrasound machine. "Do
you want to see the screen?" she asked one of Evans's patients, who was lying
unhappily on an examining table. The woman, pale-skinned, fine-featured, tall,
in her 30s, was wearing a hospital gown. Beside the woman was her husband,
sitting in a chair, holding his wife's hand. He too was pale, and, like his
wife, he looked miserable. "Yes, I'd like to see them," the woman on the table
said firmly.

   "I'll just take a few pictures, and I'll show them to you," Greenbaum said.

   "Them" referred to the three fetuses in the woman's belly, a long sought
pregnancy achieved by in vitro fertilization. The woman and her husband were
about to turn their triplets into twins in a procedure known as selective
reduction.

   Selective reduction is one of the most unpleasant facts of fertility
medicine, which has helped hundreds of thousands of couples have children but
has also produced a sharp rise in high-risk multiple pregnancies. There is no
way to know how many pregnancies achieved by fertility treatment start out as
triplets or quadruplets and are quietly reduced to something more manageable.
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which publishes an annual
report on fertility clinic outcomes, does not include selective-reduction
figures because of the reluctance to report them.

   The industry doesn't publish them, either. "This is a very sensitive topic,"
says David Grainger, president of the Society for Assisted Reproductive
Technology, the membership group for IVF clinics. It's sensitive, personally,
for patients, but also politically, for doctors.

   Mark Evans is one of the few doctors in the country who not only performs
reductions but also is willing to discuss all qualms, ethics, issues, outcomes.
Evans, who describes himself as an obstetrician-geneticist, is a pioneer in
fetal therapy. Using stem-cell transplants, he developed the first in-utero
correction of SCID, a genetic disorder that severely compromises the immune
system. He has also pioneered fetal surgeries, including bladder shunts for
fetuses with urological obstructions. The goal of his practice is the delivery
of a healthy baby. In some cases, this can be achieved by treating a fetus in
utero. In some cases, it is achieved by sacrificing a fetus in utero.

   In 2005, I spent two days with Evans, where the first reduction patient was
the distressed woman who had become pregnant with triplets. Triplets pregnancies
are far riskier than most people realize: Carrying three babies to term would
more than double the woman's risk of developing the most severe diseases of
pregnancy, such as preeclampsia. The average triplet is born two months
premature, significantly raising the risk of disabilities such as cerebral palsy
and of lifelong damage to the infant's lungs, eyes, brain and other organs. By
reducing the pregnancy to twins, the woman and her husband would decrease the
risk of severe prematurity. And the risk of losing her entire pregnancy would
fall from 15 percent to 4 percent.

   As she was having her sonogram, the patient told Greenbaum how she'd ended up
there. After suffering a series of miscarriages, she and her husband had IVF
performed, producing three embryos. To maximize the chances of a successful
pregnancy, all three embryos were put into her uterus. All three took.

   "Triplets," Greenbaum said.

   "So they tell me," the woman said, her voice hollow.

   And, sure enough, on Greenbaum's screen were three little honeycombed
chambers with three fetuses growing in them. The fetuses were moving and waving
their limbs; even at this point, approaching 12 weeks of gestation, they were
clearly human, at that big-headed-could-be-an-alien-but-definitely-not-a-kitten
stage of development. Evans has found this to be the best window of time in
which to perform a reduction. Waiting that long provides time to see whether the
pregnancy might reduce itself naturally through miscarriage, and lets the
fetuses develop to the point where genetic testing can be done to see which are
chromosomally normal.

   Greenbaum periodically magnified one fetus and brought it into focus. She
would then freeze the frame and do two things: measure the fetuses to assess
their growth and see if any one is lagging; and take a "nuchal translucency,"
measuring the fluid behind each fetus's neck. An excess of nuchal fluid suggests
a possible problem: Down syndrome, for example. They are all measuring at 11
weeks and 6 days," Greenbaum said.

   "That's right," the woman said, wonderingly. "It is 12 weeks tomorrow."

   So far, there was nothing anomalous about any of the fetuses. Greenbaum
turned the screen toward the patient. "That's the little heartbeat," she said,
pointing to the area where a tiny organ was clearly pulsing. "And there are the
little hands. There's the head. The body."

   "Oh, my God, I can really see it!" the patient cried. "Oh, my God! I can see
the fingers!"

   "Okay!" she said, abruptly, gesturing for the screen to be turned away. She
began sobbing. There were no tissues in the room, so her husband gave her a
paper towel, which she crumpled to her face. The patient spent the rest of the
procedure with her hospital gown over her face, so she would not see any more of
what was happening.

   WHAT WAS HAPPENING WAS DAY ONE OF A TWO-DAY PROCESS, in which one of the
woman's three fetuses would be eliminated through an injection of potassium
chloride, which stops the fetal heart. This process was developed by a select
group of doctors including Evans, a large man with the occasional impatience of
someone smarter than most of the people around him.

   Evans, now 54, was in high school when he became interested in genetics, and
he soon realized that the action, genetic therapy-wise, was going to be in
prenatal. He became known as an adept practitioner of fetal therapy -- somebody
with the know-how and the nerve to treat a tiny creature growing deep and
invisible to the naked eye, within a vulnerable womb.

   In 1984, Evans says, he was contacted by an ob-gyn who had a patient pregnant
with quadruplets from fertility treatment. The patient, not even 5 feet tall,
was too small to carry four babies to term. The doctor saw no solution but to
abort them. The woman, unwilling to sacrifice a pregnancy she had worked so hard
for, asked whether it might be possible to do a "half-abortion." The way
abortion is normally performed, through vacuum suction, this would not be
possible, but the doctor called Evans to see if there might be another way.

   "I don't know if it's possible, but I know how I would do it," Evans replied.
The woman was sent to Evans, who, as he puts it, stabbed two of the fetuses with
a needle. "Not an elegant technique," he acknowledges. But it worked. "I reduced
four to two," he says, "and the two are in college right now."

   The technique has been refined. Today, Evans performs CVS, chorionic villus
sampling, on his reduction patients. In CVS, a small portion of the placenta,
which shares the chromosomes of the fetus, is drawn into a hollow needle. The
tissue is shipped to a lab for an overnight test for genetic birth defects. The
same test can also determine the gender of each fetus. Evans also studies the
position of each fetus. The point is to seek a rationale for which one, or ones,
to eliminate.

   Most of Evans's practice does not involve reduction. He does genetic
counseling and testing of pregnant women, and in most cases gets to deliver the
news that their baby is blessedly normal. The days I spent with him, Evans had
three sets of patients coming in for reduction. The first was the unhappy
couple, who left the office so shaken that they would not allow me to watch
their reduction the following day. The second was a woman who had flown in from
Puerto Rico and who arrived for her ultrasound alone, clearly terrified and
needle-shy. She shrieked throughout the CVS procedure, making the tense and
difficult process of aspirating three incipient placentas even more tense and
difficult.

   His third couple was two women. One was a physician whose practice involves
young children with severe birth defects. The other had a job that also brought
her into contact with children in difficulty. Like the other patients seeing
Evans for reductions, the women were gracious enough to let me sit in, but asked
that identifying details not be revealed. For the purposes of this story, I'll
call them Jane and Emma.

   Emma was the one who was pregnant, via a sperm donor. She had suffered a
miscarriage after her first artificial insemination. But the next time, she got
pregnant with quadruplets. "We went from famine to feast," said Jane, explaining
that they felt that carrying four babies to term would be far too risky. These
women knew all too well what serious disability does to a child and to a family.
Evans outlined what would happen and reviewed the criteria for deciding which to
reduce: chromosomal abnormalities, fetal position, professional instincts. "And
then, if absolutely nothing else matters, and if everything else is equal . . ."

   "Selection for sex," finished Jane.

   "If there's a gender difference, we'll talk about that," he acknowledged.

   "I used to be totally not willing to talk about gender," elaborated Evans,
who has pieced together his own ethics during more than 20 years of practice. At
the outset, he worked with a bioethicist to develop guiding principles. For
years, he says, the majority of sex-selection requests came from Asian and
Indian parents, who tended to want to keep the boys. That he would not do.
Increasingly, however, what people want is the Holy Grail of the modern
two-child family: one boy and one girl. He finds that morally acceptable.

   Emma positioned herself on the table for her sonogram, while Jane scrutinized
the four fetuses on the screen. "They are all tucked in really nicely into their
little nests," she said, fascinated. "The most I've ever looked at in utero is
two."

   Greenbaum took the measurements. The growth of all four babies was fine. The
nuchal folds were fine. Evans studied the way the fetuses -- labeled A, B, C and
D -- were positioned and quickly made one decision. "I want to test C," he says,
"because I'm trying to keep it." Located in the most interior spot, C would be
the hardest to get at. To eliminate C, he would almost certainly have to go
through B, cutting off any other options. But to justify keeping it, he needed
to make sure C was normal.

   The women were planning to eliminate two of the fetuses and keep two, which
would decrease their chances of losing the entire pregnancy from 25 percent if
they did nothing to 7 percent if they reduced to twins. And if they fell into
the 7 percent who miscarry, this would be "despite the reduction, not because of
it," Evans said. There may be some risk from the procedure itself. In 20-odd
years, he estimates, a "handful" of pregnancies have miscarried shortly after
his performing the reduction, and with a less experienced practitioner, the risk
of procedure-caused miscarriage is higher, probably just under 1 percent. But
based on the statistics, he argues, "it's almost always safer to do this than
not to do it."

   Jane wanted to safeguard Emma's pregnancy but was feeling some ethical
qualms. "It's killing me that we're going to do this," Jane said. "I never
thought I would feel that. I'm the most pro-choice person. I'm vehemently
pro-choice."

   When Evans was finished, Emma got up from the table, and the women left for
the day. Tomorrow they would be called, like the others, once their test results
were back.

   MIDMORNING THE NEXT DAY, THE WOMAN FROM PUERTO RICO ENTERED THE DOCTOR'S
COUNSELING ROOM, this time accompanied by her mother. Evans told the patient
that all three of her fetuses were normal. The patient let out an elated squeal.
This, said Evans later, is unusual: Often couples are relieved if there is
something wrong with one fetus, since this makes the decision to reduce easier
to bear. "We can leave you with two," he said.

   "Do you know the sex?" the patient's mother asked.

   "All are girls," Evans said, in front of him a sheet on which he had written
the sex chromosomes. A: XX, B: XX, C: XX. "Two girls! That's what she wanted!"
the mother said.

   "Dos ni?as!" said the patient, who ran out of the counseling room and into
the waiting room, where she summoned her grandmother and another elderly woman,
and suddenly there were four women in the room looking ecstatically at Evans,
who explained what would happen next. Because there were no abnormalities and no
sex differences, he said, he would go to the "next level of subtlety" in
determining which to reduce.

   "It's up to you," the mother of the patient said.

   "It can't be three?" said the patient, wistfully.

   Evans reviewed the loss rates for triplets. The patient's mother was clearly
in favor of reduction. They had been over this before, she said, with the IVF
doctor in Puerto Rico. "The risk would be too great," she said. "Sometimes you
have to do unpleasant things to have a family."

   "Very unpleasant," said the patient, who went into the examining room. Evans
opened a pack of instruments; a square napkin with a hole in the center went
over the patient's belly, which he swabbed with antiseptic.

   "I'm a coward," the patient said, bracing herself. Evans and Greenbaum,
wearing surgical gloves, inspected the ultrasound. Evans decided, based on
location, to go for fetus C, which was the most accessible.

   Selective reduction is actually quicker than CVS. It takes a smaller needle
to inject a chemical down than it does to draw a placenta piece up. Even so, the
procedure demanded great skill, dexterity and resolve from Evans and Greenbaum.
Destroying a fetus requires three hands: one to hold the ultrasound transducer
on the patient's belly; one to inject the needle and maneuver it into a position
near the fetal heart; another to draw out the metal rod at the core of the
needle and replace it with the vial of potassium chloride. Evans, who is
left-handed, did all these things at various times, tools close together as he
worked over the patient's belly. At points, Greenbaum assisted by holding the
vial until he needed it; holding the transducer; and coaching him into position,
watching on the screen and issuing directions. Evans worked for a while trying
to get the needle into the right spot.

   "I'm not in," he said at one point, tensely. Then he pinned C with the
needle, and pushed the plunger to release the chemical. The fetus, which had
been undulating and waving, went still. It would remain in the womb, while the
other fetuses grew and developed.

   "Let's check the other two," Evans said, and they moved the transducer to see
the other two fetuses, still there, still waving, two hearts beating, unaware of
what had just happened to the sibling they would never have. "Do you want to see
your twins?" he asked the patient.

   "I don't want to see the other one," the woman said quickly.

   "I chose my words carefully," Evans told her. "Do you want to see your two
daughters?"

   And so he showed her the two daughters, babies so important to this family
that three generations of women had made the flight from San Juan to New York to
ensure the safety of the pregnancy. Contemplating her two living fetuses, the
woman's face displayed an explosion of emotion. Her face went intensely red.
Then Greenbaum adjusted the machine so that it showed, suddenly, a vivid 3-D
image of the twin fetuses, an ultrasound image so rich and detailed that it
looked like a digital photograph taken from deep within the belly. There were
the two faces, the two fontanels, the two nasal ridges, the eight limbs,
everything.

   "That's the heartbeat, the hands," said Evans to the patient, who was gazing,
rapt, at the ultrasound.

   "They're beautiful!" said the woman's mother, who had been summoned into the
room.

   "You can see the arm going up and down," Greenbaum said, pointing to one.
"This one is a busy baby!"

   "A busy baby!" joyfully repeated the patient's mother.

   AFTER THE PROCEDURE, I ASKED EVANS IF WHAT HE HAD JUST DONE WAS AN ABORTION.
"Technically, this is not an abortion, a procedure that kills the fetus and
empties the uterus," he said. "The bottom line is, abortion ends the pregnancy.
We don't end the pregnancy. We very specifically don't end the pregnancy."

   It's not a distinction antiabortion groups necessarily make. "We're opposed
to any taking of life of the human person after they're conceived," said Wanda
Franz, president of the National Right to Life Committee, which opposes
selective reduction, as it does abortion, unless the life of the mother is
clearly at risk. Franz argues that most multiple pregnancies, including
high-order ones, should be carried to term, with the fetuses treated as
patients. "Occasionally, you have tragedies, and the babies don't survive, but
those are the kind of tragedies that can't be prevented."

   While Evans and I chatted, the sonographer, Rachel Greenbaum, was eating a
salad. A new mother herself, she was pumping breast milk between procedures. She
had been recently hired by Evans and, just back from maternity leave, was trying
to get used to this part of her job.

   "I don't particularly like doing the reductions," she said. "I find it very
stressful. With every patient, I think, If it was me, what would I do? Some of
these people tried to get pregnant for the past five years and prayed to God.
And now that they are pregnant, they are telling God: You gave me too many. I
sometimes feel like we are playing God, and that is very emotionally stressful."

   Greenbaum, who is Jewish, takes seriously her religion's admonition not to
take a life. What sustains her, she said, is the knowledge that the reductions
she has been involved with were done for sound medical reasons. She would never,
she said, work at an abortion clinic. "This is as close as I would get," she
said. "Here, it is completely different. You are helping people have healthy
babies."

   Still, she says: "It's a very hard procedure, because the baby is moving, and
you are chasing it. That is what is very emotional -- when the baby is moving
and you are chasing it.

   "Do you still feel emotional?" she asked Evans.

   "I've come to look at it as: The finished product has a much better chance of
surviving," replied Evans, who had been following the conversation intently.
"Look, you never want to dehumanize it, because then you get cavalier. You have
to keep the big picture in mind. We're not losing one. We're saving some."

   When he began performing reductions 20 years ago, about 75 percent of his
patients had gotten pregnant using fertility drugs alone, which often cause a
woman to ovulate many eggs at once, and can result in extremely high-order
multiples. Back then, he estimates, about 40 to 45 percent were pregnant with
quads or higher; the same percentage were carrying triplets; and 10 percent were
twin pregnancies in which one fetus had a serious problem. But things have
changed. Now, 75 percent of his patients have gotten pregnant through IVF, a
more controlled form of fertility treatment, and the size of the pregnancies has
gone down. Now it's 5 to 10 percent very high-order multiples, 20 percent quads,
60 percent triplets, and about 10 to 15 percent twins.

   When he was working to establish bioethical principles, Evans decided that he
would not reduce a normal twin pregnancy. He would take somebody from three to
two, but he would not take somebody from two to one. "The rationale we used was:
One, every OB knows how to take care of twins, and two, the outcome is not as
good as with singletons, but good enough. And number three, all these were
fertility patients, and if we could get them to twins, that was that much closer
to their family ideal. And four, we didn't know what the risk might be of
damaging one of the fetuses by the procedure. Because of all of the above, it
didn't feel ethical to go ahead and do that."

   But Evans's thinking has changed. He is willing now to reduce two to one, and
he does so. Not often, but the incidence is increasing. There are now data
showing that reducing one twin does not affect the physical well-being of the
twin who remains. Plus, many of his patients are women in their late 30s and
early 40s, some married for the second time. Both partners may already have
children, and what they want is one child together. And for a woman reducing a
twin to a singleton, the pregnancy loss rate drops from 8 percent to 4 percent.

   Evans has written articles arguing that it is ethical to reduce a twin
pregnancy. After all, he said, if it's okay to reduce from one to none -- that
is, if you support abortion rights -- then two to one should be okay, too. The
idea is still controversial. "Twenty years ago, the ethical debate was with
triplets. But now, as far as I'm concerned, there is no doubt about triplets,
and the ethical debate has moved to twins."

   And it is a debate. At the same time that Evans and others have been
publicizing the data about the risks of gestating twins, other specialists have
been showing women how they can take care of themselves to enhance their chances
of carrying a multiple pregnancy to term or close to term. Among these is the
nutritionist Barbara Luke, who has published books on successful gestation of
multiple pregnancies, pointing out, among other things, that eating lots of
protein helps the babies grow. Luke also published a 2004 article in the journal
Fertility and Sterility showing that babies who started out as high-order
multiples and were reduced to twins did not do as well as babies who started out
as twins. The implication was that reduction may be bad for a pregnancy. This
argument drives Evans -- and some of his colleagues -- nuts. They believe it's
not fair to compare reduced twins to twins who started out as twins.

   "Reduction is not bad for you," Evans says. "Starting out as quints is bad
for you."

   The long-term psychological consequences of reduction are still little
understood. According to Isaac Blickstein, one of the world's experts on
multifetal pregnancies, the studies that have been done suggest that the
aftereffects of selective reduction are different from those of abortion. In
general, parents feel better after the reduction is over. But grief can return,
postpartum, as parents contemplate the babies they have, and think about the
one, or ones, they lost. One study found that one-third of women who underwent
selective reduction reported persistent depression a year later. At two years,
most were feeling better. But, Blickstein notes, "psychoanalytic interviews with
women who underwent [selective reduction] describe severe bereavement reactions
including ambivalence, guilt, and a sense of narcissistic injury, all of which
increased the complexity of their attachment to the remaining babies."

   "Complexity of their attachment to the remaining babies" seems an apt way to
put it. I encountered this one day when I was interviewing a mother who had
reduced triplets to twins. "In some ways, the selective reduction becomes harder
to deal with after the babies are born," the mother said. "They are babies with
personalities, and you become attached to them, and you think: I could have
ended up with one of these being gone, and the one that is gone could have been
one of these."

   "Now that I know my two daughters, looking at them, I think: It could have
been you," she continued. "You terminated an embryo that could have turned into
a baby you would love as much as the ones that you have, and that's hard."

   THE TEST RESULTS FOR JANE AND EMMA STACKED UP LIKE THIS: A: XX, B: not
tested, C: XY, D: XX. Two girls, one boy, one unknown. The known ones all
normal. And so, for this last reduction procedure of the day, one decision had
been made. Evans would reduce B, which was most accessible. As for the other
one, he told the women they could have two girls -- that is, he could keep A and
D -- or they could have a boy and a girl, in which case he would keep C and one
of the girls. "If you want one of each, I'll keep one of each," Evans told them.

   They wanted one of each. "I have mixed feelings about it, but I think boys
and their mother have a very special relationship," said Jane, who alluded to
what she perceived as the difficulty of raising adolescent girls. And with that,
she and Emma had done it: They had selected for sex. They had made their choice
not on the now unacceptable idea that boys are superior to girls but according
to the notion that boys and their mothers may have easier, less tempestuous
relationships.

   Now Emma was on the table, and everybody was looking at four fetuses on the
sonogram. The screen had been turned so that even Emma could see it. Evans
decided that in addition to B, he would eliminate D, because of its position,
farthest from the cervix, and most accessible after B. Just now, on the
sonogram, D happened to be visible, moving and waving. "D is really active.
That's what I hate to see," said Jane, who had woken up in the middle of the
night worried about the "karma of what we are doing."

   Evans prepared two syringes, swabbed Emma with antiseptic, put the
square-holed napkin on her stomach. Then he plunged one of the needles into
Emma's belly and began to work his way into position. He injected the potassium
chloride, and B, the first fetus to go, went still.

   "There's no activity there," he said, scrutinizing the screen. B was lying
lengthwise in its little honeycomb chamber, no longer there and yet still there.
It was impossible not to find the sight affecting. Here was a life that one
minute was going to happen and now, because of its location, wasn't. One minute,
B was a fetus with a future stretching out before it: childhood, college,
children, grandchildren, maybe. The next minute, that future had been deleted.

   Evans plunged the second needle into Emma's belly. "See the tip?" he said,
showing the women where the tip of the needle was visible on the ultrasound
screen. Even I could see it: a white spot hovering near the heart. D was moving.
Evans started injecting. He went very slowly. "If you inject too fast, you blow
the kid off your needle," he explained.

   After Evans was finished injecting, D moved for a few seconds, then went
still. Now, as we watched, there was something called the effusion: a little
puff. "When I see that effusion, I know it's done," Evans said, taking "one last
look at D before I come out," to make sure D was gone.

   "Want to see your twins?" he asked the women, who did. On the ultrasound, he
showed them the living fetuses, moving vigorously in their sacs. The women
thanked him profusely. "Thank God there are people like you," Jane said.

   "I'm sorry we had to meet under these conditions," Evans said.

   Six months later -- I learned, from an e-mail the women sent -- Emma went
into labor. The boy and girl were born vaginally, both healthy, both immediately
and deeply cherished. The women e-mailed photos of both of them, nestled
together on a blanket. "We could not be happier," they wrote.

   During the course of the pregnancy, they had been able to see traces of the
two reduced fetuses in the ultrasounds; Jane said that she felt it was important
to own up to what they had done. After the birth, Jane inspected the placenta
for the remains of the reduced two, which were visible in the placental tissue.
She said "goodbye to the two that we were unable to carry," Emma wrote me in an
e-mail, "which I know was very helpful to her."

   Liza Mundy is a staff writer for the Magazine. This is excerpted from her new
book, Everything Conceivable: How Assisted Reproduction Is Changing Men, Women,
and the World, published by Alfred A. Knopf. She can be reached at
mundyl@washpost.com She will be fielding questions and comments about this
article Monday at 1 p.m. at washingtonpost.com/liveonline.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2007


                              508 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2007 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              May 18, 2007 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 790 words

HEADLINE: Celebrity trial attorneys go back to school;
Lawyers for Michael Jackson, Robert Blake and Paris Hilton share insights on the
justice system at Loyola.

BYLINE: Joe Mozingo, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   High-profile Los Angeles trial attorneys told law students Thursday that
lofty notions of jurisprudence, such as the presumption of innocence or burden
of proof, are all well and good. But in defending clients, it's best to focus on
how jurors actually think, they told a conference on celebrity justice at Loyola
Law School.

   For example, Richard Hutton, who specializes in cases of driving under the
influence and was recently hired by Paris Hilton in her probation violation
case, said it was easy to choose panelists for the clients he defends.

   "You want to pick people in my little world.... that drink and drive," he
said, to laughs from the students.

   Hutton said he watches potential jurors on their breaks and notes the ones
who smoke. "How many people do you know who smoke but don't drink, who are not
going to" Alcoholics Anonymous?

   The program -- called the Fidler Institute on Criminal Justice -- aims to
give students a look at the "inner workings of the criminal justice system."

   It was named for Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge Larry Paul Fidler, a
Loyola alumnus who is now hearing the Phil Spector murder trial and canceled the
day's court proceedings to attend the event.

   Fidler said he hoped to expand the program in coming years.

   "My goal is to make Loyola the destination for anyone who wants to practice
criminal law," he said.

   The seminar brought together some of the top practitioners of criminal law,
both prosecutors and defense lawyers, to discuss the craft of preparing and
arguing a case.

   Thomas A. Mesereau Jr., who represented Michael Jackson at his
child-molestation trial, said he often ignores the trial conventions that he was
taught in law school.

   He called the "presumption of innocence" total nonsense. "People don't keep
their minds open until the end of trial," he said. "People make decisions in an
instant."

   He said defense attorneys need to open their cases with a strong, emotional
statement. And they definitely shouldn't repeat the standard refrain that what
attorneys say is not evidence.

   "You're undercutting yourself," he said. "I hope they think what I say is
evidence."

   Loyola Law School professor Laurie Levenson asked how defense attorneys
decide whether to put their clients on the stand.

   Harland Braun -- who has represented Robert Blake, John Landis and an officer
acquitted in the Rodney G. King beating case -- said it's a tough call.

   "Once you call your client to the stand, all the damage you've done to the
prosecution's case disappears," he said.

   "Now the focus is on if he's telling the truth," Braun said.

   And the defendant can be discredited on cross-examination, he warned.

   Mesereau said he neatly avoided having to put Jackson on the stand by
persuading prosecutors to allow the attorney to play five hours of tape of the
pop star under questioning.

   As a result, Jackson was able to give his side without being cross-examined.

   Braun said prosecutors often introduce tapes of questioning or statements by
the defendant -- to their own detriment.

   "They just can't resist throwing everything in," he said.

   "We do make that mistake a lot," said Thomas O'Brien, the chief of the
criminal division in the U.S. attorney's office in L.A. and a candidate to head
the office, which became vacant upon the resignation of Debra Wong Yang.

   "When a defendant makes a statement, the prosecutor sees all the
inconsistencies," O'Brien said. "I tell them, we're not trying to prove he's a
liar. We're trying to prove he's guilty."

   O'Brien said that as a federal prosecutor, one of the difficulties is
convincing a jury to believe informants, who are often people who took part in
the crime and struck a plea deal.

   "Those are the type of people jurors don't like -- they don't like snitches
at all," O'Brien said.

   The panelists also discussed how to work with the media during a celebrity
trials and debated whether coverage influences verdicts.

   Loyola Law School professor Stanley Goldman asked Braun what his rationale
was when he went on a morning talk show and said of Blake's wife, "To know her
was to kill her."

   Braun corrected Goldman. "What I actually said was, 'If I was married to her,
I could have killed her myself.' "

   Braun then explained that he had meant to let people know that many people
could have murdered her.

   Other panelists included Cathryn Brougham, a deputy district attorney who
brought child-molestation charges against William French Anderson, the head of
USC's gene therapy lab; Mark Geragos, who defended Scott Peterson; Richard
Gabriel, a jury consultant for numerous high-profile trials; John Hueston, a top
white-collar defense attorney and a former federal prosecutor who was on the
Enron task force; and K.C. Maxwell, who represented I. Lewis "Scooter" Libby.

   joe.mozingo@latimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: CONFERRING: Defense lawyer Mark Geragos, left, speaks with L.A.
County Superior Court Judge Larry Paul Fidler at the Fidler Institute on
Criminal Justice at Loyola Law School. Geragos represented Scott Peterson.
Fidler is hearing the Phil Spector murder trial.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Photographs by
Spencer Weiner Los Angeles Times PHOTO: FOR THE DEFENSE: Attorney Thomas A.
Mesereau Jr. defended Michael Jackson against child-molestation charges.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2007


                              509 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                Copyright 2007 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                              May 15, 2007 Tuesday
                                  Main Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 1409 words

HEADLINE: Daily Briefing

BYLINE: From Staff and News Services

BODY:

   HEALTH CARE: Cardinal Health to buy Viasys

   Dublin, Ohio --- Medical products and services company Cardinal Health Inc.
said Monday it will buy medical technology company Viasys Healthcare Inc. for
$1.42 billion, an acquisition that will help Cardinal expand in international
markets. Cardinal will pay $42.75 per share for Viasys' outstanding shares, a 35
percent premium over its closing stock price of $31.55 last Friday. Cardinal
also will assume debt of $50 million. Conshohocken, Pa.-based Viasys, which had
revenue of $610 million in 2006, has about 40 percent of its customers in
international markets. The company makes ventilators and diagnostic systems used
to diagnose and treat pulmonary disease and instruments that monitor the brain,
muscles, blood flow, hearing and nerves. It also makes orthopedic implants.
Cardinal is an $80 billion company that makes products and provides services for
hospitals, doctors and pharmacies. It said the addition of Viasys complements
its products, which include those that address medication errors, adverse drug
reactions and infection prevention. Cardinal also makes surgical drapes, gowns
and other products to improve critical care and reduce hospital-acquired
infections.

   High court passes on patent case

   The Supreme Court on Monday declined to consider a patent dispute between
biotech drug maker Amgen Inc. and two other companies involving Amgen's
blockbuster anemia drug Epogen. Despite passing on this case, justices have
shown a heightened interest in patent law recently, taking up a half-dozen cases
in the past two years and issuing two high-profile decisions in April. Amgen
initiated the dispute in 1997 when it accused Aventis Pharmaceuticals Inc., a
unit of Paris-based Sanofi-Aventis SA, and Shire Human Genetic Therapies Inc., a
division of British drug developer Shire PLC, of infringing its patents on
Epogen. Aventis was previously known as Hoechst Marion Roussel Corp. A federal
district court largely agreed with Amgen's claims, but the Court of Appeals for
the Federal Circuit issued a mixed decision last year, ruling that two of
Amgen's patents were valid while reversing the lower court's findings on two
others.

   MEDIA: 'Deal or No Deal' producer sold

   Milan, Italy --- It's a deal for Italy's richest man and former Premier
Silvio Berlusconi. Berlusconi's Mediaset media empire said Monday it was buying
Telefonica SA's 75 percent controlling stake in Endemol NV --- which produces
the popular NBC game show "Deal or No Deal" --- along with Endemol's founder,
John de Mol, and Goldman Sachs' private equity arm for 2.63 billion euros ($3.56
billion). Under the arrangement, the consortium must launch an offer for the
remaining 25 percent as soon as possible at a price of at least 25 euros
($33.72) a share, including dividends of 0.45 of a euro (61 cents) per share.
"Deal or No Deal," which turns on its colorful contestants trying to find a
jackpot among sealed boxes, is seen in 26 countries. Another popular Endemol
offering, "Big Brother," is produced in 36 countries. The deal comes as Mediaset
has seen its revenue from advertising shrinking. Analysts said the move into
production could protect the company from cyclical downturns.

   Revenue declines at Tribune Co.

   Chicago --- Media conglomerate Tribune Co. said Monday its revenue slipped in
April because of softness in its publishing segment. The company, whose
publishing properties include the Chicago Tribune, Los Angeles Times and 23
television stations, said consolidated revenue for the period ended April 29
dropped 3.6 percent to $399 million from $414 million in the prior year.
Publishing revenue fell 8.6 percent to $279 million as advertising revenue
sagged 10.3 percent to $217 million. Circulation revenue declined 7.2 percent on
selective discounting in home delivery and lower single-copy sales. Retail ad
revenue slid 6.8 percent because of weakness in specialty merchandise, home
furnishings and department store categories partially, but the company reported
strength in hardware/home improvement. A shift in the timing of Easter had a
negative impact, the company said. National advertising revenue slumped 8.2
percent with weakness in the financial and auto categories partially offset by
strength in movies.

   SERVICES: Ensign Group registers for IPO

   Ensign Group Inc., which runs long-term care facilities, registered Monday
for an initial public offering of up to $95 million in stock, according to a
filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Ensign said it plans to list
its common stock on the Nasdaq Global Market under the symbol ENSG. Ensign,
based in Mission Viejo, Calif., provides nursing and rehabilitative care
services at 47 facilities in California, Arizona, Texas, Washington, Utah and
Idaho. The company said it plans to use net proceeds from the IPO to acquire
additional facilities and upgrade its existing facilities, and for working
capital and general corporate purposes. D.A. Davidson & Co. and Stifel Nicolaus
were listed as underwriters for the offering. Last year, Ensign reported net
income of $22.5 million, up from $18.4 million in 2005. At the time of the sale,
its revenue climbed to $358.6 million from $300.9 million, the filing said.
Details about the number of shares offered and estimated price range for the IPO
weren't disclosed in the SEC filing.

   TECHNOLOGY: Fingerprint scanner firm to go public

   Upek Inc., a spinoff from STMicroelectronics NV that makes fingerprint
scanners, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on Monday for an
initial public offering of up to $86.25 million in stock. The Emeryville,
Calif.-based company said it intends to apply to list its common stock on the
Nasdaq Global Market, under the symbol UPEK. Upek said it intends to use the net
proceeds from the IPO for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
It may also use a portion of the net proceeds to repay credit facility or
acquire other businesses, products or technologies. Deutsche Bank Securities,
Needham & Co., Piper Jaffray and Pacific Crest Securities are listed as
underwriters for the offering. Upek was spun off from STMicroelectronics in 2004
with the aid of venture investors. For 2006, the company posted a net loss of
$20.7 million, widening from a 2005 loss of $8.6 million. The company didn't
disclose how many shares will be offered or estimate a price range for the IPO.

   TRANSPORTATION: Three groups vie for Alitalia

   Rome --- Three groups remain in the bidding for a controlling stake in
Italy's struggling flagship airline, Italy's Treasury said Monday, quashing
concern that one had dropped out. The three groups that are left are the U.S.
private equity group TPG, together with U.S. asset management group Matlin
Patterson and Italian bank Mediobanca; No. 2 carrier Air One's parent company,
AP Holding SpA, which has teamed up with Intesa Sanpaolo SpA; and OAO
Aeroflot-Russian Airlines along with Italian bank UniCredit SpA. In a statement,
the Treasury said binding bids were scheduled for the end of June. Italy will
inform the bidders in the "coming days" on the procedure for the binding offers,
which will include the bidders' final plans to turn around Alitalia. The
government, which owns 49.9 percent of Alitalia, intends to sell at least a 39.9
percent share. Under the latest terms outlined by the government, bidders must
guarantee Alitalia will retain an Italian identity for at least eight years and
set out terms of a business plan.

   Railroads accused of price-fixing

   Five major freight railroads conspired to fix prices by adding fuel
surcharges, according to an antitrust lawsuit filed Monday in U.S. District
Court. The lawsuit, which seeks class-action status, was filed by Phoenix-based
Dust Pro Inc. on behalf of other parties who shipped goods on one or more of the
railroads since July 2003. The suit seeks unspecified monetary damages from the
five railroads: CSX Transportation Inc. of Jacksonville; Norfolk Southern
Railway Co., of Norfolk, Va.; BNSF Railway Co., a subsidiary of Burlington
Northern Santa Fe Corp., of Fort Worth, Texas; Union Pacific Railroad Co. of
Omaha, Neb.; and Kansas City Southern Railway Co. of Kansas City. The lawsuit
alleges the five engaged in an "unreasonable restraint of trade or commerce" in
violation of the Sherman Act. It said the companies control more than 90 percent
of the rail freight traffic. Officials at the five railroads had no immediate
comment on the lawsuit.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2007


                              510 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2007 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              May 15, 2007 Tuesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Business Desk; Part C; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 650 words

HEADLINE: PHARMACEUTICALS;
Medicare may limit Amgen medicines;
Coverage of its anemia drugs may be cut, most certainly hurting sales.

BYLINE: Daniel Costello, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Medicare on Monday proposed limiting coverage of the anemia medicines that
are the backbone of Amgen Inc.'s historically stellar growth, accounting for
almost half of the Thousand Oaks company's sales.

   If Medicare follows through on its proposal, sales of the drugs, which have
been slipping in recent months, would most certainly suffer. The Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services' acting administrator, Leslie Norwalk, estimated
that federal reimbursements would fall by as much as 10%.

   "The safety of our Medicare beneficiaries is paramount," Norwalk said in an
interview. "We are ensuring that members only get medications and dosages that
are necessary and beneficial."

   Medicare spends more on the anemia medications, which are taken by more than
1 million people every year, than on any other drug. The agency started its
review after the Food and Drug Administration in March added a "black-box
warning" to the drugs, advising doctors to prescribe them at their lowest
possible doses and only to approved patients.

   The announcement was made after the close of regular trading, where Amgen
stock fell 23 cents to $56.07. The stock slumped to $54.10 in the after-hours
market.

   The shares are down nearly 18% since Jan. 1, when several studies, including
a large Amgen-sponsored trial, found the anemia drugs might not be safe for some
patients.

   The drugs -- manufactured by Amgen and sold by that company under the brand
names Aranesp and Epogen and by Johnson & Johnson as Procrit -- have been on the
market for more than a decade. Combined sales topped $10 billion last year.

   The FDA approved them to treat anemia caused by chemotherapy in an array of
cancer patients and for people with kidney failure. But doctors have widely
prescribed them for other people, including those not on chemotherapy, and in
higher dosages than the FDA has endorsed.

   In its proposal, Medicare said it would no longer pay for cancer patients'
use of the drugs if their anemia wasn't related to chemotherapy or if the drugs
were prescribed to prevent chemotherapy-related anemia.

   The agency will make a final decision in September.

   An Amgen spokesman said the company was reviewing the Medicare proposal and
would work with the agency. A Johnson & Johnson spokeswoman said that company
was also evaluating the situation.

   Starting last year, the drugs came under scrutiny after studies concluded
that in some dosages the drugs might hasten death in some patients.

   Thursday, an influential FDA advisory committee surprised the medical
community and Wall Street by saying it might change the drugs' labeling and
asking for further study of their safety.

   "We have a burning question," one panel member, Dr. Silvana Martino, an
oncologist in Santa Monica, said. "Do these things kill people?"

   The FDA's final labeling recommendation -- which might be to restrict dosages
and what kind of patients should receive prescriptions -- is expected sometime
this year.

   Those restrictions could "eviscerate" the entire class of anemia drugs,
Lazard analyst Joel Sendek wrote in a research note last week, and would "likely
be devastating for Aranesp sales."

   Also on Monday, the U.S. Supreme Court declined to consider a patent dispute
between Amgen and two other companies involving Epogen.

   Amgen initiated the dispute in 1997, suing Aventis Pharmaceuticals Inc., a
unit of Paris-based Sanofi-Aventis, and Shire Human Genetic Therapies Inc. The
two companies wanted to sell a competitor drug in the U.S. market and Amgen
accused them of infringing its patents.

   A federal court agreed with Amgen. Last year, the Court of Appeals for the
Federal Circuit in Washington ruled in favor of Amgen on some patents but not on
others.

   With the split decision standing, analysts said it was still unlikely the
competitor would make it to the U.S. market, although the court removed at least
one legal barrier to that possibility.

   daniel.costello@latimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: TOUGHER TIMES: Amgen's anemia drugs, sold under the brand names
Aranesp and Epogen, account for almost half of its sales. Above, the company's
Thousand Oaks headquarters.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Bryan Chan Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2007


                              511 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              May 15, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 190 words

HEADLINE: Justices Turn Down Drug Patent Dispute

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 14

BODY:

   The Supreme Court on Monday declined to consider a patent dispute between the
biotechnology drug producer Amgen and two other companies involving the Amgen
anemia drug Epogen.

     Despite passing on this case, the justices have recently shown heightened
interest in patent law, taking up half a dozen cases in the last two years and
issuing two decisions in April.

   Amgen began the dispute in 1997 when it accused Aventis Pharmaceuticals, now
a unit of Sanofi-Aventis of Paris, and Shire Human Genetic Therapies, a division
of the British drug developer Shire, of infringing its patents on Epogen.

     A federal district court largely agreed with Amgen's arguments, but the
United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit issued a mixed decision
last year, ruling that two of Amgen's patents were valid and reversing the lower
court's findings on two others.

     Amgen urged the Supreme Court to rule on the Federal Circuit's practice of
considering the factual record behind its patent claims. Typically, United
States appeals courts consider issues of law, rather than fact.

     Last year, Amgen received $2.5 billion in revenue from Epogen sales.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2007


                              512 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                              May 11, 2007 Friday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1277 words

HEADLINE: Odds high, funds sparse for stem cell researchers - Patrick's $1b
offer a temporary boost

BYLINE: Scott Allen GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   For all the hype and hope surrounding stem cell research, most of the
companies trying to develop treatments from these powerful cells live in a place
Governor Deval Patrick this week called the "valley of death." It is a harsh
place where neither the federal government nor private investors provide much
support and small firms with limited funding struggle to figure out how to
harness stem cells' extraordinary power.

   No one knows that better than Dr. Thomas Okarma, whose company, Geron Corp.,
hopes next year to start the nation's first human tests of a treatment derived
from embryonic stem cells. The California company has already spent years
developing OPC1 as a possible therapy for spinal cord injuries. Researchers have
had to inject 2,000 animals to show it was safe, grow the cells 75 times over to
prove they could do it, and invent a needle to inject cells into the injury
site. Even if human tests go well, federal approval probably won't happen for
years. If tests go badly, foes of embryonic stem cell research are sure to
pounce.

   "The challenge ... is not for the faint of heart or the light of purse," said
Okarma, who says his company has invested more than $100 million in stem cell
research to date.

   The $1 billion life sciences initiative Patrick announced this week could
provide a boost for stem cell companies that locate or start up in
Massachusetts, in part by providing stable support through the many years it
will take to realize the promise of stem cell treatments. Saying he intended to
make the state the "capital of stem cell research on the planet," Patrick wants
to set up an embryonic stem cell bank at the University of Massachusetts that
would greatly reduce storage costs for the delicate cells and expand
researchers' access to different types.

   He proposed grants for lab equipment that could be used to work with the
embryonic stem cells scientists are banned from studying with federally
supported lab instruments, and grants to keep promising researchers from leaving
the state.

   The proposal would also provide a hand up from the "valley of death" in the
form of short-term funding for companies to develop ideas until they can attract
private investors, and possibly an actual "incubator" building where new stem
cell companies could be housed. Many details of the 10-year plan remain to be
decided, including how the money would be divided between stem cell research and
other sciences, but stem cell researchers have been overwhelmingly positive
about the assistance.

   "This is really a long-term investment in Massachusetts not losing its
premier role in life sciences," said John Auerbach, state public health
commissioner.

   But, even with the burgeoning aid from Massachusetts and other states,
biotech executives at the BIO 2007 conference in Boston this week made it clear
that researchers still face daunting hurdles in learning how to grow and manage
both adult and embryonic stem cells and to get them to do something medically
useful. Embryonic stem cell research is less than a decade old, they pointed
out, and new fields of medicine typically take 20 years or more to produce
results. One danger, several top stem cell scientists said, is that
cash-strapped firms will rush into human testing before they answer basic
questions, with potentially disastrous results.

   Many stem cell pioneers "are dealing with things they don't know enough about
to begin with, and then they're adding stuff to it," said Nancy Parenteau of
Vermont-based Parenteau BioConsultants, referring to the growth enhancers and
other chemicals that are used to manipulate stem cells. She noted that some
researchers don't even know where the stem cells go once they're injected into a
patient. She said the Massachusetts initiative could be great for the whole
field if the state spurs more research on how stem cells work and why.

   The Massachusetts investment could also discourage firms from following the
lead of Advanced Cell Technology, a stem cell company that moved its corporate
headquarters from Worcester to Alameda, Calif., a year and a half ago, partly to
take advantage of California's Proposition 71, which made $3 billion available
for stem cell research in that state over the next decade.

   William M. Caldwell IV, Advanced Cell Technology chairman, called Patrick's
move "long overdue," after former governor Mitt Romney's opposition to embryonic
stem cell research. Now, Caldwell said, Massachusetts could have "the most
user-friendly state from the standpoint of research and commercialization in the
country." The company still has researchers in Worcester, and Caldwell said his
firm may expand activities there.

   Compared with most states, Massachusetts has a vibrant stem cell research
community, led by the Harvard Stem Cell Institute, which has 45 principal
faculty members and more than 600 employees involved in stem cell research at
Harvard-affiliated hospitals and labs. But the number of companies in the state
trying to develop treatments from adult or embryonic stem cells remains tiny, a
problem Caldwell sees across the country. "It's like a desert," he said.

   Embryonic stem cells have inspired hope and controversy since University of
Wisconsin researchers first isolated them in 1998. The cells are the body's
master cells, capable of becoming any kind of tissue, raising the possibility
that they could be coaxed to create replacement tissue for diseased and damaged
organs. But some argue that the harvesting of stem cells from fertilized human
embryos is unethical because it requires the destruction of the embryo. In
August 2001, President Bush sided with critics, banning US funding for research
on embryonic stem cells harvested after that date.

   As a result, unlike those in other new scientific fields, embryonic stem cell
researchers got almost no boost from the federal government: Nationally, they
received only $122 million from the National Institutes of Health from 2002 to
2006, roughly the amount Geron alone has spent on stem cell research. NIH did
provide $799 million over the same period for stem cells taken from adults, but
the requirement that older and newer embryonic stem cells be strictly segregated
discouraged many researchers from entering the stem cell field at all. And
overall NIH funding for stem cells has not increased for three years, resulting
in a steady rise in the percentage of studies that are rejected.

   For Geron, dwindling federal support means that whenever the company needs a
question answered it has to pay for the research. Fortunately for the company,
animal tests of its stem cell therapy for spinal damage, OPC1, have produced
some of the most remarkable results yet in stem cell research, consistently
restoring rats' ability to use their hind legs. Geron is now ready to ask the US
Food and Drug Administration for permission to begin testing the treatment in
humans.

   But Goldstein, who was not involved in the OPC1 research, said the clarity of
the Geron findings is a rare exception in a field full of ambiguities.

   The fear among researchers is that poorly-thought-out experiments could go so
badly that the results damage the field much the way the 1999 death of Jesse
Gelsinger, a healthy teenager, cast a shadow over another promising treatment,
gene therapy.

   "The ideological right is not asleep," said Robert Klein, chairman of the
Independent Citizens Oversight Committee in California, which oversees public
stem cell funding. He cautioned that opponents of embryonic stem cell research
will attempt to exploit setbacks in human trials. "There will be failures as
well as successes. We must be patient."

   Scott Allen can be reached at allen@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2007


                              513 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                             May 10, 2007 Thursday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE MEDICINE AND TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 470 words

HEADLINE: NATURAL GENETIC MUTATION MAY HELP BEAT SOME CANCERS

BYLINE: David Templeton, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

BODY:

   Researchers at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine have
discovered a genetic mutation that occurs normally and helps the body fight
infection and cancer.

   But the same mutation also causes a rare form of cancer known as
paraganglioma and might help other cancers survive longer with less oxygen.

   How the mutation is used by the body determines whether it is healthful or
dangerous.

   Dr. Bora E. Baysal, assistant professor of obstetrics, gynecology and
reproductive sciences at the medical school, said understanding the mutation
could lead to therapies to block the mutation from occurring in T-cell leukemia
and other cancers.

   It also could lead to a procedure to make healthy immune cells undergo
mutation so they can better kill infection and cancer in oxygen-deprived parts
of the body.

   "This kind of loss-of-function mutation can be very dangerous," Dr. Baysal
said. But there is good biological reason why the mutation occurs naturally in
immune cells. It helps them survive in low-oxygen environment where cancer and
infection may be thriving, he said.

   The research project represents the first time a mutation that inactivates a
gene has been identified as a regular occurrence in normal immune cells of the
blood. "It is part of the process for immune cells to armor up for battle
against cancer cells and other diseases," he said.

   Pitt research on the so-called "somatic stop-codon mutation" was reported in
the online journal PLoS One, published by the Public Library of Science. The
National Cancer Institute funded the research.

   At first, researchers had to show that the mutation was no fluke and occurred
regularly in normal cells. Dr. Baysal said a fundamental genetic mechanism shuts
down an important gene in healthy immune system cells in anticipation of oxygen
deprivation. That allows the immune cells to travel into tissue where there is
little blood supply or oxygen and survive to fight the infection and cancer.

   However, the mutation also causes a rare form of genetically caused cancer,
paraganglioma, which occurs in one in a million people. Dr. Baysal said he is
studying whether the same gene also mutates in other cancers as a means of
helping them survive in low-oxygen areas of the body.

   In childhood T-cell leukemia, Dr. Baysal said, he discovered that a quarter
of the cancer cells have undergone the same mutation as occurs regularly in
healthy immune cells, indicating they likely mutated as a survival mechanism.

   One possible anti-cancer therapy would involve eliminating the enzyme that
causes the gene mutation, thus weakening the cancer, he said.

   In normal immune cells, fewer than 6 percent undergo the mutation. Dr. Baysal
said a therapy could be developed to raise that percentage to 40 to 50 percent
to boost the immune response and improve the fight against infections and
cancer.

NOTES: David Templeton can be reached at dtempleton@post-gazette.com or
412-263-1578.

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2007


                              514 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                              May 8, 2007 Tuesday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1178 words

HEADLINE: Tough criticisms rise as biotech matures Lawmakers point to high drug
prices, crop worries

BYLINE: Stephen Heuser Globe Staff

BODY:

   Thirty years ago, the business of biotechnology amounted to a handful of
scientists, a few brave investors, and a bold, if unproven, idea: By tweaking
genes in a lab, you could transform the process of making drugs.

   Today, biotech encompasses hundreds of companies around the world and is a
marquee industry in New England, where political leaders gush over its ability
to create jobs and draw investment dollars to Massachusetts.

   But even as biotech revels in its successes, the business is facing a new
challenge: criticism for its real-world effect on healthcare spending and
agriculture. In particular, congressional Democrats, insurance companies, and
some large employers have begun to push publicly against the high price of
biotech drugs, which often cost $20,000 a year or more per patient.

   The resistance is a new and unwelcome development for an industry that has
attracted money and good will by telling the story of its potential. With more
than 20,000 people in Boston this week for the BIO International Convention,
biotech leaders are crafting a carefully honed message to help fend off critics:
Biotechnology, they argue, is still a business defined by its promise. They urge
patience now in return for big payoffs later.

   James C. Greenwood, the former Pennsylvania Republican congressman who joined
BIO as its top lobbyist in 2005, said the mere threat of price controls on
biotech drugs would discourage new investors.

   "If these biologics companies are going to provide to society the incredible
promise they hold," Greenwood said last week, "it's going to take a lot of
private investment."

   To reinforce the message of incredible promise, press conferences and
seminars this week highlight biotechnology as a solution not only to health
problems, but also to global energy and environmental woes.

   But behind the industry - and the reason the convention has grown to more
than 20,000 people, with 300 off-site parties and other events throughout the
city - are dozens of biotech products that have already progressed well beyond
potential. By far, the most profitable are high-priced injectable drugs. One,
Aranesp, has sales of more than $4 billion a year. And numerous biotechnology
drugs, including those made by Biogen Idec Inc. and Genzyme Corp. of Cambridge,
have reached blockbuster status - annual sales of $1 billion or more.

   Profits have also brought unwelcome attention from Washington and the
insurance industry. Congress is seeing a strong push to lower the price of
biotech drugs by allowing generic versions to be approved. Insurers and
employers, too, are starting to take a hard look at biotech spending, which
mounts every year.

   Estimates are difficult because there is more than one definition of a
biotech product. But specialized injectable drugs - a category roughly
synonymous with biotech drugs - accounted for $54 billion of healthcare spending
in the United States last year, according to the pharmaceutical-benefits manager
Express Scripts Inc. Biotech's share of US prescription-drug costs is now 25
percent and rising, the company's data show.

   Another analysis, by life sciences accounting giant Ernst & Young, showed
biotech companies around the world had $70 billion in sales in 2006.

   Less profitable, but far more widespread, is the use of biotechnology in
agriculture. By tweaking genes of corn, soybeans, and other well-known crops,
bioengineers have created higher-yield versions of long-time staples of the food
supply.

   Crop bioengineering has long drawn the ire of protesters who believe that
sterile, high-yield engineered crops represent a violation of years of natural
plant evolution and breeding. Protests against genetically modified organisms,
or GMOs, are common at biotechnology conventions, which draw "teach-ins" and
inventive protest posters that depict a fertile world under assault from the
chemically powered forces of industry.

   "The technology of genetic engineering is inherently uncertain," said Brian
Tokar of the Institute for Social Ecology, a co-organizer of this week's BIO
protests. "We also know there's a threat of environmental contamination and
contamination of other crops. And farmers all over the world are concerned about
the increasing concentration of corporate control over seeds."

   Most likely, that battle is already lost. Although some biotech foods, such
as the Flavr Savr tomato, failed as commercial products, the Biotechnology
Industry Organization estimates that 60 percent of corn and nearly 90 percent of
the soybeans grown in the United States are bioengineered strains.

   But other battles are just beginning. In Washington, Democratic
Representative Henry Waxman of California and Senators Hillary Clinton and
Charles Schumer of New York, also Democrats, have introduced a bill to allow
generic biological drugs. Because there is currently no way to get such drugs
approved without running full human clinical tests, generic drug makers are
effectively barred from introducing low-priced copycat versions, even after the
patents on the original drugs have expired.

   Without generic versions of their drugs, biotech drug makers enjoy an
effective monopoly on each invention, setting their own prices without fear of
competition.

   Neil Minkoff, who oversees drug benefits at Harvard Pilgrim Heath Care, said
biotech drugs aren't yet a huge strain on the healthcare system, but he worries
what will happen as more reach the market without competition from generic
versions to help control prices.

   "The concern here is, as this continues to grow, what do we do if there's no
outlet?" he said. For some rare diseases, "you're talking about decades of this,
without the belief that it will ever be generic or there will ever be a decrease
in prices. If you put a gun to my head and asked me what the biggest issue is
for our industry, it's that there isn't this escape hatch."

   The biotech industry argues that its drugs are too complex to be safely
copied in the way traditional pill ingredients are duplicated to make generic
pharmaceuticals. BIO's Greenwood visits Capitol Hill with a plastic model of a
simple aspirin molecule, and a DVD with a far more complex biological molecule
to attempt to convince legislators that biological drugs are so hard to make
that they need special consideration.

   Within the industry, leaders are aware of the need to keep up the image of
the industry as special. James C. Mullen, chief executive of Biogen Idec and the
current chairman of BIO, during a speech last fall at a Massachusetts biotech
luncheon, urged the founders of younger, smaller companies "untainted by
profits" to step up as the public face of biotechnology.

   "You haven't done anything wrong - your products don't cost too much, no one
is denied your products," said Mullen, whose firm's $2 billion in annual sales
makes it one of biotech's biggest winners.

   "You are the underdogs in a David and Goliath story," he said to a throng of
executives from smaller, money-losing firms hoping someday to get a drug
approved. "America loves this story."

   Stephen Heuser can be reached at sheuser@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: John R. Henry, director of communications at the Louisiana Gene Therapy
Research Consortium, with a puppet at the BIO International Convention at the
Boston Convention & Exhibition Center. Actor Michael J. Fox appeals to the BIO
International Convention yesterday to bring new treatments to market. C4 A crowd
gathers near the Canada display yesterday at the BIO International Convention at
the Boston Convention and Exhibition Center in South Boston. More than 20,000
visitors are in Boston this week for the biotech convention.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2007


                              515 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                               May 6, 2007 Sunday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: SPECIAL SECTION; Pg. K6

LENGTH: 288 words

HEADLINE: FROM NICHE TO MAINSTREAM - A sampling of drugs made by Boston-area
biotechnology companies

BODY:

   BIOHUB

   ATryn

   GTC Biotherapeutics Inc. Framingham

   Treats: surgical patients whose blood clots too quickly

   Approved: 2006 (Europe only)

   Price: not yet on market

   2006 sales: n/a

   Approved only in Europe so far, ATryn is produced in the milk of genetically
altered goats - the first approved human drug made this way.

   Avonex

   Biogen Idec Inc., Cambridge

   Treats: multiple sclerosis

   Approved: 1996

   Price: $19,000 per year

   2006 sales: $1.7 billion

   The leading multiple sclerosis drug, and the top-selling drug from any
Cambridge company, this weekly injection slows the progression of the
debilitating nerve disease.

   Elaprase

   Shire PLC

   Treats: Hunter syndrome

   Approved: 2006

   Price: $300,000 per year

   2006 sales: $24 million

   The only treatment for children with a rare genetic disorder, Elaprase
originated at Cambridge biotech firm Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., which was
bought by UK-based Shire in 2005.

   Lunesta

   Sepracor Inc., Marlborough

   Treats: insomnia

   Approved: 2004

   Price: $111 per month

   2006 sales: $567 million

   Though not considered a biotech drug, Lunesta was made by chemically breaking
apart a European sleeping pill and became one of the fastest drug launches ever.

   Myozyme

   Genzyme Corp., Cambridge

   Treats: Pompe disease

   Approved: 2006

   Price: $200,000 per year

   2006 sales: $59 million

   In infants, Pompe disease can be so quickly fatal that Genzyme had to visit
numerous countries to find 18 living Pompe babies to test the drug.

   Vivitrol

   Alkermes Inc., Cambridge

   Treats: alcoholism

   Approved: 2006

   Price: $695 per monthly injection

   2006 sales: $3 million

   The drug-delivery specialists at Alkermes took an existing addiction medicine
and encased it in microscopic spheres, creating a monthly shot that replaces
daily pills, making it harder for alcoholics to skip a dose.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2007


                              516 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                              May 3, 2007 Thursday
                                 Every Edition

SECTION: EXTRAS; Pg. DZ04

DISTRIBUTION: DC

LENGTH: 722 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF

BODY:


A Call for Safer Streets

   The D.C. Department of Transportation has introduced a traffic program aimed
at encouraging commuters to calm down while driving. The D.C. Neighborhood Pace
Car program asks residents to sign a pledge agreeing to drive within the posted
speed limits and to affix a sticker to their car window to symbolize their
commitment.

   Co-sponsored by the Washington Area Bicyclist Association, the program is
designed to encourage motorists to drive the legal speed limit; promote driver
awareness; raise awareness that motorists share the roads with pedestrians and
cyclists; and promote courteous habits. To find out more about the pace car
program visit http://www.waba.org/pacecar.

Exhibition to Raise Funds

   D.C. artist Ellen Gordon Gordon plans to donate a portion of the funds from
"Washington Color: The Next Generation," to a foundation that raises money to
help fight breast cancer.

   The exhibition  will be shown exclusively at the Alla Rogers Gallery, 1054
31st St. NW, through May 31.

   All proceeds will benefit the Brem Foundation to Defeat Breast Cancer. For
information, contact the Alla Rogers Gallery at 202-333-8595 or visit
http://www.ellengordongordon.com.

Seminar on Parkinson's

   A free event to educate Parkinson's patients and caregivers will be held from
6 to 8:30 p.m. Monday at the Georgetown University Conference Hotel, 3800
Reservoir Rd. NW.

   Neurologists and neurosurgeons from across the D.C. area will be on hand to
discuss the latest treatment options, including medication, gene therapy, stem
cell transplantation and deep brain stimulation. Parkinson's disease is a
chronic, progressive neurological disorder resulting from the loss of brain
cells that make a chemical called dopamine. The disease affects about 1 million
Americans, with 60,000 new cases diagnosed each year.

   The event, sponsored by area physicians and Medtronic, a medical technology
company, is open to the public. Registration is encouraged. To register, call
877-438-3574 or visit http://www.parkinsonsevents.com.

Foster Care Awareness

   To celebrate Foster Awareness Month, the D.C. Child and Family Services
Agency will host two orientation meetings in May for residents interested in
becoming adoptive or foster parents.

   The free, informational meetings will be held from 10 a.m. to noon May 12,
and from 6 to 8 p.m. May 24 at 400 Sixth St. SW.

   With close to 3,000 children in the District's foster care system, the need
for parents is ever-present and growing each day. For further information, call
202-671-5683 or visit http://www.cfsa.dc.gov.

Service Award Nominees

   AARP is seeking nominations for its 2007 Andrus Award for Community Service.
Named after the nonprofit organization's founder, Ethel Percy Andrus, the award
honors those who are sharing their experiences, talents and skills to enrich the
lives of others in their communities.

   Nominees must be current AARP volunteers or members, and volunteer service
must have been done in 2006. The nominees must have had a positive impact on the
lives of individuals 50 and older,  and must reflect AARP's priority issues of
health, livable communities and  economic security.

   AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan membership organization for people 50 and
older. For more information and a nomination form contact C.A. Page at
202-434-7703 or cpage@aarp.org. The application deadline is June 1.

Vacant Property Audit

   The D.C. Department of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs is canvassing
neighborhoods to identify, register, classify and secure all vacant properties
in the District.

   Under a law passed in December, the department is now in charge of auditing
all vacant properties for a massive reclassification project. Officials say
these abandoned properties can impair the health and welfare of residents and
their surrounding neighborhoods. They often harbor rodents, pests, trash and
debris and encourage criminal activity or pose a fire hazard. A team of
inspectors probe neighborhoods daily to identify these buildings.

   In March, the D.C. Council passed legislation allowing the department to
enclose a vacant building without notifying the owner. Owners who fail to
maintain safe, clean vacant properties face large penalties.

   To learn more about the new vacant property law and registration, call
202-442-4332 or visit http://www.dcra.dc.gov.

   -- Compiled by JILLIAN S. JARRETT

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2007


                              517 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 San Francisco Chronicle
                              All Rights Reserved

                    THE SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE (California)

                             April 22, 2007 Sunday
                                 FINAL Edition

SECTION: CHRONICLE MAGAZINE; LIFE SCIENCES; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 879 words

HEADLINE: Parkinson's patients desperate for help sign on to hole-in-the-head
study

BYLINE: Sam Whiting

BODY:

   Randy Calvert isn't sure if he got the 16 drops of Parkinson's Disease
treatment on his brain or not. But he's sure he got the twin holes drilled into
the front of his skull.

   That's the gamble in a randomized controlled study. Calvert, 54, was willing
to "bet the house" that he is among the 66 percent who got a brain injection of
an experimental gene therapy product in a study at UCSF Medical Center.

   "Yesterday I woke up knowing I had the juice because I had a symptom-free
day," he says. As he talks, his head is rolling on his neck, his shoulders and
arms moving every which way.

   "Symptom-free day," he allows, "may be an exaggeration."

   Calvert is among 51 Parkinson's patients nationwide taking part in a Phase 2
study of CERE-120, which has shown potential to treat the symptoms
"characterized by muscular tremor, slowing of movement, partial facial
paralysis, peculiarity of gait and posture, and weakness," according to
Stedman's Medical Dictionary. The disease causes a loss of dopamine, the
lubricant for the central nervous system. Drinkers and smokers spend their lives
trying to trick the brain into releasing more dopamine, so to lose what comes
naturally is devastating.

   "It's all about hope and desperation," Calvert says. "You've got to be pretty
desperate if you're letting them cut into your brain."

   In Phase 1, recently completed, 12 patients were given the treatment and
averaged a 40 percent improvement in motor skills, according to the principal
investigator Dr. William Marks, associate professor of neurology at UCSF. This
was enough to convince the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research to
grant $1.9 million for Phase 2, after giving $740,000 to Phase 1. The Phase 2
study will cost more than $10 million.

   "Current treatments only control the symptoms," Marks says. "The hope is that
this gene therapy might also slow down or stabilize the disease."

   CERE-120 was developed by Ceregene Inc., a private San Diego biotech concern
that was founded in 2001 as a subsidiary of Cell Genesys Inc. of South San
Francisco. To confirm the effect of CERE-120, all 51 volunteers have submitted
to the one-time surgery, which takes five hours.

   For people who drew the sham surgery, the holes go only halfway through the
skull. Calvert awoke to "a helluva headache for three or four days." But he
doesn't know if his holes went all the way through. Neither does Marks, 41, or
his colleague in the study, Dr. Jill Ostrem, 37, assistant professor of
neurology and co-investigator. Only the drillers, neurosurgeons Philip Starr and
Paul Larson, know who got the treatment, and neither is actively involved in
evaluating the patients' outcomes.

   CERE-120 is an engineered biological compound consisting of the DNA shell of
a virus, into which codes for the growth factor neurturin have been inserted.
"In Parkinson's disease, brain cells that control movement gradually die," Marks
says. "Bathing these dying cells in neurturin may help them to stay alive and
functioning." The liquid formula is applied by long needle, four injections on
each side of the brain. Then the holes in the skull are sealed by titanium caps
and closed.

   There is no known cause or cure for Parkinson's, which typically affects
people older than 55. Calvert, an energy engineer, got hit when he was 46 at a
dinner party at his home near Sacramento. Seated at the head of the table, he
reached for his knife to cut his steak and couldn't lift it. That was his first
symptom of Parkinson's, though he'd had foot cramps for two years -- a
Parkinson's hint known as dystonia.

   Medication is the first line of treatment. The herky jerky movements common
to Parkinson's patients are a side effect of the drugs, usually levodopa. When
the medicine is working, the muscles are loose and the movement indicates the
brain is responding.

   Over time, levodopa loses its effectiveness and you have to keep increasing
the dosage. Calvert takes a pill every three hours, including at night. When it
wears off, he stiffens up and can't sleep, and when awake he can barely move and
has no balance.

   Four months ago he came to UCSF to pursue the second line of treatment --

   deep brain stimulation, which involves implanting probes on either side of
the brain to give an electric pulse. He was told about the CERE-120 study,
talked to two of the 12 patients in Phase 1 and was persuaded. Either way he'd
have to have to have his skull opened, but as he reasoned, "I'd rather go the
non-hardware route than have two electrodes in my brain and a battery pack in my
chest."

   UCSF is the only California hospital participating in the trial, and Calvert
was the third patient to enter it. Every few months he comes in for tests
including blood work, X-ray, MRI, psychological exam and motor and cognitive
skills tests.

   It will be a year before he learns whether he got the dose of CERE-120.

   If it works, the people who got the placebo will be given the option to
undergo a second surgery. The titanium caps just have to be popped off, and the
holes extended through the skull so CERE-120 can be applied.

   All participants are asked to report to UCSF for testing once a year for
life. They are also asked to submit to a postmortem exam. "On top of everything
else," Calvert says with a laugh, "they throw in a free autopsy."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2)
(1) Randy Calvert prepares for blood work. He has been living with Parkinson's
for 10 years and is part of a new study at UCSF. , (2) Calvert on his way into
the MRI scanner at UCSF. / photographs by mike kepka

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2007


                              518 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 14, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-7:E,F; B-5:R; B-9:S

LENGTH: 620 words

HEADLINE: George `Bill' Bremner, 81; dentist made children's lives better

BYLINE: Michael Kinsman, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Friends and family knew George "Bill" Bremner as a soft-spoken man, but there
was one aspect of his life he kept so private that even those closest to him
knew little about it.

   Mr. Bremner, a San Diego dentist, made an unspoken vow that he wouldn't deny
treatment to children, whether or not their families could afford it.

   In the days after his death, his family learned that children from their
church's Sunday school used to show up at his office during the week for help.

   "It's that kind of thing that he never talked about," his daughter Patty
Brubaker said. "We had no idea he was doing that."

   Mr. Bremner died March 29 at Granite Hills Convalescent nursing home in El
Cajon, where he was moved only a week before his death. He had suffered from
Alzheimer's disease for a decade. He was 81.

   "My father was all about helping children," Brubaker said. "He loved
children."

   There were some signs that Mr. Bremner was providing dentistry to needy
families at his office in the College Area of San Diego.

   On one occasion, he came home with a silver poodle as payment for his work.
His family suspected someone wanted to get rid of the dog and found this an
inventive way to do that.

   Another time, he was paid with a portrait of his son Darrell. The boy sat for
hours in an uncomfortable bow tie for the artist. When the portrait was
finished, the family agreed that it bore very little likeness to Darrell.

   Mr. Bremner was born in St. Louis on Feb. 5, 1926, and grew up in Knob Lick,
Mo., a hamlet of 103 residents. He attended a three-room school that put
students from first to fourth grades in one group, fifth to eighth grades in a
second, and ninth and 10th grades in a third group. For his final two years of
high school, he rode a bus 15 miles to Fredericktown.

   During World War II, he volunteered for the Navy, where he studied to become
a dentist. He completed his studies at the University of Iowa after the war. As
a member of the Navy Reserve, he was activated during the Korean War and
accompanied the 1st Marine Division at the Battle of Chosin Reservoir, famous
for its fierce fighting and harsh conditions.

   In the early 1980s, Mr. Bremner spent six weeks in Kiryat Malachi, an Israeli
settlement for displaced Jews from Arab countries. He spent most of his time
providing free dental services to its residents, said Norman Mann, a retired San
Diego orthodontist who had invited him to work at the clinic in Israel.

   "He really felt a very strong urge to support this program," Mann said. "He
thought it was really a good thing to do."

   After learning that he suffered from Alzheimer's disease, Mr. Bremner
volunteered for a clinical study by UC San Diego neurologist Dr. Mark Tuszynski
that was said to be the first attempt at using human gene therapy to treat
Alzheimer's patients.

   "He knew all along that it wouldn't reverse his Alzheimer's," his daughter
said. "He did it anyway, thinking it might help children years later should they
ever develop Alzheimer's. He was always thinking about how to help kids."

   In addition to Brubaker, his daughter from Oceanside, Mr. Bremner is survived
by his wife, Dee; daughter Jan Hall of Moreno Valley; sons, Darrell Brubaker of
La Mesa and Montree Chusanavet of Bangkok, Thailand; sister, Beth Bremner of Des
Moines, Iowa; brothers, Bob Bremner of Cedar Falls, Iowa, Barron Bremner of Iowa
City, Iowa, and Bruce Bremner of Colorado Springs, Colo.; five grandchildren;
and two great-grandchildren.

   A memorial service is planned at 1 p.m. April 27 at San Diego First Church of
the Nazarene, 3901 Lomaland Drive.

   The family suggests donations to Quail Botanical Gardens, P.O. Box 230005,
Encinitas, CA 92023; or Vitas Hospice, 9655 Granite Ridge Road, Suite 300, San
Diego, CA 92123.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: George "Bill" Bremner

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                              519 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                             April 13, 2007 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 804 words

HEADLINE: TENDENCY TOWARD OBESITY TIED TO GENES, LARGE STUDY SHOWS;
GENETIC THERAPY YEARS OFF; DIET, EXERCISE STILL IMPORTANT, SCIENTISTS ADD

BYLINE: Dennis O'Brien, Sun Reporter

BODY:

   Ever wonder why some people can eat anything they want without gaining
weight, while others fight a year round battle of the bulge?

   British researchers confirmed yesterday what many weight-watchers and
scientists have long suspected: There are obesity genes that can add inches to
your waistline.

   A team of scientists examined the DNA of 40,000 people and found that
variations in a specific gene sequence increased the likelihood of being
overweight.

   Those with two copies of the variant gene sequence known as FTO were nearly
seven pounds heavier than those without it. They also were 70 percent more
likely to be obese, the researchers found.

   That doesn't mean weight-watchers should give up. Scientists say a healthy
diet and regular exercise are still important - and the specific causes of
weight gain vary from one person to the next.

   But the study shows there's another reason why some of us are more likely to
put on pounds than others. "What we're suggesting is genetics plays a role, as
well as lifestyle," said Dr. Andrew Hattersley, a researcher at Peninsula
Medical School in Exeter, England, and a senior author of the report in today's
issue of the journal Science.

   The DNA analysis was limited to white European adults and children, but
researchers believe the findings apply to other nationalities and ethnic groups.
They're planning future studies to find out for sure.

   Despite their increasing knowledge, scientists say genetic therapies for
obesity are still years away. They need to identify additional genes that play a
role in obesity, and until then, healthy living remains the best advice.

   "It would be wrong to say that a single gene like this is something that,
because of its effect, would be something we would want to translate into a
genetic test," said Dr. Mark McCarthy, a co-author from Oxford University.
"Lifestyle interventions, eating less and exercising more remain the mainstay of
effective therapy."

   Researchers don't know how the FTO gene sequence works. "I can't give you a
pat answer as to how this influences weight," McCarthy said. Future studies will
show whether it regulates appetite or metabolism, or has some other effect.

   What makes this study important is the scope of its findings, observers say.
"Other genes have been linked to obesity, but they haven't been replicated in
such large population groups," said Dr. Soren Snitker, who studies the genetics
of obesity and diabetes at the University of Maryland School of Medicine.

   Last year, for example, researchers at Boston University found that
variations of a gene that regulates fatty acids, known as Insig2, can signal a
predisposition to obesity in about 10 percent of European and African-American
populations.

   But the latest British findings represent the first genetic fingerprint
linked to obesity in a large group: More than half the population had at least
one copy of it.

   Still, scientists have been debating the role of genetics in obesity for
years, and the study's authors say their report won't end those arguments.

   "It's difficult to come up with accurate measures of how much of it is
genetic and how much is environmental," said Timothy Frayling, the lead author
and a Peninsula Medical School researcher.

   Scientists have found that twins raised separately experience the same weight
gain patterns, and that adopted children gain weight in ways that more closely
resemble their biological parents than their adoptive ones, added UM's Snitker.

   But the turning point in the debate over behavior vs. nature came in the
mid-1990s, when mice with genetic deficiencies that inhibited their production
of the hormone leptin were three times heavier than normal mice, Snitker said.
Leptin inhibits food intake and stimulates energy production.

   "Everybody believed up till then that obesity was a moral weakness, that
people just had to pull themselves together," Snitker said. "We know now that
isn't the case."

   The findings announced yesterday were discovered by researchers initially
looking at Type 2 diabetes in a broader effort to identify the genetic
underpinnings of numerous diseases. They initially compared DNA from 2,000
people who had Type 2 diabetes with DNA from 3,000 people without it.

   They found that the FTO variant was more common among diabetics. But their
results also showed the variant plays a role in weight patterns, so they probed
deeper, examining the DNA from another 35,000 people participating in 13
different health studies in England, Finland and Italy.

   Meanwhile, obesity will remain a major concern among health experts. An
estimated one-third of adults in the U.S. are obese, and up to two-thirds are
overweight, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. An
estimated 16 percent of children and adolescents between 6 and 19 are
overweight, the CDC says.

   dennis.obrien@baltsun.com

GRAPHIC: Photo(s)
 A study in today's issue of the journal Science reports that those with two
copies of a particular gene sequence are 70 percent more likely to be obese than
those without it.
 Suzanne Plunkett : BLOOMBERG NEWS

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2007


                              520 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                              April 9, 2007 Monday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTHSCIENCE; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 502 words

HEADLINE: WHITE COAT NOTES

BYLINE: Excerpts from the Globe's blog on the Boston-area medical community.

BODY:

   Dana-Farber gets Yawkey gift

   Officials at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute last week announced the
second-largest gift in the hospital's history: $30 million from a philanthropy
dedicated to the memory of the longtime owners of the Boston Red Sox, Tom and
Jean Yawkey.

   The gift from the Yawkey Foundation will help pay for the first new patient
care building in more than 30 years at Dana-Farber, the Yawkey Center for Cancer
Care, which is scheduled to open in 2011.

   The 275,000-square-foot outpatient treatment center, to be constructed near
the intersection of Brookline Ave. and Jimmy Fund Way, will house 100
examination rooms, 150 beds for cancer treatment, and a new front entrance for
the entire Dana-Farber campus in the Longwood Medical Area.

   SCOTT ALLEN

   Harvard creates department

   Harvard University's governing body has approved a new department of
developmental and regenerative biology - the first academic department in the
university's 371-year history to be based in more than one of the university's
schools.

   The new department will bring together 13 to 16 researchers from the Faculty
of Arts and Sciences and Harvard Medical School. It will be co-chaired by Doug
Melton and David Scadden, also the co-directors of the Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, which was founded in 2004.

   GARETH COOK

   State plan signs up thousands

   Nearly 63,000 people had signed up for new state-subsidized health insurance
plans as of April 1. State officials had projected that it would take until July
1 to enroll 70,000 residents who earn less than 300 percent of the federal
poverty level out of the estimated 140,000 eligible for subsidized coverage.

   All uninsured state residents who earn more than 300 percent of the poverty
level will be required to enroll in nonsubsidized programs this year.

   Information is available by calling 1-877-623-6765 weekdays between 8 a.m.
and 5 p.m., or online at macommonwealthcare.com.

   LIZ KOWALCZYK

   Medical school picks dean

   Dr. Terence R. Flotte, a pediatrician and gene therapy researcher from the
University of Florida, was named the new dean and deputy executive chancellor of
the University of Massachusetts Medical School.

   Currently the chairman of pediatrics at the University of Florida School of
Medicine in Gainesville, Flotte, 45, will succeed Dr. Aaron Lazare, 71, on May
15.

   Flotte focuses his research on genetic therapies and cystic fibrosis in
particular. He plans to continue to conduct research, see patients, and teach.

   ELIZABETH COONEY

   Push for flu pandemic money

   A proposal to spend $36.5 million to prepare the state for a long-feared
global epidemic of influenza is back before Massachusetts lawmakers three months
after they failed to act on the measure.

   The money would be used in large part to buy breathing machines, hospital
beds, and caches of flu medication.

   The legislation resembles a pandemic plan originally championed in February
2006 by then-governor Mitt Romney.

   STEPHEN SMITH

   MORE WHITE COAT NOTES Read news updates and events calendar at
boston.com/yourlife/health/blog.

GRAPHIC: UPI/FILE 1967 DOUG MELTONTOM YAWKEY

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2007


                              521 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                            April 4, 2007 Wednesday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE MEDICINE AND TECHNOLOGY; Pg. D-1

LENGTH: 926 words

HEADLINE: KILLING CANCER FROM THE INSIDE OUT;
UPMC CLINICAL TRIAL USES GENETICALLY ENGINEERED VIRUS IN FIGHT AGAINST LIVER
CANCER

BYLINE: DAVID TEMPLETON, PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE

BODY:

   UPMC's Liver Cancer Center hopes a clinical trial it is conducting will
showcase the benefits of viral gene therapy in treating colorectal cancer that
has spread to the liver.

   University of Pittsburgh Medical Center's liver cancer center is
participating in a national trial to test whether a genetically engineered
herpes simplex virus -- the one that causes cold sores -- will kill liver cancer
without harming healthy tissue.

   Dr. David A. Geller, co-director of the liver cancer center and principal
investigator at the UPMC site, said the center is approved to use the virus
therapy on five patients in the trial.

   Already therapy has begun on one patient, with four other slots yet to be
filled. A second candidate is under consideration, he said.

   MediGene AG, the German company sponsoring the study through its San Diego
subsidiary, genetically "disarmed" the herpes simplex virus so it can serve as a
therapeutic agent in humans.

   It accomplished that goal by switching off a gene that normally enables the
virus to multiply and kill healthy cells. The new version thrives only inside
cancer cells whose environment compensates for the lost gene. As a result, the
virus replicates inside tumor cells and destroys them without effect to healthy
cells.

   "In animal cells and human tumor cell lines, the virus was a cancer killer,"
said Dr. Geller, describing participating patients as "pioneers in cutting-edge
medicine."

   The trial will determine whether the virus kills colorectal cancer that has
metastasized to the liver. Dr. Geller said 150,000 new cases of colorectal
cancer are diagnosed each year, and 60 percent of those cases metastasize to the
liver over the lifetime of the patient.

   It's the same cancer that has stricken presidential spokesman Tony Snow, 51.
Mr. Snow, who had his colon removed in 2005 due to colorectal cancer, was told
last week that the cancer has spread to his liver.

   To qualify for the UPMC study, participants must have inoperable metastatic
colorectal cancer to the liver and have failed first-line chemotherapy.

   Viral gene therapy is designed to improve the response to second-line
chemotherapy, whose current success rate is only 15 to 20 percent.

   The one participant, whom Dr. Geller could not identify without the man's
permission, has 12 spots scattered in his liver, making it inoperable.

   During the trial, the subject will receive four doses of the genetically
engineered herpes virus every Monday for four weeks. Doses are injected into a
catheter inserted into the liver's hepatic artery during a two-hour procedure.
The study will track the virus to see if it ventures beyond the liver.

   Normal herpes simplex viruses can migrate to the brain and cause
encephalitis. To prevent that, participants must show the presence of antibodies
to fight off any wayward virus that escapes the liver. To date, the modified
virus appears to be safe with no documented herpes infections in participating
patients.

   "You have to show immunity and prior exposure to the herpes virus so it can
ward off the virus if it escapes," Dr. Geller said.

   Even if the virus escapes the liver, the patient can be treated with
Acyclovir, an antiviral medication used for cold sores.

   Eighteen patients nationwide will be treated at four hospitals, including
UPMC, in Phase II of the study. Eight of those spots already have been filled.
During Phase I, 12 patients proved the novel therapy was safe.

   "Preliminary results were encouraging," Dr. Geller said. "But it will be a
year or two before we know the outcome of this study."

   Studies on animals, including monkeys, have shown that the genetically
engineered virus is safe and kills cancer. But in human clinical trials,
procedures must be conducted under tighter scrutiny.

   "I think this is the good fight," Dr. Geller said, noting two years of
paperwork to land approval to conduct the trial at UPMC.

   Educating people about liver cancer also is important, he said. Even if
people don't qualify to participate in the trial, other treatments are
available. More information is available at www.livercancercenter.upmc.com or by
calling 412-692-2001.

   In 2006, 1,728 liver cancer patients were seen at UPMC, including 350 new
cases. At the center, one of the largest in the United States, 95 percent of
patients qualify for some form of cancer therapy.

   "The best option is to surgically remove the cancer," Dr. Geller said.

   About a third of those patients are cured. Although the study focuses on
inoperable metastasized colorectal cancer, the eventual goal, if the study
succeeds, would be to test it on other types of liver cancer, which is difficult
to cure.

   About 25 percent of UPMC liver cancer patients survive three years after
diagnosis. The most aggressive form of the disease is primary liver cancer --
hepatocellular carcinoma or HCC -- for which there is no effective chemotherapy.

   "The data is humbling," Dr. Geller said. The best treatment for HCC is a
liver transplant. "If we can detect it early, we can cure it by surgically
removing the tumor. There's a 30 percent cure rate if we catch it early."

   Unfortunately, he said, about 75 percent of liver cancer is inoperable at
time of diagnosis.

   Primary liver cancer can result from cirrhosis of the liver, hepatitis B and
C infections, chemical exposure, or autoimmune liver disease. Fifteen percent of
HCC victims had no risk factors.

   He said the viral gene therapy could be the dawn of a new era in liver cancer
treatment.

   "It has the potential to significantly improve the treatment responses when
combined with traditional chemotherapy," Dr. Geller said.

NOTES: David Templeton can be reached at dtempleton@post-gazette.com or
412-263-1578.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2007


                              522 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2007 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                              April 2, 2007 Monday
                                 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1259 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH;
Diplomacy paying off in the war on cancer;
Growing field of epigenetics uses gentler approach to manipulate diseased cells

BYLINE: ERIC BERGER, Staff

BODY:

   As they completed the "book of life" earlier this decade, scientists with the
Human Genome Project declared they had struck upon the path leading toward
eventual cures for most diseases.

   By scribbling down all 3 billion DNA letters of the genetic code, the
scientists reasoned, they could ferret out the defective genes in sick patients
that explained why diseases such as cancer flourished and ultimately killed
their hosts.

   But less than a decade later, a related science called epigenetics may have
begun eclipsing traditional genetics. In epigenetics, it is factors such as diet
and smoking, rather than inheritance, that influence how genes behave.

   A deepening understanding of this process has led to the development of drugs
to rehabilitate cancer cells - by wiping away their bad memories - instead of
bombing them into submission.

   "There are more people working now on the epigenetics of cancer than the
genetics of cancer," said Jean Pierre Issa, a professor at the University of
Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center.

   That's a claim not every cancer researcher would support, but it's clear that
interest in epigenetics has skyrocketed in recent years. A decade ago, at major
cancer meetings, there would be a handful of presentations on epigenetics. Today
there are hundreds. And epigenetic therapies now have moved beyond the lab and
into the clinic, treating patients.

   "It's impossible to pick up any scientific journal today and not find at
least one epigenetics paper," said Peter Jones, director of the Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center at the University of Southern California and a
pioneer in epigenetics research. "The growth has been explosive."

   So, what's all the fuss about?

   Cancer is a disease of malfunctioning genes.

   Like a gene mutation, epigenetics also may cause a gene to break down, or
begin doing bad things, such as turning a healthy cell into a cancerous one. In
epigenetics, however, the DNA letters of genes are not changed or mutated.
Instead, some other external force, typically a tiny hydrocarbon molecule, bonds
with a healthy gene and stops it from functioning.

   Among the most common of these epigenetic "silencers" is a methyl hydrocarbon
chemical in the body, which attaches itself to the DNA inside cells. It still
isn't entirely clear why this methylation occurs.

   Scientists have determined, however, that the process can be triggered by any
number of environmental factors, such as a consistently poor diet, smoking, even
aging. It is, perhaps, no coincidence that those are among the leading risk
factors for cancer.

   A patient cannot change his or her genes. But there already are drugs
available that will strip epigenetic tags - such as methyl groups - away from
DNA. And that's the critical difference for cancer researchers.

   It's one thing for a geneticist to identify a gene that gives rise to a
particular form of cancer. It's quite another to alter the mutated gene. That
was the hope of gene therapy, but that has had limited success. Epigenetic
therapy, on the other hand, already has had some successes, and the promise of
more.

   A success story

   Nancy Stanley is one of the early successes.

   About two years ago, Stanley, 71, traveled from Hitchcock to Huntsville,
Ala., for a granddaughter's graduation from high school. Once there, she felt
weak and turned pale. Upon returning home, she went to the University of Texas
Medical Branch at Galveston, where she received several blood transfusions and
was diagnosed with myelodysplastic syndrome, a deadly precursor to leukemia.

   Stanley, the former medical records director at the the Harris County Jail,
sought a second opinion at M.D. Anderson.

   There she found Dr. Hagop Kantarjian, chair of the institution's department
of leukemia. He was initiating a trial of decitabine, a drug rejected for
chemotherapy in the 1970s because of its toxicity. Working with Issa, Kantarjian
recognized the drug's epigenetic potential - it strips away the DNA methyl tags
even at lower, safe doses given over longer periods of time.

   Stanley joined the clinical trial and now is in remission.

   "I feel good, and I have never had any side effects, no nausea," she said. "I
still have my hair and my energy. I'm 71, and I'm still running."

   The overall trial was a success, too. Forty percent of participants went into
complete remission, and nearly another third derived some clinical benefit from
the medicine, according to Kantarjian.

   Issa described epigenetics as a departure from the normal war on cancer, an
all-out assault on malignant cells with radiation and toxic drugs. Instead of
killing the cancerous cells, what if the pattern of their epigenetic tags could
be reset to that of the time of their birth?

   "It's like the difference between war and politics," Issa said. "Instead of
bombing the cancer cells, we're trying diplomacy."

   The trial of decitabine was a proof of principle, a clear indicator that the
epigenetic approach could work. With its recent approval by the FDA, three
epigenetic drugs now are on the market for various types of cancer.

   Hurdles remain. It's easier to treat liquid tumors - those in which blood
cells turn cancerous as in Stanley's ailment - with epigenetic therapies because
it is easier to deliver the drug directly to the troublesome cells. But solid
tumor diseases, such as cancers of the colon, head and neck, also have been
shown to be affected by DNA methylation, so the potential is there.

   M.D. Anderson is conducting 17 clinical trials to test the merit of
epigenetic drugs.

   "This is the beginning of a new era of research," Kantarjian said.
"Epigenetic therapy is going to have a very broad therapeutic role over the next
5 to 10 years in a large number of cancers."

   Epigenetics has had an impact in other medical fields. It helps answer the
question of how one identical twin might develop an illness such as
schizophrenia and another be perfectly healthy. And then there's the mystery of
pregnant mothers.

   For a long time, scientists understood that the diet of mothers-to-be can be
critical to the chances that their offspring will acquire various diseases.

   A few years ago, a team of researchers began feeding dietary supplements to
obese, yellow mice who birthed brown, lean babies. The scientists determined the
diet had silenced a gene in the offspring that carried a predisposition to
obesity, diabetes and cancer. The supplements shut down the gene without
altering the DNA sequence.

   "That study, I think, helped bring attention to the fact that there's more
going on here than just basic genetics," said Robert Waterland, an assistant
professor of pediatrics at Baylor College of Medicine, and a co-author of the
mice study.

   ENVIRONMENT DOES MATTER

   Scientific interest in the field of epigenetics has exploded in recent years.
It is related to genetics, the study of genes that organisms inherit from their
parents, and diseases caused by mutations of those genes. Epigenetics is the
study of environmental factors, such as aging or smoking, that can also modify
the behavior of genes and cause disease.

   A CLOSE LOOK

   DNA strand

   Three billion letters (bases) make up each strand of human DNA in each cell,
with 0,000 to 25,000 genes. Based on how DNA is folded as few as a handful of
genes may be active at any time.

   DNA Methylation

   Scientists have found other ways for genes to be silenced. One of them is the
addition of a tiny organic compound a methyl group, which is attached to the
cytosine base. Scientists believe that various environmental factors cause some
genes to become methylated.

   Bases

   A - Adenosine

   C - Cytosine

   T - Thymine

   G - Guanine

NOTES: eric.berger@chron.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: 1. THRIVING: Nancy Stanley, 71, of Hitchcock, was diagnosed with
a deadly precursor to leukemia. But after participating in an epigenetic
clinical trial, her cancer is in remission. (p. 4); Graph: 2. ENVIRONMENT DOES
MATTER (p. 4, text)
1. STEVE UECKERT : CHRONICLE, 2. ALBERTO CUADRA : CHRONICLE, Sources: The
Scientist Magazine

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2007


                              523 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            March 29, 2007 Thursday
                                 FIRST EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 632 words

HEADLINE: Trouble from the start

BYLINE: Steven Syre

BODY:

   Boston Capital

   Why did Dr. Langer change his mind?

   Dennis Langer was a director at Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. in 2005 when the
Cambridge biotechnology company known as TKT entertained a takeover offer from
Shire PLC for $1.6 billion. Langer wasn't just another board member in a
contentious internal merger debate. He turned out to be the swing vote who
eventually switched sides and made the deal happen.

   The sale of TKT is memorable, nearly two years later, because it turned into
such a public rumble at the time. The company's chief executive, Michael Astrue,
was so steamed about the deal he quit before the shareholder vote. Opportunistic
investors, particularly Carl Icahn, swooped in expecting an improved price or
late additional bidder before a vote. They were disappointed.

   The deal was finally approved by a thin majority, 52.6 percent, but Icahn and
some others challenged the merger price of $37 per share in court. Depositions
from that case, still pending, were the basis for an engaging and hotly
contested tale that spilled out in a separate civil suit filed by Icahn's
investment firm and unsealed this week in Delaware.

   The outline: Warburg Pincus, an investment firm that owned a large chunk of
TKT stock and had two representatives on the company's board, wanted out and
began pushing hard for a sale. Shire showed interest and started talking with
TKT's investment bankers. Money talk started at $31 per share and moved up over
time.

   Exactly what TKT was really worth depended on the company's drug to treat
Hunter's disease. It was still in the development pipeline, but looked promising
at the time.

   Both directors from Warburg Pincus favored a deal and were joined by a third
director, according to the lawsuit. They were generally opposed by four others.
Langer was one of the four in opposition, and then he wasn't.

   Langer is a doctor with real business experience and a Harvard law degree. At
the time of TKT's negotiations with Shire, Langer was the head of North American
operations for Dr. Reddy's Laboratories, a generic drug maker in India.

   Langer was interested in a portfolio of proteins TKT owned but had not
exploited, believing the Indian company could commercialize them. Negotiations
to create a joint venture, called Zuma, were launched late in 2004 with the idea
of both companies sharing the opportunity. The lawsuit claims negotiations kept
shifting and Langer eventually proposed a venture that could have been worth
millions to him personally.

   But nothing was settled by the following March, when Langer flew to India
along with one of the TKT directors from Warburg Pincus. Langer allegedly
returned with a different outlook on a TKT sale and voted for the deal a month
later. The sale was approved, 4-3, though one director later changed her vote to
"create the impression the board was less divided," according to the suit.

   The Icahn lawsuit claims Langer changed his mind because Shire assured him
the Zuma venture would happen. In other words, the deal proponents bought his
vote.

   This version of events is adamantly denied by others. Langer's lawyer, Daniel
Folt, said his client and others opposed Shire's early offers and worked to
extract better terms. "There came a point in time where the deal got to the
right price with the right conditions and that's why he voted for it in his best
business judgment," Folt said.

   He points out that the Zuma venture never happened. The Icahn lawsuit alleges
Shire simply reneged. Shire denies that.

   "There never was any side deal," says Shire spokesman Matt Cabrey. "We
continue to feel [the proteins] are of limited value and are not being
developed."

   Some deals are happy marriages. This one was trouble out of the gate - and
it's not over.

   Steven Syre is a Globe columnist. He can be reached at syre@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: Billionaire investor Carl Icahn.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2007


                              524 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            March 29, 2007 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Column 1; Sports Desk; SPORTS MEDICINE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1383 words

HEADLINE: For Athletes, The Next Fountain Of Youth?

BYLINE: By BILL PENNINGTON

BODY:

   The latest curative leap to heal professional athletes and weekend warriors
alike may sound like science fiction, but it could transform sports medicine.
Some doctors and researchers say that in a few years the use of primitive stem
cells from infants' umbilical cord blood could grow new knee ligaments or elbow
tendons creating a therapy that becomes the vanguard of sports injury repair.

     Already, some sports agents are preparing to advise clients about banking
stem cells from their offspring or from tissue taken from their own bodies as an
insurance policy against a career-ending infirmity. Stem cell blood banks are
promoting the benefits of stem cell therapies for the practical healing and
rehabilitation of tendons, ligaments, muscle and cartilage. There are skeptics
in the medical community who wonder how soon the technology will be viable, but
enthusiastic advocates of the therapies say the time is near.

    ''It's not a pie in the sky notion,'' said Dr. Scott Rodeo, an orthopedist
and award-winning research scientist at Manhattan's Hospital for Special
Surgery. ''Maybe it's not going to happen next year, but a three-to-five-year
horizon is not unreasonable.''

     Dr. Rodeo has already practiced these technologies in laboratory surgeries
on rats, methods that will be especially useful when reconstructing the knee's
anterior cruciate ligament and the shoulder's rotator cuff. Both are common
sports maladies that can be particularly daunting to surgeons because the body
generally does not mend or restore the damaged tissue after these injuries.

     ''In each case, stem cells clearly have some beneficial role in inducing
tissue regeneration,'' said Dr. Rodeo, who is also a team physician with the
Giants and a former United States Olympic team doctor.

     Some scientists say now is the time to safeguard athletic prodigies, even
kindergartners.

     ''If you have a child who has exceptional athletic talent at the age of 5
or 6, you might want to get a muscle or fat biopsy to draw and freeze some young
stem cells,'' said Dr. Johnny Huard, the director of the Stem Cell Research
Center of the Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh and a leading gene therapy
researcher. ''To have a pool of stem cells already removed would be enormously
valuable. The practical use might be years away, but that's the future of sports
medicine.''

     The kinds of stem cell therapies being researched for the most part do not
involve the politically sensitive use of embryonic stem cells. But they could
involve using harvested adult stem cells, stem cells saved from a child at birth
or cells from what may someday be a national bank of donated stem cells derived
from umbilical cord or placental stem cells.

     While the stem cell therapies have gone beyond the theoretical stage, not
everyone in orthopedics is convinced they will be useful in treating top
athletes or anyone else.

     Dr. Regis O'Keefe, spokesman for and Fellow of the American Academy of
Orthopaedic Surgery, said attempts to use regenerated cartilage in knees has so
far been ''not highly effective.'' He noted that there have been no
peer-reviewed studies for many of the proposed therapies and limited
experimentation in humans.

     ''There is a potential benefit but it's going to take years of clinical
trials to acquire the scientific knowledge to know this is better than the
current alternatives,'' said Dr. O'Keefe, who directs musculoskeletal research
at the University of Rochester Medical Center. ''And without those trials we
also cannot properly evaluate the risks.''

     Dr. Freddie Fu, a pioneering orthopedic surgeon with the University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, agreed. ''You have to answer safety questions and
look for side effects,'' he said. ''It will also be quite expensive. Then again,
knowing professional athletes, none of that will stop them. They will always be
willing to try anything to help them play.''

     With stem cell technology advancing, some are acting now to prepare for the
wealth of restorative possibilities. Five professional soccer players had their
children's stem cells frozen at birth and stored in a Liverpool stem cell bank,
according to a story last year in The Sunday Times of London. One of the players
called the stem cells a potential repair kit for a career-threatening injury.

     Stem cell therapies could do more than refurbish joints, they could help
build muscle in elite athletes and increase other physical capacities at a pace
and proficiency not conventionally attainable.

     ''There is a performance-enhancing possibility to all this,'' said Dr.
Huard, who added that he has met with doping officials who are trying to prepare
for the new technology. ''It might not be detectable because nothing is
unnatural -- they are your own cells. I don't think you could turn a bad athlete
into a super athlete but could you provide the edge that turns an Olympic silver
medal winner into an Olympic gold medal winner? I think you could.

     ''At the same time, will this kind of engineering of the body hold up under
the strain of competition at that level? How will it work in an intense, high
impact situation like a pro football game?''

     Arthur Caplan, director of the Center of Bioethics at the University of
Pennsylvania, believes prosperous professional athletes will view the emerging
stem cell technology as a fountain of youth.

     ''It all sounds good to them,'' Caplan said. ''They'll charge in head
first. But there's danger in that.''

     Leigh Steinberg, a veteran sports agent, conceded that the nation's top
sports stars would zealously pursue each orthopedic breakthrough.

     ''For good or ill, athletes have always been in the forefront of every new
medical technique,'' Steinberg said. ''Whether it's the use of human growth
hormone or arthroscopic surgery, they are the workers in society whose
livelihood most depends on their physical condition. If the medicine is proven
out and it's the difference between being able to play four more years at $8
million a year, every athlete will consider it a godsend.''

     Steinberg said he expected to soon begin advising clients to bank their
offspring's umbilical cord stem cells, something Steinberg did when his own
children were born.

     In future years, if the use of the stem cell technology in sports becomes
more widespread, it leaves open the possibility of professional athletes
considering a pregnancy -- or artificially creating one -- solely to aid their
ability to sign another $40 million contract.

     ''Something like that does make me nervous,'' said Dr. G. Lynn Lashbrook,
an Oregon-based agent, teacher and director of the Sports Management Worldwide
Agency. ''The athletic world is renown for not controlling its ethical
compass.''

     At the facilities storing stem cells, where samplings from the best
American athletes or their offspring may already be frozen, confidentially
agreements prevent officials from revealing the names of clients.

     ''Our bank does include people with strong athletic backgrounds,'' said Dr.
Robert Hariri, founder and chief executive of LifebankUSA, one of about 25
private cord blood banks in the United States. Prices for collecting and storing
blood vary widely. Dr. Hariri's facility, in Cedar Knolls, N.J., has about
35,000 units of stem cells; donors can have umbilical cord blood stored for
about $1,900, plus $125 a year.

     The primary uses to date for cord blood have been in the treatment of
leukemia and other life-threatening diseases.

     ''The focus so far has been on more important things than fixing an
athlete's joints,'' Dr. Hariri said.''But we're well aware of the possibilities
and the revolution that is coming.''

     In the front lines of the revolution will likely be the best-paid athletes
of the world.

     ''Take David Beckham as an example,'' Dr. Lashbrook said, referring to the
English soccer star who recently signed a $250 million contract to play for the
Los Angeles Galaxy. ''If in a few years he had a knee injury, given the money at
stake, what would be more paramount than getting him back on the field? His
lifeblood and the franchise lifeblood would be dependant on the knee getting
better as quickly as possible.

     ''So it is not a stretch to say that they would turn to the most advanced
science available. Wherever it's available, I might add. History proves that.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Advances in the use of stem cell blood might be used to benefit
the healing of muscle, tendons, cartilage and ligaments of athletes. (Photo by
Fred R. Conrad)(pg. D1)
 Umbilical cord blood being prepared for storage at LifebankUSA in Cedar Knolls,
N.J. It is one of about 25 cord blood banks in the country. (Photo by Fred R.
Conrad/The New York Times)(pg. D7)

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2007


                              525 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            March 28, 2007 Wednesday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D2

LENGTH: 768 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEF

BYLINE: Globe

BODY:

   THE REGION

   Liberty Mutual chairman

   seeks insurance changes

   Liberty Mutual Group chairman Edmund F. Kelly urged Insurance Commissioner
Nonnie S. Burnes to quickly implement a new system for apportioning among
automobile insurers the drivers that no company wants to insure voluntarily.
Kelly cited a report issued Monday by a study group appointed by Governor Deval
Patrick that said the current system is "unduly complex and susceptible to
gaming." The seven-member study group, however, urged Burnes to hold off on
implementation until the effect of other reform efforts can be assessed or in
conjunction with broader changes to the state's heavily regulated auto insurance
system. (Bruce Mohl)

   Patrick taps Hibbard to be utility regulations chief

   Governor Deval Patrick named a Boston energy consultant and former state
official, Paul J. Hibbard, to head the state utility regulation commission.
Hibbard, a Boxford resident, is a vice president at Analysis Group, where he has
advised utilities, government agencies, and foundations on energy and
environmental policy. Hibbard takes over April 11 as chairman of what will be
called the Commonwealth Utilities Commission. Legislators recently approved a
Patrick plan to abolish the DTE and its five commissioners, replacing it with a
new utilities commission run by a three-person board. It will regulate electric
and gas utilities only. A separate commissioner will oversee telecommunications
and cable television. (Peter J. Howe)

   Icahn's High River sues Shire over Transkaryotic

   Carl Icahn's High River LP investment firm sued Shire PLC, seeking damages
over the UK drug maker's 2005 purchase of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. for $1.6
billion. Some Transkaryotic directors violated their duties by failing to have
the deal approved by "fully informed" vote of shareholders, High River said in a
sealed complaint filed March 7 in Delaware Chancery Court in Wilmington and made
public by court order. High River said Cambridge-based Transkaryotic didn't seek
to get the best price for shareholders. (Bloomberg)

   Times Co. unit About.com buys healthcare-rating site

   The New York Times Co.'s About.com bought Framingham-based
UCompareHealthCare.com, a website that rates hospitals, nursing homes, and other
care providers, to lure more consumers to its fastest-growing business.
UCompareHealthCare founder Mark Donnelly and the company's employees will join
About.com. Times Co. is the parent of The Boston Globe. Terms of the purchase
weren't disclosed. (Bloomberg)

   Cognex president resigns; CEO named to replace him

   Cognex Corp., a Natick maker of machine vision sensors and systems, said
president and chief operating officer James Hoffmaster resigned "to pursue other
interests." He'll be replaced on an interim basis by chief executive and
chairman Robert Shillman. Hoffmaster left voluntarily, Cognex said. (Bloomberg)

   THE NATION

   Company likely to accept $8b takeover offer by Zell

   Tribune Co., owner of the Los Angeles Times and Chicago Cubs, will probably
accept real estate billionaire Sam Zell's $8 billion takeover offer by the end
of the week, according to people familiar with the matter. An agreement is
likely by Tribune's self-imposed deadline of March 31, said the people, who
declined to be named because no decision has been made. Zell's offer of $33 a
share is 6.8 percent above Monday's close. Zell's offer was competing with the
company's plan to reorganize, as well as less-attractive bids from the company's
largest shareholder, the Chandler family, and California billionaires Ron Burkle
and Eli Broad. (Bloomberg)

   US investigates Beazer Homes mortgage unit

   A federal investigation has been launched into Atlanta-based Beazer Homes'
mortgage lending and other financial practices, an FBI agent said. The
investigation grew from allegations of fraud in the Charlotte, N.C., area. The
FBI, the inspector general at the Department of Housing and Urban Development,
the US attorney, and the IRS are cooperating in the probe, which involves "fraud
in general," said Ken Lucas, a spokesman for the FBI in Charlotte. The Beazer
program that sparked the investigation has been used to finance homes in all of
the company's 40 housing markets. Beazer, one of the nation's largest home
builders, said it "cannot comment on or verify any investigation." (Cox News
Service)

   NEED MORE? Get local business news updates from The Boston Globe on the
Business Ticker, at boston.com/business/ticker. And for big picture business
stories, go to the Business Filter, updated every weekday at
boston.com/business/blog/filter. (THIS LINK MAY EXPIRE WITHIN 6 MONTHS OF
PUBLICATION)

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2007


                              526 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                             March 26, 2007 Monday
                                 Every Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. D02

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

LENGTH: 1094 words

BODY:

    Lockheed Martin Corp. of Bethesda won a $388 million contract from the
Justice Department to provide information technology operations, infrastructure
and security services.

   Lockheed Martin of Bethesda won a $376 million contract from the Army
Aviation and Missile Command to provide hardware and services for the Patriot
Advanced Capability-3 Missile program.

   Northrop Grumman Information Technology of McLean won a $9.7 contract to
provide infrastructure support services to the Office of the Secretary of
Defense.

   Lockheed Martin Integrated Systems Inc. of Bethesda won a $73.3 million
contract from the Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center to provide operations
and maintenance support for base local area network, commercial satellite
communication, technical control facility, and circuit actions, telephone, land
mobile radio and both inside and outside cable plant installations.

   BearingPoint Inc. of McLean won a $188 million contract to provide consulting
services to the Army Communications-Electronics Command's enterprise solutions
center.

   Future Technologies Inc. of Fairfax won a five-year, $7 million contract from
the Naval Surface Warfare Center-Indian Head Division to provide electronic
documentation and data management support, as well as administrative and program
management support.

   Raytheon Strategic Systems Division of Falls Church won a contract of up to
$50.44 million from the Defense Supply Center Philadelphia for material and
material management of bench-stock items to be used at depot repair facilities
for the Army.

   Raytheon Co. of Reston won a $14.5 million contract from the Headquarters
Electronic Systems Center for the global broadcast services program, Department
of Defense's satellite-based system for distributing video, imagery and other
large data files to users around the world.

   Wintara-Salihi Group Inc. of Fort Washington won an $8.7 million contract
from the Army Joint Contracting Command-Iraq/Afghanistan for the combustion
inspection, re-commissioning and start-up of two Siemens gas turbine units,
including the associated auxiliary systems and equipment at the Kirkuk/Taza
power plant.

   General Dynamics Land Systems, General Dynamics Amphibious Systems of
Woodbridge won a $144 million contract from the Marine Corps Systems Command to
provide design for reliability efforts for the continuation of Systems
Development and Demonstration phase of the Expeditionary Fighting Vehicle
program.

   The Mid-Atlantic Regional Maintenance Center awarded a contract of up to
$51.5 million to furnish the necessary management, material support services,
labor, supplies, and equipment necessary to perform depot level preservation to:
IMIA LLC of Theodore, Ala.; Q.E.D Systems Inc. of Virginia Beach; and BAE
Systems Maritime Engineering & Services of San Diego.

   The Naval Undersea Warfare Center awarded a $27 million contract to fabricate
interactive multimedia training modules and modernize outdated training
materials, procedures and techniques for the Submarine On-Board Training Office
to: Carley Corp. of Orlando; Long Wave Inc. of Fort Worth; and EG&G Technical
Services Inc. of Gaithersburg.

   Omega Aerial Refueling Services Inc. of Alexandria won a $24.03 million
contract from the Naval Air Systems Command to provide contractor-owned and
-operated aircraft in support of the Commercial Air Services program.

   ManTech Systems Engineering Corp. of Fairfax won a $9 million contract from
the Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center for engineering and technical support
services.

   Vane Line Bunkering Inc. of Baltimore won a $17.5 million contract from the
Military Surface Deployment and Distribution Command for Atlantic dedicated
barge transportation services.

   Machining Technologies of Hebron, Md., won an $8.31 million contract from the
Joint Munitions and Lethality Life Cycle Management Command for M31 120mm mortar
tail fins.

   Team Logistics Joint Venture of Fairfax won a $16.6 million contract from the
Naval Air Warfare Center Aircraft Division for 433,937 hours of maintenance
planning and design interface technical and management support services.

   Columbia Research Corp. of the District won a $6.3 million contract from the
Navy for acquisition, logistics and administrative support services for the
Program Manager Optics and Non-Lethal Systems, Infantry Weapons Systems office.

   Trinity Protection Services Inc. of Upper Marlboro won a $1.8 million
contract from the Army to provide security guard services.

   Social & Scientific Systems Inc. of Silver Spring won a $12.1 million
contract from the Department of Health and Human Services to provide research
and development for the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute Gene Therapy
Resource Program-Clinical Coordinating Center.

   Northrop Grumman Information Technology of McLean won a $3.1 million contract
from the Navy to provide support services for FastData fund administration.

   Machining Technologies of Salisbury won an $8.31 million contract from the
Army for ammunition and explosives.

   TeleCommunication Systems Inc. of Annapolis won a $1.1 million contract from
the Army for communication equipment.

   Wartsila Lips Inc. of Chesapeake won a $2.5 million contract from the Navy
for maintenance and repair of equipment.

   Wartsila Lips of Chesapeake won a $1.5 million contract from the Navy for
maintenance and repair of equipment.

   Noblis Inc. of Falls Church won a $25 million contract from the General
Services Administration for mission-oriented business integrated services.

   APS-ARTI LLC of Alexandria won a $79 million contract from the State
Department to provide information security support services.

   U.S. Foodservice Inc. of Columbia won a $645 million contract from the
Department of Veterans Affairs for subsistence.

   EG&G Technical Services Inc. of Gaithersburg won a $27 million contract from
the Navy to develop interactive multi-media instruction.

    University Research Corp. of Bethesda won a $5 million contract from the
General Services Administration for mission-oriented business integrated
services.

   Electronic Data Systems Corp., EDS Federal of Herndon won a $4.9 million
contract from the Navy for $4.9 million contract for selection and
classification business process engineering.

   Executive Information Systems of Bethesda won a $1.12 million contract from
the Department of State for software.

   Newport News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Co. of Newport News won a $1.04
million contract from the Navy for material kitting to support VRLA S/A 4355K
installation and associated handling gear and protective barrier.

    -- Judith Mbuya and Washington Technology

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2007


                              527 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2007 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             March 23, 2007 Friday

SECTION: LAGNIAPPE; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 685 words

HEADLINE: 'Mimzy' needs more whimsy, less philosophy

BYLINE: By Michael H. Kleinschrodt, Movie critic

BODY:

   Though "The Last Mimzy" is an enjoyable family film, it just doesn't possess
adventure and enchantment in sufficient quantities to merit the often-heard
comparisons to "E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial."

   For one thing, a stuffed rabbit  --  no matter how unusual  --  just isn't as
engaging as an actual, living alien. And the lecture on gene therapy  --  in
which the movie proposes that DNA can be as damaged by cultural pollutants as by
chemical ones  --  doesn't really help, even if the message is well-intended.

   The movie is a loose adaptation of a 1943 short story ("Mimsy Were the
Borogoves") by Lewis Padgett, the shared pen name for married writers Henry
Kuttner and Catherine L. Moore. The story's title is borrowed from Lewis
Carroll's "Jabberwocky" from "Through the Looking Glass and What Alice Found
There," and, no, I have no idea why the movie uses a different spelling of
"mimsy."

   In the film, siblings Noah (Chris O'Neil), 10, and Emma Wilder (Rhiannon
Leigh Wryn), 5, discover a box of unusual toys floating in the surf off of
Whidbey Island at the northern edge of Puget Sound.

   There's a crystal that seems to hold the key to teleportation, a seashell
that permits communication with spiders and insects, a rock that splinters into
spinning shards used to create a force field, an odd lump of plasma . . . and
Mimzy.

   Mimzy appears to be just another stuffed rabbit, but she speaks to Emma,
giving her knowledge beyond her years.

   The children's parents, nervous Jo (Joely Richardson) and workaholic David
(Timothy Hutton), don't know what to make of the kids' sudden intellectual
blossoming  --  nor does the Department of Homeland Security after the start of
a blackout across the Pacific Northwest is traced to the Wilders' home, which
immediately becomes a suspected nest for a sleeper cell of terrorists.

   But there's nothing so sinister afoot. The mystery of the toys eventually is
explained (a prologue gives away much of the movie), though the story is
sufficiently lacking in detail to render it a generic melange of New Agey,
touchy-feely, we-are-the-world platitudes with an anti-technology bias.

   While no one is likely to object to a timely reminder about the potentially
alienating effects of electronic gadgetry (ironically meant to facilitate closer
communication), movie-goers might well object to a story as weakly developed as
this one.

   The children's newfound supernatural powers (such as telepathic
communication) seem to come and go as the script demands, and the wonder of the
children's discoveries is undermined by the fact that they never seem to ask the
next logical question. Each inexplicable event is taken at face value until  --
somehow  --  the children figure out how they are linked and to what purpose
they have occurred. They are amused by passing parlor tricks, not embarking on a
magical quest. They accomplish their mission almost by accident.

   The actors who seem to be having the most fun are in supporting roles. Rainn
Wilson plays a science teacher whose dreams reveal a connection with Noah.
Kathryn Hahn plays the science teacher's girlfriend, a palmist with an interest
in Buddhist philosophy. Michael Clarke Duncan plays a harried Homeland Security
official.

   "The Last Mimzy" was directed by New Line Cinema founder Bob Shaye, who last
directed "Book of Love" in 1990.

   _________________________

   THE LAST MIMZY

   (STAR)(STAR)½

   Plot: Siblings discover a box of toys, which give them supernatural powers
and set them on a mission to save the world  --  much to their parents'
consternation.

   What works: The movie's message about the alienating effects of today's
electronic gadgetry is admirable.

   What doesn't: Good intentions can't make up for the surprising lack of
adventure and enchantment.

   Starring: Chris O'Neil, Rhiannon Leigh Wryn, Timothy Hutton, Joely
Richardson, Rainn Wilson and Michael Clarke Duncan. Director: Bob Shaye. Running
time: 1 hour 36 minutes. Rating: PG, for thematic elements, mild peril and
language. Where: Elmwood Palace, Clearview Palace, West Bank Palace, Hammond
Palace, Hollywood 9 (Kenner), Hollywood 14 (Covington), Holiday 12, Grand
(Slidell).

GRAPHIC: Noah (Chris O'Neil) and Emma Wilder (Rhiannon Leigh Wryn) create a
force field -- unaware of its purpose -- in 'The Last Mimzy,' director Bob
Shaye's adaptation of a short story by Lewis Padgett.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2007


                              528 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2007 The Buffalo News
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                             March 20, 2007 Tuesday
                                CENTRAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLES; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 644 words

HEADLINE: Protein therapy advances

BYLINE: By Dr. Rallie McAllister

BODY:

   A protein that triggers the growth of new blood vessels around ailing hearts
could revolutionize the way doctors treat heart disease in the near future.
Based on the success of clinical trials in the United States and Germany, the
protein, known as Cardio Vascu-Grow, might just have what it takes to rein in a
disease that has long been a runaway killer.

   Every year for nearly a century, cardiovascular disease has ranked as the No.
1 cause of death in the U.S. Each day, nearly 2,400 Americans die from the
disease -- that's one death every 36 seconds.

   The problem frequently begins with a condition called atherosclerosis, in
which fatty deposits accumulate on artery walls and restrict the flow of blood
to the heart, brain, and other organs. When the coronary arteries become
excessively narrowed or blocked, the heart is deprived of blood and oxygen, and
a heart attack is the result.

   Treatment for blocked arteries often involves angioplasty, in which a tiny
balloon is inserted into the affected coronary artery and inflated at the site
of the blockage. In most cases, angioplasty is followed by the placement of a
small metal coil, called a stent.

   The stent widens the clogged artery, and props it open so that it's less
likely to become blocked again. When angioplasty and stenting aren't the best
options, patients may undergo bypass surgery, in which the remaining healthy
coronary arteries are rerouted to blood-starved areas of the heart.

   In some patients, atherosclerosis affects all of the coronary arteries, and
even bypass surgery cannot restore proper blood flow to the heart. At this
point, these "no-option" patients need something akin to a miracle: a new set of
blood vessels for the heart.

   Enter Cardio Vascu-Grow, a new drug candidate capable of stimulating
angiogenesis, the biological process of growing new blood vessels. Discovered in
the early '90s by cardiovascular surgeon Dr. Thomas Stegmann, the protein was
proven safe and effective in two landmark clinical trials in Germany.

   "The protein is a growth factor that signals the body to repair itself after
injury," Stegmann explained. "When it is injected directly into the heart muscle
near the site of the blocked artery, it naturally and safely triggers the growth
of new blood vessels."

   The results of clinical trials in 1995 and 1998 revealed that when
administered to no-option patients with life expectancies of less than two
years, the protein significantly improved blood flow to their hearts.

   To make the potentially life-saving treatment available to other cardiac
patients, Stegmann and his company, CardioVascular BioTherapeutics, are working
with six U.S. medical centers, where research teams are conducting FDA-approved
clinical trials.

   Stegmann is confident the drug candidate will receive FDA approval in the
near future. Based on the continued success of clinical trials, Cardio
Vascu-Grow could be available for use in patients suffering coronary artery
disease as early as 2009.

   Unlike treatments involving gene therapy, which have encountered a number of
setbacks in terms of gaining FDA approval, Cardio Vascu-Grow involves protein
therapy, a treatment that works in a different manner.

   "Unpredictable and uncontrolled blood vessel growth is just one of the risks
of gene therapy," Stegmann explained. "Protein therapy is far safer, because
we're using a precisely structured human protein at an optimal dose, and its
biological effects are well-defined."

   In addition to triggering the growth of new blood vessels around the heart,
protein therapy involving Cardio Vascu-Grow is capable of stimulating new blood
vessel formation in other tissues. This therapy could play a significant role in
the treatment of peripheral vascular disease, a condition that often goes hand
in hand with coronary artery disease.

   Dr. Rallie McAllister is a family physician in Kingsport, Tenn.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2007


                              529 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2007 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                              All Rights Reserved
                   The Courier-Journal (Louisville, Kentucky)

                             March 20, 2007 Tuesday
                                 METRO Edition

SECTION: FORUM; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 473 words

HEADLINE: READERS' FORUM; More reactions to Mohler's speculations on gay fetuses

BODY:

   {}Realignment on abortion?

   The Rev. Albert Mohler raised interesting questions ("Mohler: Babies may be
born gay," March 15). {dcidc}If homosexuality has a biological basis, could that
be identified in a fetus?

   Mohler has been criticized and accused of "playing God" for suggesting
in-uterine hormone treatment of a fetus to induce heterosexuality. I have
difficulty understanding that outrage when a fetus may be aborted for any reason
up to a certain point, and almost at full term in some cases.

   Would not pro-choice advocates say that the woman bearing the fetus should
have the right to do whatever she wants with her own body? Perhaps if such a
test ever was developed, many women might choose to abort fetuses diagnosed as
homosexual just as they now abort fetuses diagnosed with Down syndrome (or
diagnosed as little girls, in some countries).

   I believe God considers all human life precious. An in-uterine test for
homosexuality might cause a re-evaluation of the alliance of gay rights groups
with pro-abortion feminist groups.

   {}BEN FOSTER

   Fisherville, Ky. 40023

   {}Desire for 'pure' race

   Al Mohler sounds more like a Nazi every day. Now he wants to develop prenatal
treatment to alter the genetics of children who might be born gay.

   Just like Hitler, he hopes to create a "pure" race in which everybody looks,
thinks and acts alike. Hitler tired to purge the world of the Jewish gene, now
Mohler wants to purge it of the gay gene. It's diabolical!

   Yet I do agree, as he says, "We're all completely responsible, regardless of
orientation, to obey the word of God." So why not look to Jesus' teachings about
love and acceptance to save us rather than gene therapy?

   I know many wonderful and beautiful homosexuals who act more like Jesus than
anybody I knew during my brief years at Southern Seminary, and I wouldn't want
them to change a thing!

   {}Rev. TODD F. EKLOF

   Clifton Unitarian Church

   Louisville 40206

   {}Rams and religion

   ... The majority of gay people have always known they were born gay, but now
Mohler has been enlightened by a scientific study of same-sex attraction in
rams, and apparently he can no longer discount the possibility of human fetuses
being gay since conception. Figure that correlation out.

   Anyway, the new gospel, according to Mohler, is to try and "cure" the gay
baby before it is born to live a sinful, alternative lifestyle, apparently not
endorsed by God in the Old Testament or by religious fundamentalists, even
though Jesus says nary a word about it.

   Wow! If scientists can come up with a treatment to eliminate human
homosexuality in the womb, perhaps they could come up with one for fetuses
predisposed to legalistic, pious fundamentalism. Then we could finally free the
world from social prejudices wrought with religious injustices about which Jesus
actually did say something....

   {}SUE BARLOW

   Greenville, Ind. 47124

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2007


                              530 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                             March 20, 2007 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES - HEALTHY LIVING; ASK THE DOCTOR; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 401 words

HEADLINE: New therapies improve lives of those with cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: SHARI RUDAVSKY

BODY:

   Question: What is cystic fibrosis?

   Answer: It is an inherited disease that progressively affects the lungs and
some digestive organs. The defect causes the mucus to be very thick, and that
leads to inflammation, infection and dysfunction of the affected organs. There's
not a cure, but there's been an enormous amount of new work in the last two
decades that has improved not only the longevity but the quality of life for
patients.

   In the 1950s, it was unusual for a patient to reach the teenage years; now
the median age of survival is the mid-30s, and 50 percent of patients are over
18.

   Q: How many people have it?

   A: About 500 to 600 Hoosiers and about 30,000 in the United States. We have a
pediatric center, which takes care of about 275 children, and an adult program
that takes care of about 100 adults.

   These families are incredibly active in clinical trials. Over a third of our
patients here at Riley (Hospital for Children) have participated in a clinical
trial.

   Q: What are these clinical trials exploring?

   A: The majority of the clinical research looks at ways to improve the outcome
as we work toward the cure. Right now, Riley has eight clinical trials, and
they're everything from trying to sort through the genetic modifiers of the
disease to different methods of delivering inhaled antibiotics to different
kinds of enzyme products.

   We received $100,000 from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation to help us
facilitate research over the next two years. Research has been done at Riley for
about two decades. This grant allows us to put funding into establishing a
strong adult CF research program.

   Q: Are the adult trials asking different questions?

   A: Similar to the pediatric research, they're looking at new therapies or new
ways to deliver old therapies to improve lung disease and nutritional status.
The goal would be to cure the disease, and gene therapy has been looked at as a
potential cure, but it has a lot of hurdles and difficulties.

   Q: Prenatal tests exist, but parents have to choose to do those. So how early
can you catch this in the absence of prenatal testing?

   A: There's a task force in place, a cooperative effort between the Indiana
University CF Center and the State Department of Health, and we plan to have
newborn screening for cystic fibrosis come on board starting this fall.

   Have a topic for Ask the Doctor? Contact Shari Rudavsky at (317) 444-6354 or
shari.rudavsky@indystar.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2007


                              531 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                             March 20, 2007 Tuesday
                                 Every Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. HE03

DISTRIBUTION: District-Maryland

LENGTH: 299 words

HEADLINE: M E D I A S C A N

BODY:

    Corruption, lies and manipulation are words you would never want associated
with your health care, but this nightmare was a reality for thousands of
patients at Redding Medical Center in Redding, Calif., according to a new book.
"Coronary: The True Story of Medicine Gone Awry" (Scribner, $25)  documents the
tale of cardiologists Chae Hyun Moon and Fidel Realyvasquez,  who were
investigated for allegedly performing unnecessary  surgeries to  boost the
hospital's revenue -- and their salaries. Eventually the doctors and their
employer agreed to pay hundreds of millions of dollars to settle hundreds of
accusations. Former newspaper reporter Stephen Klaidman tells the story through
interviews with patients, FBI agents, attorneys and doctors. The upshot? Moon
and Realyvasquez walked away with no criminal charges.

    Five years from now the spider webs you swat at may be used to create
artificial ligaments, and the poison in a scorpion's sting may be used to treat
aggressive brain tumors. For a more in-depth peak into future medical
technologies, pick up March's issue of Reader's Digest. Also in the works,
according to the article "Top Medical Technologies": a blood substitute made
from chemically modified hemoglobin that could be used in major disasters when
human blood is in high demand and low supply; gene therapy targeted to kill
melanoma cells; and nanotechnology that could restore speech, hearing and vision
in those affected by brain and spinal cord trauma. The article describes top
medical advances on the battlefield, including an innovative bandage that
staunches severe bleeding. Made from chitosan (found in shrimp), the bandage
does not become sticky until it comes in contact with blood; then it forms a
clot and adheres to the surrounding tissue.

    -- Rachel Zavala

GRAPHIC: IMAGE

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2007


                              532 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                             March 18, 2007 Sunday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. D01

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 1195 words

HEADLINE: The Problem, in A Fundamental Nutshell: 'Is Your Baby Gay?'

BYLINE: Lynne Duke; Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Pity the poor fetus. There's a lot coming its way. And now there's talk on a
conservative evangelical blog of a hypothetical hormone patch that an expectant
mother might wear to eradicate her fetus's natural gayness.

   The patch, the biological determinism: It's all conjecture, for now. But it
hit like a theological IED when it turned up earlier this month on the blog of
the Rev. R. Albert Mohler Jr., one of the leading voices of the 16
million-strong Southern Baptist Convention. He blogged on these issues under the
appropriately provocative headline: "Is Your Baby Gay? What if You Could Know?
What if You Could Do Something About It?" In his postings, he raises the
possibility of a biological basis for homosexuality and prods his flock to think
about how it should respond.

   At a time when homosexuality in the military has reemerged as a flash point,
causing presidential candidates to deflect and dance gingerly around the topic,
Mohler has taken up the debate about the origins of homosexuality in a way he ad
mits has roiled many in the Christian right.

   For seeming to contradict a basic tenet of anti-gay thinking -- that
homosexuality is a lifestyle choice, not a state of nature -- Mohler, president
of the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary in Louisville, was inundated with
e-mails from readers who castigated him, he said on his blog Friday.

   And for expressing his approval of a hypothetical prenatal intervention to
change a baby's sexual orientation, he was verbally attacked by gay-rights
advocates. Some of them likened him to the Nazi doctor Josef Mengele for seeming
to advocate the manipulation of nature to "basically wipe out gay people," said
Wayne R. Besen, founder of Truth Wins Out, a group that fights efforts to
convert gays to heterosexuality.

   To quiet the storm, Mohler's blog on Friday attempted to more fully explain
his thinking, sparked by an article by Tyler Gray, entitled "Is Your Baby Gay?,"
in the March issue of Radar magazine.

   "My purpose in writing my previous article was, in the main, to draw
attention to a very real threat to human dignity that lurks as a possibility on
our horizon, a possibility explicitly described in the Radar magazine article,"
Mohler wrote. "This is the possibility that, if a biological marker (real or
not) is ever claimed to mark homosexuality in prenatal testing, widespread
abortion of such babies might well follow," a prospect he denounced.

   In an interview on Friday, Mohler said that Christian couples "should be
open" to the prospect of changing the course of nature -- if a biological marker
for homosexuality were to be found. He would not support gene therapy but might
back other treatments, such as a hormonal patch.

   "I think any Christian couple would want their child to be whole and
healthy," he said. "Knowing that that child is going to be a sinner, we would
not want to make their personal challenges more difficult if they could be less
difficult."

   On his blog, he said "Christians must be very careful not to claim that
science can never prove a biological basis for sexual orientation. . . . The
general trend of the research points to at least some biological factors behind
sexual attraction, gender identity and sexual orientation."

   Indeed, some scientific research suggests homosexuality may stem from
biological influences including genetics and hormones. A 2006 study published in
Proceedings of the National Academies of Science concluded that homosexuality in
some men may be a result of an immune response in a mother's womb if she has
previously given birth to one or more boys. Earlier studies revealed a genetic
variation that might influence homosexuality.

   On his blog, Mohler wrote that the search for a biological cause of the
"disorder"  could also lead to a "cure." In the interview, however, he distanced
himself from the "therapeutic language of a 'cure' " and spoke instead of
"salvation through Christ." Homosexual behavior is sinful, he said, whether
based in nature or nurture.

   The Rev. Rob Schenck, a pastor and member of the Evangelical Church Alliance,
which he said is probably the most conservative of the evangelical groups,
applauded Mohler for launching a dialogue.

   But, he warned, "this is such a delicate and risky conversation to have for a
number or reasons . . . We're going to have to be extremely prayerful and
careful about making any decision to tinker with a child's genetic or
biochemical construction. We may be awfully close to violating the sanctity of
that child's life and their integrity as a person."

   Mohler has "touched the third rail of the radical religious right's view of
homosexuality," said the Rev. Bob Edgar,  executive secretary of the National
Council of Churches, which represents 35 denominations and 45 million
congregants.

   "What he said lends credence to the fact that it's God's creation. His
brothers in faith would be more surprised than liberals with his comments."
Ironically, Mohler's musings on these subjects were based on an article in an
irreverent pop culture magazine.  Gray, the article's author, said he was "not
real happy" with the way Mohler used his writings.

   "You can't just pick the parts that you like and say, 'I'm going to use this
to say that I would be okay with a treatment that would eradicate
homosexuality,' " said Gray, whose article raised the prospect for hypocrisy
among conservatives and liberals faced with choices about the sexuality of their
unborn children.

   Mohler's missive has had a "chilling and frightening effect" on the
homosexual community, said Harry Knox,  director of the religion and faith
program at the Human Rights Campaign, a gay rights advocacy group. "My word for
[Christian conservatives] is they should be more focused on repentance for the
sins they have committed against homosexuals than on manipulating the next
generation of the unborn."

   Besen said Mohler's musing are akin to calling for a "final solution" for
gays.

   "It's the first time I've ever used such a term, and having a family
background that included the Holocaust I don't take that lightly," said Besen,
author of "Anything but Straight: Unmasking the Scandals and Lies Behind the
Ex-Gay Myth."

   "However . . . if you follow what he said there would be no gay people in the
future."

   Homosexuality is a "huge challenge" to Christianity, said Mohler, referring,
in part, to the Rev. Ted Haggard,  former president of the National Association
of Evangelicals, who was forced to step down last November because of a gay sex
scandal. And  the Rev. Lonnie Latham, a member of the executive committee of the
Southern Baptist Convention, was embroiled in a gay sex scandal but was found
not guilty of having solicited sex from another man.

   "In our churches and in our families there are people struggling with
homosexuality and for a long time this was kind of hidden," Mohler said in the
interview. "It is no longer hidden, and the fact is we've got to be coming up
with genuinely Christian responses to Christians who are in this struggle."

   Asked if he perhaps was moving ahead of the science on homosexuality's
origins, Mohler said, "I don't think it's that far off. The battle for human
dignity is already here."

GRAPHIC: IMAGE; Southern Baptist Theological Seminary Via Associated Press; The
Rev. R. Albert Mohler Jr., one of the leading voices of the 16 million-strong
Southern Baptist Convention, raised the possibility of a biological basis for
homosexuality in his blog.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2007


                              533 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2007 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                              All Rights Reserved
                   The Courier-Journal (Louisville, Kentucky)

                            March 15, 2007 Thursday
                                 METRO Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 786 words

HEADLINE: Mohler: Babies may be born gay

BYLINE: Peter Smith psmith@courier-journal.com The Courier-Journal

BODY:

   Baptist leader backs

   prenatal treatment

   By Peter Smith

   psmith@courier-journal.com

   {}The Courier-Journal

   Babies could be born gay &mdash; and Christians should support prenatal
therapies to steer them toward heterosexuality if such therapies are ever
developed, says Albert Mohler, the president of Southern Baptist Theological
Seminary in Louisville.

   The online column in which Mohler wrote those views drew sharp criticism from
gay activists, even as it departed from conservative evangelicals' common
assertion that homosexuality is chosen, not biological.

   "If a biological basis is found, and if a prenatal test is then developed,
and if a successful treatment to reverse the sexual orientation to heterosexual
is ever developed, we would support its use as we should unapologetically
support the use of any appropriate means to avoid sexual temptation and the
inevitable effects of sin," Mohler wrote in an article posted March 2 on his
blog at www.AlbertMohler.com .

   In the article &mdash; "Is Your Baby Gay? What If You Could Know? What If You
Could Do Something About It?"&mdash; Mohler cited recent research showing that
significant numbers of rams have same-sex attractions.

   He cited a Slate magazine article, "Brokeback Mutton," that discussed how
researchers are exploring ways to alter rams' orientation to make breeding more
efficient &mdash; a prospect that has made gay activists nervous because of the
possibility of using it on humans.

   But Mohler said Christians should support such a therapy if it's ever
developed &mdash; for example, using a hormonal patch on an expectant mother.

   In an interview last night, Mohler stood by his comments.

   But he noted that most of the article addressed a question raised in a recent
Radar magazine article on the subject, speculating that even liberal parents
might take advantage of such a treatment if they learned their developing baby
would have a same-sex attraction.

   Mohler said it also raises the specter of parents choosing to abort such a
child &mdash; something "we'd better oppose before it happens."

   The Rev. Aletha Fields, founder of Genesis Ministries in Louisville, said she
was stunned by Mohler's comments.

   "What would be really interesting if there would be a prenatal test that
would detect and determine bigotry," said Fields, whose group ministers to gays,
lesbians, bisexuals and transgendered persons.

   "I wonder what the treatment would be &mdash; I suppose some
love-thy-neighbor hormones and some peace hormones," she said.

   Mohler conceded in his column what many opponents of homosexuality have
rejected &mdash; that there may be a biological explanation for why some people
are attracted to those of the same sex.

   At the same time, Mohler said that harmonizes with traditional Christian
belief that human sin has infected all of nature.

   "Given the consequences of the Fall (first sin) and the effects of human sin,
we should not be surprised that such a causation or link is found," he wrote.
"After all, the human genetic structure, along with every other aspect of
creation, shows the pernicious effects of the Fall and of God's judgment."

   In the interview, Mohler said he's been "barraged by e-mails" from other
evangelicals saying that there couldn't be a biological cause for homosexual
orientation because that would eliminate the moral responsibility for homosexual
acts.

   "That's just a bad argument," Mohler said. "I am absolutely confident that a
large number of homosexuals are telling the truth when they say they did not
choose that orientation," he added, although he said it's unclear how much of
that is caused by nature or nurture.

   But he said homosexual acts are sinful and that people are responsible for
resisting whatever sins they are tempted toward.

   "We're all completely responsible, regardless of orientation, to obey the
word of God," he said.

   Paul Simmons, a Baptist minister who teaches medical ethics at the University
of Louisville School of Medicine, said researchers have found therapy to change
homosexuals to be "a waste of time."

   He said no one has yet determined a genetic marker or treatment for any type
of personality characteristic, although he said there is a treatment for a
predetermined type of immune deficiency.

   "My own hunch is, the genetic factors in sexual orientation are so complex
that we'll likely not find a single gene, so it's likely not to be subject to
genetic therapy, but that's speculation," he said.

   "I'm not surprised about this attitude, because fundamentalists are so
opposed to homosexuality," said Simmons, who used to teach at the Baptist
seminary but left around the time of Mohler's arrival as the school was
undergoing a conservative shift.

   Reporter Peter Smith can be reached at (502) 582-4469.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                              534 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                             March 12, 2007 Monday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 647 words

HEADLINE: Biotech firms seek space for manufacturing

BYLINE: Stephen Heuser Globe Staff

BODY:

   LIFE SCIENCES: BIOTECH

   With sales of its rare-disease drugs growing, British drug maker Shire PLC is
looking to build a new $180 million biotechnology manufacturing plant, possibly
at the former Fort Devens military base, and plans to add as many as 125 jobs in
Cambridge this year.

   Shire is a British company that bought Transkaryotic Therapeutics Inc. of
Cambridge two years ago. The company currently has about 500 people working in
Cambridge, split between the former Kendall Square offices of Transkaryotic
Therapeutics and a modest two-story drug factory near the Fresh Pond mall.

   With a new drug on the market and its Alewife factory operating at capacity,
Shire is now hunting for sites for a new biomanufacturing facility and has had
talks with officials in Massachusetts, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Rhode
Island. A company spokesman said other states were in consideration for the new
site, as well.

   Bidding between states for such facilities has become heated in recent years.
Last year, competing for a $660 million biotech drug factory to be built by
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., Massachusetts beat out North Carolina, Rhode Island,
and New York by offering more than $60 million in tax credits and construction
money.

   Although Bristol-Myers has since replaced its chief executive and been the
subject of takeover rumors, the company says its plans for the Devens factory
are on track. Last month, it finalized the land purchase, and it has now begun
work on the site at the converted base 35 miles west of Boston.

   Another large drug company is also scouting a Devens site for a
biomanufacturing plant, expected to be a large factory on the scale of the
Bristol-Myers project. The company's identity is currently shielded from state
officials - it deals through intermediaries behind the code name Project
Magellan - but officials say that Massachusetts is competing with potential
sites in Europe and Asia. Development officers are currently waiting to hear
back from the company on the state's proposal.

   Massachusetts is launching a $100 million fund specifically to lure
facilities that will create new jobs. To qualify, a company has to plan to add
at least 100 jobs within two years, and keep them for at least five years. The
money, approved in last year's economic-stimulus bill and funded by bonds, is
intended to build up needed municipal infrastructure, such as water mains,
sewers, and highway ramps.

   Before Bristol-Myers came to Massachusetts, the Legislature had to vote on a
special bond to pay for the utilities and land preparation the plant required.

   Bob Coughlin, undersecretary for business development in the Patrick
administration, said the state is accepting grant applications and plans to
begin giving out the money in September.

   Asked about the Shire facility, he said the state was working with the
company to keep its manufacturing in the state.

   Shire spokesman Matt Cabrey said the company has had very good dialogue with
Massachusetts development officials, but has not yet settled on a location for
its plant. The company expects to pick a site later this year.

   Shire Human Genetic Therapies, the division formerly known as Transkaryotic
Therapeutics, makes two injectible drugs for rare genetic diseases at its
Alewife plant. One of them treats Fabry disease, which causes circulatory
problems, pain in the extremities, and kidney breakdown. Another treats children
with Hunter syndrome, a rare and often fatal disorder that causes bulging
features, growth problems, mental retardation, and serious organ damage. The
Hunter drug was introduced last year.

   With another drug for genetic disease in late-stage clinical trials, Shire
anticipates doubling its overall workforce in the next five years, Cabrey said,
although the location of those jobs will depend partly on where its new plant is
built.

   Stephen Heuser can be reached at sheuser@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2007


                              535 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                              March 9, 2007 Friday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 021

LENGTH: 351 words

HEADLINE: DRUG CO. EYEING MASS.;
 Shire seeks new plant

BYLINE: By SCOTT VAN VOORHIS

BODY:

   British drug giant Shire Pharmaceuticals is considering the Bay State for a
major manufacturing complex, a company spokesman confirmed.

   The company is looking at sites in Massachusetts as well as other states,
said Matthew Cabrey, a company spokesman, who declined to comment on specific
locations. The company has been using the code name Atlas, executives said.

   Shire, which acquired Cambridge-based biotech Transkaryotic Therapies, or
TKT, in 2005, could be talking about a project that would rival last year's
blockbuster pact with Bristol-Myers Squibb, executives close to the search said.

   Shire has kicked the tires at Devens, the former military base that is being
converted into a new community and business development park in Central
Massachusetts, executives said.

   Separately, the company, which already has 400 employees in Cambridge, is
exploring a move of its local offices and operations out to the suburbs.
Lexington, where the company recently leased space, is a top candidate,
executives said.

   Shire is just the latest example of a big biotech and drug company hunting
for manufacturing space in the Bay State - and using a code name as a cover.

   ``It's been very new to have these code names,'' said David Begelfer, head of
the local chapter of the National Association of Industrial and Office
Properties. ``It adds a little bit of mystery to it. They want to look around
and not have it publicly known.''

   Bristol Myers, which is building a $660 million plant at Devens that may
eventually employ 550, looked at sites under the code name Hummingbird.

   Another company or group of companies - believed to include Novartis - has
also been looking at Devens for a manufacturing complex, using the code name
Magellan. In the case of Magellan, Massachusetts has made it onto the short list
of possible locations.

   Meanwhile, Devens is likely to have some competition for landing the Shire
deal.

   Major new biotech and drug complexes are in the works at the Westwood Station
development off Route 128 and in Waltham.

   The former South Weymouth Naval Air Station is also being converted into a
major biotech hub.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2007


                              536 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                            March 7, 2007 Wednesday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 864 words

HEADLINE: Quality control issue;
GE plant in Aurora receives warning

BYLINE: From staff and wire reports, The Plain Dealer

BODY:

   THE TICKER

   GE Healthcare, a unit of General Electric Co., was told by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration that its manufacturing plant in Aurora hadn't used proper
quality control.

   Inspectors found that breast biopsy plates were shipped without proof they
were sterilized and that coils in medical imaging systems were distributed
without assuring they were made as designed, the FDA said in a letter posted
Tuesday on its Web site.

   GE takes such matters "very seriously" and is "working aggressively" to
resolve the issues as quickly as possible, Brian McKaig, a company spokesman,
said Tuesday in an e-mailed statement. He said more than 60 people have been
assigned to support the team responding to the FDA's observations.

   No deaths or injuries related to incidents at the Aurora plant were reported
in the letter, dated Feb. 22. The FDA, which conducted the inspection in
November and early December, asked the company to provide steps it will take to
answer the agency's concerns within 15 days.

   - Bloomberg News

   MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY

   Parkinson's research uses local technology

   University of Kentucky HealthCare researcher David Yurek is using technology
from Copernicus Therapeutics Inc. in Cleveland to develop nanoparticles that
could treat Parkinson's disease. Copernicus has figured out a way to deliver
gene therapies to defective genes, concentrating on a treatment for cystic
fibrosis. Yurek, a neurosurgery professor at the University of Kentucky College
of Medicine, recently won a $66,000 grant from the Michael J. Fox Foundation for
Parkinson's Research. Yurek plans to use the money and the Copernicus platform
to find a way to keep brain cells of Parkinson's patients from dying.

   - Mary Vanac

   MANUFACTURING

   European production growth will ease

   Following strong industrial performance in 2006, European manufacturing will
grow only moderately in 2007, according to Manufacturers Alliance/MAPI, which
tracks American and international industrial production. The group's findings
come from a study of 27 major European industries. Top performers, all with
double-digit growth in 2006, included valves, tubes and electronic components;
machine tools; optical instruments; electric motors, generators and
transformers; aircraft and spacecraft; and farm and forest machinery. Declining
industries included oil and gas; telecommunications transmitters; basic
chemicals; and motor vehicles.

   - Frank Bentayou

   RETAILERS

   Best Buy probed for price changes

   Best Buy is under investigation by Connecticut's attorney general after
consumers complained they were denied deals found at the electronic retailer's
Web site by store employees who pulled up a lookalike site that listed higher
prices on some merchandise. One Connecticut man, according to a report in the
Hartford Courant, found a laptop computer advertised for $729.99 on BestBuy.com.
He then went to a Best Buy store where an employee seemed to check the same Web
site and told him the price was actually $879.99. A spokeswoman for the retailer
confirmed that employees have access to an internal site that looks nearly
identical to the public site, but she said company policy is to always offer
customers the lowest quoted price, unless it's specifically identified as a deal
available only to online shoppers.

   - Associated Press

   CREDIT CARDS

   Bank chief to apologize for overcharges

   The chief executive of Chase Card Services, one of the nation's five largest
credit card issuers, will apologize to Congress on Wednesday for charging a
financially strapped customer $7,500 in interest charges and late fees on
purchases of $3,200, the company said Tuesday. Richard Srednicki's apology
before the Senate permanent subcommittee on investigations will follow testimony
by the customer, Ohio resident Wesley Wannemacher, on how Chase's penalty fees
and interest charges made his initial bill triple over six years. The hearing by
the subcommittee, part of the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
Committee, will examine credit card industry practices.

   - Washington Post

   LABOR

   Bill allows airport screeners to unionize

   The Senate voted Tuesday to give 45,000 airport screeners the same union
rights as other public safety officers, despite vigorous opposition by
Republicans and a veto threat from the White House. A broad anti-terrorism bill
that would put in place unfinished recommendations of the Sept. 11 commission
also would give airport screeners the right to bargain collectively. An
amendment by Sen. Jim DeMint, Republican of South Carolina, that would have
removed that right was defeated by a vote of 51-46. The House last month passed
a similar anti-terrorism bill that had the same union provision.

   - Associated Press

   AEROSPACE

   Airbus workers protest 4,300 job cuts

   Thousands of Airbus employees took to the streets Tuesday to protest a
radical company revamping that has drawn fire from French politicians amid a
heated presidential campaign. A crowd that police estimated at 8,000 to 10,000,
including the antiglobalization leader Jose Bove and politicians from the left,
marched through central Toulouse, France, to protest 4,300 job cuts in France
out of 10,000 planned across Europe over the next four years.

   - New York Times

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2007


                              537 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                              March 5, 2007 Monday
                                 FIRST EDITION

SECTION: HEALTHSCIENCE; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 618 words

HEADLINE: DISCOVERIES

BYLINE: Globe

BODY:

   CONSERVATION

   DNA analysis helped target ivory poachers

   Eighteen years after the ivory trade was banned, soaring ivory prices have
led to a sharp increase in elephant poaching and cross-border ivory smuggling.
Efforts to stem the illegal trade have been hampered by the difficulty in
pinpointing the origin of contraband ivory. Now, an international research team
has used DNA analysis to help identify the places where poaching takes place.
Examining 532 elephant tusks taken from a recent major ivory seizure, the
researchers compared DNA from a selection of the tusks to samples taken from
elephant tissue and dung from sites around Africa. The team was able to trace
the tusks to a specific area in southern Africa centered on Zambia and, in doing
so, rejected the hypothesis that the ivory had come from a wider range of
locations in Africa. The team's conclusion led the Zambian government to
strengthen its anti-poaching efforts. "We hope the results of the study will
help focus enforcement further so that poaching will stop and the elephant
population can be saved," said lead author Samuel Wasser, director of the Center
for Conservation Biology at the University of Washington.

   BOTTOM LINE: DNA analysis was used to track the origins of contraband ivory
and helped law enforcement officials better target poachers.

   CAUTIONS: Because only a random sample of the elephant tusks from the ivory
seizure were used in determining a place of origin, it is possible that some of
the remaining tusks would have pointed to a different location.

   WHAT'S NEXT: The researchers are working closely with the Interpol Working
Group on Wildlife Crime in analyzing recent major ivory seizures to pinpoint
places with high incidences of poaching.

   WHERE TO FIND IT: Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, March 6.

   AMI ALBERNAZ

   PEDIATRICS

   Children's brains can be reshaped by stress

   Severe stress can change the structure of a child's brain, a new study finds,
potentially limiting the child's ability to cope with the crisis. Levels of the
hormone cortisol are known to rise with stress, and past studies in adults have
suggested an association between higher emotional stress and a smaller
hippocampus - a brain region closely connected to the emotion center and
involved with memory storage and processing. A group of researchers led by Dr.
Victor Carrion from Stanford University looked at the brain structures and
bedtime cortisol levels of 15 children, ages 7 to 13, who were suffering from
post-traumatic stress disorder. Twelve to 18 months later, participants were
assessed again, and researchers found that hippocampus volumes were reduced more
in children with more severe stress symptoms and higher bedtime cortisol levels.
Because the hippocampus is so important in memory and emotion processing,
researchers think that its reduced volume will lower a child's coping ability.
This, in turn, will raise stress and cortisol levels, further damaging the
hippocampus and continuing the vicious cycle.

   BOTTOM LINE: Dr. Carrion said that current psychiatric therapies may work
less well in children with post-traumatic stress disorder because of their
compromised coping abilities. "We need to develop more focused therapeutic
interventions that take this into consideration," he said.

   WHAT'S NEXT: The researchers want to see if the functional ability of the
hippocampus is also reduced over time by high cortisol levels.

   CAUTIONS: This is a small pilot study. More and larger studies are required
to confirm its findings. The study does not compare brain structure before and
after trauma, or between children with and without post-traumatic stress
disorder.

   WHERE TO FIND IT: Pediatrics, March 2007

   SENA DESAI GOPAL

GRAPHIC: RINGED SPLENDOR - The Cassini spacecraft captured this view of Saturn,
released Friday, showing the planet casting a shadow across its rings.The photo
is a mosaic of 36 images - 12 separate sets of red, green, and blue images -
shot over the course of about 2 1/2 hours in January, as Cassini scanned across
the entire main ring system. / NASA/JPL/Space Science Institute REGENERATION -
Scientists at Boston's Forsyth Institute may have moved a step closer to
regenerating human spinal cord tissue by artificially inducing a frog tadpole to
re-grow its tail at a stage in its development when it is normally impossible.
Using a variety of methods, including a form of gene therapy, the scientists
altered the electrical properties of cells, inducing regeneration. Images
illustrate amputated tail (top left), regenerated tail (top right), nerves not
regenerating (bottom left), and regenerated spinal cord and nerves.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2007


                              538 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2007 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                              March 4, 2007 Sunday
                                 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 624 words

HEADLINE: Cats' eyes play a key role in doctor's vision;
Vet implanting silicon chips in felines hopes to perfect technique for humans

BYLINE: DAVID TWIDDY, Associated Press

DATELINE: COLUMBIA, MO.

BODY:

   COLUMBIA, MO. - Gingersnap, a 4-year-old Abyssinian, rolled lazily on the
examining table while Dr. Kristina Narfstrom rubbed the cat's cinnamon-colored
head.

   Then, using a special viewer, Narfstrom peered deep into the 4-year-old's
eyes to measure her losing battle with a disorder that is slowly killing her
retinas, the thin film at the back of the eyeball that makes sight possible.

   "By the time she's 5, she'll probably be blind," said Narfstrom, a veterinary
ophthalmologist at the University of Missouri-Columbia.

   Gingersnap's condition is similar to retinitis pigmentosa, an incurable
genetic disease in humans that strikes one out of every 3,500 Americans and
often causes blindness. Narfstrom, who discovered the feline version of the
disease among Abyssinians in her native Sweden, is implanting special silicon
chips in partially blind cats in a bid to help replace or possibly repair
diseased retinas in humans.

   Retinitis pigmentosa attacks the eye's photoreceptor cells, also called rods
and cones, that register light and color.

   The chips, which provide their own energy, have shown encouraging results in
clinical human trials, in some cases improving sight in people with retinitis
pigmentosa or at least slowing the disease's development. Narfstrom said chips
have been implanted in 30 people.

   Narfstrom's cats will help researchers fine-tune the chips' performance and
train physicians on surgical techniques to implant the devices, because the
structure of cat eyes is similar to human eyes.

   The 2-millimeter-wide chips, developed by Optobionics Corp. of Naperville,
Ill., are surgically implanted in the back of the eye. Each chip's surface is
covered with 5,000 microphotodiodes that react to light, sending electric
signals along the eye's optic nerve to the brain.

   "We're placing it right where the photoreceptors are and if they're lacking,
this is supposed to replace what they're doing," she said. "At this point, it's
impulses of light they're seeing (as opposed to images), but the aim of the
research is to get more information out of the chip."

   Besides helping slow the disease, studies suggest the electric currents
generated by the chips may be regenerating damaged photoreceptors surrounding
the implants.

   Narfstrom said she should know in about two years whether the implants are
actually encouraging retinal cells in her cats to grow.

   The Optobionics chip is just one of many research paths to protect and
restore sight.

   Besides genetic therapy, which is seen as a good tool to fight hereditary
disorders, researchers are also looking to use stem cells to rebuild damaged
retinal cells. Others are looking for substances that could trick healthy
retinal cells around the photoreceptors to take over for their diseased
counterparts.

   Then there are the many attempts, like Optobionics, of creating artificial
sight. Some efforts include miniature video cameras that pipe images to the
brain, devices that send signals to a network of miniature electrodes attached
to the retina or chips that eventually could graft themselves to retinal cells,
creating a cyborg-like system for producing images.

   A French company is conducting trials for an implant that would release
proteins in the eye to offset damage done to retinal cells.

   Tim Schoen, director of research development for the Foundation Fighting
Blindness, a Baltimore area group that funds researchers, said technology to
provide prosthetic sight is especially encouraging.

   "This offers great hope to individuals who have completely lost vision," said
Schoen, whose group is not involved in the Optobionics chip. "We can treat these
patients with gene therapy, but once the photoreceptors die, we have to replace
them with stem cells or one of these artificial methods."

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2007


                              539 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2007 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             March 3, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: METRO; HIGHER EDUCATION NOTES; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 904 words

HEADLINE: Tulane researcher gets grant for stem cell study;
Bone marrow cells could treat diseases

BYLINE: By John Pope, Staff writer

BODY:

   A Tulane University gene-therapy researcher has received a $2.1 million
federal grant to investigate the use of adult stem cells to treat diseases of
the central nervous system.

   Donald G. Phinney, who has a doctorate in biochemistry, will do his research
at Tulane's National Primate Research Center.

   He will use the four-year grant from the National Institutes of Health to
focus on a group of inherited diseases that can lead to nervous-system
malfunction, mental retardation and early death. There are about 50 types of
these illnesses, which happen once in every 5,000 births, he said.

   The stem cells he uses are found in bone marrow and have shown potential for
treating an array of afflictions, including vascular, inflammatory and
neurological diseases.

   Health care disparities

   Eliminating disparities in health care that different population groups
receive will be the topic of a three-day Xavier University conference that will
start Sunday.

   The regional meeting at the Hotel InterContinental, which is sponsored by
Xavier's Center for Minority Health and Health Disparities Research and
Education, will focus on such topics as the shortage of health-care
professionals, the information people have about their own health care and
models of providing such help.

   There is no registration fee for the conference, which is designed for
health-care personnel and is underwritten by an arm of the National Institutes
of Health.

   More information is available at xula07.the1joshuagroup.com and at (504)
520-7424.

   Lecture on La. writers

   A discussion of Louisiana writers, with special emphasis on Tennessee
Williams, Truman Capote, Walker Percy and Dorothy Dix, will be offered Monday at
Nunez Community College by the historian Christina Vella.

   Vella's lecture, part of the college's series of history lectures, will start
at 7 p.m. in the Nunez Auditorium. A reception will start at 6:30 p.m. The event
is free to the public.

   Vella, an adjunct history professor at Tulane University, has written
"Intimate Enemies: The Two Worlds of the Baroness Pontalba."

   More information is available at www.nunez.edu and from Michelle Minor at
(504) 278-7422.

   African impact on U.S.

   Toyin Falola, an expert on Nigerian history, will discuss "The African Impact
on the United States" Wednesday at 7 p.m. in the Mary & William McCaffrey
Ballroom in the University Center of Xavier University.

   Falola, a history professor at the University of Texas at Austin, has written
more than 50 books, most recently "A Mouth Sweeter Than Salt," a memoir that
received the E.J. Alagoa Prize from the West African Oral History Association
and the President's Distinguished Scholarship Award from the Association of
Third World Studies.

   More information about the lecture is available at (504)  520-5272.

   Seminar on rebuilding N.O.

   Developing strategies for rebuilding New Orleans will be the theme of a
Thursday seminar in the New Orleans Hilton's Grand Ballroom.

   The meeting, which will start at 8 a.m. and last until 12:30 p.m., is
sponsored by the University of New Orleans and Latter & Blum, a real estate
agency.

   Realtors and UNO faculty members are scheduled to speak.

   The registration fee is $70 per person. People may register online at
www.unobusiness.com and with Aundrea Kloor at (504) 280-1322.

   Environmental conference

   The 12th annual Environmental Conference on Law, Science and the Public
Interest will start Friday at the Tulane Law School, 6329 Freret St.

   The two-day meeting, which the Tulane Environmental Law Society is
organizing, will feature panel discussions, workshops and a performance of
"Welcome to Chalmette," a play about the Murphy oil spill, which happened during
Hurricane Katrina.

   The play was written by Mary Nagle, the law society's vice president. She is
also the main source for information about the conference, and she can be
contacted at mnagle@law.tulane.edu and at (913) 486-1939.

   Information about the meeting is available at www.tulanelawenviro.org. A
schedule is available at
envirolaw.vesana.com/images/documents/2007_program_final.pdf .

   The registration fee is $40, but students may get in free. Every lawyer who
will use the conference to help fulfill the annual continuing-education
requirement must pay $200, Nagle said.

   SUNO official honored

   Rose Marie Duhon-Sells, the vice chancellor of academic affairs at Southern
University at New Orleans, is one of 11 Kansas State University alumni to be
named 2007 alumni fellows.

   In addition to being honored, alumni fellows return to campus to deliver
lectures and meet with students and faculty.

   Duhon-Sells, who earned a doctorate from Kansas State in 1980 in curriculum
and instruction, took her turn Feb. 21-23.

   Dillard exchange program

   Dillard University is one of four institutions of higher learning that are
developing student- and faculty-exchange programs with a Texas university to
research such subjects as music, environmental issues and African-American
history.

   Other schools involved in the collaboration with Southwestern University in
Georgetown, in central Texas, are Huston-Tillotson University in Austin, Texas;
Morehouse College in Atlanta; and Rhodes College in Memphis, Tenn.

   The initiatives are underwritten by Mellon Foundation grants totaling
$250,000. The student program was begun in 2005, and the faculty program was
announced last month, Southwestern spokeswoman Ellen Davis said.

   . . . . . . .

   John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3317.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2007


                              540 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                          February 28, 2007 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1512 words

HEADLINE: As Ethics Panels Expand, No Research Field Is Exempt

BYLINE: By PATRICIA COHEN

BODY:

   Ever since the gross mistreatment of poor black men in the Tuskegee Syphilis
Study came to light three decades ago, the federal government has required
ethics panels to protect people from being used as human lab rats in biomedical
studies. Yet now, faculty and graduate students across the country increasingly
complain that these panels have spun out of control, curtailing academic freedom
and interfering with research in history, English and other subjects that poses
virtually no danger to anyone.

     The panels, known as Institutional Review Boards, are required at all
institutions that receive research money from any one of 17 federal agencies and
are charged with signing off in advance on almost all studies that involve a
living person, whether a former president of the United States or your own
grandmother. This results, critics say, in unnecessary and sometimes absurd
demands.

    Among the incidents cited in recent report by the American Association of
University Professors are a review board asking a linguist studying a
preliterate tribe to ''have the subjects read and sign a consent form,'' and a
board forbidding a white student studying ethnicity to interview
African-American Ph.D. students ''because it might be traumatic for them.''

     ''It drives historians crazy,'' said Joshua Freeman, the director of the
City University's graduate history program. ''It's a medical model, it's
inappropriate and ignorant.'' One student currently waiting for a board to
approve his study of a strike in the 1970s, Mr. Freeman said, had to submit a
list of questions he was going to ask workers and union officials, file signed
consent forms, describe the locked location where he would keep all his notes,
take a test to certify he understood the standards.

     Review boards, first created in 1974, were initially restricted to
biomedical research. In 1981 the regulations were revised to cover all research
that involves ''human subjects'' and is designed to contribute to
''generalizable knowledge.''

     Yet precisely how to interpret these rules has largely been left to each
review board -- 5,564 in all. And while the regulations apply specifically to
research that gets federal dollars, many colleges use Institutional Review
Boards to monitor all research, no matter where the funds come from. This system
of helter-skelter enforcement, critics say, has no meaningful oversight and no
appeal process.

     Debbie S. Dougherty and Michael W. Kramer, two former members of a review
board at the University of Missouri, Columbia, who wanted to study review
boards, had to first get their own board's O.K. Although they thought their
project was exempt from board approval, the only entity authorized to make that
decision is the board itself, and the only appeal if the researchers had
rejected the ruling is also the board.

     Bernard A. Schwetz, director of the federal Office for Human Research
Protections, which administers the regulations, acknowledges that the guidelines
covering the boards' actions have not been clear enough and says he intends to
make public new proposed guidelines before the end of the year. Still, he said
the priority is to protect human subjects and dismissed the notion that most
nonmedical research carries few dangers. ''Obviously the balance is very
subtle,'' he said. ''I think it's naive to say there isn't any risk.''

     But to many faculty and graduate students, review boards are like a blister
that gets worse with every step. Those outside of the hard sciences say the
legitimate concerns over ethics and safety are largely irrelevant to most of
their research.

     According to a stack of reports, symposiums and studies by academic
associations and scholars, the system's ''mission creep'' is having a pernicious
and widespread effect on humanities and social science research. Legal scholars
also argue the boards violate the First Amendment.

     The growing number of complaints in recent years apparently stems from an
overall crackdown after a series of medical-research blunders beginning with the
death of an 18-year-old in a gene-therapy trial at the University of
Pennsylvania in 1999.

     A board is required to have a minimum of five members, including one
nonscientist and one person unaffiliated with the institution, said Pat
El-Hinnawy, spokeswoman for the Office for Human Research Protections. Larger
universities often have several boards. Members are generally appointed for
limited terms.

     When Robert L. Johnson, the review board administrator for Appalachian
State University, talks to students, he said he starts off by asking, ''If you
were going to participate in a study, what are the things you would like to
know?''

     The usual responses, he said, are: What are you doing? Will you use my
name? Who's responsible if I get hurt? What's in it for me? Making sure those
questions get answered, said Mr. Johnson, ''that's the purpose of the I.R.B.''

     Mr. Johnson said his board met monthly and reviewed approximately 200
projects a year; most are routine, require what he called minor changes and get
approved within two weeks. About 30 to 40 require full board review, which takes
at least six weeks.

     Timothy Wilson, a social psychologist at the University of Virginia, now in
his second term as a member of Virginia's nonmedical review board, said that
''I.R.B.'s naturally become cautious,'' but that given the constraints, ''I
think our board works extremely well.''

     In the past year, discussions about what some call the ''I.R.B. wars'' have
sprung up in specialty publications like The Chronicle of Higher Education,
conferences, scholarly journals and blogs. Although research proposals are
rarely rejected, scholars argue that the requested changes in the wording of
questions and consent forms can alter the nature of the study and scare off
participants.

     Bernadette McCauley, a historian at Hunter College, said she ran into
trouble a couple of years ago when she tried to help students working with the
Museum of the City of New York on an exhibition about Washington Heights. She
asked if a few nuns who had grown up in that neighborhood and whom she knew from
her research would talk to the students. And that, Ms. McCauley said, was ''when
things went haywire.''

     The review board discovered the request and lambasted Ms. McCauley for
failing to consult with it, she said. The board also demanded proof that
previous research for a completed book did not use any archival material
involving living people and banned her from doing any research.

     Michael Arena, the director of communications at City University, said in
an e-mail message that Ms. McCauley initially refused to send in a ''brief
description'' of her research so that board members could determine whether
federal regulations covered her work. Ms. McCauley hired a lawyer and after six
months of negotiations, the board agreed that her research was exempt.

     Ms. Dougherty, an associate professor of communications at Missouri, said
review boards were needed because ''historically, social science has done things
abhorrent to human subjects.'' Unfortunately the current process ''obliterates a
lot of research,'' she said, because untenured faculty and graduate students on
a timetable cannot afford to spend months waiting for approval. So, for example,
''instead of talking to people who are victims of violence, you might look at
newspaper articles,'' she said, echoing a common complaint that the requirements
cause academics to steer clear of controversial topics. Research decisions
''should be guided by science,'' she said, ''not whether or not it's going to
get through the board.''

     Ms. Dougherty said she was willing to speak openly, unlike many graduate
students and faculty, because she had tenure.

     Professors also say that some board directives, like destroying interview
recordings and notes after publication to ensure confidentiality, violate
accepted scholarly practices. ''There probably will be litigation,'' predicted
Philip Hamburger, a professor at Columbia Law School who argues that prior
approval violates the First Amendment. ''There are potentially hundreds of
thousands of plaintiffs.''

     Mr. Schwetz said there was no chance that some subjects like oral history
and journalism would be altogether excluded from review, as some academic
organizations have urged. ''If we were just to say, 'Assume you don't have to
take them before an I.R.B.,' I think we would regret that,'' he said. But he
said the new guidelines ''will give a lot of examples and will give more
guidance on how to make the decision on what is research and what is not.''

     Some critics fault the universities, placing blame either with overzealous
panels or with university administrations that have not done enough to
differentiate between research that receives federal money and research that
does not.

     Mr. Freeman of City University said that within the humanities ''most
faculty members don't know these rules exist.'' He added, ''If they in fact
followed these rules, the whole I.R.B. system would grind to a halt.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bernadette McCauley, a historian who was temporarily banned by
an ethics panel from doing any research. (Photo by Marko Georgiev for The New
York Times)

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2007


                              541 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                    Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock)

                           February 27, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: NORTHWEST ARKANSAS

LENGTH: 378 words

HEADLINE: Fayetteville UA receives grants for science research

BYLINE: BY TRACIE DUNGAN ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:

   Two National Science Foundation grants will help University of Arkansas at
Fayetteville research engineers explore ways to target drug delivery to diseased
cells and teach undergraduates auto-identification technologies.

   One of the grants, a $401,000 Faculty Early Career Development grant, will
allow Sulin Zhang, 33, an assistant professor of mechanical engineering, to use
computer modeling in creating new pathways for nanoparticles to target drugs at
the molecular level.

   Doctors and scientists have long wanted drug-delivery systems that could send
medicine to specific diseased cells, reducing unwanted side effects and making
the drugs more efficient. Traditional systems distribute drugs uniformly,
killing healthy cells along with the target cells, according to the grant
award's abstract on file with National Science Foundation.

   "We are trying to understand how nanoparticles interact with living cells,"
Zhang said Monday.

   Biologists desire this better understanding of how the particles behave once
in contact with cells, said Zhang, in his second year of working for UA. But
their experiments are costly and amount to blind trial and error: "The
biologists cannot tell us what is going on with the interface at the molecular
level." Zhang plans computer scenarios, based on different variables, in a
five-year project that begins March 1.

   The aim is a better design for nanoparticle-based drug carriers.

   Possible applications include use in gene therapy, or in designing more
targeted chemotherapy drugs and other medicines.

   The other grant award totals $149,709 and will allow Nebil Buyurgan and
Justin Chimka, assistant professors of industrial engineering, to develop an
education program on auto-identification technologies. Aimed at undergraduate
students and industry partners, the courses would cover bar-coding, biometrics
and radio-frequency identification.

   Buyurgan, the project's principal investigator, and Chimka also will develop
an interactive Web site to hear lectures and learn about best practices.

   During the fiscal year ending last June 30, the campus received 54 National
Science Foundation grants totaling $7,115,331, said Kathy Scheibel, assistant
director of its Research Support and Sponsored Programs.

   This article was published 02/27/2007

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2007


                              542 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2007 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            February 25, 2007 Sunday
                                Bulldog Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 619 words

HEADLINE: Silicon chips in cats' ailing eyes may aid diseased human retinas

BYLINE: Associated Press Writer

DATELINE:  COLUMBIA, MO.

BODY:

   Gingersnap, a 4-year-old Abyssinian, rolled lazily on the examining table
while Dr. Kristina Narfstrom rubbed the cat's cinnamon-colored head.

   Then, using a special viewer, Narfstrom peered deep into the cat's eyes to
measure her losing battle with a disorder that is slowly killing her retinas,
the thin film at the back of the eyeball that makes sight possible.

   "By the time she's 5, she'll probably be blind," said Narfstrom, a veterinary
ophthalmologist at the University of Missouri-Columbia.

   Gingersnap's condition is similar to retinitis pigmentosa, an incurable
genetic disease in humans that strikes one out of every 3,500 Americans and
often causes blindness. Narfstrom, who discovered the feline version of the
disease among Abyssinians in her native Sweden, is implanting silicon chips in
partially blind cats in a bid to help replace or possibly repair diseased
retinas in humans.

   Retinitis pigmentosa attacks the eye's photoreceptor cells, also called rods
and cones, that register light and color.

   The chips, which provide their own energy, have shown encouraging results in
clinical human trials, in some cases improving sight in people with retinitis
pigmentosa or at least slowing the disease's development. Narfstrom said chips
had been implanted in 30 people.

   Narfstrom's cats will help researchers fine-tune the chips' performance and
train physicians on surgical techniques to implant the devices, because the
structure of cat eyes is similar to human eyes.

   The 2-millimeter-wide chips, developed by Optobionics Corp. of Naperville,
Ill., are surgically implanted in the back of the eye. Each chip's surface is
covered with 5,000 microphotodiodes that react to light, sending electric
signals along the eye's optic nerve to the brain.

   "We're placing it right where the photoreceptors are and if they're lacking,
this is supposed to replace what they're doing," she said. "At this point, it's
impulses of light they're seeing" rather than images. "But the aim of the
research is to get more information out of the chip."

   Besides helping slow the advance of the disease, studies suggest that the
electric currents generated by the chips may be regenerating damaged
photoreceptors surrounding the implants.

   Narfstrom said she should know in about two years whether the implants were
encouraging retinal cells in her cats to grow.

   In addition to the Optobionics chip, researchers are investigating genetic
therapy, seen as a good tool to fight hereditary disorders. Other scientists
hope to test stem cells to rebuild damaged retinal cells. Still others are
looking for substances that could trick healthy retinal cells surrounding the
photoreceptors to take over for their diseased counterparts.

   Optobionics isn't the only possibility for creating artificial sight. Some
efforts include miniature video cameras that pipe images straight to the brain,
devices that send signals to a network of miniature electrodes attached to the
retina or chips that eventually could graft themselves to retinal cells,
creating a cyborg-like system for producing images.

   A French company is conducting trials for an implant that would release
proteins in the eyeball to offset the damage done to retinal cells, perhaps
indefinitely.

   Tim Schoen, director of research development for the Foundation Fighting
Blindness, a Baltimore group that funds researchers, said technology to provide
prosthetic sight was especially encouraging.

   "This offers great hope to individuals who have completely lost vision," said
Schoen, whose group is not involved in the Optobionics chip. "We can treat these
patients with gene therapy, but once the photoreceptors die, we have to replace
them with stem cells or one of these artificial methods."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: CHECKUP: "By the time she's 5, she'll probably be blind,"
Narfstrom says of Gingersnap. The cat has the feline version of retinitis
pigmentosa.  PHOTO: SNUGGLE TIME: Dr. Kristina Narfstrom, a veterinary
ophthalmologist, gets a kiss from Gingersnap, a 4-year-old Abyssinian with
retinal disease.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Photographs by L.G. Patterson Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2007


                              543 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                            February 25, 2007 Sunday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. G1

LENGTH: 1420 words

HEADLINE: Technology to go;
The CCF Innovations unit at the Cleveland Clinic turns medical ideas into
businesses

BYLINE: Mary Vanac, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   Because of a reporter's error, a story in the Business section Feb. 25 about
CCF Innovations, the commercialization unit of the Cleveland Clinic, misspelled
the first name for Dr. Marc Penn. Penn is the director of the Clinic's Bakken
Heart-Brain Institute.

   Several years ago, Dr. Mark Penn and his colleagues at the Cleveland Clinic
were trying to figure out why certain stem cells target the heart.

   Christopher Coburn, who had recently landed at the Clinic to start its
product commercialization unit, CCF Innovations, sat in on a cardiology staff
meeting around that time. He encouraged the heart doctors to patent their
interesting ideas.

   "We'd identified some factors. We decided to protect them [as] intellectual
property," said Penn, director of the Clinic's Bakken Heart-Brain Institute.

   Penn, who also is medical director

   of the Clinic's coronary

   intensive care unit, didn't realize

   then that his discovery

   would be used to attract stem

   cells from elsewhere in the

   body to repair damaged hearts.

   He also didn't know that his

   genetic therapy would be licensed

   by BioHeart Inc. in Sunrise,

   Fla., or that it would be the

   basis for RegenRX, the company

   spun off in 2005 by CCF

   Innovations and now poised to

   get its first operating investment

   and chief executive.

   "We never would have thought

   of doing this without CCF Innovations,"

   said Penn, an M.D. and

   Ph.D. who received the Innovator

   of the Year Award from the

   Clinic last year.

   Few doctors or researchers

   think about commercializing a

   medical device or a laboratory

   discovery. Most scientists don't

   know how to create a product,

   much less a business to make

   one. But the technology transfer

   and commercialization professionals

   at CCF Innovations do.

   The Clinic unit that began quietly

   in 2000 has spun off 18 companies

   since 2003, Coburn said.

   Most of those companies are

   generating license or commercialization

   revenue, about $6.5

   million a year.

   Some of the companies are

   still getting their operating legs,

   testing therapies or medical devices.

   Some are waiting for their

   first investor money to really get

   started. One is changing direction

   because investors cooled to

   its initial technology.

   Most of the companies have

   only a handful of employees.

   One, Cleveland BioLabs Inc., the

   largest CCF Innovations spinoff,

   has gone public, offering initial

   shares to investors last summer.

   But all of the companies were

   started with an idea that could

   help patients by pushing the

   boundaries of medical science.

   "Remember, the institution

   was established in 1921 specifically

   to bring a new approach to

   the practice of medicine," said

   Coburn, who left in 2000 as

   leader of the commercialization

   consultancy of Battelle in Columbus

   to become executive director

   The Cleveland native, author of

   an 800-page reference book on

   public/private technology commercialization

   initiatives, built the Battelle

   practice to 60 people from

   one.

   He was happy, but a couple of

   Clinic board members kept pestering

   him about coming to work for

   their institution.

   Finally, one of the board members

   told Coburn, "Just come and

   meet this one surgeon, Toby Cosgrove."

   Coburn had dinner with the

   man who would become the Clinic's

   chief executive - and one of its

   most prolific inventors. He was

   hooked.

   Commercialization operations

   like CCF Innovations started in the

   early 1980s after a law specified

   how federal agencies and institutions

   receiving federal money

   should transfer technologies to

   nonprofit organizations and small

   businesses.

   Most universities started technology

   transfer offices, said Jack

   Granowitz, retired executive director

   of Science and Technology Ventures,

   the tech transfer office at Columbia

   University in New York.

   Granowitz left industry to start the

   Columbia office in 1983. "The office

   became quite successful," he

   said.

   That's an understatement. Columbia's

   venture office typically

   leads academic institutions by

   generating up to $150 million a

   year in licensing and commercialization

   revenues.

   Granowitz continues to consult

   for the Columbia unit. But he

   spends at least as much of his time

   helping to commercialize products

   at CCF Innovations, where he is a

   member of its industrial advisory

   board.

   Made up of commercialization,

   medical operating and financial

   pros, as well as entrepreneurs, the

   board guides Coburn's staff of

   more than 20 people, as well as the

   Clinic's real and potential spinoffs.

   "In theory, all the technology

   transfer organizations at universities

   and hospital systems are basically

   similar," Granowitz said.

   Their job is to find the intellectual

   property being developed at their

   institutions and to commercialize

   it.

   Why commercialize products?

   "It boils down to three reasons,"

   said Jay Pieper, vice president of

   corporate development and treasury

   affairs at Partners HealthCare

   System in Boston, whose medical

   affiliate is Harvard Medical School.

   "Part of our charge when we

   have a good invention or idea for

   the betterment of medicine is to

   disseminate it," said Pieper, who

   visited the Clinic and met with Coburn

   around the time Coburn was

   setting up CCF Innovations.

   These products boost the reputation

   of an institution, and with it,

   professional morale. "Thirdly, one

   always hopes to make money,"

   Pieper said.

   Last year, Partners HealthCare

   had 13 startups. Maybe 20 percent

   of the health system's five to 10

   startups a year return $10 million

   or more on the system's investment,

   Pieper said.

   "The common characteristic

   [among commercialization units]

   is that they do a lot of work that

   has modest returns, and periodically,

   an institution makes a big

   hit," Pieper said. "That pays for a

   lot of the effort for a lot of years."

   CCF Innovations, which spins

   off about three companies a year,

   is too young to have hit a big investment

   return. Though its most

   promising spinoff, Cleveland Bio-

   Labs, has gone public, the Clinic

   can't yet sell the shares it holds because

   of a lock-up agreement, Coburn

   said.

   Shares of Cleveland BioLabs,

   which is developing drugs to protect

   human cells from death by radiation

   or cancer, hit an all-time

   high of $13.38 on Wednesday.

   That makes the Clinic's 1.3 million

   shares in the company worth

   nearly $18 million.

   Cleveland BioLabs plans to

   move much of its operations to

   Buffalo, N.Y., to follow its founder

   and chief scientific officer, who has

   been appointed at the Roswell

   Park Cancer Institute there.

   CCF Innovations doesn't have

   the money to invest in its spinoffs.

   Rather, it looks for venture capital

   firms to do the investing.

   "We're in this continuous dialogue

   with the market about how it

   appreciates our technology," Coburn

   said.

   "Securing the money is a major

   achievement," he said. "Getting the

   right management is, also."

   Tim Moran left the city of Cleveland

   as its tech czar in 2004 and

   later joined the staff at CCF Innovations.

   The former entrepreneur

   wanted to run a company again,

   but he knew little about medical

   products.

   He has spent the last two years

   learning by evaluating the Clinic's

   technologies-in-waiting.

   On Jan. 2, Moran became the

   first employee - the chief executive,

   no less - of CSF Therapeutics,

   which CCF Innovations spun off in

   December after raising $4 million

   from a venture capital firm.

   "We're concentrating on building

   the next-generation device,"

   Moran said of the company that

   has developed a medical device for

   maintaining blood flow to the

   brain during trauma or illness.

   Moran also is looking for a manufacturer

   to make the device,

   doing a regulatory plan - medical

   devices must be approved by the

   Food and Drug Administration -

   and figuring out an insurance reimbursement

   model.

   "Then we'll need to start setting

   up clinical trials," he said.

   To avoid conflicts of interest,

   CSF Therapeutics won't do its clinical

   trials at the Clinic. "We want to

   keep our data as clean as possible,"

   Moran said.

   Data that is free from entangling

   interests is easier to sell to an acquiring

   company or an investor, he

   said.

   Former CCF Innovations Chairman

   Dr. Jay Yadav ran afoul of the

   Clinic's conflict disclosure requirements

   last year. So the Clinic declined

   to reappoint him to the staff

   in August.

   That issue has not clouded CCF

   Innovations' operations, Coburn

   said.

   While CCF Innovations works

   almost solely on behalf of Cleveland

   Clinic professionals, Coburn

   hopes other technology transfer

   and commercialization organizations

   in the region also succeed.

   Commercialization organizations

   must work together to build

   the kind of base that can have an

   economic impact on a community,

   said Pieper of Partners HealthCare.

   Coburn doesn't mind sharing

   that credit with others.

   "It would be wonderful if four

   years from now, there are 10 biotech

   companies - medical device

   or pharmaceutical - in Cleveland

   that employ at least 100 people,"

   Coburn said.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:

   mvanac@plaind.com, 216-999-5302

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS BY GUS CHAN THE PLAIN DEALER As executive director of
CCF Innovations, Chris Coburn helps license technologies or spin off companies
based on inventions of Cleveland Clinic doctors and researchers. The Cleveland
native left Battelle in Columbus in 2000 to start the Clinic's commercialization
unit. Weijia Wu, senior manager of the mass spectrometry lab at PrognostiX Inc.,
runs biological samples for future diagnostic testing. PrognostiX is a Cleveland
Clinic spinoff that is developing tests that measure inflammation, such as what
often precedes a heart attack. The company is located in the
CCF Innovations Center on the Clinic's main campus.

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2007


                              544 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            February 25, 2007 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 43

LENGTH: 720 words

HEADLINE: Cats' bionic eyes could help fight human blindness

BYLINE: DAVID TWIDDY, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: COLUMBIA, Mo.

BODY:

   Gingersnap, a 4-year-old Abyssinian, rolled lazily on the examining table
while Kristina Narfstrom rubbed the cat's cinnamon-colored head.

    Then, using a special viewer, Narfstrom peered deep into the 4-year-old's
eyes to measure her losing battle with a disorder that is slowly killing her
retinas, the thin film at the back of the eyeball that makes sight possible.

    "By the time she's 5, she'll probably be blind," said Narfstrom, a
veterinary ophthalmologist at the University of Missouri-Columbia.

    Gingersnap's condition is similar to retinitis pigmentosa, an incurable
genetic disease in humans that strikes one out of every 3,500 Americans and
often causes blindness. Narfstrom, who discovered the feline version of the
disease among Abyssinians in her native Sweden, is implanting special silicon
chips in partially blind cats in a bid to help replace or possibly repair
diseased retinas in humans.

    Retinitis pigmentosa attacks the eye's photoreceptor cells, also called rods
and cones, that register light and color.

    The chips, which provide their own energy, have shown encouraging results in
clinical human trials, in some cases improving sight in people with retinitis
pigmentosa or at least slowing the disease's development. Narfstrom said chips
have been implanted in 30 people.

    Narfstrom's cats will help researchers fine-tune the chips' performance and
train physicians on surgical techniques to implant the devices, because the
structure of cat eyes is similar to human eyes.

    The 2-millimeter-wide chips, developed by Optobionics Corp. of Naperville,
Ill., are surgically implanted in the back of the eye. Each chip's surface is
covered with 5,000 microphotodiodes that react to light, sending electric
signals along the eye's optic nerve to the brain.

    "We're placing it right where the photoreceptors are and if they're lacking,
this is supposed to replace what they're doing," she said. "At this point, it's
impulses of light they're seeing (as opposed to images), but the aim of the
research is to get more information out of the chip."

    Besides helping slow the advance of the disease, studies suggest that the
electric currents generated by the chips may be regenerating damaged
photoreceptors surrounding the implants.

    Narfstrom said she should know in about two years whether the implants are
actually encouraging retinal cells in her cats to grow.

    The Optobionics chip is just one of many research paths now swarming with
scientists looking for ways to protect and restore sight.

    Besides genetic therapy, which is seen as a good tool to fight hereditary
disorders, researchers are also looking to use stem cells to rebuild damaged
retinal cells. Others are looking for substances that could trick healthy
retinal cells surrounding the photoreceptors to take over for their diseased
counterparts.

    Then there are the many attempts, like Optobionics, of creating artificial
sight. Some efforts include miniature video cameras that pipe images straight to
the brain, devices that send signals to a network of miniature electrodes
attached to the retina or chips that eventually could graft themselves to
retinal cells, creating a cyborg-like system for producing images.

    A French company is conducting trials for an implant that would release
proteins in the eyeball to offset the damage done to retinal cells, perhaps
indefinitely.

    Tim Schoen, director of research development for the Foundation Fighting
Blindness, a Baltimore area group that funds researchers, said technology to
provide prosthetic sight is especially encouraging.

    "This offers great hope to individuals who have completely lost vision,"
said Schoen, whose group is not involved in the Optobionics chip. "We can treat
these patients with gene therapy, but once the photoreceptors die, we have to
replace them with stem cells or one of these artificial methods."

    Machelle Pardue, a researcher at Emory University and the Veterans
Administration Hospital in Atlanta, who is working with Narfstrom on the
Optobionics chip, said she's glad she's not the only one doing such research.

    "I think it's helpful because we all have slightly different ideas and
expertise," Pardue said. "In some respect, we are competing to find a product
that will work, but that's advantageous to the patients because it provides an
incentive to move forward."

GRAPHIC: 1. Gingersnap, a 4-year-old Abyssinian, is examined by Kristina
Narfstrom at the University of

Missouri in Columbia. Narfstrom is implanting special silicon chips in partially
blind cats in a bid to help replace or possibly regenerate diseased retinas in
humans.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2007


                              545 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            February 25, 2007 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Style; D01

LENGTH: 727 words

HEADLINE: Hope in a Cat's Eye;
Researchers Implant Chips In an Effort to Fight Human Blindness

BYLINE: David Twiddy, Associated Press

DATELINE: COLUMBIA, Mo.

BODY:

    Gingersnap,  a 4-year-old Abyssinian, rolled lazily on the examining table
while veterinary ophthalmologist Kristina Narfstrom rubbed the cat's
cinnamon-colored head.

     Then, using a special viewer, Narfstrom peered deep into  Gingersnap's eyes
to measure her losing battle with a disorder that is slowly killing her retinas,
the thin film at the back of the eyeball that makes sight possible.

     "By the time she's 5, she'll probably be blind," said Narfstrom, a
professor at the University of Missouri.

     Gingersnap's condition is similar to retinitis pigmentosa, an incurable
genetic disease in humans that strikes one out of every 3,500 Americans and
often causes blindness. Narfstrom, who discovered the feline version of the
disease among Abyssinians in her native Sweden, is implanting special silicon
chips in partially blind cats in a bid to help replace or possibly repair
diseased retinas in humans.

     Retinitis pigmentosa attacks the eye's photoreceptor cells, also called
rods and cones, that register light and color.

     The chips, which provide their own energy, have shown encouraging results
in clinical human trials, in some cases improving sight in people with retinitis
pigmentosa or at least slowing the disease's development. Narfstrom said chips
have been implanted in 30 people.

     Narfstrom's cats will help researchers fine-tune the chips' performance and
train physicians on surgical techniques to implant the devices, because the
structure of cat eyes is similar to that of humans.

     The 2-millimeter-wide chips, developed by Optobionics Corp. of Naperville,
Ill., are surgically implanted in the back of the eye. Each chip's surface is
covered with 5,000 microphotodiodes that react to light, sending electric
signals along the eye's optic nerve to the brain.

     "We're placing it right where the photoreceptors are and if they're
lacking, this is supposed to replace what they're doing," she said. "At this
point, it's impulses of light they're seeing (as opposed to images), but the aim
of the research is to get more information out of the chip."

     Besides helping slow the advance of the disease, studies suggest that the
electric currents generated by the chips may be regenerating damaged
photoreceptors surrounding the implants.

     Narfstrom said she should know in about two years whether the implants are
actually encouraging retinal cells in her cats to grow.

     The Optobionics chip is just one of many research paths now swarming with
scientists looking for ways to protect and restore sight.

     Besides genetic therapy, which is seen as a good tool to fight hereditary
disorders, researchers are also looking to use stem cells to rebuild damaged
retinal cells. Others are looking for substances that could trick healthy
retinal cells surrounding the photoreceptors to take over for their diseased
counterparts.

     Then there are the many attempts, like Optobionics,  to create artificial
sight. Some efforts include miniature video cameras that pipe images straight to
the brain, devices that send signals to a network of miniature electrodes
attached to the retina or chips that eventually could graft themselves to
retinal cells, creating a cyborg-like system for producing images.

     A French company is conducting trials for an implant that would release
proteins in the eyeball to offset the damage done to retinal cells, perhaps
indefinitely.

     Tim Schoen, director of research development for the Foundation Fighting
Blindness, a Baltimore area group that funds researchers, said technology to
provide prosthetic sight is especially encouraging.

     "This offers great hope to individuals who have completely lost vision,"
said Schoen, whose group is not involved in the Optobionics chip. "We can treat
these patients with gene therapy, but once the photoreceptors die, we have to
replace them with stem cells or one of these artificial methods."

     Machelle Pardue, a researcher at Emory University and the Veterans
Administration Hospital in Atlanta, who is working with Narfstrom on the
Optobionics chip, said she's glad she's not the only one doing such research.

     "I think it's helpful because we all have slightly different ideas and
expertise," Pardue said. "In some respect, we are competing to find a product
that will work, but that's advantageous to the patients because it provides an
incentive to move forward."

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2007


                              546 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           February 20, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 5; Health&Fitness; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 888 words

HEADLINE: Progress Is Reported On a Type Of Autism

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   Researchers have found that Rett syndrome, a severe form of autism, may not
be so entirely beyond repair as supposed. In mice that carry the same genetic
defect as human patients and have similar symptoms, the disease can be
substantially reversed, even in adult mice, by correcting the errant gene.

     This is a surprising result for a neurological disease. Biologists
generally assume that if the brain does not wire itself correctly at specific
stages of development, the deficit can never be corrected.

   The treatment for the Rett mice would not work in people because it involved
genetically engineering the mice before conception. But by showing that the
neurons are intact, except for the stricken gene, the finding may encourage new
approaches. ''It gives renewed hope that Rett syndrome will be a treatable
disorder, and maybe autism as well,'' said Monica Coenraads, co-founder of the
Rett Syndrome Research Foundation.

     Fred Gage, a brain expert at the Salk Institute, said, ''A renewed optimism
for finding a therapy for these types of diseases is warranted, I believe.''

     Rett syndrome strikes mostly girls, who around the age of 3 start to lose
their speech and movement faculties. It is one of the spectrum of autistic
disorders, but unlike most of the others it is caused by mutations in a single
gene.

     The gene, known as MECP2, was identified in 1990 by Adrian Bird, a
molecular biologist now at Edinburgh University. In 1999, Ruthie Amir and Huda
Zoghbi at the Baylor College of Medicine discovered that mutated forms of this
gene are the cause of Rett syndrome.

     Dr. Bird, as part of his continuing study of what the gene does, engineered
a strain of mice whose MECP2 genes had been inactivated with the insertion of an
extra block of DNA. When the mice were several weeks old, they started to
develop the symptoms of Rett syndrome, including the loss of movement control
seen in human patients.

     Dr. Bird and his colleague Jacky Guy had engineered a second gene into the
mice, one with the ability to snip out the interfering block of DNA in MECP2.
The second gene could be activated at will by dosing the mice with the drug
tamoxifen. When the stricken mice were fed tamoxifen, even at quite advanced
ages, they lost the symptoms of Rett syndrome, Dr. Bird and his colleagues
reported last week in the journal Science.

     A similar finding was published this month in The Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences by Dr. Rudolph Jaenisch and colleagues at the
Whitehead Institute, though in this study the mice's recovery was not as
complete.

     Dr. Bird believes that the mice's symptoms are reversible because the MECP2
gene is not involved in any of the steps that lead neurons to grow and make the
right connections among themselves. The gene comes into play only afterward, in
maintaining the genetic decisions the developing neurons have made. Among the
most important of these are steps to permanently switch off many genes that the
neurons will no longer need. Each of the various symptoms of Rett syndrome
presumably arises because a specific gene that should have been shut down is
left on, causing havoc.

     The MECP2 gene plays a central role in this silencing process. Its job is
to recognize chemical tags called methyl groups that get added to DNA at what
are called CpG sites, and to recruit proteins that silence or switch off the
genes at these regions. ''What MECP2 does is to go where the methyl groups tell
it to go,'' Dr. Bird said. ''So when you put it back, normal service is
resumed.''

     Dr. Bird believes that this is the first time a neurological disease has
been corrected by restoring a missing component of cells, and that researchers
should now reconsider the view that little can be done to repair the brain after
birth. ''Our result shows it's not too late,'' he said, ''so there's no excuse
for not going hell-for-leather to find some sort of therapy.''

     The reconsideration could extend to other neurological diseases in which
the neurons appear to be intact. ''Given that features of Rett can be reversed
in a mouse model,'' Dr. Zoghbi said, ''one would predict that postnatal
disorders like autism and schizophrenia might be reversible.''

     But it is not so easy to correct a mutated gene in people, and gene therapy
has seldom worked. The problem in Rett syndrome is that the father's copy of
MECP2 gets damaged in the course of generating sperm. The gene is carried on the
X chromosome, of which women have two copies in each cell. But one copy, the one
bequeathed by either the mother or the father, is randomly inactivated in each
cell so as to keep dosage levels the same in women's cells as in men's, which
possess only one X chromosome. Males with a defective MECP2 gene mostly die
before birth, whereas in affected women half the cells will have a good copy,
half a bad one.

     Could the good copy be restored in cells where it is silenced? Some
biologists are thinking of ways to reawaken genes on the inactivated X
chromosome in women, Dr. Gage said. Another approach, Dr. Zoghbi and Dr.
Jaenisch suggested, would be to figure out the target genes that MECP2 is
supposed to keep silenced and whose improper activation presumably causes the
various symptoms of Rett syndrome. Drugs that suppressed each of these target
genes might alleviate the symptoms of disease.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2007


                              547 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                           February 20, 2007 Tuesday

LENGTH: 438 words

HEADLINE: Shire to buy partner firm in $2.6 billion deal

BYLINE: Thomas Ginsberg, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Shire P.L.C., the world's No. 1 maker of attention deficit-disorder
medications based partly in Wayne, said today it will swallow its longtime
partner in ADHD drugs in a deal valued at $2.6 billion.

   Shares in New River Pharmaceuticals Inc., of Radford, Va., rose nearly 9
percent in early trading to just below the per-share purchase price. Shares in
U.K.-based Shire rose 4 percent.

   Under the deal, which requires shareholder approval, Shire would pay $64 for
each New River share, or nearly 10 percent higher than its Friday close of
$58.28. Shire said it will fund the transaction with $2.3 billion in new debt
and $800 million equity financing.

   The deal would give Shire full control over New River's yet-unapproved drug
Vyvanse, for treatment of ADHD in children. Shire and New River already have
been collaborating for two years on the drug. Shire has said it expects to file
by June for FDA approval.

   The acquisition also would give Shire control of New River's experimental
pain-reliever NRP290, now in Phase-2 trials.

   Shire said it expects its tender offer to close in April 2007. New River's
chief executive, R. J. Kirk, who owns 50.2 percent of the outstanding shares,
has agreed to tender his shares as part of the deal.

   In a statement, Shire chief executive officer, Matthew Emmens, said he sees
Vyvanse as a possible successor to its current No. 1 selling ADHD medication,
Adderall XR.

   "This acquisition continues our leadership position in the growing U.S. ADHD
market, improves our operating margins, significantly enhances our earnings
growth from late 2009 and delivers on our overall global growth strategy,"
Emmens said.

   A new product would also help Shire protect its dominance in the ADHD market
from generic-drug makers which have been nipping at its revenues on Adderall. It
noted that Vyvanse has "robust intellectual property with patent protection to
June 2023 in the U.S. and to June 2024 in Europe."

   The U.S. market for ADHD drugs was worth an estimated $3.3 billion last year,
almost half of which went for drugs made by companies in the Philadelphia
region, including Shire and McNeil Consumer and Special Pharmaceuticals, a
Johnson & Johnson subsidiary in Fort Washington.

   The deal is the second major move for relatively small Shire. In 2005, Emmens
led Shire in buying the biotech firm Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. for $1.6
billion.

   Shire, based in Basingstoke, about 50 miles west of London in Hampshire
County, has about 2,500 employees worldwide and 600 in Wayne, where it has been
building up its headquarters functions.

   Contact staff writer Thomas Ginsberg at 215-854-4177 or
tginsberg@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2007


                              548 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            February 18, 2007 Sunday
                                 FOURTH EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: Aging nation faces growing hearing loss

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   An aging U.S. population faces a looming crisis in hearing loss, researchers
said Saturday. Some research holds promise, but much is in the early stages.

   By 2050, there could be as many as 50 million people in the United States
with impaired hearing, Steven Greenberg of Silicon Speech in Santa Venetia,
Calif., told the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement
of Science.

   Hearing loss results in social and psychological isolation, "which makes
their life hell," Greenberg said.

   Thanks to loud music and a generally noisy environment, young people have a
rate of hearing loss 2 1/2 times that of their parents and grandparents, he
said.

   Stefan Heller of Stanford University said that research in restoring damaged
hearing cells "is very much at the beginning and it's still a long, long road."

   Inner and outer hair cells in the ear pick up sound vibrations and send them
to the brain. Damage to outer cells causes hearing impairment that can be helped
by hearing aids, he said. Damage to the inner cells cannot be repaired and
causes deafness.

   Heller said ear stem cells had been isolated in laboratory work and grown
into cells that resembled hair cells.

   "They're not perfect," he said. When placed in the ear of chicken embryos,
most of the cells died. A few survived and were implanted into the inner ear.
The next step, he said, is to try the experiment in mice.

   Gene therapy is being tested in an effort to produce more hair cells in the
ear. The result so far has been a type of hybrid cell, and researchers are
unsure whether they can get these cells to survive.

   Heller said scientists in Japan were experimenting with drugs that seemed to
help spur the growth of hearing cells in young mice. The results in older mice
are far less promising.

   There seems to be something not yet understood that prevents new cell
development in the inner ear. This is an area where cancer is not known to
occur, he said, and an indication that something prevents cell development.

NOTES:  Health & Science

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2007


                              549 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                            February 16, 2007 Friday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 697 words

HEADLINE: Venture philanthropy targets a cure;
Cleveland firm working on cystic fibrosis therapy

BYLINE: Mary Vanac, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation has increased its 2007 investment in
Copernicus Therapeutics Inc., the Cleveland company that is working on a genetic
therapy for the fatal disease.

   Instead of investing $4.6 million in Copernicus this year, as previously
announced, the foundation plans to invest $5.2 million, said Robert Beall, its
president and chief executive.

   Including its latest commitment, the foundation will have invested $9 million
in Copernicus and its potential genetic therapy since 1998, Beall said.

   Copernicus has one of nearly 30 therapies in the foundation's "drug
development pipeline." Since 2001, the foundation has invested $200 million in
companies that could commercialize therapies for the nation's most common fatal
genetic disease.

   "We frequently refer to this as venture philanthropy," said Beall, a former
physiology professor at Case Western Reserve University's medical school.

   The relationship between the foundation and Copernicus is aimed at getting
basic research out of the laboratory and into the clinic at a faster pace.

   Traditionally, medical foundations invest in basic research at academic or
medical institutions.

   But the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation started investing in companies about a
decade ago because it was getting nowhere with large pharmaceutical companies,
Beall said.

   Part of the problem is cystic fibrosis is considered an "orphan disease." It
affects about 30,000 people in the United States. So the profit from
commercializing a therapy for the disease is small, said Dr. Robert Moen,
president and chief executive of Copernicus.

   The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation is trying to lessen companies' development
risk by investing in them.

   The investments help the companies do research and pre-clinical and clinical
testing.

   Through royalty or payback agreements, the foundation hopes to get a return
of several times its investment so it can invest in other promising therapies,
Beall said.

   Why would a foundation invest in a company rather than an institution to find
a disease therapy?

   Because most academic institutions don't know how to commercialize therapies
- and companies do, said Stephen Rose, chief research officer for the Foundation
Fighting Blindness.

   Companies know how to refine basic research, figure out how to make a therapy
profitably and then sell it, said Rose, whose foundation began collaborating
with companies about two years ago.

   Copernicus has the only genetic therapy in which the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation is investing. But using a genetic therapy for this disease makes
sense.

   Cystic fibrosis patients have two defective genes - one from their mother,
one from their father. These defective genes produce a protein that clogs the
lungs with mucus and prevents the pancreas from adding enzymes to the digestive
tract.

   Researchers and doctors have figured out how to treat the lack of pancreatic
enzymes - give the patient an enzyme pill with each meal, Moen said. But too
much mucus in the lungs can cause infections, which are the leading cause of
death for cystic fibrosis patients, he said.

   Using technology that started at Case, Copernicus has developed a
nanoparticle that contains a correct version of the cystic fibrosis gene. The
small particles are administered to a patient through an aerosol, which is
inhaled.

   Once in the lungs, the nanoparticles hook up with nucleolin, a substance on
the perimeter of each lung cell. Nucleolin acts like the Pony Express, taking
the nanoparticle to the nucleus of the cell, Moen said.

   There, the good copy of the cystic fibrosis gene takes over, giving the cell
correct instructions for a time, he said.

   The Copernicus therapy has been tested on 12 patients, targeting their nose
cells, which are identical to their lung cells, Moen said. The nose cells
accepted the nanoparticle and acted as if they understood its instructions.

   "Now we're optimizing the whole set of instructions to give us the ideal
situation for use in the lung so you have to use it as infrequently as
possible," Moen said.

   When could the cystic fibrosis therapy be available to patients? "Not
tomorrow," Moen said, but possibly in a few years.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter: mvanac@plaind.com, 216-999-5302

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2007


                              550 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           February 13, 2007 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 1; Science Desk; ESSAY; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1081 words

HEADLINE: Crossed by the Stars They Reach For

BYLINE: By DENNIS OVERBYE

BODY:

   I've been haunted all week by the distraught face of Lisa Nowak as it
appeared in her mug shot, reproduced endlessly on television and newspaper front
pages. She is the astronaut who has been accused of trying to kidnap and perhaps
kill a rival for the affections of a fellow astronaut.

     We all know someone who has been there or in the neighborhood. Maybe not so
far as Captain Nowak is accused of going, but making one phone call too many or
taking a late-night cruise past the house to see whose car is in the driveway.

   Captain Nowak's situation might seem inexplicable to people who have bought
into the media image of science and spaceflight as a robotic realm of light and
reason inhabited by drones more interested in crossword puzzles and chess than
in the latest exploits of Jack Bauer or the White Stripes.

     In fact, the opposite is more often true. It takes guts and gumption, as
well as no small amount of ego, to endure years of training and competition to
ascend the ranks of military and government bureaucracies to the levels of test
pilot or astronaut, or to survive the ego bashing at the blackboard during
physics seminars and presume to crack the mysteries of the universe.

     Not to mention vast reserves of talent and stubbornness. You've got to
think you're pretty special to fly in space or to engage, as an astronomer once
described it to me, in a bar fight with God.

     These are qualities that don't get switched off going in or out of the lab
door, and the results are often as messy as the lives of the rest of us who
aren't regularly weighted with cosmic destiny. It would not be surprising if
their lives, like those of rock stars, were even messier.

     Only three days before Captain Nowak was arrested, William French Anderson,
a geneticist at the University of Southern California and a hero of the
once-promising technique of gene therapy whose work has been described (among
other places) on the front page of this newspaper, was sentenced to 14 years in
prison for molesting a girl when she was 10 to 14 years old.

     The girl's mother worked for Dr. Anderson and had recruited him to teach
her daughter martial arts.

     Confronted by the girl years later, Dr. Anderson was recorded saying, ''I
will love you forever,'' but also admitting, ''Something inside me was evil.''

     Last month Andrew Pakhomov, a physics professor at the University of
Alabama in Huntsville, pleaded not guilty to the murder of his wife, Yelena
Zakin. She was found dumped in the Tennessee River last summer, a week after she
had caught him with another woman, a staff assistant, in his office and attacked
them.

     A successful merger of sex and science was engineered by Erwin Schrodinger,
the Austrian quantum physicist, who gave us the parable of the cat that is both
alive and dead. In 1925 Schrodinger invited a still-mysterious woman friend to
join him over the year-end holidays in a lodge in Arosa, Switzerland. While he
was there he invented a wave equation that won him the Nobel Prize. It now bears
his name and has been the basis of quantum mechanics ever since.

     At Oxford, where he fled the Nazis, Schrodinger lived openly in a threesome
with his wife and a mistress (the wife of his assistant), who bore him a
daughter in 1934. In Dublin, where Schrodinger and his two ''wives'' eventually
landed in 1940 as he became the director of the School for Theoretical Physics,
the quantum genius had more love affairs and fathered more children.

     Captain Nowak's humiliation brings to mind the plight of Marie Curie, who
won the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics with her husband, Pierre, for discovering
radium and who has been a role model for female scientists ever since. As
detailed in Susan Quinn's biography, ''Marie Curie: A Life,'' she was nearly
hounded out of Paris in 1911 when it was discovered that she was having an
affair with Paul Langevin, one of Pierre's students, who was married with four
children.

     Pierre was run over by a carriage in the street in 1906. Drawn together by
mutual grief, Paul and Marie set up an apartment near the Sorbonne as a love
nest. Langevin's wife sent a man to break into the apartment, obtaining love
letters, which his mother-in-law then shared with the newspapers.

     ''The fires of radium which beam so mysteriously have just lit a fire in
the heart of one of the scientists who studies their action so devotedly; and
the wife and children of this scientist are in tears,'' read one article.

     France was apparently more strait-laced then than now, and the press
vilified the lovebirds. Langevin challenged the editor of one newspaper to a
duel, but neither man could bring himself to fire his pistol. The only violence
occurred when Langevin showed up for work bruised and beaten and said his wife
had hit him with a chair.

     In the midst of the brouhaha, Curie won another Nobel, for chemistry, but
the Swedish academy suggested she stay away from the awards ceremony. She went
anyway.

     Albert Einstein, who met Curie for the first time at a meeting in Brussels
that year, wrote home that he didn't really see what the fuss was all about.
''She has a sparkling intelligence, but despite her passionate nature, she is
not attractive enough to represent a threat to anyone,'' he wrote.

     Einstein was soon to have his own problems with adultery. For most of the
years that he was inventing his supreme achievement, the general theory of
relativity, which predicted the bending of light, the expanding universe and
black holes, he was having an affair with his cousin Elsa and fending off
suspicions, accusations and emotional breakdowns from his wife, Mileva. His
oldest son stopped speaking to him at various times.

     In his divorce deposition, Einstein admitted that there had been physical
violence in the marriage, but said his wife was the one who had started it.

     Einstein continued to have affairs after he married Elsa in 1919. One of
them, according to a letter in the Einstein archive at the Hebrew University in
Jerusalem, commenced with the by-then-famous physicist sneaking into the house
of his friend Hans Muhsam, to be with his niece Betty Neumann, whom he then
hired as a secretary. With his wife's explicit permission, Einstein carried on
with Neumann for about a year.

     Einstein broke off the affair in 1924, saying that he had to seek in the
stars what had been denied him on the Earth.

     But he was pursued by and involved with other women for the rest of his
life. If you are an Einstein, the stars are never enough.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Michael Criley)

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2007


                              551 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2007 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            February 9, 2007 Friday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 982 words

HEADLINE: Research shines light on Rett Syndrome Manipulation of gene in mice
ends symptoms

BYLINE: Carey Goldberg Globe Staff

BODY:

   It almost always strikes girls in infancy. It can leave them unable to walk,
talk, or use their hands, racked by seizures, or gasping for irregular breaths
with little prospect of improvement. But now the devastating symptoms of Rett
Syndrome, a rare genetic disease related to autism, have been dramatically
reversed in mice, raising a great wave of hope for families that previously had
little.

   Researchers reported yesterday that when they reversed the genetic defect
involved in Rett Syndrome, they brought on a stunning recovery in mice just days
from death: irregular breathing returned to normal and mobility was restored.
Brain activity, too, appeared to improve and tremors abated.

   Scientists caution that it is a long way from mice to humans, that the
experiments must be replicated by others, and that the genetic manipulation that
restored the brains of the mice is not currently feasible in people.

   But they also point out that the new findings raise hope not only for people
with Rett, but for those with autism and other "developmental" brain diseases
that strike after birth, because the dramatic recovery of the mice suggests that
the brain is far more fixable than many have thought.

   "Everyone assumes that autism, schizophrenia, all these things are done deals
once the symptoms are there," said Adrian Bird, senior author of the findings
published online yesterday in the journal Science.

   "But we have to ask ourselves, `Why do we believe the brain is so fixed and
nonplastic?"' said Bird, a professor of genetics at Edinburgh University who
found the gene that, when mutated, causes Rett. "Maybe we should look more
carefully at what else can be reversed."

   Rett Syndrome affects an estimated 1 in every 10,000 girls, and occasionally
boys. Like autism, it often involves a regression early in life. For example,
Lori McTernan of Needham had seemed a fairly normal baby at first, but at nine
months she was still not crawling, and over the next few months, she made no
progress with language and lost the ability to pick up food between two fingers,
said her mother, Maria.

   Lori is now almost 15, and Maria McTernan said the Science paper's findings
restore hope that had long since waned.

   "If Lori could even nod her head yes or no, that would be just unbelievable,"
she said.

   For doctors as well as researchers, the Science paper provides a boost
broader than Rett Syndrome, said Dr. Omar Khwaja, director of the new Rett
Syndrome program at Children's Hospital Boston.

   "There are very few if any childhood neurological diseases that are curable,"
he said, but the paper provides "proof of principle" that, in an animal model at
least, the symptoms of such a disease can be reversed.

   So what will Khwaja tell families now about potential help for humans? He
does not think it can come within five years, he said, but "It's very
unpredictable."

   Bird's team worked on a mouse model engineered to have Rett Syndrome that
could effectively be turned on and off. The researchers put a "Stop cassette," a
kind of chemical roadblock, on the key gene involved in Rett. When the Stop
cassette was in place, the gene did not work in brain cells and the mice had all
the symptoms of the mouse version of Rett. For example, when a cage lid is
lifted, normal mice scurry about but Rett mice sit still.

   When the mice were a few weeks old, the researchers gave them a drug that
would remove the cassette, and the gene began to function. Nine of the 17 mice
died, perhaps because the gene came back on too strongly, and the remaining
eight showed an amazing recovery.

   "The first thing we thought was: `This can't be true! These mice are
completely cured! So we'd better do it again," said Bird, the senior author,
whose research was funded in part by the Rett Syndrome Research Foundation. "The
next time we got the drug dose just right, and nearly all mice were cured."

   The same key gene has been implicated recently in autism, learning
disabilities, and some forms of mental retardation.

   There are three possible ways that the Science experiment may eventually be
translated to humans, Bird said, all just beyond the realm of what is currently
possible: Gene therapy aimed at somehow producing the same effect as what was
done in the mice; a drug that would imitate the effect of turning the gene back
on; and a method that would somehow activate the "good," nonmutated copy of the
gene that is present along with the "bad" copy in people with Rett.

   Neuroscientists not involved in the Science paper welcomed the findings,
though with the usual scientific caution.

   Mark Bear, director of the Picower Institute for Learning and Memory at MIT,
said that the paper provided "welcome good news" with its suggestion that "it is
never too late to try a new treatment for a developmental brain disorder."

   Of course, he added in an e-mail, "the less interesting aspect of the study
is that the rescue was achieved by re-expressing the same gene. I do not think
anyone expects that it will be possible, in the near future anyway, to replace a
disease gene throughout the nervous system in humans like what they did here in
mice."

   Local parents of children with Rett said they are realistic and know that a
cure remains far away. Still, news that the symptoms could be reversed in
animals "seems like a miracle," said Jennifer Endres of South Yarmouth, whose
3-year-old daughter, Jillian, has Rett.

   Asked what improvement in Jillian they hope for most, Jennifer and her
husband, Justin, said they would most love to hear Jillian speak some day.

   "It would be nice to hear her say, `Mommy,' `Daddy,' `I love you,"' Justin
Endres said. "Or to reach up to give you a hug. She doesn't have the use of her
arms to do even that, to make any sign of definite communication."

   Carey Goldberg can be reached at goldberg@globe.com.

   To see a video about Rett Syndrome, go to www.rsrf.org/

   reversal_experiment/video-

   reversal_summary.html.

GRAPHIC: Jennifer and Justin Endres of South Yarmouth with their daughter,
Jillian, 4, who has Rett Syndrome, a rare genetic disease that is related to
autism. The Endres hope that research will lead to treatment that will enable
their child to speak.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2007


                              552 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2007 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           February 3, 2007 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 930 words

HEADLINE: Scientist gets 14 years for sexual abuse;
William French Anderson molested the daughter of his lab colleague. The victim,
now 19, says the pain led her to consider suicide.

BYLINE: Peter Y. Hong, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   William French Anderson, among the world's most acclaimed scientists, was
sentenced Friday to 14 years in prison for sexually abusing the daughter of a
researcher at his lab at USC.

   Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Michael E. Pastor said he considered the
contributions the 70-year-old researcher, a pioneer in gene therapy, had made to
science, as well as the many letters he received from the defendant's colleagues
-- including a Nobel laureate -- vouching for Anderson's character.

   "It is rare to be presented with such heartfelt, lengthy letters," Pastor
said.

   But, in imposing what he described as a mid-term sentence, the judge said
those who wrote did not know the details of Anderson's crimes. "I wish they had
heard the evidence," Pastor said.

   The judge said Anderson "had a game plan. He ensnared [the victim] to make
her totally dependent on him emotionally and psychologically."

   Anderson made the girl "his protege, offering her the opportunity to achieve
everything this country has to offer: fame, influence, financial success,
success in academics, sports and life. What mother would not be thrilled beyond
belief?" Pastor said.

   As he spoke, the victim's mother broke into tears, burying her face in a
handkerchief. The young woman, who flew in from college in the Midwest, placed a
comforting hand on her mother.

   Now 19, the victim addressed the court in a wavering voice, recalling "pain
that led me to cut my own body and contemplate suicide." Her voice grew more
forceful as she declared: "He has had second chances. He is well educated.... He
could have stopped the first, the second or any of the times he molested me, but
he didn't."

   The Times generally does not identify sexual abuse victims.

   Anderson, dressed in an open-collar shirt with a rumpled, double-breasted
jacket, showed little emotion as he gazed straight at those who spoke for and
against him, though he smiled warmly as he entered the courtroom. He
occasionally glanced at his wife, Kathryn, an accomplished surgeon who attended
his trial every day.

   Blair Berk, one of Anderson's lawyers, said his client would be targeted by
inmates as a child molester, so a prison term would mean "either a death
sentence or solitary confinement."

   Anderson had faced a maximum sentence of 18 years for his conviction on four
counts of continuous sexual abuse and lewd acts toward a child younger than 14.
Pastor also ordered him to pay $52,000 in restitution to the victim and her
family to cover past therapy bills and $16,000 in fines to state restitution
funds.

   The victim said Anderson first abused her shortly after they met, when she
was in the fifth grade. The girl's mother, Anderson's second-in-command at the
laboratory, had asked him to spend time with the girl, because she had few
friends and was acting up in school. Anderson agreed and said that with his help
the girl might go on to his alma mater, Harvard University.

   During the trial, the victim testified that he first touched her crotch as
she playfully swung on a heavy punching bag at his San Marino house, where
Anderson, an athlete himself, gave her karate lessons.

   The abuse continued for five years, prosecutors said, though the conviction
covered only three. Anderson had the girl undress for medical exams at his
house, and when she was an adolescent had her undress to her underwear and lie
on a towel on his bed, she said. He thrust himself on her until he ejaculated,
she testified.

   In high school, she reluctantly agreed to cooperate with police after a
school counselor got her to confide she had been abused. Wearing a police wire,
she faced down Anderson in 2004 outside the South Pasadena library.

   In that recorded encounter, Anderson did not acknowledge molesting the girl
but apologized generally and said that "something inside me was evil." Then 67,
Anderson told the girl, 17 at the time, "I will love you forever."

   He also sent her multiple e-mails begging to see her and one e-mail warning
that he might kill himself. "For me, a powerful 9-millimeter bullet through the
side of the head would be the way to go," he wrote.

   Pastor cited the e-mails as predatory behavior.

   Before Anderson was accused in 2004 of molesting the girl, he was among the
few U.S. scientists who achieved something close to celebrity status. He was
featured in lengthy profiles in national magazines and newspapers, including
this one.

   In September 1990, Anderson and two colleagues implanted a healthy gene to
correct a 4-year-old girl's defective immune system. Whether the operation or
later medical treatment saved her life is now in dispute. The media then,
however, hailed Anderson as the man who bested nature, the closest thing to
playing God.

   But critics said Anderson took too much credit for others' achievements. By
2003, his USC lab had lost most of its funding.

   After he was charged with abuse in Los Angeles, a Maryland man said Anderson
had molested him 20 years earlier. Anderson was charged with abusing the boy,
but prosecutors, citing limitations of Maryland law, eventually dropped the
case.

   Anderson resigned his USC faculty post in September 2006.

   He had come to the university in 1992 from the National Institutes of Health
in Bethesda, Md. He said he was following his wife, who had been made surgery
chairwoman at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles. The Andersons said they chose not
to have children so that they could devote themselves fully to medicine.

   As he stood to leave the courtroom Friday, Anderson looked to his wife and
pursed his lips as if to kiss her. She looked back at him, bright-eyed, and did
the same.

   *

   peter.hong@latimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 06, 2007

CORRECTION:

   Child molestation sentencing: An article Saturday in the California section
about the sentencing of scientist William French Anderson mentioned lawyer Blair
Berk and said Anderson was "his client." Berk is a woman.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: IN COURT: William French Anderson, a pioneer in gene therapy,
had achieved some celebrity for his work.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Ringo H.W. Chiu For The
Times

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2007


                              553 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           February 3, 2007 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 114 words

HEADLINE: National Briefing West: California: Geneticist Sentenced For Molesting

BYLINE: AP

BODY:

   A renowned geneticist was sentenced to 14 years in prison for molesting an
employee's daughter who took martial arts classes at his home. Many people,
including a Nobel Prize winner, wrote letters in support of the geneticist,
William French Anderson, who was the Time magazine runner-up for Man of the Year
in 1995. Judge Michael E. Pastor said Dr. Anderson had caused incalculable
emotional damage to the victim. Dr. Anderson, 70, was convicted in July of child
molesting. Prosecutors said he molested the girl from 1997 to 2001, starting
when she was 10. Dr. Anderson has been called the father of gene therapy for
work on the promising but controversial experimental medical treatment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2007


                              554 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                           February 3, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 487 words

HEADLINE: In the Nation

BODY:

   Katrina victims

   can sue Army Corps

   NEW ORLEANS - Residents whose homes were flooded during Hurricane Katrina may
sue the Army Corps of Engineers over allegations that the agency ignored
warnings about defects in a nearby navigation channel, a federal judge ruled
yesterday.

   The ruling, one of the first significant decisions in a set of cases over
what caused the 2005 flooding, may force the Corps to hand over documents about
management of the 76-mile channel. Corps spokesman Eugene Pawlik said the
agency's lawyers were reviewing the ruling. The Corps and the federal government
had argued they were immune from legal challenges because decisions about the
waterway were based in policy.

   During Katrina, storm surge traveled up the channel and overwhelmed levees,
according to scientists.- AP

   Texas to require cancer vaccine

   AUSTIN, Texas - Bypassing the Legislature, Republican Gov. Rick Perry issued
an order yesterday making Texas the first state to require that schoolgirls get
vaccinated against the sexually transmitted virus that causes cervical cancer.

   By employing an executive order, Perry sidesteps opposition in the
Legislature by conservatives and parents'-rights groups that fear that such a
requirement would encourage premarital sex and interfere with the way parents
raise their children.

   Starting in September 2008, girls entering the sixth grade - generally, those
ages 11 and 12 - will have to get Gardasil, Merck & Co.'s new vaccine against
strains of the human papillomavirus, or HPV. Perry, a conservative Christian who
opposes abortion and stem-cell research using embryonic cells, has said the
vaccine is no different from the one that protects children against polio. - AP

   Scientist gets jail for molestation

   LOS ANGELES - A world-renowned geneticist was sentenced yesterday to 14 years
in prison for molesting an employee's daughter who took martial-arts classes at
his home.

   Many people, including a Nobel Prize winner, wrote letters in support of
William French Anderson, who has been called the "father of gene therapy" and
was Time magazine's runner-up for Man of the Year in 1995. But Judge Michael E.
Pastor said Anderson, 70, had caused "incalculable" emotional damage to a victim
he described as an insecure and trusting immigrant.

   Prosecutors said Anderson molested the girl from 1997, when she was 10, to
2001. Pastor also ordered him to pay her family about $52,000 in restitution for
therapy and cover the cost of any future treatment, and he imposed about $16,000
in fines and fees.- AP

   Elsewhere:

   As many as 5,000 California convicts will be transferred out of state to ease
an overcrowding crisis in the nation's largest prison system, the state
corrections secretary said yesterday.

   Michigan's public universities and state and local governments would violate
the state constitution by providing health insurance to the partners of gay
employees, the Michigan Court of Appeals ruled yesterday.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2007


                              555 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2007 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           February 3, 2007 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 328 words

HEADLINE: World-famous geneticist sentenced to 14 years for molestation of girl

BYLINE: ROBERT JABLON, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   A world-renowned geneticist was sentenced yesterday to 14 years in prison for
molesting an employee's daughter who took martial arts classes at his home.

    Many people, including a Nobel Prize winner, wrote letters in support of
William French Anderson, Time magazine's runner-up for Man of the Year in 1995.
But Judge Michael E. Pastor said he caused "incalculable" emotional damage to a
victim he described as an insecure and trusting immigrant.

    "Because of intellectual arrogance, he persisted and he got away with as
much as he could," the judge said.

    Anderson, 70, was convicted in July of child molestation. He could have
gotten 18 years behind bars.

   Anderson has been called the "father of gene therapy" for his work on a
promising but controversial experimental medical treatment that involves
injecting healthy genes into sick patients.

   He claimed to be the first person to successfully treat a patient with the
therapy in 1990, though the claim has been disputed.

    Prosecutors said Anderson molested the girl from 1997 to 2001, starting when
she was 10.

    Anderson watched intently as his victim, now 19, read a statement before he
was sentenced.

    "Roughly three years ago, I wanted to kill myself," she said. "I couldn't
live with all the pain. . . . He maliciously destroyed my world to fulfill his
own sick pleasures."

    The judge also ordered Anderson to pay her family about $52,000 in
restitution for past therapy and cover the cost of any future treatment. He also
imposed fines and fees of about $16,000.

    Defense attorneys argued that Anderson was a friendly mentor to the girl and
was being smeared by her mother, who wanted to assume Anderson's position as
director of the Gene Therapies Laboratories at the University of Southern
California's Keck School of Medicine.

    In e-mails and a tape-recorded conversation played for jurors during the
trial, the girl angrily confronted Anderson, who told the girl, "I just did it,
just something in me was just evil."

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2007


                              556 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2007 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           February 3, 2007 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A16

LENGTH: 505 words

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF

BODY:

   AUSTIN  --  An executive order by Gov. Rick Perry (R) on Friday made Texas
the first state to require that schoolgirls get vaccinated against the sexually
transmitted virus that causes cervical cancer.

    The order allowed Perry to sidestep opposition in the Texas legislature from
conservatives and parents' rights groups who fear that such a requirement would
condone premarital sex and interfere with the way parents raise their children.

     Beginning in September 2008, girls entering the sixth grade will have to
receive Gardasil, a vaccine against strains of the human papillomavirus, or HPV.

    LOS ANGELES  --  A renowned geneticist was sentenced Friday to 14 years in
prison for molesting an employee's daughter who took martial-arts classes at his
home.

    William French Anderson, 70, has been called the "father of gene therapy"
for his scientific work. He conducted the first U.S.-approved gene therapy
experiment while at the National Institutes of Health, and he was Time
magazine's runner-up for Man of the Year in 1995.

    But Judge Michael E. Pastor said he caused "incalculable" emotional damage
to the victim.

   *  CAMP PENDLETON, Calif.  --  A Marine who has spoken publicly about a
massacre allegedly committed by his unit in Iraq has been charged with rape and
stealing government property. Lance Cpl. Roel Ryan Briones, 22, is accused of
raping a nonmilitary person in the Camp Pendleton area last year and of stealing
optical equipment worth about $3,820 in Iraq. Briones's family said he suffers
from post-traumatic stress disorder after following orders to photograph and
help remove the bodies of 24 Iraqi men, women and children who were slain in
November 2005 in Haditha.

   *  TRENTON, N.J.  --  Former governor James McGreevey (D), who announced he
was gay in 2004, filed for divorce from Dina Matos McGreevey, his wife of seven
years.

   *  SACRAMENTO  --  As many as 5,000 California convicts will be transferred
out of state to ease overcrowding in the nation's largest state prison system, a
top corrections official said. Only about 380 inmates have volunteered for the
transfers, despite a survey released in October that found nearly 20,000 inmates
were willing to go.

   *  ATLANTA  --  A judge warned that he may have to suspend the murder trial
of Brian Nichols, accused of killing four people in a shooting spree that began
inside a courthouse, unless more money is made available for the suspect's
defense.

   *  LANSING, Mich.  --  A 2004 voter-approved state ban on gay marriage also
prohibits government agencies and schools from providing same-sex domestic
partner benefits, the Michigan Court of Appeals ruled.

   *  LONG BEACH, Calif.  --  Four of nine black teenagers convicted of beating
three white women on Halloween were sentenced to probation. The teenagers, three
females and one male, were ordered to serve 250 hours of community service and
60 days house arrest, and take anger management and racial tolerance programs.
The other five defendants face sentencing next week.

     --  From News Services

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2007


                              557 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                            January 28, 2007 Sunday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: VIEWPOINTS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1091 words

HEADLINE: WILL ARIZONA COME TO TERMS WITH ITS TROUBLED HEALTH CARE SYSTEM BEFORE
IT COMES TO THIS?;
the vanishing doc;
CONTINUING THE STATUS QUO PUTS YOUR WELL-BEING AT RISK

BYLINE: Roger Hughes, Special for The Republic

BODY:

   If you're predicting the future, never give dates.

   That is an especially sound piece of advice for those who traffic in dire
predictions for the American health care system, which has been pronounced to be
in a state of crisis for the past 40 years.

   During that period, health care has become a major driver of the American
economy, a source of scientific innovation and a supplier of quality jobs. This
vast industry represents over $2 trillion in expenditures, or close to 17
percent of the gross domestic product, and is expected to grow to $4 trillion in
2015.

   Arizona and other states are making big bets on biotechnology. Hospitals here
are in a growth mode, consumers demand the latest and greatest, and financial
advisers recommend health care stocks for our retirement portfolios.

   In the face of doom-and-gloom projections, many people continue to make a lot
of money in the health care industry. They are not about to bite the hand that
feeds them.

   Beneath the frenzied surface of economic growth, however, a more complex
picture emerges. Here is one scenario for the future of health care in Arizona
if economic and social forces now in play continue without correction or
compensation:

   Declining access to affordable, effective care. In addition to the 1 million
Arizonans who don't have any health insurance coverage at all, an increasing
number of insured residents, many with complex chronic diseases, are unable to
access timely and effective care across a fragmented, uncoordinated system based
on fee-for-service reimbursement.

   If all we do is look for ways to increase health insurance coverage without
also looking at ways to improve the coordination and integration of care across
silos of specialty interests, we may in fact exacerbate the access problem and
continue to drive up costs.

   Shredding of social benefits. There is intense pressure on reducing Medicaid
and Medicare costs at the federal level, which in turn shifts costs to states
and private payers. Businesses that provide health and retirement benefits --
and many small businesses don't -- are shifting costs to employees, who in the
future will be expected to shoulder more of the health care bill themselves.
Some believe this is a good thing -- greater consumer responsibility, shopping
for value -- but it's not exactly a revenue winner for an industry that relies
on the great majority of its income from government and business payers. Who
will pay for expensive hospital care and the latest technological interventions
in the future?

   Severe workforce shortages. Arizona is 49th in the nation in the number of
nurses per 100,000 population, 47th in pharmacists and 36th in physicians. You
can't grow an industry if you don't have the talent to staff it, and you can't
grow the talent if you don't have the faculty, training and support programs.
This is an infrastructure issue that Arizona needs to address in a significant
way.

   Eclipse of primary-care physicians. It used to be that physicians graduated
from medical school and talked about opening a practice. Today, they talk about
finding a job and paying off a mountain of school debt. This drives them to the
more lucrative procedure-driven specialties and away from the cognitive
specialties such as primary care, family medicine, internal medicine and
psychiatry. Opening more medical schools won't fix this; changing reimbursement
and practice patterns will.

   Fractured hospital-physician relationships. Hospitals can't do business
without physicians, but physicians can do business without hospitals -- and more
are choosing to do so. In one scenario, hospitals gradually decline under huge
fixed costs and decreasing revenues as care shifts to physician-owned outpatient
settings and the greater use of medical software (gene therapy, designer drugs)
and innovative technology that doesn't require a large operational theater.

   In another scenario, hospitals go on the offense, employ more physicians
directly and extend services through integrated outpatient settings and
electronic networks. Either way, expect to see greater consolidation on the
local hospital scene. The future of the stand-alone community hospital is
problematic.

   Outsourcing of public benefits. In the face of a declining employer-based
insurance market, more health plans will contract with Medicaid and Medicare for
a greater portion of their business. Further, what some call the "graying" of
group health insurance -- older, higher-income people get private health
insurance, and the rest get public coverage or nothing -- may make it harder for
private health plans to pool risks. Many are betting on new individual insurance
products (health savings accounts, etc.) as the salvation for private health
plans that, in the words of one Wall Street analyst, are "taking a long walk off
a short pier." If these products don't take off in a big way relatively soon,
there will be greater pressure for some type of universal single-payer system.

   Fat people meet skinny benefits. That's how the futurist Ian Morrison
describes a scenario in which Americans are forced to come to terms with their
own unhealthful behaviors and unrealistic expectation that they can continue to
"live large" and not pay for it in the end. All the financial pressures and
competing public interests will force payers to reduce benefits: a set number of
outpatient visits and inpatient hospital days, limited prescription drugs, and
then you're on your own. Living large, indeed.

   There are other scenarios, of course. The coming age of prevention and
wellness in a value-driven system, physicians, nurses and others working
together in integrated teams tied together by electronic health networks; an
emphasis on quality improvement, new methods of payment; some of this is already
under way in Arizona and across the country. Americans are a resourceful,
resilient and creative people, and the same energy that now props up an
increasingly dysfunctional "sick care" system can be redirected toward a
powerful health promotion system in the future.

   That's where we need to be headed in Arizona. We can't predict the future,
but we can imagine what we want it to look like and work together to achieve a
shared vision. It comes down to leadership and innovation.

   \

   Roger Hughes is executive director of St. Luke's Health Initiatives, a
Phoenix-based public foundation focused on health policy, public education and
advocacy, and strength-based community development. SLHI's reports on Arizona
health care and community health issues are available at www.slhi.org.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2007


                              558 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2007 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            January 28, 2007 Sunday
                                 FIRST EDITION

SECTION: METRO; Pg. C13

LENGTH: 719 words

HEADLINE: Cat research might offer keys to fighting human blindness

BYLINE: By David Twiddy The Associated Press

DATELINE: COLUMBIA, Mo.

BODY:

   Gingersnap, a 4-year-old Abyssinian, rolled lazily on the examining table
while Dr. Kristina Narfstrom rubbed the cat's cinnamon-colored head.

   Then, using a special viewer, Narfstrom peered deep into Gingersnap's eyes to
measure the cat's losing battle with a disorder that is slowly killing her
retinas, the thin film at the back of the eyeball that makes sight possible.

   "By the time she's 5, she'll probably be blind," said Narfstrom, a veterinary
ophthalmologist at the University of Missouri at Columbia.

   Gingersnap's condition is similar to retinitis pigmentosa, an incurable
genetic disease in humans that strikes one out of every 3,500 Americans and
often causes blindness. Narfstrom, who discovered the feline version of the
disease among Abyssinians in her native Sweden, is implanting special silicon
chips in partly blind cats in a bid to help replace or possibly repair diseased
retinas in humans.

   Retinitis pigmentosa attacks the eye's photoreceptor cells, also called rods
and cones, that register light and color.

   The chips, which provide their own energy, have shown encouraging results in
clinical human trials, in some cases improving sight in people with retinitis
pigmentosa or at least slowing the disease's development. Narfstrom said chips
have been implanted in 30 people.

   Narfstrom's cats will help researchers fine-tune the chips' performance and
train physicians on surgical techniques to implant the devices, because the
structure of cat eyes is similar to human eyes.

   The 2-millimeter-wide chips, developed by Optobionics Corp. of Naperville,
Ill., are surgically implanted in the back of eye. Each chip's surface is
covered with 5,000 microphotodiodes that react to light, sending electric
signals along the eye's optic nerve to the brain.

   "We're placing it right where the photoreceptors are, and if they're lacking,
this is supposed to replace what they're doing," Narfstrom said. "At this point,
it's impulses of light they're seeing (as opposed to images), but the aim of the
research is to get more information out of the chip."

   Besides helping slow the advance of the disease, studies suggest that the
electric currents generated by the chips may be regenerating damaged
photoreceptors surrounding the implants.

   Narfstrom said she should know in about two years whether the implants are
actually encouraging retinal cells in her cats to grow.

   The Optobionics chip is just one of many research paths now swarming with
scientists looking for ways to protect and restore sight.

   Besides genetic therapy, which is seen as a good tool to fight hereditary
disorders, researchers are also looking to use stem cells to rebuild damaged
retinal cells. Others are looking for substances that could trick healthy
retinal cells surrounding the photoreceptors to take over for their diseased
counterparts.

   Then there are the many attempts, like Optobionics, of creating artificial
sight. Some efforts include miniature video cameras that pipe images straight to
the brain, devices that send signals to a network of miniature electrodes
attached to the retina or chips that eventually could graft themselves to
retinal cells, creating a cyborg-like system for producing images.

   A French company is conducting trials for an implant that would release
proteins in the eyeball to offset the damage done to retinal cells, perhaps
indefinitely.

   Tim Schoen, director of research development for the Foundation Fighting
Blindness, a Baltimore area group that funds researchers, said technology to
provide prosthetic sight is especially encouraging.

   "This offers great hope to individuals who have completely lost vision," said
Schoen, whose group is not involved in the Optobionics chip. "We can treat these
patients with gene therapy, but once the photoreceptors die, we have to replace
them with stem cells or one of these artificial methods."

   Machelle Pardue, a researcher at Emory University and the Veterans
Administration Hospital in Atlanta, who is working with Narfstrom on the
Optobionics chip, said she's glad she's not the only one doing such research.

   "I think it's helpful because we all have slightly different ideas and
expertise," Pardue said. "In some respect, we are competing to find a product
that will work, but that's advantageous to the patients, because it provides an
incentive to move forward."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
 PHOTO - Gingersnap, a 4-year-old Abyssinian, lies on an examination table
Thursday, while Dr. Kristina Narfstrom prepares to look at the cat's eyes in her
lab at the University of Missouri at Columbia. Narfstrom, who discovered the
feline version of retinitis pigmentosa  -  an incurable disease that causes
blindness in humans  -  among Abyssinians in her native Sweden, is implanting
special silicon chips in partly blind cats in a bid to help replace or possibly
repair diseased retinas in humans.  The Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2007


                              559 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 23, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1907 words

HEADLINE: An innovator in bioengineering;
Combining two fields' principles has earned researcher accolades

BYLINE: Terri Somers, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In the mid-1960s, it became obvious to Dr. Shu Chien that the field of
medicine could be greatly improved by applying engineering concepts to
biological functions.

   His ensuing research at the intersection of the two fields led to the
publication of 450 scientific articles and has fed biotechnology companies such
as San Diego-based Advanced Tissue Sciences and Celladon with discoveries on how
to build new human tissue and blood vessels.

   "He is a pioneer in an entirely new endeavor, bioengineering, which has now
become a major field," said Dr. Kenneth Chien, Anders Professor of Medicine at
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School. "I don't think many
people realized how rich this field would be."

   Shu Chien's groundbreaking work has earned him exclusive membership in all
three national academies -- the National Academy of Engineering, the Institute
of Medicine and the National Academy of Sciences -- a feat accomplished by only
eight other people.

   Shu Chien, who is not related to Kenneth Chien, has also won numerous
professional awards, including the National Academy of Engineering's Founder's
Award for lifetime achievement, which tickles him because he never earned an
engineering degree.

   To San Diegans, Chien's work may be best visible closer to home. Over the
past 12 years, he helped create the University of California San Diego's
department of biomedical engineering and elevate it to one of the top three
ranked bioengineering departments in the nation.

   At 75, he continues to teach students and lead a lab of 20 researchers, with
no thoughts of retirement.

   He is a giant in a field that is still growing and proving its value in the
fields of drug discovery, medical devices and diagnostics. Yet his humble
demeanor, engagingly warm smile and unfettered interest in learning anything new
make it easy for students, faculty and the industry's most successful executives
to approach him without hesitation to share ideas or seek advice.

   But the most impressive thing about Chien, according to more than a dozen
people around the country, is his ability to build consensus among some
strong-willed and occasionally egotistical and territorial minds, while never
making an enemy.

   "He allows everyone to speak their hearts and opinions and makes everyone
feel that they've been heard and that the discussion cannot be personal," said
Amy Sung, a bioengineering professor who followed Chien from Columbia University
to UCSD 19 years ago.

   "In the end, everybody is very supportive of the vision that he has built.
That is not something that everybody can do," Sung said.

   Chien credits a "greater good" approach to life to his parents' teaching.

   He grew up in Shanghai, China, the middle son of a chemistry professor who
would become one of the nation's top intellectuals. At 16, he began the pre-med
program at Peking National University in Beijing.

   In 1949, his homeland was immersed in a bloody civil war. When the Communist
revolutionary army began shelling Beijing, the government sent airplanes to
evacuate top scholars.

   Chien was summoned home from university one day and given just minutes to
pack a bag before boarding a plane that would whisk his family to Taiwan. Later,
the intellectuals who stayed in China would be considered criminals, he said.

   A career decision

   At Taiwan's top university, Chien earned his medical degree and made the
difficult decision: "Would I deal with people every day trying to help them,
which I loved, or would I conduct research that would allow me to help many
people in a long-term way?"

   He chose research, "because it allowed me to be innovative."

   On a scholarship, he earned a Ph.D. in physiology at Columbia University and
later became a member of its faculty. Fifty years ago this April, he married his
wife, Kuang-Chung, who had followed him to the United States to pursue her
residency in pediatrics.

   "That was the greatest thing I have ever done in my life, marrying my wife,"
Chien said.

   It was at Columbia that Chien began to see how principles of engineering
could impact the understanding of biological processes. So he learned all that
he could about engineering and sought out respected Columbia engineering
professor Richard Skalak, who happened to have an interest in biology.

   Their collaboration turned into a lifelong friendship. And their work has led
to potential therapies for sickle cell disease, hypertension, atherosclerosis,
diabetes, arthritis and cancer.

   Specifically, Chien has investigated how the mechanical forces of blood flow
affect the cardiovascular system. His research is also providing insight into
the spread of cancer cells. And at the molecular level, Chien is discovering how
mechanical forces affect genes and influence them to produce proteins that cause
cell growth, migration or cell death, all key factors in disease.

   In 1985, Yuan-Cheng "Bert" Fung and Ben Zweifach were looking to expand the
biomedical engineering program they started at UCSD. Chien was their top
candidate.

   But it took three years to woo him.

   Chien was hesitant because he loved his Ivy League life, which included
running a lab of 30 researchers.

   In 1987, with the UCSD professors still nipping at his heels, Chien took an
extended sabbatical and returned to Taiwan to help establish the Institute of
Biomedical Sciences in the nation's Academia Sinica, the equivalent of the U.S.
National Academy of Science. Chien's father served as president of Academia
Sinica from 1970 until his death in 1983.

   In a year and a half, the younger Chien oversaw the growth of Academia
Sinica's biomedical faculty and staff from zero to 200 people. Lectures
scheduled in halls that accommodate 200 were filled to twice their capacity.

   "The excitement was unbelievable," Chien said. "You couldn't help but be
motivated by it."

   Chien went on to help Taiwan establish its National Health Research
Institutes, that nation's equivalent of the U.S. National Institutes of Health.

   "He is one of the invisible hands that helped shape Taiwan's biomedical
sciences," Cheng-Wen Wu, who heads the Taiwan National Health Research
Institutes, wrote in a tribute book published for Chien's 70th birthday.

   When his sabbatical drew to a close, Chien and his wife decided to give San
Diego a try: "At the time, Columbia was a better school, but I could see the
trajectory of UCSD.

   "What has happened is more than I could ever have expected," he said.

   Fung and Zweifach had built a program strong in biomechanics and
microcirculation. Chien brought with him a cadre of scientists -- including
Skalak -- and experience using cellular and molecular applications in
bioengineering.

   Bioengineering push

   He quickly started campaigning for bioengineering to be its own department,
and volunteered to do the legwork needed to win the administration's approval.

   He got the go-ahead, but no additional funding.

   In 1993, the now-defunct Whitaker Foundation awarded UCSD a $5 million grant
Chien had requested, allowing the university to establish the department, with
Chien as its chairman.

   "That was really the first functioning school of bioengineering nationwide,
and now 10 UC campuses have bioengineering," said Frieder Seible, dean of UCSD's
Jacobs School of Engineering.

   In 1998, an additional $13.8 million from the Whitaker Foundation and $8
million from the Charles Lee Powell Foundation of San Diego supported the
construction of a bioengineering building. Opened in 2002, it became the first
privately funded research/teaching building on campus.

   That accomplishment is proof of the intelligence, diplomacy and multitasking
that Chien puts to use each day, Seible said.

   Chien's students, past and present, are equally effusive about his abilities
as a teacher and the job he did elevating the department's reputation.

   Mohammad Sotoudeh, who earned his Ph.D. in Chien's lab, is now principal
scientist at Synthasome, a startup San Diego biotech. He recalled stumbling in
his research and turning to Chien for help.

   "He'd inevitably say, `Oh yes, when I was doing research we had this problem
and here's how you resolve it.' Ninety-nine percent of the time he was correct,"
Sotoudeh said.

   It was through Chien that Sotoudeh, and many other post-doctorate scientists,
made connections in the biotech industry. Sotoudeh began working at Advanced
Tissue Sciences when Chien started collaborating with the now-defunct San Diego
company on how to grow new blood vessels.

   Industry and academia should have a symbiotic relationship, Chien said.

   "What we do with our research, in the end, is that we like to use it to
benefit people either by turning it into a product, or device, or pharmaceutical
agent to treat a patient, or prevent or diagnose disease," Chien said.

   He serves on the Whitaker Institute of Biomedical Engineering's Industrial
Advisory Board, which brings together academia and biotech companies to discuss
the pressing issues facing industry.

   But colleagues say personal financial gain isn't what motivates Chien.

   "Shu could make millions if he joined an organization on the outside (of
academia), but he basically enjoys the scientific work, the nitty gritty details
that only over time add up to something that really make a difference for
society," said Geert Schmid-Schoenbein, who studied under Chien at Columbia and
is now a member of UCSD's bioengineering faculty.

   Chien has a great eye for recognizing work that can benefit industry, said
Paul Kedrosky, executive director of the William J. von Liebig Center at UCSD.

   He is currently in discussion with Pfizer about his work in which he uses
fluorescence to indicate the presence of a molecule that is a very early marker
for cancer.

   He was also a co-founder of Celladon, a San Diego biotech company whose core
technology relates to gene therapy for heart failure.

   In 2000-01, when he and co-founder Kenneth Chien were trying to start the
company, it was an extra-tough time to find funding for biotechnology. They made
several trips to meet with investors, and Shu Chien's contacts in Taiwan led to
the company's initial seed funding.

   Success is a Chien family trait.

   Shu's older brother, Robert, was Taiwan's finance minister and secretary
general of the Executive Yuan, the highest executive office in Taiwan's
government.

   Younger brother Frederick was president of the Control Yuan of Taiwan, which
is the watchdog branch of the government, and Taiwan's ambassador to the United
States.

   Both now retired, they wrote a tribute to Shu and his selfless support of
them for his 70th birthday celebration.

   When Robert was pursuing his graduate degree in Minnesota and couldn't make
ends meet, Shu sent half of his Columbia scholarship check.

   A few years later, Frederick received a scholarship for graduate work at
Yale. But he didn't think he could make the move because he lacked funds for
daily expenses, such as food.

   Shu, who had two young daughters at the time and was trying to make ends meet
on a small post-doctorate researcher's salary, encouraged his brother to make
the trip. Then he sent Frederick $100 a month.

   Shu Chien isn't slowing down with age, his friends and colleagues say. He
finds the idea of retirement boring.

   "What would I do all day?" he asked.

   He points to his friend and "role model" Fung, also a member of all three
national academies. Fung, 87, had to retire from UCSD at 70. But on most days he
can still be found in his office, "still coming up with new ideas," Chien said.

   "Whenever I feel that I cannot perform, that is when I'll retire," he said.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: 1. Shu Chien, 75, saw in the mid-1960s that
applying engineering concepts to biological functions could greatly improve the
field of medicine. 2. PROFILE -- Shu Chien; PHOTOBY: 1. Scott Linnett /
Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2007


                              560 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                Copyright 2007 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                           January 10, 2007 Wednesday
                                  Main Edition

SECTION: METRO NEWS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 482 words

HEADLINE: Tech scientist gets to swap test tubes for TV tube

BYLINE: ANDREA JONES; Staff

BODY:

   Most days, Georgia Tech researcher Bahareh Azizi can be found in a biochem
lab in sweatpants, hunched over petri dishes and bottles of yeast and bacteria.
But a newfound second career recently had the bubbly 29-year-old biochemist
zooming around racetracks in electric cars and investigating the disappearance
of leopard frogs from Long Island.

   Azizi, a chemistry lecturer who received her doctorate from Tech, is one of
four hosts on PBS's new "Science Investigators," a hourlong pilot TV program
that premieres tonight at 8. The public television station is trying out three
new science shows this month and will decide from viewer feedback which program
it will pick up for a full season. Azizi applied for the hosting position on a
lark after seeing an ad on a science job Web site in the fall. Next thing she
knew, she was headed to Oregon to film a segment on amphibians. While her three
co-hosts all had experience in front of the camera, hosting everything from
Discovery Channel documentaries to British science shows, Azizi said she came in
stone cold.

   "I had never done anything like it before," she said, laughing. "I had no
idea what I was doing."

   She jetted off to New York and California for the show, working with other
scientists to answer scientific mysteries. Promoted as a "science show with an
attitude for the blog generation" the program is up against "Wired Science,"
which translates Wired magazine into a TV show, and "22nd Century," a show that
looks at what the world will be like in 30 years. You can watch all three at
www.pbs.org.

   Azizi, who grew up in Kuwait where her parents still live, said she's hoping
everyone she knows will tune in and help "Science Investigators" beat the
competition. Meanwhile, she's continuing her research in protein and gene
therapy, in the same lab where she did her doctoral work.

   In one of the show's segments, Azizi jumps into an electric car with its
Silicon Valley owner, topping speeds of 120 mph. Her screams, she said wryly,
weren't faked for the camera.

   "I really thought I was going to die," she said.

   The show asks questions like whether iPods will one day be powered by
bacteria or whether Neanderthals could be brought back with their DNA. Azizi
said her experience teaching a freshman chemistry class helped prepare her for
the program.

   Hilda Castillo, a second-year graduate student at Tech, said Azizi has been
her mentor in the lab. Castillo watched the pilot and said Azizi's passion for
teaching came through on the show.

   "I think she's very dedicated in whatever she does. She's very serious about
her work, but always brings a fun, enthusiasm to everything."

   And even if the show doesn't get picked up for a full season, Azizi said
she'd like to find a way to keep doing some type of science journalism.

   "I enjoyed being on TV, but more importantly I really enjoyed educating
someone on a more science scale," she said.

GRAPHIC: Photo: BITA HONARVAR / StaffGeorgia Tech researcher Bahareh Azizi hosts
PBS's pilot episode of "Science Investigators" tonight at 8./ImageData*
ImageData*
Photo: BITA HONARVAR / StaffTech researcher and chemistry lecturer Bahareh Azizi
goes from petri dishes to prime time when she hosts a PBS show
tonight./ImageData*

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              561 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             January 7, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7; Column 3; Book Review Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1069 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Park

BYLINE: By DAVE ITZKOFF.

   Dave Itzkoff writes the Across the Universe column for the Book Review.

BODY:

   NEXT

     By Michael Crichton.

     431 pp. HarperCollins Publishers.

     $27.95.

   Though the moment may lack the inherent gravitas of Harriet Beecher Stowe's
encounter with Abraham Lincoln, or even Elvis Presley's private audience with
Richard Nixon, surely history should reserve a special place for the day in 2005
when Michael Crichton was invited to the White House to meet with George W.
Bush. Imagine: the modern era's leading purveyor of alarmist fiction, seated
side by side with Michael Crichton. Oh, to be a concealed recording system in
that Oval Office! Did Crichton confess to his host that he'd been inspired to
write ''Rising Sun'' by a certain Poppy in chief with a propensity for puking on
Japanese dignitaries? Did our president tell Crichton he found the dinosaurs of
''Jurassic Park'' every bit as frightening as our ancestors did at the dawn of
time, 6,000 years ago?

     A serendipitous F.O.I.A. request may later prove me wrong, but I'm going to
assume the conversation at that fateful appointment focused largely on
Crichton's 2004 novel, ''State of Fear,'' his heavily footnoted attempt at
expressing his skepticism about man-made climate change (a k a global warming)
via mass-market fiction. Perhaps sensing that no one would buy a techno-thriller
with Senator James Inhofe as its protagonist, Crichton made his apostate hero an
M.I.T. scientist/undercover agent who battles eco-terrorists and enunciates
rousing catchphrases like ''There is mass balance data extending five years or
more for only 79 glaciers in the entire world.'' Step off, Ian Fleming!

     Crichton's latest novel, ''Next,'' not only preserves the hysterical tenor
and questionable methodology of ''State of Fear,'' but also completes the
author's metamorphosis from steely-eyed augur of the not-too-distant future to
unabashed demagogue.

     The nebulous bogeyman of ''Next'' is the field of genetic research, which,
in Crichton's view, is driven not by scientific goals but by the financial
ambitions of private firms and universities and the egos of professors, and is
progressing at an exponential rate that regulatory legislation cannot keep pace
with. Nor can our judicial system protect the public from science's unwanted
advances, because the courts, as one character claims, ''are totally
incompetent. The courts don't realize how fast things are changing. They don't
understand we are already in a new world. They don't get the new issues.''
Unless we correct our present course, the novel suggests, we might soon face a
world where we lose control of our own tissue and DNA to corporations, insurance
companies revoke our policies based on our genetic predisposition to disease,
our offspring sue us for passing our biological infirmities on to them, and
maybe -- just maybe -- half-human, half-chimpanzee hybrids are permitted to live
among us and attend our public schools.

     Some of these concerns are more valid than others, but rather than risk a
fair hearing of the arguments, Crichton once again stacks the rhetorical deck
heavily in his own favor. The characters in this multipronged narrative who
espouse the author's beliefs are given ample opportunity to explain their
viewpoints in calm, rational tones, while those who would dare to contradict him
are depicted as sophists, plagiarists and charlatans or, worse still, trust-fund
liberals who live in Northern California lofts and read Mother Jones magazine.

     In one scene, a biology professor who clearly enjoys Crichton's sympathy
delivers a four-page-long speech on the perils of stem cell research, beginning
with the familiar gambit that any suggestion such treatments might soon cure
degenerative diseases is a cruel fraud ''intended to ensure funding for
researchers, at the expense of false hopes for the seriously ill.'' Never mind
that this canard has been shot down time and time again -- is it any more
responsible of Crichton to dismiss the potential of stem cell research in a
novel that implies we're just around the corner from talking apes, gene
therapies for drug addiction and transgenic parrots that can recite whole swaths
of dialogue from ''Red River''?

     Hypocrisy is only one of the novel's sins. Throughout ''Next,'' Crichton
divides his competing plotlines -- a trial lawyer fleeing a bounty hunter who
wants to claim the lawyer's valuable genetic material; a pedophiliac biotech
worker beset by a 16-year-old girl savvy enough to fake her own rape -- with
chapter breaks that are meant to read like authentic newspaper articles and
press releases. Some of these reports are based in reality, but they often play
fast and loose with the facts: while it is true, for example, that the
Australian performance artist Stelarc has sought to grow a quarter-scale replica
of his own ear from living cells, it is not true, as Crichton suggests, that the
project was successfully completed at M.I.T., or that hearing-aid companies were
interested in licensing the technology. The author makes no attempt to
distinguish his extrapolations from established fact, and even seems to relish
the ambiguity. As Crichton helpfully puts it in a disclaimer, ''This novel is
fiction, except for the parts that aren't.''

     Elsewhere, a subplot about a pipeline construction supervisor who learns
that his cancer-fighting cells were extracted by his doctor and sold to a drug
company seems to be based on the real-life case of a leukemia patient, John
Moore. In 1990, the Supreme Court of California found that Moore's tissue ceased
to be his property once it left his body, and that his doctor had the right to
profit from conducting research on it. The court, however, did not rule that the
doctor owned all the DNA in Moore's cells, or that he could forcibly extract
replacement tissue from Moore or his offspring. But that doesn't stop Crichton
from allowing his version of events to play out to this unintentionally
ridiculous conclusion.

     All science fiction has some element of titillation -- a strategy of taking
known facts and stretching them to the limits of credulity, for the purposes of
both entertaining and enlightening. But Crichton seems intent on confusing his
readers, pummeling them with a barrage of truths, half-truths and untruths,
until they have no choice but to surrender. As one of the author's numerous
stand-ins warns a naive interlocutor, ''Disinformation takes many forms.'' Here,
finally, Crichton has a point that should be heeded.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Henning Wagenbreth)

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2007


                              562 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             January 7, 2007 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 5076 words

HEADLINE: The Scold

BYLINE: By Michael Sokolove.

   Michael Sokolove, a contributing writer for the magazine, is working on a
book about women's sports after Title IX and the high rate of injuries among
young female athletes.

BODY:

   Dick Pound, chairman of the World Anti-Doping Agency and global evangelist
for the cause of pure sport, is not, technically, a law-enforcement man, but he
thinks like one. He is part romantic, part hard-boiled realist. He hopes for the
best from people but is not surprised when he doesn't get it. He believes deeply
in the grandeur of sport, less so in the goodness of athletes.

   Pound has been WADA's leader since the International Olympic Committee
created it in 1999 to ''harmonize'' efforts to clean up the murky underworld of
performance enhancement. In theory, he could have limited his concerns to the
various Olympic sports, but instead he has also sparred with what he likes to
call the ''North American pro leagues,'' including Major League Baseball, whose
anti-doping policies he has long characterized as ''a joke.'' His style is all
confrontation, all the time, and the bigger the target -- Carl Lewis, Lance
Armstrong, the entire U.S. Olympic establishment -- the better.

     As it happened, the news that the cyclist Floyd Landis had failed a drug
test at the Tour de France broke in July, in the midst of a series of interviews
I had with Pound in Montreal, where he runs WADA and also holds down more big
jobs and positions than would seem humanly possible: partner at a top law firm,
chancellor of McGill University, member of the I.O.C. and editor of something
called Pound's Tax Case Notes. He belongs, as well, to that bizarre subset of
people who write long books as a hobby, eight of them so far. (One that I picked
up in an anteroom of his office, a history of his law firm, ran to a
door-stopping 559 pages.)

     On this particular day, Pound, who is 64, looked tired. His broad face was
drawn, his complexion pasty. He had just returned from China, and his back hurt.
Thinking about Landis seemed to enliven him. He spoke of the cyclist as if he
were some sleazy perp just collared by the vice squad. ''He was 11 minutes
behind or something, and all of the sudden there's this Herculean effort, where
he's going up mountains like he's on a goddamn Harley,'' he said. In the 2006
tour, Landis raced in pain while awaiting a hip replacement, went out to an
early lead, lost it, then seemed to miraculously regain it. ''It's a great
story,'' Pound said. ''Wonderful. But if it seems too good to be true, it
probably is.''

     Pound took something like a schoolboy's delight in talking about Landis's
lab result, which supposedly showed his testosterone level to be grotesquely
above what is typical for most men. Landis has denied taking a prohibited
substance and is fighting what could be a two-year ban from cycling. ''I mean,
it was 11 to 1!'' Pound said, referring to Landis's reported
testosterone-to-epitestosterone ratio, a measure used to identify doping.
''You'd think he'd be violating every virgin within 100 miles. How does he even
get on his bicycle?''

     With an annual budget of $22 million, WADA oversees the testing done by the
world's sports federations. The agency finances research, credentials a global
network of drug-testing laboratories, conducts some of its own drug-testing of
athletes and regularly updates its list of banned substances. It puts out a
number of publications, among them a magazine called Play True. Its most
important accomplishment has been to persuade 191 nations, including the United
States, to sign on to its Anti-Doping Code -- which prohibits most of the
world's top athletes from taking anything on WADA's list of banned substances
and, in the event of violations, generally blocks them from appealing to the
legal systems in their home countries. (Appeals are heard by the
Switzerland-based Court of Arbitration for Sport.)

     WADA's targets -- drug-taking athletes and their coaches, handlers and
chemists -- have plenty of money and science on their side. They invent new
compounds or new methods of masking old drugs, and all Pound and his allies can
do is try to anticipate their moves and try to catch them. The drugs work
remarkably well -- see East German women's track-and-field athletes, circa
1980s, or big-league baseball players, 1990s -- and in ways that often surprise
anti-doping authorities.

     Performance enhancement is like any other kind of underground activity: the
participants are the only ones who know for sure what they're up to. Anabolic
steroids were for weight lifters, home-run hitters and sprinters and would never
help an athlete in an endurance event like the Tour de France, right? Yet that's
what Landis tested positive for. How that might have helped him climb mountains
is unknown -- except, if he took them, by Landis and any enablers. Everybody
thought pitchers never used steroids because they value flexibility more than
strength. Then baseball started checking for steroids, and about half the
positive tests came from pitchers. In university laboratories across the world,
and in places like the United States Department of Defense, scientists are
dreaming up yet new ways to enhance human beings -- steps that may very well be
taken by elite athletes before they are perfected or even considered safe.

     Battling the known and the unknown, and probably outspent and outgunned,
Pound has seized the prerogative of the underdog: fight with whatever you've
got. Fight fair. Or unfair. His best weapon is his brilliance as a formulator of
quotes, his ability to make headlines and call attention to his cause. (He takes
great pride in this; one of his books is titled ''High Impact Quotations.'')
Pound is not a stereotypical Canadian, if you think of Canadians as reticent,
nor is he very lawyerly: he assembles whatever facts he can gather, but when
they're not attainable, sometimes just makes them up.

     Take the ruckus he caused when he charged that one-third of players in the
National Hockey League, or about seven per team, were using illegal performance
enhancers. Sitting in his office, I asked him how he came up with that estimate.
He leaned back in his chair and chuckled, completely unabashed to admit that he
had just invented it. ''It was pick a number,'' he said. ''So it's 20 percent.
Twenty-five percent. Call me a liar.''

     Pound certainly understands that he can be abrasive. What he cannot grasp
is how anyone could not comprehend the rightness, the essentiality, of his
mission. ''How is the sport real if the athletes are not real?'' he asks. He has
heard himself compared to a sheriff in the Wild West, as if that's a bad thing.
''I don't get that. Weren't the sheriffs the good guys?''

     Pound grew up, as he likes to say, in a succession of ''smelly mill towns''
in Canada, wherever his father, an engineer, happened to be working. The last of
them, Ocean Falls, 36 hours north of Vancouver, reachable only by boat, had a
smaller-than-regulation-size indoor pool and a gifted coach who birthed a
succession of great swimmers, the best of them Pound, who by the time he reached
McGill University was known as Dick Pound the Swimmer, a man on his way to a
sixth-place finish in the 100-meter freestyle at the 1960 Summer Games in Rome
and a place of prominence in Montreal and, beyond that, greater Canada.

     Pound will mention his athletic exploits, but usually with a hint of
self-deprecation. ''If you want a pointless statistic,'' he said to me at one
point, ''I am the last Canadian to reach the final of the 100 freestyle.''

     He passed up a chance at the 1964 Olympics and set out on his career. He is
a tax lawyer by trade. His position as chancellor at McGill is largely
ceremonial, although it takes up hundreds of hours a year. He was previously
president of McGill's alumni association and of its board of governors.

     Kip Cobbett, the managing partner at Stikeman Elliott, Pound's law firm,
describes his colleague as almost frighteningly efficient: ''You ask him for a
memo on some complicated topic, it's on your desk 15 minutes later, and it's
perfect.'' It helps that Pound can so quickly access his opinions. ''He is
willing to draw conclusions before other people are willing to draw
conclusions,'' Cobbett says. ''That's not a common thing anymore, whether
because of caution or political correctness.''

     Pound was first elected to the I.O.C. in 1978, and his quarter-century
tenure has been marked by several anomalies -- the most intriguing one his
defense, in 1988, of Ben Johnson, the Canadian sprinter who won the 100-meter
dash at the Summer Games in Seoul but then tested positive for the steroid
stanozolol. Still a decade away from his incarnation as a crusader against
performance-enhancing drugs, Pound represented Johnson before the I.O.C.'s
medical commission after Johnson's positive test -- a job Pound says was foisted
upon him because there was no other lawyer with the Canadian delegation.

     After Johnson assured Pound he was clean, Pound asked him, Could someone
have spiked his post-race beer? No, he got his own beer. Anything unusual in the
collection of his urine sample? No, nothing. ''Give me some bullets,'' Pound
remembers thinking. ''I've got nothing to say.'' But there wasn't much of a
defense to offer. Johnson was stripped of his medal, and it was awarded to the
second-place finisher, the American Carl Lewis.

     On my first visit to see Pound in Montreal, I asked him about Lewis,
arguably the greatest athlete the United States has ever produced. A long jumper
and a sprinter, Lewis won nine gold medals in four Summer Games between 1984 and
1996. ''Carl and I are fairly cheery,'' Pound said. ''I've never gone after him,
other than to say, 'Here are some things that did happen.' ''

     Pound has argued that Lewis should not have been allowed to run in Seoul
should have never been in that 100 final with Ben Johnson because Lewis tested
positive for a banned substance at the U.S. Track and Field Trials earlier that
summer, a result that American officials disregarded. ''USA Track and Field was,
of course, the gold medalist at doing that,'' Pound told me. What Lewis tested
positive for, Pound said, ''was a steroid of some sort. A steroid.''

     Pound is at his most ferocious, and sometimes most reckless -- a one-man
truth squad -- when looking toward the past. But athletes live in the here and
now. They don't like anyone digging into old files and certainly not into old
blood or urine samples.

     In 2003, the U.S. Olympic Committee's former director of drug control
turned over documents to Sports Illustrated and The Orange County Register that
showed Lewis had tested positive in 1988 for banned stimulants found in cold
medicine -- not anabolic steroids. Many would consider that a distinction
without a difference: testing positive, for whatever banned substance, often
brings harsh disciplinary action. But while ephedrine and two other
cold-medicine ingredients found in Lewis's system might improve performance at
high-enough doses, the U.S.O.C. accepted his explanation that he took them to
fight a cold.

     In a telephone interview, Lewis summed up the situation for me: ''The only
thing they have on me is Sudafed. A cold medicine. ... If he had any more, it
would be provided.''

     At one point, Pound claimed he had documents relating to Lewis's failed
tests. ''I have them somewhere,'' he said. ''I wouldn't throw them away.'' But
when I asked him before my second visit if he could dig them out, he said he
couldn't find them. It didn't seem to bother him any more than acknowledging
that his estimate on the percentage of chemically enhanced N.H.L. players was
pretty much a wild guess. Pound's words are sort of like darts: he lets them go,
accumulates points, then throws some more.

     Pound has also kept up a running battle with another American sports icon,
Lance Armstrong, the seven-time Tour de France winner who has fought a seemingly
endless series of allegations that he used erythropoietin, or EPO, which
increases red-blood-cell production and enhances the flow of oxygen to muscles.
Pound has piled on by pointing out what he calls certain ''problematic
statistics'' -- including the fact that the next three men who finished behind
Armstrong in the 2005 tour, his crowning victory, were all investigated for
suspected EPO use and banned from last year's tour.

     Pound leaves it at that. But the implication is clear: Armstrong was riding
with a bad crowd, so how could he be clean and win? Pound told me he likes
Armstrong, or at least he likes the mythic Lance: ''I like the idea of sports
heroes. Nothing I like better.''

     They even talked on the telephone about two years ago, according to Pound,
when Armstrong called to defend cycling. Pound recounted their conversation: ''
'Hello, it's Lance Armstrong. I just want to tell you I love my sport.' And I
said, 'That's great, Lance, but sometimes there's gotta be tough love.' It was
fairly inconsequential, and we left it just short of the Hollywood producer
thing -- we'll do lunch.''

     On matters involving Armstrong, Pound adopts a tone of insinuation often
mixed with sarcasm. When I asked if he thought Armstrong cheated, Pound replied:
''You've got to be kidding. Why would I get into a lawsuit with Lance? Let him
deal with the problems he's created.''

     Armstrong told me he telephoned Pound twice to confront him over his public
comments. He also wrote the I.O.C. demanding that Pound -- whom he referred to
as ''the quotemeister'' and ''a showboat'' when we spoke -- resign or be
removed. Armstrong says he believes Pound and WADA have run roughshod over his
and other athletes' rights, and he is not alone in that criticism. An
investigative article by The Los Angeles Times in December concluded that the
agency is ''a closed, quasi-judicial system without American-style checks and
balances.''

     It is not always clear whether critics are objecting to WADA or Pound. The
organization's Anti-Doping Code, with its limits on athletes' appeals, can
certainly be construed as heavy-handed. But without it, WADA might well be tied
up in an array of legal systems, from federal courts in the United States to
regional courts in China to, conceivably, courts in small towns in Mongolia or
Uzbekistan or wherever some athlete happened to fail a drug test.

     Pound's tendency to go off like a loose cannon is less defensible. Athletes
and their representatives are beginning to challenge the legitimacy of WADA
itself, rather than just the particulars of the charges against them, and Pound
may be fueling that reaction. John Hoberman, a professor of Germanic languages
at the University of Texas who writes extensively on issues of athletic doping,
credits Pound for aggressively raising the profile of his cause but says that he
has been ''fast and loose with historical fact, and with what you can and cannot
say with regard to the verifiable level of drug use among elite athletes.''

     Because Pound engages big targets -- and the biggest ones are in the United
States -- he has repeatedly had to fend off charges that he is somehow
anti-American. ''How could I be?'' he responded when I asked him about this. He
pointed out that his wife is from Chicago and that three of their five children
attended college in the U.S.

     Then, typically, he fired off another salvo. ''There aren't too many people
who are prepared to point the finger at America and say: 'Hey, take off the
[expletive] halo. You're just like everybody else.' That's a problem in America.
America has a singular ability to delude itself.''

     Pound's biggest role in sport, before joining WADA, is one that can be seen
as having helped create the very thing he is now fighting. Pound was the I.O.C.
money man. He recognized that Olympic organizers were undervaluing their product
and, as chairman of the I.O.C.'s television and marketing committee from 1983 to
2001, he dragged the games into the big-money era by negotiating richer deals
with multinationals like Visa, McDonald's, Kodak and Coca-Cola. In 1980, the
I.O.C. got about $100 million for its TV rights; for the Beijing Games in 2008,
the total will be nearly $2 billion.

     Pound was, as well, a trusted adviser to and protege of Juan Antonio
Samaranch, the former I.O.C. president who personally chose him for the WADA
post. Samaranch, a minor official in the Fascist regime of the Spanish dictator
Francisco Franco and a canny politician within the Olympic movement, appointed
Pound in 1999 to lead an internal investigation into bribe-taking and the
awarding of the 2002 Winter Games to Salt Lake City. That task almost certainly
ended any realistic chance Pound had of succeeding his mentor as president;
Pound finished third in the election for the post in 2001.

     Andrew Jennings, a British investigative journalist who has written three
books on the International Olympic Committee, told me he believes Pound so
valued his place within the I.O.C.'s inner circle that he abided the group's
questionable ways of doing business until Samaranch cast him in the role of
reformer. ''He's not corrupt,'' Jennings says. ''He's not seedy. He's too classy
for that. But Dick sat very happily with this ragbag of European princes and
second-rate royalty.''

     Jennings says Pound ''did very well at giving sports away to commercial
interests'' and, by making the games vastly bigger and the money available to
athletes more plentiful, thereby increased temptation and cheating. ''The
sponsor money brought the doping,'' he claims, adding that it also financed the
lavish travels and perks of I.O.C. members. Craig Masback, C.E.O. of USA Track
and Field and a frequent target of Pound's, says that ''it seems logical that
with more money, there is more temptation to make the tragic decision to
cheat.'' But he adds that it may be too pat to equate the money and drugs.
''There was plenty of doping before there was a big financial incentive,''
Masback says.

     Pound, not surprisingly, disputes that more money begat more doping. He
argues that increased revenues made sport more inclusive by enabling the I.O.C.
to make grants to athletic federations in poorer nations. And if the I.O.C. is a
jet-setting social club, underwritten by sponsorship money, Pound, by his own
and other accounts, has never been a big part of it. While other I.O.C. members
hobnobbed at Olympic venues, he says he spent ''18 hours a day in a tent,
baby-sitting sponsors.''

     For all his quotability, Pound is not particularly gregarious and can even
be socially awkward. ''He's warm,'' says Cobbett, his law partner. ''He's
pleasant. He's not aloof. But he's not going to work a room.''

     Pound says that by leading the Salt Lake City probe, he ''saved'' Samaranch
and, by extension, preserved the Olympic brand. ''The reason the sponsors didn't
bail is because I said we would fix the problem.''

     WADA, of course, is also very much about preserving the Olympic brand.
Sponsors want to associate with an idealized, ''Chariots of Fire'' view of
sport, not the doped version. Even when Olympic athletes test positive, Pound
says, ''it oddly enough adds to the luster of the Olympic brand. Even though we
don't always get it right'' -- by this he means the fight for drug-free sport --
''people understand and respect that we are trying, and that's what separates us
from the N.F.L. and N.B.A. and others.''

     WADA is a bureaucratic dynamo -- an organization that in a very short time
has extended its tentacles across the globe, spawned regional anti-doping
organizations, created the anti-doping code and, mainly through Pound himself,
broadcast a strong message that doping is risky. Violators do stand a chance of
being discovered and disciplined. The Bay Area Laboratory Co-Operative steroids
case, which led to the suspension of the elite sprinters Tim Montgomery and
Kelli White -- and cast further suspicion on the slugger Barry Bonds -- was
first cracked open at a WADA-accredited lab in Los Angeles.

     In the previous era of doping, until the fall of the Berlin Wall, cheating
tended to be sponsored by governments and inspired by nationalism -- most
notably in the systemic doping of the East Germans. Current doping is driven
more by economics and organized on the Balco model: a loose confederation of
athletes and coaches, sometimes representing various nations and sports.
Anti-doping officials, Pound among them, assume there are other Balcos out
there, hidden from view.

     What constitutes unfair enhancement for the purpose of athletic achievement
-- as opposed to, say, the latest kinds of training -- is clearer to Pound than
it is to some others. He says he can discern (if not always exactly define) what
violates ''the spirit of sport.'' He told me at one point: ''It's like they used
to say about pornography. You know it when you see it.'' He says ''artificial''
methods should not be introduced into training, and he expresses a deep concern
for health: no one, he says, should have to be ''a chemical stockpile'' in order
to compete.

     The specificity of WADA's list of banned substances -- hundreds of
steroids, stimulants, beta blockers, masking agents and other compounds -- tends
to make the whole anti-doping endeavor look tidier than it really is. Weight and
endurance training, strictly speaking, enhance performance, yet nearly everyone
would agree that they fall within the spirit of sport. But what about scientific
approaches to nutrition? And all those vitamins and nutritional supplements that
athletes gobble by the handful -- believing (or hoping) that they are
performance enhancers?

     Or to consider an example that WADA has recently struggled with -- what
about simulated high-altitude training that boosts the production of red blood
cells? Some athletes are lucky enough to live at altitude; for years, others
with the means to do so have traveled to train at altitude; and lately, a small
number have taken to living and sleeping in hermetically sealed tents or rooms
that simulate high-altitude conditions, what WADA calls ''artificially induced
hypoxic chambers.'' Pound has been troubled by them, considering them, at best,
''tacky.'' The WADA executive board declined for now to bar them at its most
recent meeting last fall, deciding instead to circulate a letter warning of
possible health hazards associated with the chambers.

     Pound, though, only rarely gets bogged down in the loftier questions. He's
a man who identifies a challenge and puts his head down and works. There's a tax
code. There can be a drug code.

     ''Who is not braced for the first renegade human clone?'' Joel Garreau asks
in his book ''Radical Evolution.'' Garreau argues that the next frontier of
technology will be aimed inward, toward human enhancement. This is Pound's real
challenge: The future. Pound's wife, Julie Keith, a well-regarded short-story
writer, says that her husband likes to ''fix things'' -- but you can't fix what
is not yet clearly in view, least of all with bluster and high-impact quotes.

     Garreau's book sounds like really far-out science fiction, but lots of
cutting-edge medicine -- from cochlear implants that allow the deaf to hear to
retinal implants that allow the blind to see to nervous-system hookups that
allow people to directly control their artificial limbs -- would have seemed
just as far-fetched a few decades ago. Given such advances, a current Defense
Department research projectto build ''the metabolically dominant soldier,'' a
warrior who can ''run at Olympic sprint speeds for 15 minutes on one breath of
air,'' hardly seems preposterous. The same goes for a ''pain vaccine'' that will
block pain and inflammation for 30 days or drugs that will allow soldiers to
fight for a week without sleep and still make good decisions.

     Much of the research Garreau uncovered is from the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency, a longtime incubator of innovation, including a
precursor of the Internet. One Darpa researcher refers to himself as a ''combat
zoologist.'' Another, the leader of the metabolically enhanced soldier project,
told Garreau, ''My measure of success for this is that the I.O.C. bans
everything that we do.''

     The references to athletics and the I.O.C. are telling. The ultimate in
physical enhancement is to go beyond known current limits. Elite athletes are
acutely aware of those limits, because they bump up against them daily. At some
point no amount of training makes them stronger, faster or better able to endure
long distances.

     The most advanced medical research, including gene therapy, exists to help
severely compromised people, those with Parkinson's, diabetes, various
muscle-wasting diseases; but the physical elites, those trying to push beyond
the upper limits, often seem as desperate for them. Still, it's hard to disagree
with Ramez Naam, who argues in ''More Than Human'' that researchers should not
put brakes on their work because some might misuse it. ''Scientists cannot draw
a clear line between healing and enhancing,'' Naam writes.

     About four years ago, Pound became aware that a professor at the University
of Pennsylvania, H. Lee Sweeney, was changing the genetic structure of mice to
create supermice with greatly enhanced musculature, which is not lost as they
age. The research is intended to help those with muscular dystrophy, but Sweeney
has received e-mail messages and calls from weight lifters, bodybuilders and
other athletes and coaches -- in one case, from the coach of a high-school
wrestling team -- wanting to know how to adapt the technology for performance
enhancement.

     When Sweeney and other scientists told Pound it was possible -- although
not demonstrably safe -- for an enterprising chemist to appropriate the
published research for athletic purposes, Pound challenged the researchers to
create a test that would detect this particular form of gene doping. I heard
Pound, in a speech at Princeton last fall, tell an audience that such a test was
''close.'' Sweeney, who consults for WADA's gene-doping panel, agrees that
progress is being made but says that Pound may be overstating matters.

     ''They're giving out grants, and those doing the work are making progress
on showing what kind of changes would occur,'' Sweeney explains. ''But none of
this convinced me that these changes are not what you would see with training.
All of the tests have been done on sedentary animals. That's not the right
study. You need an animal that is in training.''

     The scientists Pound expects to devise tests for any new enhancements are,
generally, the same ones doing the research on them -- for purposes of curing
the sick. They're pretty busy. Pound is never going to have more than a small
part of their attention.

     And even as WADA tries to figure out how to detect whether athletes are
using the latest methods of performance enhancement, ever newer research is
coming on line -- not off-in-the-future stuff from Darpa, but knowledge and
techniques that can be applied now. For example, Sweeney says he is currently
experimenting with a myostatin inhibitor in dogs; because myostatin puts the
brakes on IGF-1, a protein that promotes muscle growth, when you inhibit or turn
off the myostatin, the IGF-1 continues to do its work, and dogs get bigger.

     Sweeney says he hopes this science might one day help those with
muscle-wasting diseases, but it is not close to being considered safe for human
use. Still, it could probably be adapted for athletic enhancement even more
easily than the experiments that created the supermice. And the research has all
been published. ''I don't think WADA considers that anyone could be doing this
yet, but they sell the scientific community short if they assume that,'' Sweeney
told me. ''There are serious heart risks associated with this, but athletes, as
far as I can tell, don't care.''

     Sport everywhere is broken down into divisions: you play in the big leagues
or Triple A. With Manchester United in the English Premier League or three rungs
down with Notts County. John Hoberman, the University of Texas professor and the
author of ''Testosterone Dreams,'' is among a growing number of thinkers who
envision, at some point, another way of dividing up sport: the doped and the
undoped. He's not looking forward to it; he just says it's inevitable.

     ''The whole reality of elite sport is that it's vulnerable to doping,''
Hoberman says. ''The N.F.L. is a ticking time bomb. That's been a Pound topic.
He's been a scold to Selig,'' meaning Bud Selig, Major League Baseball's
commissioner. ''Good for him. We need that. But I would say to him: the people
who you want to idealize are not cooperating in very large numbers. And you know
what? When you look at the historical record, they were never terribly
interested in the first place.''

     What Hoberman, who calls himself a doping historian, means is that athletes
have always looked for any edge -- going back to the ancient Greeks, who ate
mushrooms and dried figs to gain a perceived energy boost before competition.
Cyclists, as recently as a half-century ago, were using strychnine, which is a
stimulant as well as a poison. Victor Conte, the Balco mastermind, has said that
the sprinter Tim Montgomery told him that if he could win an Olympic gold medal,
''it wouldn't matter if I died right on the other side of the finish line.''

     Pound knows that some people believe he is naively engaged in an unwinnable
fight; he's just not sure what they expect him to do. ''What do you say?'' he
responds. ''It's too complicated, too big, so let's just give up?'' To simply
permit unfettered doping, he says, is not a solution. ''You could look at them
as just gladiators, these big cartoon characters, but that's somebody's kid out
there. What if your kid had to do that just to play high-school ball?''

     Pound told a freshman seminar at Princeton that WADA was ''created under
Swiss law.'' I don't think the students cared too much about that, but it is the
sort of thing that's important to Pound: rules, and a structure that encodes
them. Maybe what Pound has put in place -- WADA, the anti-doping code, the long
list of banned substances -- will hold for only another decade or two. But he is
determined to keep up the fight for as long as possible.

     ''Here's the deal,'' he says. ''The shot-put weighs this much. The race is
so many laps long. You can't hollow out your shot-put and make it 12 pounds
instead of 16. You don't start before the gun. Run 11 laps instead of 12. And
part of the deal is don't use these drugs. It's kind of an affirmation when you
show up at the starting line. You are making an affirmation that you are playing
the game the way it is supposed to be played.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: (Photograph by Jennifer Karady)
 Amazing Race: Ben Johnson (right) of Canada outruns Carl Lewis (middle) to
100-meter gold in Seoul in 1988. Pound had to defend Johnson after he tested
positive for a steroid because Pound was the only lawyer in the Canadian
delegation. The gold medal was eventually awarded to Lewis. (Photograph By Gary
Kemper/A.P.)

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2007


                              563 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 6, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: LOCAL ; Pg. B-3:C; B-1:R

LENGTH: 748 words

HEADLINE: New lung cancer weapon studied

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   For biologist Ruth Gjerset, curing lung cancer may require concealing a
weapon in a kind of Trojan horse.

   The researcher, who works at the Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center in La Jolla, is
working on ways to hide cancer-fighting genes inside stem cells grown from a
patient's bone marrow. Once injected into the patient, the stem cells would
theoretically carry the anti-cancer genes to the appropriate sites.

   Scientists haven't learned how to consistently use such gene therapy without
causing an immune reaction that rejects the treatment and threatens the life of
the patient.

   Gjerset believes stem cells are part of the answer, and her idea has caught
the attention of a lung cancer foundation in New York City. Joan's Legacy, named
for an NBC News writer who died of lung cancer in 2000, recently awarded Gjerset
$100,000 to advance her studies.

   "We're real excited about the research that Ruth is doing ... and think that
is the kind of approach that's going to actually save lives," said Susan Mantel,
the foundation's executive director.

   Despite setbacks in early experiments with gene therapy, many scientists say
changing the genes inside cancer cells would be a far more sophisticated and
effective way to battle cancer than the current treatment: bombarding the body
with chemotherapy and radiation.

   Lung cancer is a good target for new developments.

   More people die from the disease than any other type of cancer, said the
national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.

   In 2004, nearly 174,000 people in the United States were diagnosed with lung
cancer and more than 160,000 died from the disease, the American Lung
Association estimated.

   Smoking causes about 87 percent of lung cancer cases, according to the
association. Joan's Legacy has worked to raise awareness of lung cancers not
caused by smoking.

   Radon, a naturally occurring gas that comes from rocks and dirt and sometimes
can be found in people's homes, raises a person's risk of getting lung cancer.
Exposure to asbestos, arsenic, chromium and some forms of silica also increases
the risk.

   Alcohol abuse may play a role, too, although it's difficult to say whether
drinking or smoking is the culprit because many people who drink also smoke.

   Anti-smoking campaigns nationwide have been so effective that many people
wrongly believe that if they don't smoke, they won't get lung cancer, Mantel
said.

   But many people who have never smoked, or who quit years ago, still get the
disease. Physicians need to find ways to diagnose the condition earlier and
treat it more effectively, she said.

   "In a way, a lung cancer patient is a victim of the success of the prevention
forces ... (that) left research into effective diagnosis and treatment virtually
untapped," Mantel said.

   Gjerset said she had personal motivation for wanting to combat lung cancer.

   "I have friends who have had lung cancer, and I have a friend right now who
has lung cancer," said Gjerset, who lives in University City. "I would very much
like to be able to use my knowledge to do something for these people."

   Gjerset, a graduate of the University of California San Diego, with a major
in biology and a minor in music, completed her postdoctoral studies at UC San
Francisco's medical school. She then worked as a researcher at the Pasteur
Institute in Paris before joining the Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center 14 years ago.

   The gene therapy technique Gjerset hopes to develop for lung cancer would be
a multistep process.

   First, she would engineer viruses to carry the anti-cancer genes. Then she
would hide those viruses inside mesenchymal stem cells, which are grown from a
sample of a patient's bone marrow. Such stem cells would not be rejected as
foreign objects by the immune system when they're injected back into the
patient.

   Once inside the patient's bloodstream, the stem cells would migrate to
cancerous tumors and release the viruses. The viruses would then infect the
cancer cells, deliver their anti-cancer genes and halt the tumors' growth.

   "I'm hoping that within a two- to three-year period, we'll know pretty well
whether this approach is going to be effective and can be actually used in
patients with cancer," Gjerset said.

   Risk factors for lung cancer

   Smoking causes about 87 percent of lung cancer cases in the United States.
Other factors that heighten a person's risk of getting the disease include
exposure to:

   Radon gas

   Asbestos

   Arsenic

   Some forms of silica

   Chromium

   Sources: American Lung Association, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: 1. Ruth Gjerset, a researcher at the Sidney
Kimmel Cancer Center in La Jolla, is working on ways to hide cancer-fighting
genes inside stem cells grown from a patient's bone marrow. She was recently
awarded $100,000 to advance her studies. 2. Risk factors for lung cancer;
PHOTOBY: 1. Jim Baird / Union-Tribune 2. Sources: American Lung Association,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              564 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2007 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                              All Rights Reserved
                   The Courier-Journal (Louisville, Kentucky)

                             January 1, 2007 Monday
                                 METRO Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 563 words

HEADLINE: New institute to focus on heart

BYLINE: Laura Ungar lungar@courier-journal.com The Courier-Journal

BODY:

   Cutting-edge research will help treat disease

   By Laura Ungar

   lungar@courier-journal.com

   {dcdc}The Courier-Journal

   Heart disease is endemic in Wayne Gunnell's family, so he welcomes the new
Cardiovascular Innovation Institute, which will research and develop treatments
for heart disease &mdash; including cutting-edge devices such as artificial
hearts.

   "It's going to save a lot of lives," said Gunnell, 59, of Eminence, Ky.

   The institute, a partnership between the University of Louisville and Jewish
Hospital & St. Mary's HealthCare, will officially open on Jan. 13 at 302 E.
Muhammad Ali Blvd.

   The medical director will be the physician who performed Gunnell's triple
bypass a decade ago: Dr. Laman Gray, who with Dr. Rob Dowling also implanted the
AbioCor artificial hearts, which were pioneered in Louisville and approved for
sale by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in September.

   The institute builds on Gray and Dowling's work, and will focus on
heart-assist devices as well as gene therapies and other technologies.

   For instance, researchers will continue work on an artificial heart for
children, Gray said. They also will study using implanted sensors to detect
increases in pulmonary artery pressure, so that heart problems can be treated
early. And they will look at helping the heart recover using adult stem cells.

   "I think it's going to be one of the predominant research facilities in the
world," said Gray, professor of surgery and director of the division of thoracic
and cardiovascular surgery at UofL. "It's going to make a huge impact."

   Ronald Greenberg, the institute's executive director, said one thing that
makes the institute unique is that "we are combining the medical research and
the engineering research."

   "By having everybody work together, we're setting the platform for
significant medical breakthroughs," he said.

   Building the institute, which Gray said has five floors above ground and one
underground, has taken about three years and $27.8million, which came from
several sources, including the state, charitable foundations, UofL and Jewish
Hospital.

   Gray said about $55million has been raised altogether, which also will help
pay for other resources, such as endowed chairs.

   Greenberg said the institute will open with about half a dozen doctors and
about 20 Ph.D.-level researchers, including engineers and medical experts
&mdash; a number he expects to double within the year. Graduate students in
health sciences and engineering will aid in the research.

   While the innovation institute won't offer patient care, Gray said it will
offer research designed to move quickly from the laboratory to the bedside.

   Heart disease is the leading cause of death in Kentucky and the United
States. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, it
accounted for 11,808 deaths in Kentucky in 2001 &mdash; about 30percent of the
state's toll.

   DeAnne Downey, Gunnell's 39-year-old daughter, said she was happy to hear
about the institute. Like her father, Downey also had a triple-bypass. And her
grandfather died after a heart attack.

   "There are so many people that die of heart disease," said Downey, of
Eminence. "It's great to know they're putting more money and resources into
research."

   Reporter Laura Ungar can be reached at (502) 582-7190.

   STAFF MAP THAT SHOWS THE LOCATION OF CARDIOVASCULAR INNOVATION INSTITUTE (SEE
LIBRARY MICROFILM OR PDF PAGES)

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2007


                              565 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            December 22, 2006 Friday

SECTION: BRIEFS; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 1275 words

HEADLINE: Business news in brief

BODY:


IN THE REGION

Hersha Hospitality Trust buys seven Hyatt hotels

   Hersha Hospitality Trust, a New Cumberland, Pa., real estate investment
trust, said yesterday that it had agreed to buy seven extended-stay Hyatt
Summerfield Suites hotels for about $169 million. The seven hotels, owned by
LodgeWorks L.P., have 1,005 suites. Hersha said it planned to spend $2.5 million
for renovations at the hotels - in Arizona, California, Maryland, New York,
North Carolina and northern New Jersey - which would continue to be managed by
LodgeWorks. The deal is set to be completed in the first quarter of 2007, and
Hersha chief executive officer Jay H. Shah said the acquisition was expected to
add to his company's earnings for the year.- Paul Schweizer

Beijing Med-Pharm raises $15 million in private sale

   Beijing Med-Pharm Corp., of Plymouth Meeting, said it had raised $15 million
in a private sale of 3.3 million shares of its common stock to a group of
institutional and individual investors. The investors also received five-year
warrants to buy an aggregate of 666,611 shares of common stock at $5.62 a share.
Participants in the financing included Abacus Investments Ltd., Strata Capital
Management, and Ashford Capital Management Inc. Beijing Med-Pharm is a marketing
and distribution company that helps U.S. and other Western drug companies sell
their medicines in China.- Linda Loyd

RheoGene to merge with Intrexon, a Va. biotech

   RheoGene Inc., a Norristown company developing a new gene therapy, announced
plans to merge with a Virginia biotechnology company, Intrexon Corp., in a deal
expected to close in the first quarter. Financial terms were not disclosed. The
combined company will be called Intrexon and based in Blacksburg, Va., with some
"supporting facilities" in Norristown. All RheoGene employees will be offered
jobs with Intrexon, the privately held companies said. The merger still must be
approved by the firms' shareholders, as well as regulatory agencies.- Linda Loyd


PSEG to resume managing two nuclear plants in N.J.

   Public Service Enterprise Group Inc. and Exelon Corp. announced that PSEG
would resume direct management of the Salem and Hope Creek nuclear generating
stations in New Jersey, effective Jan. 1. The companies announced that three
senior Exelon executives who have been at the Salem and Hope Creek plants, under
a services agreement since January 2005, will leave Exelon and become PSEG
employees. The three new PSEG executives are William Levis, who will continue as
chief nuclear officer and become president of PSEG Nuclear, and Thomas Joyce and
George Barnes, who will remain site vice presidents at Salem and Hope Creek,
respectively.- Linda Loyd

Drop in Phila.-area output the greatest in three years

   Manufacturing in the Philadelphia region this month contracted the most in
more than three years as orders continued to fall, a Federal Reserve survey
showed. The Fed Bank of Philadelphia's general economic index fell more than
expected to minus 4.3, the weakest since April 2003, from 5.1 in November. A
number less than zero means that most factories reported business that was
weakening.- Bloomberg News

Merger of Diversified and Ill. executive-recruiting firm

   Diversified Search Ray & Berndtson, a Philadelphia executive-search firm with
$14 million in revenue, will merge with Furst Group, a Rockford, Ill.,
executive-search firm with $5 million in revenue. Diversified will be the
dominant partner in the merger, and the combined company will be based in
Philadelphia. Headed by Judith M. von Seldeneck, Diversified runs the U.S.
operations of Ray & Berndston, a international executive-recruiting company. Bob
Clarke leads the Furst Group, which specializes in health-care recruiting.- Jane
M. Von Bergen

ELSEWHERE

SEC sues three ex-Tyco officers for overstating profit

   The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has sued three former executives
of Tyco International Ltd., accusing them of overstating operating income by
more than $500 million. Former vice president Richard Heger immediately settled
his litigation, agreeing to pay $450,000 without admitting wrongdoing. The SEC
sued Heger, 61; former chief financial officer Richard Power, 58; and Edward
Federman, 53, who was CFO of Tyco's electronics division. "For more than five
years,: the complaint, filed in Manhattan federal court, said, "defendants
engaged in multiple improper accounting practices." - Bloomberg News

Investor makes rival bid for auto-parts-maker Delphi

   Highland Capital Management L.P. proposed a refinancing plan worth up to $4.7
billion to Delphi Corp.'s board, competing with a plan already accepted by the
nation's largest auto-parts-maker earlier this week. On Monday, Delphi said an
investor group led by Appaloosa Management L.P. and Cerberus Capital Management
L.P. would spend as much as $3.4 billion to help the company out of bankruptcy
protection. In a letter to Delphi's board, Highland Capital, a hedge fund based
in Dallas, Texas, that owns 8.9 percent of Delphi, said it opposed the earlier
plan and outlined its own proposal. - AP

Fidelity to pay $42 million penalty to its mutual funds

   Fidelity Investments, the world's largest mutual-fund company, has agreed to
pay $42 million as a penalty to its funds that were put at potential risk by
traders who accepted gifts from brokers. The penalty was recommended by the
funds' independent trustees after their investigation of the matter, Fidelity
chairman Edward Johnson III said in a letter posted on the Boston-based
company's Web site. - Bloomberg News

Judge cuts jury award Merck must pay in Vioxx verdict

   A judge in a Texas widow's lawsuit over the Merck & Co. Inc.'s drug Vioxx
reduced a $32 million jury award to about $7.75 million so that it conformed to
state law. A state jury in April found Merck liable for the death in 2001 of
Leonel Garza, a 71-year-old man who had a fatal heart attack within a month of
taking the since-withdrawn painkiller. After the verdict was issued, the company
was ordered to pay the Garza family $7 million in noneconomic compensatory
damages and $25 million in punitive damages. - AP

American Airlines raises round-trip fares $40

   AMR Corp.'s American Airlines, the world's largest carrier, raised round-trip
fares as much as $40 in most U.S. markets to help offset higher fuel prices. UAL
Corp.'s United Airlines, US Airways Group Inc., Northwest Airlines Corp. and
JetBlue Airways Corp. said they were studying the move. To stay competitive,
carriers generally roll back increases if they aren't matched by rivals. Other
major U.S. airlines "are expected to match over the next several days," said
Jamie Baker, a JPMorgan Securities Inc. analyst. - Bloomberg News

U.S. land for organic agriculture up a million acres

   The amount of land devoted to organic agriculture reached four million acres
last year, up a million acres, with much of the growth coming in Alaskan
rangeland, the U.S. Department of Agriculture said. With 17,818 acres of organic
cropland and 7,284 acres of organic pasture, Pennsylvania was not among the
leaders in total acreage, but was among the largest producers of organic milk,
eggs, chickens and turkeys. Broiler production exploded in Pennsylvania, from
56,100 birds in 2000 to 2.9 million birds last year, or 26 percent of U.S.
production. New Jersey's organic acreage reached nearly 2,487 acres last year.
Alaska had the most organic acreage, but almost all of its 1.46 million acres -
up from 960,000 in 2004 - was rangeland for cattle. California had the most
cropland, with 222,557 acres. Despite the growth, only 0.5 percent of U.S.
cropland and 0.5 percent of pasture was certified organic.

   Harold Brubaker

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2006


                              566 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                           December 21, 2006 Thursday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1051 words

HEADLINE: Hope arises for gains long after stroke Stimulation, therapy tested

BYLINE: Carey Goldberg Globe Staff

BODY:

   It has been nearly 10 years since a stroke left Jim Porter with an
all-but-useless left hand and a weakened left arm. In the old days, he would
have had no options: conventional wisdom long held that after a few months of
recovery, stroke survivors never get any better.

   But in recent years, the stroke rehabilitation field has junked what some
called its "nihilism" as research has increasingly shown that the brain
continues to change all through life - suggesting that under the right
conditions, the nation's 5 million stroke survivors may be able to improve even
years later.

   That shift of thinking brought Porter, now 70, from his Nashua home to
Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital in Boston this week. He hoped to qualify for a
study just getting underway there. Researchers will implant electrical
stimulators just inside the skulls of stroke survivors, aiming to help their
brain rewire enough to restore movement to their arms and hands.

   "I'd go through anything to get my left hand back," Porter said.

   Electrical stimulation is one of many methods that researchers are exploring
as ways to induce these later gains. They include new forms of physical therapy
and intensive exercise tailored for longstanding weakness, drugs, devices, and
even futuristic methods using stem cells or gene therapy.

   In general, "we're still limited in how much we can influence the recovery
process," said Dr. Joel Stein, chief medical officer at Spaulding, who is
overseeing the electrical stimulation study. "But in the last 10 or 15 years,
we've recognized that there is recovery of the brain to a meaningful degree,
and, equally important, we can influence that recovery."

   Just last month, the Journal of the American Medical Association published a
rigorous study of 220 stroke survivors that found that even months after a
stroke, intensive, guided exercise could help restore some hand and arm function
in patients with poorly functioning limbs. Called "constraint-induced movement
therapy," or "forced use," the method involved restraining the patient's "good"
arm in a sling, forcing the "bad" arm to work more during intense, repetitive
exercises.

   An editorial in the journal noted that despite decades of research, it
remains unclear how far stroke survivors can improve with such "interventions
that harness the learning powers of the human brain." But, it said, "a little
more excitement in the lives of stroke survivors can only be good."

   The significance of that study is not the specific method used, but its
demonstration that "intensive, repetitive practice improves recovery," said
Pamela Duncan, a professor of physical therapy about to start work at Duke
University.

   Ultimately, said Duncan, an expert on stroke rehabilitation, late recovery
from stroke is likely to entail "a cocktail of therapies," one that will
inevitably still entail a great deal of work by the patient.

   One hurdle to pursuing these later-stage therapies is that most insurance
currently does not cover rehabilitation after a patient's recovery plateaus.
Typically, once progress stalls, the "recovery" period is officially over, and
reimbursement for rehabilitation ends.

   As research shows ever more convincingly that it is worthwhile for stroke
survivors to keep trying, insurance companies may be persuaded to cover more
treatment. But more likely, a new system will be required to get stroke
survivors the help they need, perhaps through programs based in communities,
Duncan said.

   And even if all the conditions are perfect, she warned, it is important for
patients to realize that there may be limits to their recovery: "If patients
could get up and be totally normal again, we would already have known this," she
said.

   When their brains falter, stroke survivors may someday have the option of
drugs that enhance learning to help improve their recovery, said Dr. Lee
Schwamm, director of acute stroke services at Massachusetts General Hospital.
Perhaps in a decade or so, he said, drugs could accomplish what the implant
does, boosting the brain's ability to rewire.

   Other distant prospects include the use of stem cells and gene therapy to
promote new pathways in the brain, he said.

   Researchers are hoping to learn how to implant stem cells in stroke
survivors' brains and coax them to grow into replacement neurons. But trying to
grow new tissue in the brain carries the risks of causing seizures - already a
danger for stroke survivors - or brain tumors, Schwamm said.

   Jim Porter volunteered for the first major national study of the electrical
stimulation device after hearing it advertised on a Boston radio station. During
the study, the device is turned on while the stroke survivor intensively
exercises a disabled limb. After about two months, the implant is removed, but
any improvements are expected to remain.

   The theory is that low levels of electrical stimulation, when applied during
exercise, can boost brain activity over a necessary threshold in an area next to
a damaged area, helping it take over lost functions, Stein said. Results in
rats, monkeys, and some human patients have been promising, though they brought
partial improvement rather than a cure.

   Porter said he was excited about signing up for the brain implant study,
known by the code-name EVEREST. "I've never been in a study before," he said.

   "Better later than never," Stein replied.

   But when Richard Hughes, the lead physical therapist on the study, put Porter
through a standardized test of arm and hand movements to score his level of
disability, Porter made it only to 21, despite his best efforts.

   He had needed to score 28 to qualify for the study, because people with
intermediate levels of weakness are believed to have better potential to improve
than those with more severe impairments. A 28 is about comparable to the level
of movement required to pick up and drop a washcloth.

   After his rejection, Porter did not hide his disappointment and anxiety:
"It's been 10 years," he said. "I don't know if I'll ever get this arm back. I
was so confident I'd pass this - overconfident."

   But it took him only about a minute to bounce back. "I'm not going to give
up," he said. "I'm not a quitter."

   For more information about the study, call 617-726-9143.

   SIDEBAR:

   STROKE TREATMENT

   SEE MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA

   Carey Goldberg is reachable at goldberg@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: James R. Porter, whose left arm was weakened by a stroke, did exercises
with physical therapist Richard Hughes at Spaulding to see if he was eligible to
participate in the new study.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 2006


                              567 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                           December 21, 2006 Thursday

LENGTH: 301 words

HEADLINE: Norristown gene therapy developer to merge with Va. firm

BYLINE: Linda Loyd, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   RheoGene Inc., a Norristown company developing a new gene therapy, announced
today plans to merge with a Virginia biotechnology company, Intrexon Corp., in a
deal expected to close in the first quarter.

   Financial terms were not disclosed. The combined company will be called
Intrexon and will be based in Blacksburg, Va., with some "supporting facilities"
In Norristown. All RheoGene employees will be offered jobs with Intrexon, the
privately held companies said.

   The merger still must be approved by the companies' shareholders, as well as
regulatory agencies.

   RheoGene was created in 1999 by Philadelphia chemical company Rohm & Haas Co.
and is now owned by the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center which has
financed the company's research and development activities.

   UPMC will retain a significant ownership stake and a seat on the board of the
combined company.

   RheoGene chief executive officer Tom Tillet will be chief operating officer
of the merged cmopany. Intrexon CEO Robert Beech will remain in his current job.

   RheoGene has a technology that turns genes on or off and adjusts gene
activity, which one day could help sufferers of Parkinson's and other diseases.

   Intrexon's technology rapidly assembles novel gene combinations from an
extensive library of natural and engineered DNA modules. "Intrexon and RheoGene
technologies are very complementary," said Beech.

   Earlier this year, RheoGene received $4.2 million from the Michael J. Fox
Foundation for Parkinson's research and to refine and further test its
technique.

   Parkinson's disease causes loss of brain cells that create dopamine, a
chemical vital for motor function. Michael J. Fox, star of the '90s television
series Spin City, revealed in 1998 that he had the disease.

   Contact staff writer Linda Loyd at 215-854-2831 or lloyd@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 2006


                              568 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           December 14, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1545 words

HEADLINE: BRAIN THRUST;
CAN STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION STOP A RARE, FATAL DISEASE?

BYLINE: Ann Parson, Ann Parson is the author of "The Proteus Effect; Stem Cells
and Their Promise for Medicine."

BODY:

   Every illness is cruel. But one that goes beyond cruel is Batten disease, a
fatal brain disorder also known as neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.

   An infant will develop normally for a while, only to start experiencing
seizures and regress neurologically. Fading vision, changing behavior and
deteriorating mobility can alert parents that something is terribly wrong.Then,
piling insult upon injury, as the child's mental decline grows more acute,
parents are apt to encounter "misdiagnose after misdiagnosis," as one mother
described it. Because of its extreme rareness, many doctors fail to identify the
disorder.

   Last month, in an unprecedented and gutsy move, a team of doctors at
Doernbecher Children's Hospital on the campus of Oregon Health and Science began
testing a radical therapy for Batten disease, for which there is currently none.
The phase-one clinical trial involves transplanting neural stem cells into the
brains of six children afflicted by Batten's.

   Surgery on the first child in line for the procedure took place Nov. 14,
according to StemCells Inc., the Palo Alto company that developed the process.
The FDA and a university review board both deemed the procedure acceptable
enough to sign off on it months ago.

   The cells being transplanted -- StemCells' proprietary product "HuCNS-SC" --
were derived from the donated neural tissue of human fetuses. Thus they are the
"adult" kind of stem cell and not those from early embryos.

   Many eyes are on this human trial. To begin with, it's reportedly the first
time that a pure composition of neural stem cells has been used to treat a brain
disorder. According to StemCells Inc., in the past, when Parkinson's patients
have received fetal brain cells, their implants have amounted to a "gemish" of
different cell types.

   StemCells scientists emphasize that the primary objective at this early stage
of testing is to evaluate their procedure's safeness. Still, any indication that
the therapy works would be exhilarating progress not only against Batten
disease, but numerous other lysosomal storage disorders.

   Pioneering families

   Of some 40 lysosomal storage diseases, half are brain-related. Each of these
diseases is due to a specific inherited genetic mutation that robs a person of a
crucial enzyme that recycles a cell's fat and protein "garbage."

   Although Batten disease is extremely rare, the entire clump of lysosomal
storage diseases isn't. The damaging clump, which includes Tay-Sachs, Gaucher,
Schindler and Krabbe's disease, affects 1 in every 5,000 people.

   The hope, in the Oregon trial, is that the brain-infused cells will make
enough of the enzyme that's missing in Batten disease that cells throughout the
brain will no longer become engorged with unrecycled waste.

   The Batten's trial is also attracting attention because, as experimental as
it is, "you have some really thoughtful, really great scientists behind it,"
said Larry Goldstein, director of the UCSD Stem Cell Program. StemCells'
scientific founders include three of the stem cell community's most senior
mavericks: Fred Gage at the Salk Institute, Irving Weissman at Stanford and
David Anderson at the California Institute of Technology.

   Behind the surgery at Doernbecher Children's Hospital are: doctors Robert
Steiner, vice chairman of pediatric research; Nathan Selden, head of the
division of pediatrics neurological surgery; and Thomas Koch, director of
pediatric neurology.

   "These kids are doomed if you don't do anything," noted Goldstein. "It's my
personal opinion that it's legitimate for scientists to take greater risks,
because the alternative is so grim."

   But the trial's foremost "pioneers," pointed out Lance Johnston, executive
director of the Batten Disease Support and Research Association, are the
families willing to enroll. "It's something that a lot of families have had to
do soul-searching over, to subject their children to this," said Johnston. "But
the prospects are very exciting, since it holds the potential to stop the
disease."

   Gauging risks

   Batten disease's three most common forms start in infancy, late infancy and
the teenage years. Children enrolled in the Oregon trial have either the
infantile version, which usually brings death by age 5, or the late-infantile
type, which usually ends life by age 12.

   Some scientists, meanwhile -- who don't want to be identified and seen as
doubting Thomases -- view the Batten trial as seriously high-risk. The brain is
complex, and our knowledge of it scant. Are we, they ask, really ready for this
particular human brain-cell transplant? Will the transferred neural stem cells
specialize into glial cells, as StemCells has indicated? What if they turn into
neurons instead? And what if the cells travel into inappropriate regions of the
brain?

   And though the brain is perceived as an area that doesn't mount an immune
defense against introduced tissue, will that hold true in this case, when neural
cells from a fetus that has no kinship to the patient are put into his or her
brain?

   Evan Snyder, a neurologist pediatrician and director of The Burnham
Institute's Stem Cells and Regeneration Program, offers that he's "less
concerned about the risks" of this particular trial than he is the prospect that
"the cells won't do anything at all" and fail to help the children. The cells
possibly aren't being delivered early enough in the disease process or
"optimally" enough, he said. "There may be no adverse effects, but no positive
effects, either."

   Interestingly, one other phase-one Batten trial, which began in 2004, is
after the same enzyme-replacing effect but by way of an intracranial
gene-therapy approach. A team headed by Ronald Crystal, chairman of the
department of genetic medicine at the Weill Cornell Medical Center, is trying to
replace Batten's mutated gene with a normal copy inside cells. The same outcome
is envisioned: that cells, once genetically corrected, should be able to produce
the missing waste-clearing enzyme.

   Ten children are enrolled. With the exception of one previously reported
death that occurred 45 days after the trial began, there have been "no other
significant adverse events," said Crystal, who expects to report on the trial's
outcome within the year.

   At a September teleconference with members of the media, StemCells and Oregon
University staff said that, after the initial surgery, a surgery will follow
approximately every 30 days until all six of the phase-one children have
received transplants. With the aid of a targeting computer, the surgeons will
drill small incisions in the skull and, using thin needles, pass cells though
these incisions into multiple locations in the left and right hemispheres as
well as the brain's ventricular fluid. The doctors did not mention exactly where
these locations are.

   "The locations are essentially based on two factors," said Selden. "One, we'd
like to distribute the neural stem cells around the brain such that they can get
to as much brain tissue as possible. And then secondly, we want to avoid making
the injections directly into eloquent brain areas where the injection procedure
itself might have a higher risk of causing a deficit, such as, for example,
primary motor cortex would be a bad place to inject because it could cause
weakness or paralysis of a part of the body."

   Two doses of cells, the team said, will be used and their effects on the
brain disease eventually compared. The children's cognitive, communicative,
behavioral and motor functions will be closely monitored, with brain MRI,
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, EEG and seizure frequency providing additional
measurements.

   Whether the implanted cells produce the desired effect of making enough of
the absent enzyme to stop Batten's incorrigible march probably won't be known
for one, two or even more years.

   Proof-of-concept for the Oregon trial, said the researchers, has originated
from mouse studies that show that when human neural cells are placed in the
mouse brain, they secrete the enzyme that Batten children so desperately need;
moreover, as levels of the enzyme increase, abnormal lysosomal storage material
recedes.

   Additional reasons for going out on an experimental limb include successful
enzyme replacement therapies for lysosomal storage diseases in other parts of
the body. Since the early 1990s, for instance, doctors have been using enzyme
replacement therapy to halt and even reverse Gaucher disease, which affects
mostly bone marrow, liver and spleen. The protein that Gaucher patients lack
(glucocerebroside) is administered intravenously.

   Back in 1995, Evan Snyder (then at Harvard Medical School) and colleagues
reported in the journal Nature that they had successfully cured mice of a
disease similar to Sly disease in humans, a lysosomal storage disorder. Cells
from healthy newborns were transferred to the brains of sick mice. This
essentially gave the mice the enzyme their bodies needed.

   Snyder was quoted in The New York Times as saying, "This is like a bone
marrow transplant, but in the brain." As he continues to insist today, there's
reason to think that with further study and application, such brain-cell
transplant strategies should someday save the lives of many youngsters.

   Ann Parson is the author of "The Proteus Effect; Stem Cells and Their Promise
for Medicine."

GRAPHIC: 4 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Oregon physicians have inserted stem cells into
the brain of one child with Batten disease, an always fatal, untreatable brain
disorder. They plan to do the same with five other children within the coming
weeks. 2. The cells used in the Batten disease experiment were derived from the
donated neural tissue of human fetuses. They are the "adult" kind of stem cell
and not those from early embryos. 3,4. The team at Oregon's Doernbecher
Children's Hospital includes Dr. Robert Steiner (left), vice chairman of
pediatric research, and Nathan Selden, head of the division of pediatrics
neurological surgery.; PHOTOBY: 2. Getty Images 3,4. Oregon Health and Science

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2006


                              569 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2006 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                           December 14, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 789 words

HEADLINE: Tulane medical dean resigns;
Chicago hospital system woos him

BYLINE: By John Pope, Staff writer

BODY:

   Dr. Paul Whelton, Tulane University's senior vice president for health
sciences and dean of its medical school, will leave New Orleans at the end of
January to become president of the Loyola University Health System in suburban
Chicago.

   Whelton, 60, whose resignation was announced Wednesday, leaves a university
that is rebuilding after flooding from Hurricane Katrina forced the medical
school to move to Texas for nearly 5 months. Although Charity Hospital, its
principal teaching hospital, still faces an uncertain future, Tulane's medical
programs have returned to New Orleans.

   In Illinois, Whelton will lead an enterprise that includes a medical school,
a nursing school and a network of hospitals and specialty clinics throughout the
Chicago area.

   It has about 6,800 full-time employees and an annual budget of nearly $800
million, Loyola spokeswoman Joanne Swanson said.

   "It's an exciting opportunity," said Whelton, who came to Tulane from Johns
Hopkins University in January 1997 to be dean of the School of Public Health and
Tropical Medicine.

   But, he said, "It's very hard to leave New Orleans. It's a great place, and
it's been a terrific 10 years."

   During Whelton's Tulane tenure, the School of Public Health and Tropical
Medicine moved into new quarters, several degree programs were added, clinics
were established throughout the New Orleans area and the number of grants to
researchers soared.

   "Paul has made a lot of very significant contributions to Tulane and New
Orleans for the past decade, and we're a lot better institution for his having
been at Tulane," Tulane President Scott Cowen said Wednesday.

   Although he said he is sad at the departure of "a great colleague," Cowen
said, "I'm pleased because I know he's wanted this kind of opportunity. He's at
the right age and the right point in his career to take it on."

   Cowen said he will appoint an interim medical school dean by the end of the
first week in January.

   He hasn't decided yet whether the permanent dean will also inherit Whelton's
vice presidency, or whether he will seek a separate individual for that post, he
said.

   "That's one of the issues I want to spend some time reflecting on," Cowen
said.

   Dr. Larry Hollier, Whelton's counterpart at Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center in New Orleans, also holds two jobs: He is medical school dean
and the center's chancellor.

   When Whelton starts at Loyola Feb. 1, he will succeed Dr. Anthony Barbato,
who is retiring after 18 years.

   "We believe that Dr. Whelton is a great fit for Loyola, with his proven
leadership in both the administrative arena and in the world of academic
medicine," said Dan Walsh, chairman of the health system's board of directors.

   Walsh also was leader of the search committee that picked Whelton from a
field of about 300 candidates.

   Whelton, an native of Ireland with degrees in medicine and epidemiology, was
dean of the School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine until 1999, when he
was named Tulane's senior vice president of health sciences, a job that gave him
jurisdiction over that school, the medical school and the National Primate
Research Center.

   The two schools have a total of about 2,100 students, Tulane spokesman Mike
Strecker said.

   The Health Sciences Center has about 500 full-time employees, he said, and an
annual budget of about $350 million.

   In addition to the vice presidency, Whelton twice served as medical school
dean  --  in 2000 and 2001, and since 2005.

   While he was at Tulane, the university acquired Lakeside Hospital and
increased its network of clinics.

   "We were focused downtown," he said. "Now we have a somewhat different
strategic plan. The mothership is downtown, but we have a front door in many
different areas."

   Also, partnerships with LSU were enhanced, including the gene-therapy
initiative, the cancer consortium and the BioInnovation Center.

   During that period, the amount of money Tulane researchers received from the
National Institutes of Health more than tripled, Whelton said, and the
university's ranking rose by more than 30 points.

   In the fiscal year that ended June 30, 2005, three months before Katrina
struck, Tulane researchers amassed a record $110 million in grant money.

   Earlier this year, Tulane established a $20 million fund to help scientists
develop promising concepts and to pay for work that researchers were unable to
do when Hurricane Katrina forced Tulane to close from August 2005 until early
January.

   Even though Whelton is moving to Chicago, he will maintain New Orleans ties.

   He said he and his wife, Shelagh, are keeping their Uptown home. Moreover,
their children, Seamus and Megan, are students in Tulane's medical school.

   . . . . . . .

   John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or at (504) 826-3317.

GRAPHIC: Dr. Paul Whelton 'It's very hard to leave New Orleans' [384837]

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2006


                              570 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            December 11, 2006 Monday

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 729 words

HEADLINE: Carnal An idea about E.D. finally gains respect

BYLINE: Faye Flam, Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Back in the early '90s, Arnold Melman and George Christ were mocked when they
suggested using gene therapy to cure impotence. After all, the futuristic form
of medicine requires an often dangerous intervention into the genetic code. At
the time, gene therapy was inspiring dreams of curing cancer, AIDS, and
debilitating childhood diseases - not something as "frivolous" as erectile
dysfunction.

   Melman and Christ saw some vindication last week when the results of their
first human study ran in the December issue of the journal Human Gene Therapy,
along with a glowing editorial by University of Pennsylvania bioethicist Arthur
Caplan.

   And so, the dream of gene therapy might find its first widespread application
in helping people have sex - a twist of events that opens new questions about
medicine's role in enhancing the quality of life and our society's willingness
to accept risks for the advancement of technology.

   Melman, a urologist from Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York,
says he realized years ago that impotence often stems from a breakdown of
communication between cells.

   Here's how it works: To get an erection, the smooth muscle cells in the penis
must communicate with each other. A gene called hMaxi-K is activated, creating a
protein that goes out to the cell membrane and opens a window, allowing
potassium to flow out of a cell. That's just the first step in a cascade of
events. The exiting potassium ions leave the cells with a net negative charge,
which triggers yet another protein to close another window to keep calcium ions
in.

   The closing of that calcium channel prompts the smooth muscle cells to relax,
which then lets blood flow in and get trapped. When a man doesn't have an
erection, the muscle cells are contracted, says Melman.

   It's more complicated than most people appreciate, he says, which is why so
many men have problems getting it to work on cue.

   One way to intervene, he and colleague Christ realized, would be to get more
of the gene hMaxi-K into the penis muscle cells, thus helping prime the pump.

   But over the years other researchers discovered the hard way the hazards of
editing the human genetic code.

   Some, such as James Wilson at the University of Pennsylvania, were infusing
patients with modified cold viruses carrying "corrective" genes. In 1999 that
technique led to a fatal immune reaction in 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, who was
being treated for a non-fatal genetic disease.

   Other viral carriers spliced new DNA directly into patients' existing genetic
code in a way that triggered cancer.

   "But this is not that kind of gene therapy," says Christ, a professor in the
department of regenerative medicine at Wake Forest University in North Carolina.
He and Melman weren't using viruses but instead injecting so-called naked DNA
into cells, where it would help make more of the erection protein.

   Other researchers around the country are using a similar technique to deliver
vaccines without the risks associated with viruses.

   After years of treating rats, Melman, Christ and collaborators got FDA
approval to treat 11 men who had been completely impotent for months and didn't
respond to Viagra or its relatives. These men got a shot of the DNA directly
into the corpus cavernosum - described as "expandable tissue along the length of
the penis that fills with blood during erection."

   Christ insists it really doesn't hurt.

   The first volunteers got a low dose, designed to test safety. They reported
no side effects, and two said it put them back in action.

   Isn't gene therapy a little too risky and invasive for something like
erectile dysfunction? "You've obviously never had the problem," says Melman, who
assured me they had no shortage of willing volunteers.

   Penn's Art Caplan says he first thought gene therapy seemed a bit aggressive
for erectile dysfunction but then thought better of it. "It's easy to laugh
about it or say it's trivial, but people kill themselves because they're
impotent."

   Beyond that, Caplan says, this research will help scientists better
understand how to harness gene therapy while using it on an organ that's more
accessible than, say, the liver.

   And whatever knowledge is gained could bring all those other scientists a
little closer to their dreams of modifying the book of life to cure cancer, AIDS
and other killers.

   Contact staff writer Faye Flam at 215-854-4977 or fflam@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2006


                              571 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                            December 10, 2006 Sunday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SUNDAY NOW; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: A MUMBLE IN THE JUNGLE SOUNDS AN ALARM

BYLINE: BY SHERRYL CONNELLY

BODY:

   NEXT

   By Michael Crichton

   HarperCollins,

   $27.95

   Michael Crichton isn't for scaredy-babies. In "Next," he carouses through the
landscape of scientific development, presenting one frightening possibility
after another. He intercuts so many plots that it's possible to lose some
threads, but the talking orangutan who swears at tourists in both Dutch and
French will likely stay in mind.

   "Next" deals with the profusion of biotechnology and its freakish by-products
both in the physical and moral sense. A researcher illicitly inserts his genes
into an embryo in the laboratory and, four years later, discovers he has a "son"
- part human, part chimp. The adorable "boy" is in the habit of asking everyone,
"Are you my mother?"

   In one of Crichton's multiple scenarios, a middle-aged man learns his body is
no longer his property. Frank Burnet recovered from leukemia, but his doctor
insisted on further treatments. Without his knowledge, he was being harvested.
His cells, rich in cancer-fighting agents, were sold to a start-up company,
BioGen Research, for $6 billion. The company claimed exclusive rights to any
Burnet genetic material, including that of his daughter and grandson as well.

   In his "faction" - "This novel is fiction, except for the parts that aren't"
- Crichton sounds more than one alarm. The patenting of genes, he says, severely
hampers research and can make medical therapies prohibitively expensive. It also
encourages weird science, in which the public is oversold on the potential of
genetic ­benefits that come with an odd lot of "conditions." In "Next," a rogue
researcher runs amok with a gene that ages drug addicts and the chronically
irresponsible into mature behavior. Unfortunately, they die young, having grown
prematurely old.

   Crichton warns that our system is infested with obstacles to bringing
life-saving therapies to market, and with roadblocks on spreading alerts about
hazardous new treatments. In other words, his message is every bit as serious as
sudden death ... or the prolonged, torturous variety.

   But Crichton learned long ago how to break bad news for popular consumption.
He has never been an entirely deft writer, and "Next" is clumsy at times. But
still, the invention of a malicious transgenic parrot who blackmails a cheating
husband by reproducing the vocals of his affair, in front of the betrayed
spouse, is quite ­witty. At least we hope it's pure invention. It is, isn't it,
Michael?

   E-mail: sconnelly@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2006


                              572 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            December 8, 2006 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1467 words

HEADLINE: Accepting the risk in hopes of a cure;
2 area Parkinson's patients take part in Ceregene's experimental treatment

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In the dry language of clinical trial records, they are known as Patient 2
and Patient 12.

   But the quest by Vista chiropractor Brad Arens and San Diego real estate
broker David Kruest to find some relief from Parkinson's disease, a chronic,
degenerative central nervous system disorder that can leave sufferers with
little or no mobility, is anything but prosaic.

   It's a tale of a cutting-edge experimental therapy in a field fraught with
medical disasters. Of a profit-motivated biotechnology company that managed to
tap into a nonprofit cash stream with Hollywood cachet. And of desperate
patients who suddenly find themselves pioneers, helping to push forward the
scientific frontier.

   Along the way, Arens and Kruest got a rare glimpse of how risky science moves
forward despite the brutal financial climate for early-stage drug companies, and
how self-interest and altruism can sometimes find common ground in the search
for medical cures.

   For Kruest, who this year became the last of 12 patients to undergo brain
surgery to implant an experimental gene therapy developed by San Diego's
Ceregene, the quest began 13 years ago while driving his car to work.

   Glancing down, Kruest watched with foreboding as his hand scuttled like a
spider across the seat.

   "It walked across the seat of its own power, like it had a life of its own,"
Kruest, 59, recalled. "I looked at it and thought `what the heck is this about?'
"

   It turned out, after an initial misdiagnosis, to be Parkinson's disease, a
disorder that occurs when nerve cells, or neurons, in a part of the brain called
the substantia nigra lose their ability to produce dopamine, a crucial chemical
messenger. When that happens, the neurons in the brain fire erratically,
affecting control of limbs and speech.

   Though the disease progresses differently with each patient, problems such as
tremors, muscle rigidity, shuffling gait, blurred speech, mood disturbances and
memory loss take hold.

   "When I found out that I had a neurological disease that was degenerative and
incurable, I tried to forget about it. Not deny it, but not give it any power,"
Kruest said. "But it was always there, always present. I was always hurting. I
tried to keep on moving, but I kept on moving slower."

   Over the years, Kruest tried various medications and enrolled in a clinical
trial to gain access to one experimental drug, which was eventually approved for
use in the United States.

   But every therapy was "cosmetic," helping to relieve symptoms but not slow or
halt the progress of the disease, Kruest said.

   Then, last December, Kruest read about a fellow San Diegan who was among the
first to undergo Ceregene's experimental gene therapy, and Kruest decided to
track him down.

   Arens, 53, wasn't surprised to get the call. Ever since his name appeared in
a media account of the therapy, numerous people with Parkinson's disease had
contacted him, seeking information.

   Arens' battle with Parkinson's disease began in the fall of 2001, when he
began having trouble with his coordination. While helping out with his
childrens' school, another parent, a sharp-eyed nurse, observed his fumbling and
suggested that he look into the possibility of Parkinson's disease.

   The nurse proved to be correct, and Arens searched the Internet and consulted
experts seeking options.

   "The pathway of this disease is not a pretty picture, so I was trying to do
everything I could to interrupt its progression," Arens said. Ultimately, Arens
hit on the Ceregene therapy after failing to qualify for another study.

   "For me it became a risk-benefit ratio, and I came to the decision it was the
best thing for me," said Arens, who believes his gait and coordination have
greatly improved. "I still think it is the best thing for Parkinson's. Compared
to everything else out there, this is the hottest ticket in town."

   Kruest quizzed Arens about the procedure, and what he learned initially gave
him pause. The treatment required surgeons to drill a small hole in his skull
and inject, in a specific portion of the brain, a viral shell that carried a
gene that codes for a protein called neurturin.

   Once in the brain, certain cells take up the gene, which tells the cells to
start making the potent nervous system growth factor. In animal studies,
neurturin has been shown to not only protect brain cells afflicted by a
Parkinson's-like disorder, but to ease symptoms and repair some of the damage.

   But something that looks promising in animal studies can turn out to be a big
stretch for humans, as the field of gene therapy has proved in the past.

   The well-publicized death in 1999 of Jesse Gelsinger, a teenager who died
during a gene therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania, was a huge
setback for the field. For a time, that failure and others halted clinical
trials, dried up funding and led to the demise of several gene therapy
companies.

   Ceregene was founded in January 2001, soon after the peak of the
biotechnology boom. But unlike the genomic start-ups that captured the
imagination of investors at the time, the tiny biotech was never going to have
an easy path.

   Yet a year earlier, the popular actor Michael J. Fox announced his retirement
from the ABC television show "Spin City" and the establishment of the Michael J.
Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research.

   Fox had publicly disclosed earlier that he had been diagnosed with
Parkinson's disease, and he dedicated his foundation to finding a cure for the
disorder within a decade.

   For cash-strapped Ceregene, which is also developing gene therapies for
Alzheimer's disease and Huntington's disease, it was a match made in heaven.
With a tight budget, clinical studies often have to be "cut to the bare bones"
of what is essential for product development, said Raymond Bartus, Ceregene
chief operating officer.

   Last year, the foundation gave a $740,000 grant to Ceregene to help fund the
Phase 1 clinical trial. Bartus said the grant allowed the company to enhance the
depth of the scientific data, including funding special brain scans to help
measure whether biological changes occurred.

   For Kruest, the fact that the foundation found Ceregene's work worthy of
funding also helped assuage some concerns.

   "I was very scared: They were going to open you up, do some injections and
seal you up," Kruest said with a rueful laugh. "It was like these guys were
going to have a party in my head, and I'm not invited."

   Encouraged by Arens experience and his own research, Kruest decided to become
Patient 12, the last to be treated in the pilot study at the University of
California San Francisco.

   In October, the results were presented at a scientific meeting in Chicago.
The Ceregene therapy appeared to reduce symptoms of Parkinson's disease by 40
percent, and the patients -- all of whom were advanced in their disease and
couldn't control it with standard medicines -- reported a doubling of good
quality `on' time, when they felt they were functioning well, according to
self-reported diaries.

   Based on those results, the Fox foundation decided to chip in an additional
$1.9 million to fund a larger Phase 2 clinical study that will test the
treatment in 50 volunteers.

   Dr. William Marks, UCSF associate professor of neurology and principal
investigator for the study, said the Phase 1 results should be viewed with
caution. The small size of the study, and the lack of a nontreated "control"
group to compare results against, makes it impossible to draw definitive
conclusions.

   "One needs to strike a balance between scientific excitement at what this
approach could bring, and the need to prove it first," said Marks, who will lead
the planned Phase 2 study, which will be placebo-controlled.

   "But whether it ends up working or not, we are entering a new medical era,"
Marks said. "Just the fact that we can explore these options is very exciting
for the medical community and our patients."

   Marks commended the collaborative effort between Ceregene and the Fox
foundation, and praised the patients who took part in the groundbreaking study.

   "It takes a special sort of person to move forward with an experimental
treatment before it has been proven," Marks said. "These two people have
provided important information that will allow another 50 people to be involved
in this.

   "Sure, they want to get better themselves, but they also want to contribute
to the welfare of others," Marks said. "I think it is important to know there is
hope out there, innovative stuff going on, and these people help give that
hope."

   Kruest, who is now pursuing activities like swimming that he couldn't do
before, said he wants to figure out what to do with the rest of his life. It's
an exercise he thought he had abandoned.

   "Before, there was no tomorrow, it was a degenerative disease that can kill
you," said Kruest. "Today, there is a tomorrow. I can see that."

GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. David Kruest underwent an experimental gene
therapy this year to treat his Parkinson's disease. He believes his symptoms
have improved since the treatment. 2. Brad Arens of Vista practiced yoga in his
living room as part of an exercise regimen to battle effects of Parkinson's
disease. 3. Brad Arens was the second of 12 patients treated in a gene therapy
study.; PHOTOBY: 1. Scott Linnett / Union-Tribune 2,3. Don Kohlbauer /
Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2006


                              573 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Cincinnati Enquirer (Ohio)

                           December 7, 2006 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 419 words

HEADLINE: Children's joins cancer consortium

BYLINE: Annie Hall Enquirer Columbus Bureau

BODY:

   Four hospitals appeal to state for more money for research

   COLUMBUS - Every day, an average of 72 people in Ohio die from cancer, and
another 168 are diagnosed with cancer.

   Cancer is the second-leading cause of death for Ohio adults after heart
disease and the second-leading cause of death in children after deaths resulting
from injuries.

   But four Ohio hospitals have created a consortium, unlike any other in the
country, to battle the disease.

   Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, the Ohio State University
Comprehensive Cancer Center, the Cleveland Clinic and the Case Comprehensive
Cancer Center have joined to take advantage of their respective expertise in
diagnosis and treatment to better attack cancer in Ohio.

   The National Cancer Institute (NCI) has given the consortium its highest
recognition for excellence, Comprehensive Cancer Centers.

   Experts from the four institutions made a presentation to a state legislative
cancer caucus Wednesday in an attempt to get more money for cancer research in
the next state budget.

   The chairman of the caucus, Rep. Jim Carmichael, R-Wooster, called the
presenting doctors "the heavy hitters in cancer research in the country."

   Dr. David Williams of Children's Hospital said that Ohio faculties are in
national leadership roles and that the state is poised to take a nationwide
leadership position in cancer research and treatment.

   Williams said that the most common form of childhood cancer is leukemia and
85 percent of those children are cured of the disease. After a relapse of
childhood leukemia, however, most of the children die. In addition, only 20
percent of children with brain tumors or some types of solid tumors survive.

   Cure rates, however, are slowing, Williams said, with standard chemotherapy
approaches.

   The challenges are to bring children new targeted drugs developed through
advances in cancer biology research which is made possible by increased
collaborations among institutions to cover the costs of the enormous
infrastructure and research required.

   The four NCI Cancer Centers are opening the pipeline to cure childhood cancer
through new drug development initiatives including cell and gene therapies, he
said.

   Dr. Stan Gerson of Case Comprehensive Cancer Center said geographic clusters
such as the urban centers of Cincinnati and Cleveland are not being served well.
Gerson said special outreach programs are needed in Amish and other rural
regions; Hispanic and African-American communities; and among the elderly.

   E-mail alhall1@aol.com

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2007


                              574 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2006 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                           December 7, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: EAST JEFFERSON PICAYUNE; To the Rim; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 845 words

HEADLINE: Local women attend conference in Tokyo

BYLINE: Tina Soong

BODY:

   Bette Lyons, Carol Smith and Hiroko Tsuzuki, representing New Orleans Ikebana
Chapter 97, participated in the ninth World Conference of Ikebana International
held Oct. 27-30 in Tokyo.

   Ikebana International is a nonprofit cultural organization founded in 1956 by
the late Ellen Gorden Allen. It is dedicated to the promotion and appreciation
of ikebana, the Japanese art of flower arrangement. It aims to promote
understanding and friendship between Japan and other countries and to unite the
peoples of the world through their mutual love of nature and enjoyment of
ikebana.

   Today, Ikebana International has spread to more than 60 countries with 165
chapters and membership of more than 8,500, said Lyons, president of Chapter 97.

   The world conference is held every five years in Japan. The theme of 2006
meeting was "Retracing the Foot Steps of Ikebana and Lighting the Path of the
Future." Lyons said 1,100 people representing 60 countries celebrated the 50th
anniversary of the organization. Our Chapter 97 celebrated it 40th anniversary
this year.

   Before the convention, the New Orleans delegation attended workshops in Kyoto
and traveled to Tokyo by train.

   At the convention, seven major Ikebana schools demonstrated elaborate floral
arrangements, using regional and seasonal materials in their workshops. Other
exhibits were set throughout the host hotel.

   "Ikebana is a disciplined art form in which nature and humanity are brought
together," Lyons said. "The audience at the conference was treated to the beauty
and splendor from the intricate characteristics of nature by observing the
floral arrangements of the head masters."

   For information on Chapter 97, call Lyons at (985) 876-3474.

   . . . . . . .

   Urvi Shah, Ms. India, has been chosen Ms. Asian Pacific American Society
(APAS) for 2006.

   Jordon Cressy, Ms. Philippines, was first runner-up, and Kelly Bui, Mss
Vietnam, was second runner-up, at the society's Nov. 4 gala. Other contestants
were Olivia Basyuni, Ms. Indonesia; Wan Ching Wu, Ms. Taiwan; Min Jung Suh, Ms.
Korea; Juko Yano, Ms. Japan; and Bei Zeng, Ms. China.

   Shah has studied classical Indian dances both in India and at Sunanda's
Performing Art Center in New Orleans, which moved to Houston after Katrina. She
has performed classical Indian dances in various areas of India and at Asian
Pacific American Society events. She helped to raise money for the rebuilding of
the Hindu Temple in New Orleans.

   In addition to being a homemaker, Shah helps at the family-owned businesses,
the International Wholesale Club and International Market.

   Cressy is a sophomore English major at Louisiana State University. She has
taken singing lessons for 12 years and has composed her own piano music. After
Katrina, Cressy volunteered in Baton Rouge, assisting in reuniting families
separated during the hurricane evacuation. In the future, she said she hopes to
attend law school while continuing to compose and sing.

   Bui, born in Vietnam, received her degree in marketing from the University of
New Orleans. She is the youth coordinator of the Boat People SOS After-School
Programs, both at the BoDe Temple and St. Joseph Church. The programs are
designed to empower Vietnamese American youths to become productive, responsible
and active members in the community.

   Basyuni, born in Indonesia, is a sophomore majoring in psychology at UNO. She
participates in many civic and cultural activities, including performing
Indonesian dances at Asian Pacific American Society events and other occasions.
Her hobbies include music, dancing, reading and cooking.

   Wu, born in Taiwan, is a junior at Tulane University and is majoring in
biological chemistry. She was the recipient of Tulane Founder's Scholarship,
Louisiana Battle Abbey Newcomb scholarship and a Louisiana TOPS scholarship. Her
community service projects include Boy's Hope and Girl's'Hope, the Boo at the
Zoo to benefit the Audubon Institute, Habitat for Humanity, the Louisiana SPCA,
Children's Hospital and the Light the Night Walk for Leukemia and Lymphoma
Society.

   Yano holds a bachelor of science degree in biological sciences from UNO,
serves as a research associate at the LSU Health Sciences Center. She is an
active member of the Japan Club of New Orleans and her hobbies include scuba
diving, music and cooking.

   Suh, who holds a Ph.D. in physiology from Pusan National University in Korea,
is an exchange scholar in the Department of Gene Therapy at Tulane University,
where she researches stem cell biology. She enjoys jogging, swimming and
cooking.

   Zen, educated in China, the United Kingdom and now the United States, is
working toward her Ph.D. in financial economics at UNO. She received her degree
in financial management from Wuhan University in China, where she was given the
outstanding student scholarship throughout her undergraduate years. She received
her master's in international financial analysis from the University of
Newcastle in England.

   . . . . . . .

   Members of the Asian and Pacific-American communities in the New Orleans area
may e-mail news items to Tina Soong at tsoongtotherim@aol.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2006


                              575 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2006 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           December 6, 2006 Wednesday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Science; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 673 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH NOTEBOOK Monkeys in study benefit from reduced-calorie diet

BYLINE: Compiled by Richard L. Hill, The Oregonian

BODY:

   RESEARCH NOTEBOOK

   Monkeys in study benefit from reduced-calorie diet

   A study at Oregon Health & Science University has found that a
reduced-calorie diet delays aging of the immune system in monkeys.

   Researchers with OHSU's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute studied 42 adult
rhesus macaque monkeys. Some were fed a healthy, reduced-calorie diet while
others received a traditional monkey diet. Their immune systems were then
monitored for 42 months.

   The researchers tracked two forms of T cells, which are white blood cells
that detect and fight disease. The team --led by Janko Nikolich-Zugich, a senior
scientist at the institute and the Oregon National Primate Research Center
--found that the monkeys on the reduced-calorie diet had better T-cell function
than the other monkeys.

   Some studies have found that a reduced-calorie diet may increase life span.
The findings are in Tuesday's issue of the Proceedings of the National Academies
of Science.

   Ancient astro calculator was precise, scientists say

   Researchers say they have cracked the workings of a more than 2,000-year-old
computer called the Antikythera Mechanism, a clocklike astronomical calculator
dating from the second century B.C.

   Remnants of a broken wooden and bronze case containing more than 30 gears
were found by divers exploring a shipwreck off the Greek island of Antikythera
in 1902.

   Mike Edmunds and Tony Freeth of Cardiff University in Britain, who led the
team, said the device was able to track astronomical movements with remarkable
precision. The calculator was able to follow the movements of the moon and the
sun, predict eclipses and even re-create the moon's irregular orbit.

   The findings suggest that Greek technology was more advanced than previously
thought. No other civilization is known to have created anything as complicated
for another 1,000 years. The mechanism is in more than 80 pieces and stored in
precisely controlled conditions in Athens.

   The scientists unveiled their findings last week in Athens and in the current
issue of the journal Nature.

   Gene discovery may add more polish to your apples

   Australian researchers have located the gene that controls the color of
apples, a discovery they say may lead to bright new varieties.

   The color is from anthocyanins, compounds responsible for blue and red colors
in many flowers and fruits, said Mandy Walker, a researcher with the
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization. "Anthocyanins are
also antioxidants with healthy attributes, giving us plenty of reasons to study
how the biochemical pathway leading to apple color is regulated."

   That knowledge will give plant breeders the opportunity to speed up apple
breeding and select for improved color, Walker said.

   'Skinny scope' preferred for chronic-heartburn exam

   Screening people with chronic heartburn or pre-cancer of the esophagus with a
so-called "skinny scope" is as accurate, less expensive and less risky than a
traditional technique, say researchers at the Oregon Health & Science University
Digestive Health Center.

   Dr. Blair A. Jobe and his colleagues found that participants preferred the
skinny-scope procedure to the standard screening method --sedated upper
endoscopy --for upper digestive disease.

   A sedated upper endoscopy involves using an endoscope, 9.8 millimeters (.385
inch) in diameter, which is passed through the mouth and throat to the
esophagus, stomach and small intestine. The procedure requires intravenous
sedation.

   The skinny-scope procedure is done in an office setting and does not require
sedation. Patients inhale an anesthetic that numbs their nasal passages and
throat. The clinician then passes a smaller-caliber endoscope --4.9 mm (.193
inch) in diameter --through the nose, pharynx and throat.

   The study included 134 adults with symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux
disease. More than 70 percent said they would choose the skinny scope over the
conventional approach in future exams.

   The findings are in the November issue of the American Journal of
Gastroenterology.

   -- Compiled by Richard L. Hill

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2006


                              576 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   USA TODAY

                            December 5, 2006 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 4C

LENGTH: 495 words

HEADLINE: With gene-doping test, science ahead of curve in race against cheaters

BYLINE: Sal Ruibal

BODY:

   The recent history of anti-doping efforts has been a series of reactions to a
cascade of new performance-enhancing drugs. The news that scientists have found
a way to detect gene doping is the rare case in which a test is being developed
before an actual offense has occurred: So far, there is no evidence of the
existence of gene-doping labs.

   "But we were not born yesterday, and we know the resources it would take,"
says Theodore Friedmann, considered the world's top gene-doping expert. "A
committed person who really wants to do it can use gene-doping methods. The
resources are not really great. With a small number of people and a molecular
biology facility, it would not be that difficult."

   At a very basic level, genes are the software of your body.

   Like the computer software that runs your e-mail and web browsing, genes
contain codes that tell every cell in your body what to do and when to do it.

   Gene transfer is similar to making changes to the software in your personal
computer.

   If you have a faulty code that is preventing your computer from working
properly, a computer technician can insert a segment of corrected code to make
things right. When that's done with genetic material instead of computer code
and in a living organism instead of a computer, that's gene therapy.

   If your computer is otherwise OK, but you want to upgrade its performance in
a certain area, you can download software that overrides your existing codes to
make your computer more powerful, or you can add tools.

   Medical researchers are already exploring this new world that promises cures
for a multitude of ills, including muscle-wasting diseases.

   Overriding otherwise healthy normal genetics with a gene transfer to improve
strength or endurance is the basis of enhancement gene therapy, or in the case
of athletes, gene doping. Since the first word of the performance-building
potential of the technique became known in 2000, athletes have clamored to take
part in trials. Today, the possibility exists that some are ready to make the
leap by illegal means.

   Both legal and illicit gene transfers are made by chemically attaching the
new section of DNA to what's called a "vector virus," some related to common
cold viruses, which are injected into the body. The viruses replicate and copy
themselves onto existing gene strands.

   But unlike crashing your PC with bad software, the consequences of botched
gene doping can be catastrophic, even fatal.

   "The sad fact is that if someone in this field wants to do it, they are not
going to worry about all the quality control and the ethical aspects of
manipulating people genetically," Friedmann says.

   Despite the emergence of a detection test, demand will still drive the
creation of illicit gene transfer networks.

   "There are many labs, thousands of labs in the world that could do the work,"
he says. "We know that there is a tremendous amount of money in sport. And where
there is money and a will to do it, some people are going to do it."

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              577 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   USA TODAY

                            December 5, 2006 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 424 words

HEADLINE: A new tool to catch sports cheats;
Test for gene doping could be breakthrough

BYLINE: Sal Ruibal

BODY:

   For the first time in decades, scientists are saying they have an edge
against sports cheaters: a test for gene doping.

   Gene doping had been considered a potentially perfect crime, undetectable by
the usual methods because the technique uses a person's own body to create the
changes at a cellular level.

   A spinoff from legitimate gene therapy, it involves inserting a selected
portion of DNA code -- for larger muscles or increased stamina -- into the body.
It can be detected only through the use of MRI scans or multiple muscle
biopsies, which are impractical in a sports setting.

   But Theodore Friedmann, the world's leading expert on gene doping, told USA
TODAY that researchers have found a way to detect the practice through blood,
urine and saliva, the same methods used to detect illegal steroids, EPO
(erythropoietin) blood boosters and testosterone.

   "It is very early in the development of the technology, and we are encouraged
that it is proving possible to find evidence of foreign genes being introduced
into a body," says Friedmann, director of the Center for Molecular Genetics at
the University of California-San Diego School of Medicine. "The problem is not
only to develop a test but to validate it to the point where you can take it to
an arbitration or court and prove that's the only explanation for the finding
that you made. That's very difficult, and that's going to take a lot more work."

   Experts have predicted that the August 2008 Beijing Olympics would be the
first arena in which genetically altered athletes might compete, but no evidence
of gene doping labs has emerged.

   Friedmann says the new test might not be officially sanctioned by 2008, "but
that should provide no comfort for people who want to use illicit methods to
dope."

   That's because the World Anti-Doping Code allows samples to be tested for up
to eight years after an event.

   "I'm not overly concerned that the test will probably not be validated by
2008," says Dick Pound, chairman of the World Anti-Doping Agency.

   "The most important thing for me is to make sure we have the test right. If
we have to give up six months or even a year to make sure all of those
scientific ends are tied up, I'm not worried about it."

   The real payoff, Pound says, is the advantage enforcers are finally gaining
after losing ground to hard-to-detect high-tech drugs and masking agents.

   "With genetic doping, we've tried to keep up with the curve as that science
develops and not let the genie out of the bottle as the sports movement did in
the '60s, '70s, '80s and even the '90s."

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, Color, USA TODAY (Illustration)

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              578 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   USA TODAY

                          November 29, 2006 Wednesday
                                 FIRST EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 1057 words

HEADLINE: New technology helps drug firm rise from dead;
Gene-targeting drugs unite Sirna, Merck

BYLINE: Julie Schmit

BODY:

   SAN FRANCISCO -- Almost four years ago, the company that would become Sirna
Therapeutics had burned through $200 million of investors' money  and was still
far from producing a marketable drug.

   Its stock, which had soared to $60 in 2000, was trading below $1. The company
was in danger of being delisted from Nasdaq. Its CEO couldn't unload the company
for even $10 million.

   Fast-forward to a month ago when drug giant Merck announced plans to pay $1.1
billion for essentially the same company that still doesn't expect to bring a
drug to market for at least five years.

   What changed? Excitement over RNAi, a technology that might one day be used
to treat diseases from cancer to diabetes to hepatitis by turning off the genes
that play a role in the disease.

   RNA interference, or RNAi, is a natural mechanism cells use to fight viruses.
It is already being used to study the function of genes.

   Sirna's hope is that new  RNAi drugs could hijack the mechanism to stop genes
from making disease-causing proteins before a disease takes hold or in an early
stage when treatment may be more effective.

   "We aim to turn off the faucet, rather than mop up afterward," as traditional
drugs do, says Bharat  Chowrira,  Sirna vice president.

   Only discovered in 1998, RNAi's potential has steadily gained credence. Last
month, the discovering scientists Andrew Fire and Craig Mello  won a Nobel
Prize. In 2002, Science magazine dubbed it the breakthrough of the year.

   "It was a huge discovery," says John Rossi, a molecular biologist at the City
of Hope National Medical Center in California. He compares its significance with
the 1953 discovery of the structure of DNA, which carries genetic information
from one generation to the other.

   Survival plan

   It is part "luck and wisdom" that Sirna, with 85 employees, is even alive
much less about to be Merck's biggest acquisition in 13 years, says Sirna CEO
Howard Robin.

   Founded in 1992 as Ribozyme Pharmaceuticals,  the company had concentrated on
a different way of disrupting the ability of mutant genes to produce harmful
proteins.

   But years later, the company was far from having drugs in the pipeline that
were likely to become moneymakers. In 2001, Robin was recruited from drugmaker
Berlex Laboratories to change that.

   Robin spent months assessing the company's strengths. He found great
scientists but no realistic business plan. He also found a company well versed
in RNAi, which was then largely confined to discussions in scientific journals.

   Robin decided the company had two choices: concentrate only on RNAi or be
sold for pennies on the dollar. "There was great silence," Robin says, after he
delivered that message to the company's board. "It was uncomfortable for them to
think that they had spent 10 years and $200 million on what was essentially a
failure."

   The board bought into Robin's survival plan. To conserve capital, half the
workers were let go. Robin pursued dozens of potential investors. None bit.
"Everyone found RNAi fascinating but not investment-worthy," says Robin.

   Then, Robin approached venture capitalists, who at that time were not
inclined to invest in companies that had already gone public, as Ribozyme had in
1996.

   The outlook was bleak: The dot-com collapse had sent venture capitalists
running for cover. Finally, Robin sold the RNAi story to five firms that
invested $48  million in early 2003. The company was renamed Sirna Therapeutics
with a focus on RNAi.

   "The assets were good, and the low price was hard to pass up," says investor
James Niedel. Then a venture partner at the Sprout Group,  which supplied $24
million, Niedel characterized RNAi in a 2003 press release as a technology "with
the potential to change the practice of medicine."

   Investors' gain

   The venture capitalists, who took an 88%  ownership stake in Sirna, stand to
turn a tidy profit.

   Merck's $1.1 billion cash offer, worth $13 a share, came in at a 102%
premium over Sirna's stock price before the deal was announced on  Oct. 30.

   Other RNAi companies have also seen their values rise with interest in RNAi.
Shares of Alnylam Pharmaceuticals closed Tuesday at $20.86, up from a 52-week
low of $11.29. CytRx  shares closed at $1.68, up from a 52-week low of 87 cents.
Acuity Pharmaceuticals, a private company, also does RNAi work.

   Now, it's up to Merck to make good for its shareholders. The company in 2001
spent $620 million to buy Rosetta Inpharmatics,  a research company that
identifies genes and their functions. With RNAi, Merck could further narrow
which genes  are key players in causing particular diseases.

   "We believe RNAi could significantly change the way we go about and discover
drugs," says Peter Kim,  president of Merck Research Laboratories. He also says
it could become a new way to treat diseases, as Sirna is attempting to do with
drugs in development.

   Deutsche Bank pharmaceutical analyst Barbara Ryan applauds the deal because
of RNAi's research potential. She's less sure that any of Sirna's drugs under
development will reach market.

   The company is partnering with drugmaker Allergan on a drug to treat
age-related macular degeneration, a leading cause of blindness. That drug is
furthest along in Sirna's pipeline. The company is also partnering with
GlaxoSmithKline on respiratory diseases. And Sirna is pursuing drugs for
hepatitis, diabetes and unwanted hair growth.

   The biggest issue for RNAi drugs is figuring out how to get them where
they're needed in the body without giving patients high doses toxic to them,
says molecular biologist Rossi. Another risk: accidentally shutting down genes
that aren't being targeted.

   Skepticism is warranted. Previous biotech therapies that made for
groundbreaking science have faltered in drug development.

   Ribozyme Pharmaceuticals was founded on Nobel Prize-winning science. The
field of gene therapy, in which scientists attempt to correct defective genes
responsible for disease development, entered clinical trials 16 years ago and
has yet to result in a Food and Drug Administration-approved drug. Ribozyme and
Sirna combined have losses of $304 million. For the first three quarters of
2006, Sirna reported losses of $28 million.

   Even Sirna CEO Robin admits that some Sirna drugs may not make it to market.
But he's "100% certain" that other RNAi drugs will.

   "This technology will change medicine," he says. "That's why it's so
important."

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2006


                              579 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 25, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: ZONE; Pg. NC-5; NI-5

LENGTH: 522 words

HEADLINE: North Coast Singers concert to feature kids and adults

BYLINE: Amanda Daniels, TODAY'S LOCAL NEWS

BODY:

   Music always provided Mary Lou Gibson with joy and an outlet for creativity
and emotional release.

   As such, she encourages her children to sing. Gibson and two of her daughters
will perform together for the first time at the Wishes and Candles holiday
concert next month.

   "Music just takes me to another place," said Gibson, a virologist who lives
in Carlsbad.

   She hopes to impart the same appreciation to her children.

   One daughter, Eve Paxton, will sing a solo at the 14th annual holiday
concert, which will be in Encinitas and is put on by the North Coast Singers.

   Gibson's youngest daughter, Grace Paxton, will perform with Brioso, a group
within the North Coast Singers.

   It was only recently the choral was opened to parents, said director Sally
Dean.

   This will be the premier performance with parents and their children singing
together.

   The adult chorus includes 37 singers, about a third of whom are men, Dean
said. The addition of adult male voices adds a new texture to the music, she
said.

   The child and teen singers number 130.

   Dean said she is looking forward to the moment when all 167 performers will
be on stage during the Dec. 15 concert.

   "There's a certain energy in the human voice singing together, and something
about a large choir, particularly," Dean said.

   She sang in glee clubs throughout high school and college and sings with the
San Diego Lyric Opera Chorus. She also plays the violin, as do Eve and Grace.

   "My goal is to get a string trio of us all together," she said.

   The ladies sing around the house and Gibson often performs at nursing homes,
she said.

   "Music has so much emotion to it," she said. "That's what I'm trying to show
the kids, too. They may not feel that now, but in the future, if they can look
at music as an emotional release, it's very rewarding."

   Gibson owns a gene-therapy company and spends her days emersed in science, so
singing is her creative outlet.

   Dean said she initiated the adult chorus because of parents such as Gibson,
who has been involved behind-the-scenes of the North Coast Singers for seven
years while her children were a part of it.

   "I thought, 'I bet most of the parents have some experience in choral
singing; it's probably so near to their heart because of that,'" she said.

   So she sent out an e-mail.

   "I've never had such a response," Dean said.

   She hopes to open the adult portion of the chorus to everyone in the
community next year, she said.

   The parents will close the concert together with their children with the
songs "Wishes and Candles" by composer Stephen Paulus and "Go Where I Send
Thee!," a traditional gospel.

   "Wishes and candles, they warm the season," is a line from the first song,
which expresses the nondenominational mood Dean wanted for the holiday concert.

   The gospel is a rousing number that should get the audience on its feet, she
said.

   What: Wishes and Candles: A Holiday Concert Celebrating Life, Peace and Hope

   When: 7 p.m. Dec. 13 and 15

   Where: San Dieguito United Methodist Church, 170 Calle Magdalena, Encinitas

   Cost: Adults, $12; students, $5

   Information: (760) 944-1866 or www.northcoastsingers.com Amanda Daniels:
(760) 752-6735; amanda.daniels@tlnews.net

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: The North Coast Singers stood in front of the Coronado
Bridge in 2005. The choral group will be giving a holiday concert Dec. 13 and 15
at the San Dieguito United Methodist Church. Carlsbad resident Eve Paxton is
second from left, top row.; PHOTOBY: Courtesy of Miel Burnett

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2006


                              580 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                    Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock)

                           November 23, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: ARKANSAS

LENGTH: 1431 words

HEADLINE: Scientist seeks continuous blood-sugar monitor UA researcher working
on skin implant or contact lens to simplify diabetics' lives

BYLINE: BY TRACIE DUNGAN ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:

   FAYETTEVILLE - Kaiming Ye envisions a day when diabetics use an implanted
biosensor or protein-coated contact lens he invents to read their blood sugar
levels.

   The contact lens or the chip, implanted under the skin, would continuously
monitor sweat or tears for glucose readings.

   The sensors would detect and measure glucose, then transmit the readings
wirelessly to a cell phone, iPod or computer so patients could keep a record and
e-mail the information to physicians. All without ever pricking a finger for
blood, he said.

   Ye, a scientist at the University of Arkansas at Fayetteville, is in the
early stages of his research. So this application is likely years away, said the
assistant professor of biomedical engineering in UA's College of Engineering.

   He and his team must first fine-tune an array of glucoseindicator proteins
that can take readings from within a living cell, unlike current methods of
reading sugar in the blood.

   Scientists haven't perfected a way to measure intracellular glucose
concentrations without destroying cells, he said. Inserting ultra-tiny,
nanoscale computer chips or biosensors in a living cell won't work.

   "It would kill the cell," Ye said.

   So he has genetically engineered proteins that show promise for serving as
living computer chips, so to speak.

   His proteins would coat the contact lens. For the implantable skin sensor,
many protein molecules would be embedded in the device, which would be about the
diameter of a strand of hair.

   Most recently, Ye's work has been funded by a $220,000 grant from the
Arkansas Biosciences Institute and a $200,000 grant from the National Institutes
of Health.

   UNIQUE APPROACH

   Richard Baird, who helps direct grant funding at the National Institutes of
Health's National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, said there
is no shortage of researchers looking at new devices for monitoring blood sugar.

   "What's interesting about Dr. Ye's research is that he's focusing on
monitoring the glucose levels in living cells in real time," Baird said. "And
that's somewhat unusual." Ashok Saxena, the UA Engineering College's dean, said
Ye's research could vastly reduce diabetes complications that incapacitate
patients.

   "Dr. Ye's research will allow patients to accurately and continuously monitor
diabetes with minimum disruption in everyday routines, so proper treatment can
be administered at the right time," Saxena said.

   The American Diabetes Association estimates 14.6 million people in the United
States have been diagnosed with diabetes, a disease in which the body does not
produce or properly use insulin, and another 6.2 million are unaware they have
it.

   Ye uses techniques that fall under the umbrella of recombinant DNA
technologies.

   Jared Garrett, a Fayetteville High School alumnus who is one of four graduate
students now working with Ye on the project at UA, said the subcutaneous skin
implants might one day allow noninvasive glucose measurement.

   "This protein that we're working on, the wavelength of light that we use to
excite it, and the wavelength that it emits is in the near-infrared region of
the light spectrum," said Garrett, who is seeking his master's in biomedical
engineering. "Near-infrared light can travel through tissue." So instead of
sticking yourself to get blood for a glucose test, "you'd just shine a light on
there," he said.

   "This is very far forward, but the implications of this would be
noninvasive." Ye came to UA in November 2004 from the University of Pittsburgh,
where he and a fellow bioengineering professor, Jerome Schultz, first
genetically engineered a protein that could signal its glucose reading via a
fluorescent glow.

   FLUORESCING JELLYFISH

   The protein was formed from three biologically derived proteins, which were
linked together in the shape of a thumb and forefinger.

   They engineered the middle protein from E. coli bacteria in which "all the
toxic genes have been removed," Ye said. This protein binds to glucose.

   One of the outer proteins emits a green fluorescent light. It was derived
from a fluorescent protein coded in the DNA of jellyfish, which can emit a
fluorescent glow naturally under certain conditions. The other outer protein is
a "mutant" protein formed from the jellyfish protein, Ye said, and it emits a
yellow fluorescent light.

   "Dr. Ye added those in just the right DNA sequence for the glucose-binding
protein," Garrett, said.

   Schultz told the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette in 2003 that he relied on Ye's
expertise in molecular biology to develop the protein: "I may have some ideas,
but he can actually figure out the genetics of how to do it." The initial
protein turned out to have some drawbacks at detecting intracellular glucose
levels, so Ye's team modified it to be a better measure.

   The first measuring system used a process known as "fluorescence resonance
energy transfer." The scientists viewed the fluorescent light, which measured
the energy intensity released by the protein molecules after their exposure to
light.

   In this process, the "thumb" and "forefinger" proteins opened and closed,
glowing intermittently as they sensed changing glucose levels and signaling one
another.

   The new system Ye is developing at UA is called "fluorescence lifetime
microscopy imaging." Ye uses a camera attached to a microscope and computer
software to visually read the signals. The new process measures the time it
takes for molecules to go from a high- to a low-energy state, which Ye refers to
as the "lifetime." The proteins glow when they are in a low energy state - which
means they are lacking glucose at that moment, he said. In the new process, the
proteins fluoresce using blue and yellow colors, with yellow signaling higher
glucose concentrations.

   GLUCOSE MAGNETS

   Ye's team will test the glucose indicator proteins they engineer using the
new imaging system. They are now testing on human epithelial cells - flakes from
the top layer of skin.

   On a recent day in the lab, Ye peered through a microscope at the skin
flakes, which are suspended in a bright candy-red liquid medium.

   "I will show you what the cell look like - it will be very beautiful," he
said. Part of what he is studying is how healthy the cells look.

   Under magnification, the cell clusters resemble holly embossed on a gold foil
Christmas card.

   The next step is testing the protein on human skeletal muscle cells. As Ye
examined them under the microscope, their image was projected on a computer
screen. They resemble star clusters in space.

   "This kind of cell houses 80 percent of the glucose in the body," Ye said.
When functioning correctly, these cells sense the presence of insulin and begin
the uptake of glucose from the bloodstream.

   One of Ye's goals is to better understand the relationship between the
intracellular glucose and glucose in blood. Monitoring both glucose levels
simultaneously will help him and other biomedical-engineering scientists better
understand cells' metabolic control systems for using blood sugar.

   He also believes studying cellular glucose will yield more precise,
scientific diagnosis of prediabetes cases, rather than physicians' current
method of estimating this based on body index, diagnosis of physical symptoms,
family history and other factors.

   If these experiments succeed, Ye plans to apply for more NIH grants to fund
live animal testing, which would involve using the new proteins to monitor the
glucose levels in mice. His other research projects at UA include work on
embryonic and adult stem cells in mice, gene therapy, tissue engineering and
organ regeneration.

   The tests on mice might lead to testing in humans.

   Ye already is working with other scientists on his research, Saxena said. One
of them is Vijay Varadan, who holds the title of distinguished professor of
electrical engineering at UA and is also a professor of neurosurgery at the
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences.

   "Dr. Ye is already working with Dr. Varadan on the wireless transmission of
the data," the dean said. UAMS professor and cardiologist Dr. Jay Mehta, who has
done work in gene therapy, is another research partner.

   Other human applications that Ye said he hopes to achieve for his proteins
include new drug screening methods for diabetes treatment and new ways to
deliver drugs or insulin in the body.

   The same contact lens or biosensors implanted subcutaneously in a person's
skin that monitor glucose might be engineered to contain a "smart" insulin pump
that could deliver the hormone as the sensor requires, he said.

   "So the insulin could be controlled," Ye said. "It would tell you how much,
and when."

   This article was published 11/23/2006

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2006


                              581 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                    Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock)

                           November 23, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: NORTHWEST ARKANSAS

LENGTH: 1431 words

HEADLINE: Fayetteville Scientist out to better diabetics' lives Aim: Steady
blood sugar monitoring

BYLINE: BY TRACIE DUNGAN ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:

   FAYETTEVILLE - Kaiming Ye envisions a day when diabetics use an implanted
biosensor or protein-coated contact lens he invents to read their blood sugar
levels.

   The contact lens or the chip, implanted under the skin, would continuously
monitor sweat or tears for glucose readings.

   The sensors would detect and measure glucose, then transmit the readings
wirelessly to a cell phone, iPod or computer so patients could keep a record and
e-mail the information to physicians. All without ever pricking a finger for
blood, he said.

   Ye, a scientist at the University of Arkansas at Fayetteville, is in the
early stages of his research. So this application is likely years away, said the
assistant professor of biomedical engineering in UA's College of Engineering.

   He and his team must first fine-tune an array of glucoseindicator proteins
that can take readings from within a living cell, unlike current methods of
reading sugar in the blood.

   Scientists haven't perfected a way to measure intracellular glucose
concentrations without destroying cells, he said. Inserting ultra-tiny,
nanoscale computer chips or biosensors in a living cell won't work.

   "It would kill the cell," Ye said.

   So he has genetically engineered proteins that show promise for serving as
living computer chips, so to speak.

   His proteins would coat the contact lens. For the implantable skin sensor,
many protein molecules would be embedded in the device, which would be about the
diameter of a strand of hair.

   Most recently, Ye's work has been funded by a $220,000 grant from the
Arkansas Biosciences Institute and a $200,000 grant from the National Institutes
of Health.

   UNIQUE APPROACH Richard Baird, who helps direct grant funding at the National
Institutes of Health's National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering, said there is no shortage of researchers looking at new devices
for monitoring blood sugar.

   "What's interesting about Dr. Ye's research is that he's focusing on
monitoring the glucose levels in living cells in real time," Baird said. "And
that's somewhat unusual." Ashok Saxena, the UA Engineering College's dean, said
Ye's research could vastly reduce diabetes complications that incapacitate
patients.

   "Dr. Ye's research will allow patients to accurately and continuously monitor
diabetes with minimum disruption in everyday routines, so proper treatment can
be administered at the right time," Saxena said.

   The American Diabetes Association estimates 14.6 million people in the United
States have been diagnosed with diabetes, a disease in which the body does not
produce or properly use insulin, and another 6.2 million are unaware they have
it.

   Ye uses techniques that fall under the umbrella of recombinant DNA
technologies.

   Jared Garrett, a Fayetteville High School alumnus who is one of four graduate
students now working with Ye on the project at UA, said the subcutaneous skin
implants might one day allow noninvasive glucose measurement.

   "This protein that we're working on, the wavelength of light that we use to
excite it, and the wavelength that it emits is in the near-infrared region of
the light spectrum," said Garrett, who is seeking his master's in biomedical
engineering. "Nearinfrared light can travel through tissue." So instead of
sticking yourself to get blood for a glucose test, "you'd just shine a light on
there," he said.

   "This is very far forward, but the implications of this would be
noninvasive." Ye came to UA in November 2004 from the University of Pittsburgh,
where he and a fellow bioengineering professor, Jerome Schultz, first
genetically engineered a protein that could signal its glucose reading via a
fluorescent glow.

   FLUORESCING JELLYFISH The protein was formed from three biologically derived
proteins, which were linked together in the shape of a thumb and forefinger.

   They engineered the middle protein from E. coli bacteria in which "all the
toxic genes have been removed," Ye said.

   This protein binds to glucose.

   One of the outer proteins emits a green fluorescent light. It was derived
from a fluorescent protein coded in the DNA of jellyfish, which can emit a
fluorescent glow naturally under certain conditions.

   The other outer protein is a "mutant" protein formed from the jellyfish
protein, Ye said, and it emits a yellow fluorescent light.

   "Dr. Ye added those in just the right DNA sequence for the glucose-binding
protein," Garrett, said.

   Schultz told the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette in 2003 that he relied on Ye's
expertise in molecular biology to develop the protein: "I may have some ideas,
but he can actually figure out the genetics of how to do it." The initial
protein turned out to have some drawbacks at detecting intracellular glucose
levels, so Ye's team modified it to be a better measure.

   The first measuring system used a process known as "fluorescence resonance
energy transfer." The scientists viewed the fluorescent light, which measured
the energy intensity released by the protein molecules after their exposure to
light.

   In this process, the "thumb" and "forefinger" proteins opened and closed,
glowing intermittently as they sensed changing glucose levels and signaling one
another.

   The new system Ye is developing at UA is called "fluorescence lifetime
microscopy imaging." Ye uses a camera attached to a microscope and computer
software to visually read the signals.

   The new process measures the time it takes for molecules to go from a high-
to a low-energy state, which Ye refers to as the "lifetime." The proteins glow
when they are in a low energy state - which means they are lacking glucose at
that moment, he said. In the new process, the proteins fluoresce using blue and
yellow colors, with yellow signaling higher glucose concentrations.

   GLUCOSE MAGNETS Ye's team will test the glucose indicator proteins they
engineer using the new imaging system. They are now testing on human epithelial
cells - flakes from the top layer of skin.

   On a recent day in the lab, Ye peered through a microscope at the skin
flakes, which are suspended in a bright candy-red liquid medium.

   "I will show you what the cell look like - it will be very beautiful," he
said. Part of what he is studying is how healthy the cells look.

   Under magnification, the cell clusters resemble holly embossed on a gold foil
Christmas card.

   The next step is testing the protein on human skeletal muscle cells. As Ye
examined them under the microscope, their image was projected on a computer
screen.

   They resemble star clusters in space.

   "This kind of cell houses 80 percent of the glucose in the body," Ye said.
When functioning correctly, these cells sense the presence of insulin and begin
the uptake of glucose from the bloodstream.

   One of Ye's goals is to better understand the relationship between the
intracellular glucose and glucose in blood. Monitoring both glucose levels
simultaneously will help him and other biomedical-engineering scientists better
understand cells' metabolic control systems for using blood sugar.

   He also believes studying cellular glucose will yield more precise,
scientific diagnosis of prediabetes cases, rather than physicians' current
method of estimating this based on body index, diagnosis of physical symptoms,
family history and other factors.

   If these experiments succeed, Ye plans to apply for more NIH grants to fund
live animal testing, which would involve using the new proteins to monitor the
glucose levels in mice. His other research projects at UA include work on
embryonic and adult stem cells in mice, gene therapy, tissue engineering and
organ regeneration.

   The tests on mice might lead to testing in humans.

   Ye already is working with other scientists on his research, Saxena said.

   One of them is Vijay Varadan, who holds the title of distinguished professor
of electrical engineering at UA and is also a professor of neurosurgery at the
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences.

   "Dr. Ye is already working with Dr. Varadan on the wireless transmission of
the data," the dean said. UAMS professor and cardiologist Dr. Jay Mehta, who has
done work in gene therapy, is another research partner.

   Other human applications that Ye said he hopes to achieve for his proteins
include new drug screening methods for diabetes treatment and new ways to
deliver drugs or insulin in the body.

   The same contact lens or biosensors implanted subcutaneously in a person's
skin that monitor glucose might be engineered to contain a "smart" insulin pump
that could deliver the hormone as the sensor requires, he said.

   "So the insulin could be controlled," Ye said. "It would tell you how much,
and when."

   This article was published 11/23/2006

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2006


                              582 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2006 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           November 16, 2006 Thursday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Local; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1418 words

HEADLINE: Tanasbourne Hitting new heights

BYLINE: ESMERALDA BERMUDEZ, The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary - A daring vision in Tanasbourne to build a high-rise community of
10,000 people could make the suburbs the new urban jungle

   What do you think about plans to create a new, high-rise community in the
Tanasbourne area? Do you think it will become reality? Is there anything about
the proposal that concerns you? Leave a voice message at 503-778-7893, send an
e-mail to west@news.oregonian.com, write to The Oregonian, 1675 S.W. Marlow
Ave., Suite 325, Portland, OR 97225, or send a fax to 503-294-5902. If you'd
like us to publish your response, please include your full name, daytime phone
number and hometown.

   ESMERALDA BERMUDEZ

   HILLSBORO --Imagine: New York City in Hillsboro.

   Or a scaled-down version of Central Park and all the sky-high buildings that
surround it, at least.

   Five years from now, the idea could start to become reality as the city plans
to build an urban community that would attract an expected 10,000 new residents
to nearly 600 acres in the Tanasbourne area. Buildings would reach 20 stories
tall, and the budget could call for billions of dollars.

   "This project is a wake-up call for people who don't think of us as part of
the Portland metro area," Mayor Tom Hughes said. "It asks them, 'Have you
thought of Hillsboro lately?' "

   Known for bold moves such as Orenco Station and Intel's Ronler Acres campus,
city planners want this area south of Northwest Cornell Road to be a magnet for
high-income singles and two-person households seeking alternatives to Portland.

   Planners and developers face a series of hurdles with the project, including
its high cost, securing land rights and lining up public and private funding
--not to mention the traffic congestion that could result when developments go
in.

   Although it's not clear whether the real estate market will take to the idea,
the time and location are ideal to build the project, officials said. The
planning area consists of plenty of vacant and redevelopable lots, it's next to
Beaverton, it's easily accessible for U.S. 26 commuters, and it's adjacent to
Tanasbourne, one of the county's most popular hubs with its variety of stores
and restaurants.

   Also, in coming years 7,000 to 8,000 new employees are expected to settle in
Hillsboro as companies such as Genentech and Standard Insurance build sites and
Kaiser Permanente plans a new hospital a few blocks from the planned new
community. And in the next 25 years, it's expected that more than 270,000 more
residents will arrive in Washington County.

   Planners want to expand on the success of Streets of Tanasbourne, an outdoor
shopping mall that opened in 2004 along Northwest Cornell Road, to build the new
community. Construction could begin as early as 2010 and be complete in 2026.

   High-rises and a park

   The plan, with as many as nine 20-story buildings and a series of smaller
towers stacked around a 35-acre central park, would set a new urban tone in
suburbia. Condos and town houses would mix with retail, office space and
research centers.

   The planning area is bounded by Northwest Cornell and Walker roads on the
north, 185th Avenue on the east, the MAX line on the south and Northwest 206th
Avenue on the west. The city owns five acres of the land on the west end.

   Referred to as the OHSU/AmberGlen Area Plan, it now consists of vacant lots,
green space, office buildings, research facilities for Oregon Health & Science
University and education centers for Portland Community College and the state.

   Planners see the new community --built intensely dense and unusually high
--as a way to alleviate concerns about growth citywide and as a solution to the
land crunch brought by the urban growth boundary. The more people who live in
this area, the more relief the rest of Hillsboro will see, said Wink Brooks, the
city's planning director.

   "It really is unique," said Brian Campbell, a project manager with PB
PlaceMaking, an international consulting company based in Washington, D.C., that
is working with the city to plan the community.

   Though there are a few examples nationwide of this concept, Hillsboro's
community would be a first in the Portland suburbs, Campbell said. Portland's
Pearl District would be the closest example, with its mix of condos and town
houses built along a streetcar route that's dotted with shops and restaurants.

   "Hillsboro has stepped out there," Campbell said.

   Yet it's difficult to predict how suburbia would react to such a project,
although Hillsboro's concept has the right ingredients and makes sense, said
Matt Brown, a project manager who looks into new projects for Williams & Dame
Development.

   The Portland-based company was one of the primary developers of the Pearl
District and has been heavily involved with projects in Portland's South
Waterfront and, most recently, in Los Angeles.

   Developers would need to study closely the demographics of the area, Brown
said. "The $64,000 question is whether Hillsboro and the western suburbs are
ready," he said. "When you think of suburbs, you don't think of that type of
environment."

   Brown said suburban areas are challenged because "you have to create a highly
vibrant, mixed-use community out of whole cloth. You don't have the bare bones
of an interesting urban area. It can be done, but it must done right."

   Residents weigh in

   During open houses this year about the project, residents greeted the vision
with awe. Although some are troubled by the project's high density and high
cost, many welcome the idea and hope it will pan out during the next 20 years.

   "I think it's great," said Kevin LaBreche, who's lived northwest of the
property for a decade. "They're really putting a lot of thought into how these
people are going to fit in this area. . . . Things are going to change."

   Bob Martin, who lives west of the planned area, said he's "cautiously
enthusiastic." The Beaverton School District employee said he likes that the
city is planning this far in advance but worries about the quality of the
development and the traffic headaches it could generate.

   "I know there's no escaping it," Martin said about growth in the area. "I'm
concerned whether they can maintain the original vision to make sure it's
consistent and compatible so that the last building looks like the first."

   With the long timeline, some wonder whether the city and property owners can
deliver. Steve Cook, a retired dentist and businessman who lives on six wooded
acres inside the planning area, welcomes the proposal. He just wonders whether
the market will support it.

   "Somebody's gotta say, 'This is so unique that I'm willing to go out on a
limb to support it,' " said Cook, who wants to preserve the tree-filled land
he's owned for 30 years south of Northwest Walker Road. "In order for this thing
to be pulled off, there has to be instant attraction."

   Potential roadblocks

   Because the idea is so new, officials say they'll have a hard time testing
market forces. The fact that real estate sales have slowed in recent months does
not intimidate planners, because the project won't be built for at least five
years, Brooks said.

   Along with the market, other challenges have given developers and property
owners pause.

   The city must find savvy developers --the fewer, the better --willing to
invest hundreds of millions of dollars into the idea. The project also will
require significant changes to the surrounding roads to accommodate traffic,
which will be one of the biggest hurdles, Campbell said.

   In addition, because the 582 acres have more than a half-dozen owners, the
city must coordinate a vision and keep property owners from selling and dividing
the land. Officials say it will be difficult to settle on a master plan if there
are too many participants.

   Oregon Health & Science University, which owns 300 acres at the site, is the
key landholder. In coming years, the university plans to maintain a presence on
about 160 acres in the center of the site where its primate center, the
Neurological Sciences Institute and the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute are
located.

   Last month, OHSU agreed to sell its 40-acre Oregon Graduate Institute campus
at the site for about $44 million. The buyer has not been disclosed. Officials
are discussing whether to sell about another 70 acres of the land.

   "We're not sure who we would sell it to," said chief administrative officer
Steve Stadum. "We're studying whether or not it makes sense to sell."

   You tell us:

   Esmeralda Bermudez: 503-221-4388; ebermudez@news.oregonian.com

   Graphic and photo - Tanasbourne:  Then, now and what's to come  Chronology

   Cover photo not found

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2006


                              583 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2006 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            November 12, 2006 Sunday

SECTION: METRO; HIGHER EDUCATION NOTES; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1011 words

HEADLINE: Tulane study tackles diabetes;
Stem cell injections appear to help mice

BYLINE: By John Pope, Staff writer

BODY:

   In a development that could be promising for people with diabetes, Tulane
University researchers have found that injections of stem cells from adult
humans increased insulin production in mice with type 2 diabetes.

   After scientists at Tulane's Center for Gene Therapy gave the stem cells to
mice with elevated blood-sugar levels, those levels dropped over time, the
researchers reported last week in the Early Edition of the Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, a peer-reviewed journal.

   Nearly 21 million Americans have diabetes, and type 2 is the most common,
according to the American Diabetes Association. People with this chronic
condition either do not make enough insulin, which is necessary for the body to
use sugar, or their cells ignore it. Sugar is a basic body fluid, and insulin
carries it from the blood to cells.

   Insulin is produced in the pancreas. The Tulane team found that stem cells
went to each mouse's pancreas to repair damaged insulin-producing tissues, and
the cells also repaired damaged kidney tissues.

   Even though the mice were a special type with a defective immune system, Dr.
Darwin Prockop, director of the gene-therapy center, said effective use of human
cells indicates that they could be used in people with diabetes.

   The cells used in this experiment were grown from donated human bone marrow.

   . . . . . . .

   HEALTHY PROGRAM: A New Orleans-based program designed to help youths manage
their weight has met the standards of the National Cancer Institute.

   Trim Kids, previously called Committed to Kids, was developed at Louisiana
State University Health Sciences Center and is about a decade old. According to
center spokeswoman Leslie Capo, 70 percent of the children who signed up for the
program completed the one-year plan and maintained a weight loss of about 30
percent.

   Because it met the cancer institute's criteria, the program is on its
Research Tested Intervention Program Web site,
cancercontrol.cancer.gov/rtips/index.asp, under the Physical Activity category.
This distinction is reserved for programs whose effectiveness has been shown in
peer-reviewed research.

   . . . . . . .

   TULANE, TWO STUDENTS HONORED: For service after Hurricane Katrina, Tulane and
two of its students have won national acclaim.

   The university was one of three recipients of the President's Higher
Education Community Service Award for Excellence in Hurricane Relief Service.
Its storm-related activities merited designation as a Program With Distinction
for General Community Service.

   The other two honored schools were LSU and Jackson State University.

   Sonia Schwartz, chairwoman of Tulane's Community Action Council of University
Students, better known as CACTUS, received the Howard R. Swearer Student
Humanitarian Award. Schwartz, a senior, was honored for organizing more than
2,000 Tulane students, as well as 800 people from other campuses, to work with
local groups during winter and spring breaks.

   And Austin Marks, a senior, was given the President's Volunteer Service Award
for helping to repair storm damage at City Park. He was the 500,000th recipient
of the honor, which President Bush established in 2002.

   . . . . . . .

   OUTSTANDING DEAN: Dr. Eric Hovland, dean of LSU's School of Dentistry, has
received the Outstanding Dental Leader Award because he moved students and staff
to Baton Rouge and set up classes there five weeks after Katrina floodwaters
drowned the New Orleans campus.

   The dental school, the only one in Louisiana, still is in Baton Rouge but is
expected to return in the summer, Capo said.

   Hovland received the accolade from the International College of Dentists.

   . . . . . . .

   ALL-STEINWAY SCHOOL: Because the 30 pianos in Tulane's music department are
Steinways, the university has joined a list of conservatories and colleges that
have been named All-Steinway Schools.

   Besides letting the world know the highly regarded source of Tulane's pianos,
the designation by Steinway & Sons gives the department's students and faculty
access once a year to Steinway Hall, a piano museum, showroom and recital room
in New York City, said Barbara Jazwinski, the department's chairwoman.

   Although the designation came this fall, most of the department's grand
pianos have been Steinways since the 1930s, she said.

   . . . . . . .

   XAVIER RECEIVES SECOND CHECK: Xavier University has received $85,000 from 3M
as the second installment of a $200,000 commitment the corporation made to its
business department's Sales Leadership Institute.

   While 3M representatives visited campus to present the check, Xavier
dedicated the 3M Computer Lab, which the company underwrote with a separate
$100,000 gift after Hurricane Katrina. It is on the library's first floor.

   . . . . . . .

   GROUP'S PRESIDENT SELECTED: A nursing student at LSU Health Sciences Center
has been elected president of the Louisiana Association of Student Nurses, and
the school's chapter has been honored for its personnel and programs.

   Jill Acosta was elected president at the group's convention in Lafayette, and
DeAnna Dardar was named student nurse of the year. Susan Steele, a faculty
member, was named faculty adviser of the year.

   The nursing students won Best Community Health Project, Most Community Health
Projects and the School Spirit award, as well as honors for Best Overall
Traditional Scrapbook and Most Creative Scrapbook.

   Other LSU nurses elected to association officers were Jenny Theriot,
secretary; Irielle Banks, treasurer; Brittany Bodine, special events
coordinator; and Shane Grant, regional representative. Kim Guidry was named to
the statewide program designed to increase the number and diversity of people
choosing nursing as a career.

   . . . . . . .

   NUNEZ EMPLOYEE WINS AWARD: Larry Goodwin, coordinator of the
process-technology program at Nunez Community College, is one of three
recipients of the Alden Andre Service Award.

   Process technology teaches students about plant operations and safety.
Training includes instruction in laws governing companies' environmental
impacts.

   . . . . . . .

   John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3317.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2006


                              584 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           November 11, 2006 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 326 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE FILE;
Gene treatment may slow HIV;
In four of five patients who received a modified version of the virus, immune
cells held steady or increased.

BYLINE: Jia-Rui Chong, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   A new type of gene therapy that injects a modified version of HIV into
special immune cells appears to hinder the AIDS virus' ability to replicate,
according to a new study.

   In the five HIV-infected patients in the study, the amount of virus remained
stable or decreased. The number of T cells -- immune cells that fight the virus
-- held steady or increased in four of five patients.

   Tests showed no dangerous, mutated forms of the genetically modified virus in
the body, said Bruce Levine, lead author of the paper published Tuesday in the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   Levine, an immunologist at the University of Pennsylvania, said none of the
patients, who received the treatment two to three years ago, had developed
leukemia or other problems that had afflicted patients in other gene therapy
studies.

   "Although gene therapy has had setbacks ... this shows the slope of steady
progress we're making," he said.

   The Penn group collaborated with scientists at Virxsys Corp., a Gaithersburg,
Md., biotechnology firm that developed the modified version of HIV, called
VRX496.

   The study was funded by Virxsys, the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Disease and the Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute.

   Levine's group gathered T cells from five subjects who had failed to improve
using combination drug treatments. The cells were mixed with the altered virus,
which was designed to attach itself into the genetic material of the T cell and
block replication of the full HIV genome.

   "We used the modified HIV as a Trojan horse to deliver something that throws
a monkey wrench in the natural replication process," Levine said.

   Researchers reinfused the patients with about 10 billion modified T cells.

   In one subject, the treatment cut the amount of virus in his blood by a
factor of about 50 at the end of 12 months.

   "It's a promising start and worthy of trials to figure out if it's going to
work," Levine said.

   jia-rui.chong@latimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2006


                              585 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 Detroit Free Press
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Detroit Free Press (Michigan)

                           November 8, 2006 Wednesday
                              METRO FINAL Edition

SECTION: NWS; NEWS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 802 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE IN THE NEWS

BYLINE: Compiled from Free Press news services

BODY:

   ASTRONOMY

   Haze may help explain life

   A thick haze blanketing Saturn's largest moon, Titan, may resemble one that
covered the Earth billions of years ago and help explain how life spread on our
planet, a study found.

   While Titan is too cold to harbor life, its haze contains organic hydrogen
and carbon compounds, the building blocks of life on Earth, according to the
study published this week in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.

   Methane-producing bacteria, among Earth's earliest life, may have thrived on
our planet in similar conditions, said Margaret Tolbert, study coauthor and
University of Colorado-Boulder chemistry professor. Exposed to the sun's
radiation, the haze's hydrocarbons may have yielded chemical nutrients that fell
to the ground and fed primitive bacteria, Tolbert said.

   Quake disrupts telescopes

   The three largest and most-powerful optical telescopes on the island of
Hawaii still haven't resumed normal operations since the Oct. 15 earthquakes.

   The estimated damage to the telescopes was not available, but the earthquakes
were so powerful they shoved the entire 400-ton Gemini North telescope an eighth
of an inch over on its base, said Scott Fisher, public outreach scientist for
Gemini.

   At the W.M. Keck Observatory, the twin 33-foot telescopes - each 300 tons and
80 feet tall - rocked on their mounts, damaging the brake pads and seismic
restraints.

   Twinkles get spot on Web

   The mysterious twinkles called the Brown Mountain Lights, for centuries the
subject of folklore, scientific intrigue and starry-eyed fascination, are headed
for the Web.

   Appalachian State University astronomer Dan Caton plans to set up a Web cam
in hopes of capturing the dots of light. He says 95% of the claimed sightings
are bogus. He suspects a phenomenon called ball lightning - a moving, glowing
gas so poorly understood it can't be produced in a lab.

   HEALTH

   Device attacks lice, eggs

   Dr. Dale H. Clayton, a biologist at the University of Utah, and colleagues
said they had developed a blow-dryer-like device that appears to get rid of lice
and their eggs in a half hour. The idea came as they were trying to find a way
to keep lice alive in a dry climate.

   "The key is volume of air, not heat," he said.

   The researchers tried six methods on 169 volunteers. All the devices did well
at killing the nits, but there were differences in how well they killed the
lice. The best result came from a device being commercially developed by the
researchers for use at schools and clinics that puts out heated air at a much
larger volume than a blow-dryer. The report appears in the current issue of
Pediatrics.

   Protein reveals cancer risk

   The speed at which a marker for prostate cancer grows is a strong indicator
for determining a patient's risk, researchers found.

   In the current Journal of the National Cancer Institute, researchers say the
findings suggest doctors should reconsider when and how often they test men for
prostate-specific antigen, or PSA, a protein in the blood that can indicate
whether a man may have the cancer.

   Based on a review of blood samples dating to 1958, researchers found that a
better predictor of which men died from prostate cancer was the so-called PSA
velocity. Men with the fastest-rising levels were most likely to have died of
the disease 20 to 30 years later.

   MRI gives clue on strokes

   In a new study, researchers led by Dr. Gregory W. Albers of Stamford, Conn.,
found that MRI scans could provide a clearer indication of whether someone who
has just suffered a stroke will benefit from clot busters. The drugs can
significantly improve the outcome in strokes caused by a blockage in a blood
vessel.

   Under current guidelines, the drugs should not be given more than three hours
after a stroke. With the MRI results, doctors may be able to give the drug
later, the study said.

   The findings are based on a review of 74 cases handled at stroke centers in
the United States, Canada and Belgium.

   Stem cells boost insulin

   Stem cells from adult human bone helped mice with diabetes make insulin,
suggesting new treatments for the disease, scientists said Monday.

   Injections of the adult stem cells increased insulin levels in about 30 mice
with diabetes, said Darwin Prockop, director of the Center for Gene Therapy at
Tulane University Health Sciences Center in New Orleans.

   About 3 million of the 21 million Americans with diabetes have the Type 1
form that occurs when the body's immune system attacks insulin-making cells in
the pancreas. Injections with bone marrow stem cells may help revive the damaged
pancreas, Prockop said.

   The work, led by Tulane gene therapy researcher Ryang Hwa Lee, is to be
published this week in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
journal.

   Compiled from Free Press news services

   ILLUSTRATION: Photo DOUGLAS C. PIZA Associated Press;Photo NASA

GRAPHIC: Dr. Dale H. Clayton shows two versions of his invention.
NASA
Titan, which is Saturn's largest moon, may explain how life spread on Earth.
This image shows Titan's surface.
CAPTIONWRITER: DOUGLAS C. PIZA/Associated Press
DISCLAIMER: THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION MAY DIFFER SLIGHTLY FROM THE PRINTED ARTICLE

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2007


                              586 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 San Francisco Chronicle
                              All Rights Reserved

                    THE SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE (California)

                           November 8, 2006 Wednesday
                                 FINAL Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 1398 words

HEADLINE: A crowded field in cancer research;
Hundreds of test therapies in the works

BYLINE: Bernadette Tansey, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

   The drug that arrests cancer years from now could be one of the millions of
test compounds whirling through a robot-driven screening process now at Exelixis
Inc. of South San Francisco, a former fruit-fly genetics company trying to
muscle its way into the hot field of cancer care.

   Exelixis is one of scores of companies charging into the oncology field,
which has been energized by a new wave of cancer drugs, such as Genentech's
Avastin and Novartis' Gleevec. These drugs have brought a fresh approach to
cancer treatment by targeting the minute molecular mechanisms that cause
malignancies.

   The pioneers have paved the way for emulators by, for example, giving them
credibility with investors. They have also created a complex, competitive
environment as more companies crowd the arena.

   With 600 employees, Exelixis is a relatively small pharmaceutical company. It
prides itself on an automated drug discovery system designed to rival that of
cancer-fighting heavyweights.

   Exelixis repeatedly screens its whole inventory of 4.3 million compounds in
the search for new drugs. Exelixis already has eight anti-cancer compounds in
clinical trials, and six in pre-clinical testing. Many of them are designed to
attack cancer mechanisms that are already addressed by other companies' drugs.

   Every year brings news of U.S. Food and Drug Administration approvals for
next-generation cancer therapies or promising experimental data on new drugs.
But so far, no company has a lock on even a single type of cancer, said Jason
Kantor, an RBC Capital Markets analyst.

   Many new drugs add mere months to a patient's life, and many are extremely
toxic. "There is a lot of room for more efficacious or safer drugs for cancer,"
Kantor said.

   There are plenty of candidates. More than 150 experimental cancer drugs are
in late-stage clinical trials, according to a study published in January by
Windhover Information Inc. A total of 646 are at some stage of testing, the drug
industry trade association PhRMA estimated in September.

   A new generation

   Researchers are using the insights from genetic comparisons of normal and
cancerous cells to find vulnerable points in tumors where a drug could strike.
The eventual goal is to replace older chemotherapy drugs, which block the
proliferation of cancer cells but can also cause severe side effects by damaging
fast-growing normal cells.

   While the newer drugs like Genentech's Avastin don't cure cancer, sidestep
all side effects or eliminate the need for chemotherapy, they can extend
survival times. Some are also big moneymakers. Avastin sales exceeded $1 billion
during its first full year on the market.

   Exelixis chief executive George Scangos noted that new drugs can try to do a
better job attacking established cancer traits or target entirely new cancer
mechanisms. "We have both of those," he said.

   One of the most advanced products in Exelixis' pipeline is XL999, which
shares a tactic with Avastin. Both try to block the development of new blood
vessels that nourish the growth of tumors. But XL999 also targets several other
mechanisms -- an attempt to make it more potent.

   In a setback last week, Exelixis suspended enrollment in a clinical trial of
XL999 because a significant percentage of subjects suffered serious
cardiovascular side effects.

   Avastin has also been linked to cardiovascular complications. While
drugmakers are trying to create drugs precisely aimed at cancer mechanisms, some
of those target molecules are important in normal body functions, such as
maintaining the heart.

   The challenge for cancer drug developers is to deliver higher potency, fewer
side effects and an enhanced quality of life during treatment. Exelixis' drugs,
if proven effective, will be pills taken by mouth at home -- more convenient
than many drugs given by injection or infusion at a doctor's office or clinic.

   Exelixis and other young companies need sophisticated strategies to shepherd
drugs through approval and position them on the market. As the field becomes
more populated, cancer drug developers are facing competition for clinical trial
subjects, more resistance from health plans over reimbursement, and tougher
approval conditions from the FDA, Kantor said.

   The obstacles can also include ethical barriers. Companies with experimental
drugs can't always run head-to-head trials against approved remedies, said Clay
Siegall, chief executive of Seattle Genetics, speaking recently on a panel at
the BioInvestor Forum in San Francisco. That would mean withholding the proven
drug from some subjects and taking the risk that their outcomes could be worse.

   Varied routes to market

   Instead, many companies test a combination that includes the approved remedy
along with their experimental drug in the hope that patients will do better than
those taking the established drug alone. That strategy can be costly. A course
of therapy for the newer cancer drugs on the market can run to $40,000 or more.

   However, competitors will sometimes supply approved drugs free for a
combination trial. If successful, the study could result in a broader market for
the established drug, Siegall said.

   Once an experimental drug shows some value in a combination trial, it's more
likely that patients would be willing to enroll in a clinical trial using it as
a single agent, Scangos said. To look for drugs that will show clear benefit,
Exelixis studies the way existing drugs fall short of cures.

   At some point, most patients develop resistance to drugs such as Gleevec.
Often this means that the molecular mechanism targeted by the drug has mutated
into a new form, Scangos said.

   Patients with chronic myeloid leukemia who no longer benefit from Gleevec can
try Bristol-Myers Squibb's Sprycel, which was designed to block one of those
mutated molecules. Exelixis is hoping to help those who no longer benefit from
Gleevec or Sprycel by developing an experimental drug that attacks the last
known resistant molecular form.

   The first step in the search for an effective new drug is to find something
that will stick to a target molecule that is linked to abnormal growth. If a
compound sticks to the target, it has a fair chance of blocking the molecule's
harmful interactions in the body.

   Automated testing

   But predicting which compound will stick is an inexact science. So Exelixis,
like many large drug developers, brings an automated, industrial approach to the
task, combining rational design and chance.

   One Exelixis lab has made millions of different compounds through a
computer-controlled process that distributes different reagents into small wells
so that each well ends up containing a unique variant.

   Lab director Patrick Kearney starts with a core "scaffold" for a family of
molecules that is likely to bind to a particular cancer target. The automated
system then adds chemical side chains to the scaffolds, varying the types of
chains and their positions on the new molecule.

   Exelixis' whole 4.3 million-molecule inventory of test compounds goes through
another robot-controlled process called high-throughput screening. The
experimental compounds are exposed to a target molecule, and mechanized readers
note which ones bind together chemically.

   These are the candidates for further study. They are tested and chemically
tweaked to improve the properties important in an effective drug, such as
solubility and low side effects.

   Sometimes an experimental compound that seems unlikely to bind with the
target turns out to be one of the successful molecules moved forward for
clinical testing, said Michael Morrissey, executive vice president of discovery
at Exelixis.

   "We want to be surprised," Morrissey said.

   Scangos said cancer therapy is moving in the direction taken by HIV
treatment, which uses combination cocktails of three drugs. In theory, the viral
population can't develop resistance to all three drugs at once.

   Cancer cells are also constantly evolving. In the future, doctors may use
multiple drug combinations in a series matching each phase of the illness. But
this might make cancer treatment even more expensive, prompting resistance from
health plans, Scangos said.

   "If there are four or five drugs in a combination and each costs $40,000 a
year, and you take them for four to five years, that's not sustainable," he
said.

   That means the bar will be raised for new treatments, Scangos said. "We have
to be providing drugs that really do provide benefit for patients."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2)
(1) Senior scientist Jia Li examines a protein crystal at Exelixis Inc. in South
San Francisco. / Brant Ward / The Chronicle, (2) Test compounds are fed into
machinery at Exelixis that will automatically run hundreds of tests in the
search for better cancer drugs. / Brant Ward / The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2006


                              587 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2006 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                            November 7, 2006 Tuesday
                                 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 389 words

HEADLINE: New gene therapy for HIV promising;
One treatment will keep fighting the infection, researchers say

BYLINE: RANDOLPH E. SCHMID, Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - The first test of a potential new gene therapy for HIV - the
virus that causes AIDS - was encouraging enough for researchers to launch a more
extensive trial.

   "The goal of this Phase I trial was safety and feasibility, and the results
established that," said lead researcher Dr. Carl June. "But the results also
hint at something much more."

   In addition to showing that the treatment was possible and didn't endanger
the patients, the amount of virus in the subjects remained steady or decreased
during the study, which involved just five people with chronic HIV infection.

   One patient had a sustained decrease in the amount of virus and immune cells,
and strength of the immune system increased in four patients during the
nine-month study.

   However, "just because this has produced encouraging results in one or two
patients doesn't mean it will work for everyone. We have much more work to do,"
said co-author Dr. Bruce Levine.

   June and Levine are researchers at the University of Pennsylvania's Abramson
Family Cancer Research Institute. Their findings are reported in the online
edition of Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   The researchers removed immune cells from the patients and introduced a virus
called a lentivirus into the cells. This change prevents HIV from reproducing
and, in the laboratory, has the ability to fight HIV in cells that have not been
treated, June explained.

   The idea, he said, was that unlike most HIV medications that have to be taken
daily or several times a day, this treatment can be done once and will keep
fighting the infection.

   This was the first human test to see if it could be done safely, he said. It
was done on patients whose HIV infections have resisted treatment.

   Now, the team has launched a Phase II test that will involve more patients,
including some whose HIV is controlled by drugs. In this test, the patients will
get more than one transfusion of the treated cells. Those on standard drug
treatment, following the new therapy, will be asked to interrupt their drugs to
see if the infection returns.

   "I think they have significant prospects to develop this into serious
anti-HIV approaches for those patients in whom HIV cannot be kept under control
by chemical means," said Dr. Martin Haas, a professor at the University of
California San Diego School of Medicine.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2006


                              588 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            November 7, 2006 Tuesday

LENGTH: 1204 words

HEADLINE: In HIV fight, Penn sees new hope in gene therapy

BYLINE: Marie McCullough, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A novel gene therapy that uses a genetic version of a Trojan Horse has shown
promise in fighting the AIDS virus, a coup in a field crippled by
disappointments and setbacks.

   The therapy is being tested at the University of Pennsylvania, where the 1999
death of Arizona teenager Jesse Gelsinger still casts a pall.

   His death, the first in a gene therapy experiment, triggered a nationwide
halt in human testing of such treatments amid revelations of ethical and
regulatory lapses.

   Now, seven years after that disaster, a team led by Penn's Carl June and
Bruce Levine has achieved a gene therapy tour de force: they removed some
infection-fighting "T cells" from five HIV patients, inserted a gene into the
cells to stop the AIDS virus from reproducing, then multiplied the modified T
cells and put them back in the patients.

   The vehicle, or "vector," that the researchers used to deliver the protective
gene to the cells was a genetically modified HIV virus - also a first.

   The five patients, who were no longer responding to conventional HIV drugs,
have had no serious side effects during two years of follow-up. Four showed
signs that the therapy was working - very unusual in such a preliminary clinical
trial.

   "In a way, it's a redemption," Levine said of the results, published
yesterday in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   Mark. A. Kay, a Stanford University researcher and past president of the
American Society of Gene Therapy, said, "The whole technology it took to get
this done was cumulatively very strong. It wasn't clear to me that this was
going to work. But I think this is an important step forward. I'm impressed."

   So is "subject #2," a Philadelphia resident who has had the most dramatic,
sustained effects. His HIV viral load fell from 54,100 three years ago to 1,930
this past January. His supply of T cells, which had been so ravaged by HIV that
he was on the edge of an AIDS diagnosis, increased slightly. The modified T
cells were detectable in his bloodstream for two years. And his immune system
grew stronger.

   "When I tested positive in 1989, I really didn't expect to live this long, so
I'm very grateful," said the muscular, 44-year-old public administrator, whose
only visible symptom of illness is sunken cheeks, a side effect of HIV drugs.
"Now, I don't expect to be gone anytime soon."

   Gene therapy, still highly experimental after almost 20 years, aims to
harness the insidious power of viruses.

   On its own, a virus can't reproduce; it must infect a cell and hijack the
host's machinery to make copies. Some viruses, including HIV, do this by
splicing their own genes into the cell's DNA.

   By using these invaders to insert DNA that is helpful to the cell - rather
than harmful - gene therapy can theoretically fix the root causes of many
diseases.

   But the obstacles to this simple-sounding strategy have proved to be
enormous.

   For one thing, even when researchers deactivate the disease-causing genes in
a viral vector, the immune system may spot the invaders and attack. That,
investigators concluded, is what killed Jesse Gelsinger: the adenovirus (cold
virus) that was supposed to deliver therapy for his rare metabolic disorder sent
his immune system into deadly overdrive.

   The subsequent suspension of all U.S. gene therapy trials "cost us two years
of progress," recalled June, a professor of pathology and laboratory medicine.

   Another obstacle is that the characteristic of viruses that makes them useful
as vectors - their constant swapping and shuffling of DNA - also makes them hard
to control. In theory, viral vectors can recombine with viruses already in the
patient, or insert their genetic payload into the host's DNA in a way that
triggers cancer.

   That theory became reality in France. Three of 10 children who underwent gene
therapy and were cured of severe combined immune deficiency disease - the
so-called Bubble Boy disease - later developed leukemia. One died in 2004.

   Although the obstacles have made biotech investors leery of the technology,
some companies have forged ahead. Among them is Virxsys, the Gaithersburg, Md.
startup that developed the novel HIV vector used by the Penn researchers.

   By 2001, Virxsys researchers had already spent almost five years - and
millions of dollars - on the vector, called VRX496.

   It is created by disabling certain genes in HIV, then inserting genetic code
that eliminates the virus's ability to wrap its DNA in a protective shell.
Naked, the virus can't escape from the cell to infect new ones.

   The vector then transfers the anti-HIV gene into the T cell, the target of
the virus. The cell becomes a sort of Trojan Horse: HIV can get in, but can't
get out - or wreck the cell's immune function.

   But Virxsys needed a way to get the vector into HIV patients' T cells - lots
of T cells. And since HIV ravages patients' T cells, that was a challenge.

   So in 2001, Virxsys turned to the Penn researchers.

   "We are one of the best labs in the world, maybe the best, in growing T
cells," said Levine.

   Indeed, June, 53, and Levine, 44 - who was a postdoctoral student when he
joined June's HIV research lab at the National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda
- have been working for more than a decade on their now-patented technology.

   It involves mixing T cells with microscopic steel beads that are coated with
growth-stimulating proteins. After the T cells divide, going from 500 million to
100 billion in eight days, the beads are removed with a special magnet.

   Still, designing a clinical trial took almost three more years because Penn,
the National Institutes of Health, and the Food and Drug Administration have
learned to err on the side of rigorous caution. At Penn alone, a dozen oversight
boards had to approve the study.

   Originally, the researchers proposed to give 12 patients escalating doses of
VRX496-treated T cells. Ultimately, they were allowed to give five patients a
single conservative dose. They had to waiting three months between each patient
and develop special tests to monitor for unintended genetic combinations.

   Each volunteer signed a 16-page consent form that warned they might not
benefit - and would have a theoretical risk of developing cancer.

   The research team included Penn HIV treatment specialist Rob-Roy MacGregor
and NIH vaccine expert John Mascola.

   "Did we feel confident it would work? No," June said. "We felt we had the
right ethical setting and it was worth a gamble. If I had HIV I would try it."

   But the results were "stunning," in the opinion of Virxsys chief executive
officer Riku Rautsola. The sickest patient's viral load went from 188,500 to
12,700 six months after the therapy; at one year, it was 36,300. His T cells
counts also increased slightly, and his immune system improved.

   "It is a real moving moment when you can show such an impact in such a
difficult disease," said Rautsola, who believes VRX496 can be adapted to fight
cancer.

   Penn is now enrolling 25 patients to receive higher doses of the therapy.

   Given its technical complexities and costs, "I don't see this being a primary
way we deal with HIV," said MacGregor, for whom Penn renamed its HIV clinic last
year.

   But it is offering new insights into how to make gene therapy work.

   Contact staff writer Marie McCullough at 215-854-2720.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2006


                              589 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            November 7, 2006 Tuesday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1210 words

HEADLINE: New hope on gene therapy;
Penn sees promise against HIV. "In a way, it's redemption."

BYLINE: Marie McCullough, Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   A novel gene therapy that uses a genetic version of a Trojan horse has shown
promise in fighting the AIDS virus, a coup in a field crippled by
disappointments and setbacks.

   The therapy is being tested at the University of Pennsylvania, where the 1999
death of Arizona teenager Jesse Gelsinger still casts a pall.

   His death, the first in a gene-therapy experiment, triggered a nationwide
halt in human testing of such treatments amid revelations of ethical and
regulatory lapses.

   Now, seven years after that disaster, a team led by Penn's Carl June and
Bruce Levine has achieved a gene-therapy tour de force: It removed some
infection-fighting "T cells" from five HIV patients, inserted a gene into the
cells to stop the AIDS virus from reproducing, then multiplied the modified T
cells and put them back in the patients.

   The vehicle, or "vector," that the researchers used to deliver the protective
gene to the cells was a genetically modified HIV virus - also a first.

   The five patients, who were no longer responding to conventional HIV drugs,
have had no serious side effects during two years of follow-up. Four showed
signs that the therapy was working - very unusual in such a preliminary clinical
trial.

   "In a way, it's a redemption," Levine said of the results, published
yesterday in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   Mark. A. Kay, a Stanford University researcher and past president of the
American Society of Gene Therapy, said: "The whole technology it took to get
this done was cumulatively very strong. It wasn't clear to me that this was
going to work. But I think this is an important step forward. I'm impressed."

   So is "Subject No. 2," a Philadelphia resident who has had the most dramatic,
sustained effects. His HIV viral load fell from 54,100 three years ago to 1,930
this past January. His supply of T cells, which had been so ravaged by HIV that
he was on the edge of an AIDS diagnosis, increased slightly. The modified T
cells were detectable in his bloodstream for two years. And his immune system
grew stronger.

   "When I tested positive in 1989, I really didn't expect to live this long, so
I'm very grateful," said the muscular 44-year-old public administrator, whose
only visible symptom of illness is sunken cheeks, a side effect of HIV drugs.
"Now, I don't expect to be gone any time soon."

   Gene therapy, still highly experimental after almost 20 years, aims to
harness the insidious power of viruses.

   On its own, a virus cannot reproduce; it must infect a cell and hijack the
host's machinery to make copies. Some viruses, including HIV, do this by
splicing their own genes into the cell's DNA.

   By using these invaders to insert DNA that is helpful to the cell - rather
than harmful - gene therapy can theoretically fix the root causes of many
diseases.

   But the obstacles to this simple-sounding strategy have proved to be
enormous.

   For one thing, even when researchers deactivate the disease-causing genes in
a viral vector, the immune system may spot the invaders and attack. That,
investigators concluded, is what killed Jesse Gelsinger: the adenovirus (cold
virus) that was supposed to deliver therapy for his rare metabolic disorder sent
his immune system into deadly overdrive.

   The subsequent suspension of all U.S. gene-therapy trials "cost us two years
of progress," recalled June, a professor of pathology and laboratory medicine.

   Another obstacle is that the characteristic of viruses that makes them useful
as vectors - their constant swapping and shuffling of DNA - also makes them hard
to control. In theory, viral vectors can recombine with viruses already in the
patient, or insert their genetic payload into the host's DNA in a way that
triggers cancer.

   That theory became reality in France. Three of 10 children who underwent gene
therapy and were cured of severe combined immune deficiency disease - the
so-called Bubble Boy disease - later developed leukemia. One died in 2004.

   Although the obstacles have made biotech investors leery of the technology,
some companies have forged ahead. Among them is Virxsys, the Gaithersburg, Md.,
start-up that developed the novel HIV vector used by the Penn researchers.

   By 2001, Virxsys researchers had already spent almost five years - and
millions of dollars - on the vector, called VRX496.

   It is created by disabling certain genes in HIV, then inserting genetic code
that eliminates the virus' ability to wrap its DNA in a protective shell. Naked,
the virus cannot escape from the cell to infect new ones.

   The vector then transfers the anti-HIV gene into the T cell, the target of
the virus. The cell becomes a sort of Trojan horse: HIV can get in but can't get
out - or wreck the cell's immune function.

   But Virxsys needed a way to get the vector into HIV patients' T cells - lots
of T cells. And since HIV ravages patients' T cells, that was a challenge.

   So in 2001, Virxsys turned to the Penn researchers.

   "We are one of the best labs in the world, maybe the best, in growing T
cells," Levine said.

   Indeed, June, 53, and Levine, 44 - who was a postdoctoral student when he
joined June's HIV research lab at the National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda
- have been working for more than a decade on their now-patented technology.

   It involves mixing T cells with microscopic steel beads that are coated with
growth-stimulating proteins. After the T cells divide, going from 500 million to
100 billion in eight days, the beads are removed with a special magnet.

   Still, designing a clinical trial took almost three more years because Penn,
the National Institutes of Health, and the Food and Drug Administration have
learned to err on the side of rigorous caution. At Penn alone, a dozen oversight
boards had to approve the study.

   Originally, the researchers proposed giving 12 patients escalating doses of
VRX496-treated T cells. Ultimately, they were allowed to give five patients a
single conservative dose. They had to wait three months between each patient and
develop special tests to monitor for unintended genetic combinations.

   All volunteers signed a 16-page consent form that warned they might not
benefit - and would have a theoretical risk of developing cancer.

   The research team included Penn HIV treatment specialist Rob-Roy MacGregor
and NIH vaccine expert John Mascola.

   "Did we feel confident it would work? No," June said. "We felt we had the
right ethical setting and it was worth a gamble. If I had HIV, I would try it."

   The results were "stunning," in the opinion of Virxsys' chief executive
officer, Riku Rautsola. The sickest patient's viral load went from 188,500 to
12,700 six months after the therapy; at one year, it was 36,300. His T-cell
counts also increased slightly, and his immune system improved.

   "It is a real moving moment when you can show such an impact in such a
difficult disease," said Rautsola, who said he believed VRX496 could be adapted
to fight cancer.

   Penn is now enrolling 25 patients to receive higher doses of the therapy.

   Given its technical complexities and costs, "I don't see this being a primary
way we deal with HIV," said MacGregor, for whom Penn renamed its HIV clinic last
year.

   But it is offering new insights into how to make gene therapy work.

   Contact staff writer Marie McCullough at mmccullough@phillynews.com or
215-854-2720.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2006


                              590 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                            November 7, 2006 Tuesday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE MEDICINE AND TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 234 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY PROMISING IN TREATMENT OF HIV

BYLINE: RANDOLPH E. SCHMID, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The first test of a potential new gene therapy for HIV -- the virus that
causes AIDS -- was encouraging enough for researchers to launch a more extensive
trial.

   "The goal of this phase I trial was safety and feasibility, and the results
established that," said lead researcher Dr. Carl June. "But the results also
hint at something much more."

   In addition to showing that the treatment was possible and didn't endanger
the patients, the amount of virus in the subjects remained steady or decreased
during the study, which involved just five people with chronic HIV infection.

   One patient had a sustained decrease in the amount of virus, and immune cells
and strength of the immune system increased in four patients during the
nine-month study.

   But "just because this has produced encouraging results in one or two
patients doesn't mean it will work for everyone. We have much more work to do,"
said co-author Bruce Levine.

   Dr. June and Mr. Levine are researchers at the University of Pennsylvania's
Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute. Their findings are reported in the
online edition of Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   The study team also included researchers from the VIRxSYS Corp. of
Gaithersburg, Md., which is involved in developing the treatment and helped fund
the study. Other funding came from the National Institutes of Allergy and
Infectious Disease and the Abramson Institute.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2006


                              591 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            November 7, 2006 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A14

LENGTH: 508 words

HEADLINE: FINDINGS

BODY:

   A regional fisheries management group whose members include China, Japan, the
United States and several European countries has imposed a moratorium on shark
fishing in the Southern Ocean, which surrounds Antarctica.

    Environmentalists hailed the decision by the Convention  on the Conservation
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources as a preemptive move that could protect the
population from overfishing.

    French officials proposed the moratorium amid concerns over widespread
harvesting of shark fins as well as shark fishing in general. Some fishing
companies seek out deepwater sharks for their rich liver oil, used mainly for
pharmaceuticals. The sharks grow slowly and have a hard time rebounding if their
stocks are depleted.

    Sonja Fordham, policy director for the Ocean Conservancy's shark program and
another advocacy group, the Shark Alliance, called it "a landmark agreement in
shark conservation" and said fisheries managers "must begin to err on the side
of caution."

   The first small test of a potential new gene therapy for HIV  --  the virus
that causes AIDS  --  was encouraging enough for researchers to begin a more
extensive trial.

     "The goal of this phase I trial was safety and feasibility, and the results
established that," said lead author Carl June of the University of Pennsylvania.
"But the results also hint at something much more."

     In addition to showing that the treatment was possible and didn't endanger
the patients, their virus levels remained steady or decreased during the
nine-month study, which involved five people with chronic HIV infection. Their
disease had resisted treatment with current drugs.

     One patient had a sustained decrease in the amount of virus, and immune
cells and strength of the immune system increased in four.

    The findings were reported yesterday by the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences.

     The study team also included researchers from the Virxsys Corp. of
Gaithersburg, which is involved in developing the new treatment and helped fund
the study.

     The team removed immune cells from the patients and introduced a virus
called a lentivirus into the cells.  That prevents HIV from reproducing and, in
the laboratory, has the ability to fight HIV in cells that have not been
treated.

   Duct tape works only slightly better than doing nothing to cure warts in
schoolchildren, Dutch researchers reported in a study that contradicts a popular
theory about an easy way to get rid of the  lumps.

     The study of 103 children ages 4 to 12 found that duct tape barely worked
better than using a corn pad, a sticky cushion that does not touch the wart and
was a placebo.

     "After 6 weeks, the warts of 8 children (16 percent) in the duct tape group
and the warts of 3 children (6 percent) in the placebo group had disappeared,"
the disappointed researchers, led by Marloes de Haen of Maastricht University,
wrote in the Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine. They said this
difference was not statistically significant.

     --  From News Services

    and Staff Reports

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2006


                              592 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            November 6, 2006 Monday
                                 FIRST EDITION

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 748 words

HEADLINE: Radicalism in the Deaf culture

BYLINE: CATHY YOUNG - Cathy Young is a contributing editor at Reason magazine.
Her column appears regularly in the Globe.

BODY:

   SINCE LAST MAY, Gallaudet University, the world's only university designed
entirely for deaf and hard-of-hearing students, has been rocked by protests over
the selection of a new president.Jane K. Fernandes was scheduled to take over
from I. King Jordan in January. On Oct. 29, after protesters shut down the
Washington campus for more than two weeks, the board of trustees revoked
Fernandes's appointment. This fiasco is a striking example of identity politics
gone mad.In 1988, protesters rebelled against the appointment of a hearing
president, Elisabeth Singer, and demanded a deaf president (something Gallaudet
had never had since its founding in 1864). Singer resigned , and Jordan was
appointed in her place.Fernandes, the Gallaudet provost whom Jordan wanted to
see as his replacement, is also deaf; but to some, "not deaf enough."

   She grew up lip-reading and speaking and learned sign language only as a
graduate student.In recent weeks, anti-Fernandes students and professors have
denied that their objections had anything to do with her not being deaf enough,
and have accused her of raising the issue to pose as a victim of political
correctness.However, the Washington Post reports that the protesters backed off
the "not deaf enough" complaint only when they realized that it wasn't likely to
garner sympathy from the outside world. They focused instead on Fernandes's
supposedly autocratic and intimidating leadership style and her alleged lack of
interpersonal skills (one critic quoted by the Inside Higher Ed website even
noted that she didn't smile enough).There were also vague charges that she is
insufficiently committed to fighting racism. Yet none of these gripes seem
sufficient to justify the passion that led to her ouster: the protests included
hunger strikes and threats of violence.Some of the criticisms publicly leveled
at Fernandes are overtly rooted in identity politics.In a letter to the Post ,
Gallaudet English professor Kathleen M. Wood excoriated both Fernandes and
Jordan for taking the position that Gallaudet is for all deaf students. This
misguided inclusiveness, Wood asserted , had attracted deaf students who were
"not integrating into Deaf culture" and resisting the use of sign language. She
ended her letter by stating, "The new Gallaudet will not be for everyone.""Deaf
culture" -- that's Deaf with a capital D -- has flourished at Gallaudet. It is a
radical movement that views deafness not as a disability but as an oppressed
minority status akin to race, and also as a unique linguistic culture. The
movement holds that there is nothing wrong with being deaf, only with how
society has treated deaf people.Few would deny that, historically, deaf people
and others with disabilities have endured stereotyping, bias, and unfairness.
Much progress has been made toward seeing people with disabilities as whole
individuals, toward focusing on what they can do, not on what they can't . But
it's a leap from this understanding to the bizarre idea that the lack of hearing
is no more a disability than being female or black. (Verbal communication aside,
surely being unable to hear environmental sounds often places a person at a
serious disadvantage.)The majority of deaf people do not belong to Deaf culture.
It is estimated that at most a quarter of profoundly deaf people in the United
States use sign language. Yet at many schools for the deaf, signing has been
dogmatically treated as the only acceptable communication; children with some
hearing have received little training in auditory and speaking skills. Deaf
schools that promote "oralism" have been targeted for protests.More harmful
still, Deaf activists have railed against cochlear implants, which enable many
deaf children to gain functional hearing; some deaf parents have denied implants
to their children on ideological grounds. The activists also oppose research
into cures for deafness through gene therapy and other means.To them, attempts
to "fix" deafness amounts to nothing short of genocide.Fernandes herself
embraces Deaf culture, but she does not want it to be isolated from the hearing
world or exclude those who don't meet purist standards of "Deafness." She also
believes that the deaf community must deal honestly with the challenges posed by
advances in medicine.When this sensible view is rejected under pressure from a
handful of radicals, it is a testament to the madness that can prevail when
oppressed-minority status becomes a weapon to silence critics.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2006


                              593 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                            November 6, 2006 Monday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 3259 words

HEADLINE: A family's hopeful trip down an unproven road

BYLINE: Diana Keough, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   Ken and Julie Bihn of Olmsted Falls and Craig and Nichole Markowich of
Amherst learned their young daughters have Tay-Sachs, a rare, fatal disease of
the central nervous system. The couples decided to go to Duke University to
pursue a risky, grueling procedure offered by a doctor who gave them hope but no
guarantees. The procedure might stabilize the progressive disease and perhaps
reverse some of its effects, the doctor said. Most other physicians disagreed.

   Durham, N.C. - Julie Bihn's stomach was in knots. She was nervous enough, and
now she was about to get a preview of what might be in store for Dakota.

   It was the first night in North Carolina for Julie, her husband, Ken, and
their 6-year-old daughter, Dakota. Julie couldn't wait to check out the
transplant floor at Duke University Medical Center, known simply as "5200" -
fifth floor, main building. Most here knew 5200 was their last resort.

   Alexis Markowich, 4, of Amherst, had been on 5200 for four weeks after
undergoing a cord-blood transplant for Tay-Sachs disease. Julie wanted to see
Alexis. Dakota would be here soon.

   This is the terrain of Dr. Joanne Kurtzberg, who runs the pediatric stem-cell
transplant program. For years, Kurtzberg treated blood diseases like leukemia
with bone-marrow transplants. Now many of the children on 5200 came because
their parents sought out Kurtzberg to perform umbilical cord-blood transplants
for inherited metabolic storage diseases, a group of disorders that share one
trait: A missing enzyme causes cell malfunctions that lead to severe disability
and, in Tay-Sachs, certain death.

   Like bone marrow, donated cord blood is a source for stem cells,
undifferentiated cells that morph into certain specialized cells.

   Kurtzberg has concluded that cord-blood cells can do more than that: She
contends these cells can traverse the brain's protective lining to treat
diseases like Tay-Sachs that affect the central nervous system. Kurtzberg
believes that, once across the blood-brain barrier, they can become healthy
cells with intact enzymes in the brains of kids with rare metabolic diseases.

   But these are just beliefs. Most doctors say there is no medical evidence
this will happen for Tay-Sachs children.

   Transplants are drawn-out, grueling procedures with a high risk of death.
First, high-dose chemotherapy wipes out the immune system, taking patients to
the brink of death and making them vulnerable to infections for months. Then the
cells are infused. Powerful drugs are administered to stave off rejection of the
donor cells, another sometimes fatal complication.

   Because the procedure can be so harmful and any benefit to patients is
questionable, many of Kurtzberg's colleagues involved with stem-cell transplants
vigorously oppose the procedure for Tay-Sachs children. Some at Duke refuse to
participate in the pre-procedure tests like the ones Dakota would undergo the
next morning.

   In the last decade, Kurtzberg had transplanted dozens of children with
metabolic storage diseases. She said five were babies with Tay-Sachs. Two are
dead; the others were alive but severely disabled as of July. Tay-Sachs
progresses at varying rates, and no data demonstrates whether the treatment
hastened their deaths or prolonged their lives. Studies are underway to chart
the disease's natural progression.

   Before last December, when Kurtzberg performed Alexis' transplant, the doctor
had treated no children with juvenile Tay-Sachs, which differs from the more
common infantile form. Children with juvenile Tay-Sachs have low levels of the
enzyme that is absent in infantile cases, so symptoms appear later and the
disease progresses more slowly, affecting development as it devastates the
brain.

   Kurtzberg performed her first three juvenile Tay-Sachs transplants in quick
succession. First, Alexis. Two weeks later, Jashaia Small, a 2-year-old from
Connecticut. Two weeks after that, on Jan. 27, she would transplant stem cells
into Dakota.

   Dr. Maria Escolar, a developmental pediatrician at a nearby university,
collaborates with Kurtzberg and plays a key role in assessing Kurtzberg's
patients.

   Escolar said that research she and Kurtzberg published shows a transplant is
unlikely to make a difference for children who had deteriorated too far
neurologically. She said the disease had caused Dakota's and Alexis'
neurological development to fall more than two years behind their chronological
age. Because of this, Kurtzberg appeared to ignore her own criterion when she
transplanted them.

   The Bihns were relieved Kurtzberg took Dakota's case. As they arrived at Duke
to begin treatment for a disease considered untreatable by most doctors, they
were comfortable, even confident. Julie walked the busy halls of 5200 to visit
Alexis' room, excited and ready to start the procedure.

   Her heart sank when she saw Alexis.

   Alexis, who had had her transplant four weeks earlier, had lost her hair and
could barely walk or talk. She had stopped eating, and doctors were discussing
surgery to insert a feeding tube. Nichole, Alexis' mother, said Alexis hadn't
smiled in weeks.

   Julie looked at Alexis and wondered if this was what Dakota was going to be
like.

   Kurtzberg, 55, is petite, wears Mickey Mouse earrings and has a chatty,
casual bedside manner that melts parents' anxiety. In her roomy clothes softened
by repeated wash cycles, she looks more like a retired neighbor who putters in
the garden than a doctor performing life-and-death procedures.

   Get her talking about stem cells and the children she has transplanted, and
Kurtzberg's soft-spoken constitution gives way to passion. She believes that 10
years from now, stem cells from cord blood will be used to rejuvenate diseased
livers or stroke-scarred brains.

   In the past 15 years, researchers learned that for patients with blood
diseases who need stem-cell transplants, cells harvested from placentas and
umbilical cords don't have to match as closely as bone marrow does to minimize
the risk of rejection. The first studies found that when a transplant succeeds -
the cells take root and grow - it can effectively treat some cancers, such as
leukemia, and other blood-borne disorders.

   Kurtzberg has been at the forefront from the beginning, making cord-blood
transplants her life's work for nearly two decades. She was among a handful of
researchers who expanded the use of cord blood to include treating inherited
metabolic storage diseases such as Hurler syndrome and Krabbe disease.

   Kurtzberg's work with cord blood in these diseases has been characterized as
pioneering in the Los Angeles Times, USA Today, Time and elsewhere in articles
that lauded her for giving parents hope. She has appeared on "Today" and "Good
Morning America" with families of sick children to prod insurance companies to
pay for their transplants.

   Kurtzberg has testified about the success of her cord-blood therapies for
metabolic storage diseases as she campaigned for a national cord-blood registry,
speaking before Congress half a dozen times in the past five years.

   Kurtzberg's push to expand the use of umbilical cord blood has resonated,
particularly with conservatives who oppose embryonic stem-cell research, which
destroys human embryos. Many scientists say embryonic cells can grow into more
kinds of cells than the "adult" cells in cord blood.

   Congress recently passed legislation to provide $79 million to collect
150,000 units of umbilical-cord blood for public cord banks over the next five
years. The law also established a national registry, a single database of
cord-blood and adult bone-marrow donors.

   In January, in the early days of Alexis', Jashaia's and Dakota's transplants
on 5200, Kurtzberg was with President Bush when he signed the registry into law.

   Kurtzberg joined former Buffalo Bills football star Jim Kelly, whose son,
Hunter, died of Krabbe disease, to push for mandated newborn screening in New
York for Krabbe disease and other disorders, including Tay-Sachs. New York began
screening newborns for these diseases in August.

   Earlier this year, Cordus, a private cord-blood bank based in Florida, opened
a branch at Duke that is run out of Kurtzberg's office. She receives a fee for
every unit of blood collected and processed for Cordus.

   Cord-blood transplants are generally accepted by some in the medical
community as an effective treatment for appropriate cases of Hurler syndrome and
Krabbe disease. But not for Tay-Sachs.

   At the heart of physicians' questions about Kurtzberg's use of cord-blood
transplants to treat Tay-Sachs patients is whether the technique has been
sufficiently tested to be considered treatment or whether it should be
classified as experimental.

   In the small universe of physicians who study and treat metabolic storage
diseases, Kurtzberg's transplants for children with Krabbe and Hurler are well
known.

   Kurtzberg was among the authors of a New England Journal of Medicine article
on 20 children with Hurler syndrome, a progressive disease that damages the
central nervous system and causes heart disease, bone abnormalities and eventual
death.

   In 15 of the 17 children who survived transplant, coordination and motor
skills stabilized or improved, the May 2004 article reported. All continued to
gain skills.

   Another journal article in May 2005 outlined the results of transplants on 25
children with Krabbe, another debilitating disease. All 11 newborns with no
neurological symptoms survived and improved. But six of the 14 infants who had
symptoms died. The eight who survived showed little improvement. The authors
concluded that the youngest children - those without symptoms - benefited from
the transplant.

   Both articles came out of a larger study known as COBLT that the National
Institutes of Health sponsored to test whether cord blood was a good alternative
to bone marrow for a wide range of diseases. Among the participants were 69
children with inherited metabolic storage diseases, 67 of whom were treated in
Kurtzberg's program at Duke. Three were babies with Tay-Sachs.

   Kurtzberg described the results of these 69 children in a journal, reporting
that 72 percent survived at least a year. The researchers concluded that
cord-blood transplants extended the children's lives. No data were presented
about their cognitive, language or motor skills after transplant, one of the
points made by pre-publication reviewers, who criticized the paper for using
words such as "clinical outcomes" and "efficacy" when only survival data for the
transplants was reported.

   "It's a 'you're alive or you're dead' paper," said Dr. Paul Martin, lead
author of the study and a hematologist who works with Kurtzberg. "It doesn't
address neurological outcomes."

   Kurtzberg cites these studies to explain why she considers transplants for
Tay-Sachs to be therapy rather than experiments, even while many unknowns
remain.

   "To deny a child an option for therapy at the time we can offer it while we
continue to learn is sort of state-of-the-art for transplant medicine and
oncology, for that matter," Kurtzberg said in a February interview.

   Kurtzberg later said in an e-mail that Dakota, Alexis and Jashaia were on
treatment plans, because following the COBLT study, "we now consider this
standard of care."

   But Dr. Liana Harvath, who oversees research funded by the Blood Disease and
Resources division at the NIH's National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, said
treating Tay-Sachs with a transplant is considered investigational.

   Dr. Charlie Peters, director of stem-cell transplantation at Children's Mercy
Hospital in Kansas City, said Kurtzberg is stretching the notion of accepted
medical practice by basing Tay-Sachs transplants on results from other diseases.

   "The only place transplanting (for) Tay-Sachs is considered standard of care
is in Dr. Kurtzberg's head," Peters said.

   Ken and Julie were eager to get Dakota's transplant started when a nurse
asked them to sign the consent form.

   Informed consent is an important part of any medical procedure. There's no
reality check like seeing the hard road ahead spelled out in black and white.

   Dakota's consent form was nine pages. The cord-blood transplant is a
treatment plan for an inherited metabolic disorder, the form said. Tay-Sachs
wasn't specifically mentioned. He said he skimmed the rest, signed it and handed
it to Julie.

   She said she signed without reading any of it.

   Kurtzberg said she decided to transplant juvenile Tay-Sachs cases like
Dakota's and Alexis' because the good cognitive results of older children in the
Hurler study suggested that older Tay-Sachs children would benefit, too.

   Juvenile Tay-Sachs is rarer than the infantile form, and different. In
infants, neurological problems usually appear by 6 months of age, with rapid
loss of abilities and death by age 5. In juveniles, the disease makes itself
known later, between 2 and 5, because the brain produced the needed enzyme at
some point. The decline begins when the brain stops producing the enzyme, often
meaning a slower deterioration than in the infantile form. Death occurs between
the ages of 5 and 15.

   "They lose these things at a slower pace, and when you come in with a
transplant you have more time to rescue and repair than you would with a child
with a faster-developing disease," Kurtzberg maintains. "We have to find out,
but I do expect that the principles follow each other and that there is no
reason why the juvenile Tay-Sachs kid should not get more benefit than the
infantile Tay-Sachs kids."

   Kurtzberg's critics say her theory is flawed. Just because a transplant may
help Disease A doesn't mean it will help Disease B, they said. For one, they say
the missing enzyme that characterizes Hurler and Krabbe doesn't cause brain
cells to die like Tay-Sachs does.

   Unlike in Krabbe and Hurler, the missing enzyme in Tay-Sachs makes brain
cells balloon up to three times their normal size, profoundly affecting the
central nervous system, Peters said.

   "And there is no evidence that bone marrow or cord-blood transplants can
correct enzyme deficiencies affecting the central nervous system in Tay-Sachs
disease," he said.

   Doctors at the University of Minnesota in 1990 were the first to treat a
juvenile Tay-Sachs patient with a bone marrow transplant. The cells took, so the
transplant worked, but the girl died more than three years later. Dr. Chet
Whitley, who treated the girl, said the procedure was deemed to have no benefit
because no evidence showed the cells halted the onward march of the neurological
damage.

   Peters said stem cells from bone marrow and cord blood work the same way when
it comes to brain tissue. Cord blood would bring no better results than the bone
marrow tried 16 years ago, he said.

   Whitley, who was a member of the Minnesota team and is now with the Gene
Therapy Center and Institute of Human Genetics in Minneapolis, said in an e-mail
that neither type of cell seems to prevent neurological deterioration in
Tay-Sachs.

   Kurtzberg disagrees. She said she has demonstrated that missing enzymes can
penetrate the brain and repair damaged brain cells in Krabbe. Two brain
autopsies of Krabbe patients found the missing enzyme characterizing that
disease in the dead men's brain tissue, she said.

   Evan Snyder, director of the Burnham Institute of Stem Cells and Regeneration
in San Diego, who interpreted the autopsy reports with Kurtzberg, said
cord-blood cells "do go throughout the brain, and they appear to make missing
enzyme material which is crucial in these types of diseases."

   But the autopsies were done on patients with Krabbe disease, not Tay-Sachs.

   "What we know is that not every enzyme can be taken up by the cells," said
Dr. John Wagner, director of stem cell transplantation at the University of
Minnesota. "Some enzymes can be; others won't be. So the fact that the enzyme is
there doesn't necessarily mean anything, unfortunately. I wish that it did."

   Wagner said he's not aware of any data in the last 20 years that demonstrate
a transplant will help Tay-Sachs.

   "It can't just be, 'Well, I'm crossing my fingers.' It's got to have
something more objective than that, that says this could work," Wagner said.

   Kurtzberg's supporters stand by her efforts to go down unproven roads because
of her expertise, and because so little is known about Tay-Sachs.

   "Physicians are human and physicians want to help kids," said John Falletta,
chairman of Duke's Institutional Review Board, which oversees human research.
"Physicians want to help parents of kids, and Joanne is very much a human and
very interested in trying to help people."

   It is not unreasonable to try something that has the potential to reverse a
devastating disease, said Dr. Mary Laughlin, a transplant doctor at University
Hospitals Case Medical Center who trained under Kurtzberg at Duke.

   "Physicians who are innovators will raise controversy," Laughlin said. "And
in this circumstance, if you have the potential high risk, potential high impact
using new medical technology, you're going to raise someone's hackles."

   Even at Duke. Martin, the Duke hematologist in Kurtzberg's unit, now refuses
to do pre-transplant work-ups on her patients with metabolic storage diseases,
although he has come to see the value in trying in certain cases of Krabbe and
Hurler.

   "I have a hard time informing a family of what their child is going to be
like in the future when I've seen other kids with the same metabolic disease go
through [this] for nothing," said Martin, who helped care for nearly 70 children
in the large study Kurtzberg cited. "I've been burned out."

   Transplant Day. Friday, Jan. 27, would be known from here on as Day 1 on the
calendar Ken and Julie posted on the Web page that allowed family and friends to
follow Dakota's progress.

   "This is the day Dakota's getting 'The Gift of Life,' " Julie sing songed.

   Julie counted her days away from home in Olmsted Falls, her daughter, her
friends. In that calendar in her head, it was Day 24. They had such a long way
to go, and already some days she felt paralyzed by homesickness.

   Dakota had spent the last two weeks receiving chemotherapy. She still had her
hair and plenty of energy and coordination to pull stickers from a page and
plunk them onto paper, color within the lines and interact with her older
sister, Bailey. Ken and Julie had trouble keeping Dakota in bed.

   A few minutes after 2 p.m., the nurse arrived with the donor's cells. The
plastic bag looked like a sandwich-size Ziploc of thickened cherry Kool-Aid. The
nurse hung the bag on a pole and attached another IV line to the central line in
Dakota's chest.

   "Blue's Clues" played on the TV, and Dakota didn't take her eyes off the
screen. As the nurse started the drip, she warned that Dakota probably would
start to smell like creamed corn because of the preservatives.

   Fifteen minutes later, the transplant was done.

   "Is that it?" Julie asked. The nurse nodded, yes.

   The moment seemed woefully anticlimactic. Julie suggested the hospital
compose a song and clapping routine, like restaurants do for birthdays.

   "This is your Transplant Day, this is your Transplant Day," Julie sang and
clapped before erupting into giggles. She was giddy with expectation and hope.

   The room began to smell like creamed corn. Ken put a mask on because the
smell nauseated him.

   "The smell of life," Julie teased.

   Two days later, Dakota was vomiting blood nonstop and couldn't get out of
bed.

   Tuesday: The rigors of the treatment take their toll on the families, and
predictions about the consequences of treatment begin to ring true.

   Plain Dealer news researcher Cheryl Diamond contributed to this story. To
reach this Plain Dealer reporter: dkeough@plaind.com, 216-999-5068

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2006


                              594 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                           October 28, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 396 words

HEADLINE: Drugmaker Shire reports 19% rise in 3d-quarter revenue

BYLINE: Linda Loyd, Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Shire P.L.C. yesterday reported a 19 percent rise in third-quarter revenue as
it continues to expand its share of the U.S. market for attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder medicines.

   The British drugmaker, which has major operations in Wayne, makes the world's
best-selling ADHD drug, Adderall XR. Shire said its total share of the U.S. ADHD
market rose to 29 percent from 26 percent at the end of June.

   For its third quarter that ended Sept. 30, Shire posted net income of $87.2
million, or 17 cents a share, compared with a loss of $630.7 million, or $1.26,
in the same quarter last year. Revenue rose to $449.4 million from $376.1
million a year ago, as Shire introduced products such as the attention-deficit
patch Daytrana.

   Shire lost nearly $631 million in the year-earlier quarter after writing off
research and development related to its $1.6 billion acquisition last year of
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., of Cambridge, Mass.

   "It's been an excellent quarter across all areas of our business," said
Wayne-based chief executive officer Matthew Emmens.

   The company is now projecting 2006 revenue growth of between 12 and 14
percent, up from earlier predictions in the "low double-digit range." Shire
employs about 600 people in the Chesterbrook Corporate Center.

   Adderall XR sales rose 25 percent, to $207.6 million from $165.9 million in
the same quarter a year ago. Adderall XR accounts for half of Shire's product
revenues. Combining Adderall XR and Daytrana sales, Shire said its share of the
U.S. ADHD market was 29 percent.

   Shire reported revenue in the third quarter from three new products:
Daytrana, the ADHD patch, with $9.9 million in sales; Elaprase for the rare
Hunter syndrome, with sales of $4.3 million; and Replagal, a therapy for a rare
genetic disorder called Fabry disease, with $32.4 million in sales.

   Shire and partner New River Pharmaceuticals Inc. are planning to launch an
ADHD drug, known by FDA number NRP104, in the second quarter of 2007.

   Shire and New River said NRP104 delivers the same kind of stimulant as the
most popular hyperactivity drugs, but through a process in which the medicine
can be activated only by a stomach enzyme. The drug is designed to be more
difficult to abuse.

   American depositary shares of Shire closed down 31 cents at $54.04 yesterday
on the Nasdaq.

   Contact staff writer Linda Loyd at 215-854-2831 or lloyd@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2006


                              595 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            October 27, 2006 Friday

LENGTH: 325 words

HEADLINE: Higher revenue, profits for ADHD drugmaker

BYLINE: Linda Loyd, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Shire P.L.C., the Britain-based pharmaceutical company with major operations
in Wayne, posted a profit and said today revenues were up nearly 20 percent in
the third quarter because one-time charges due to an acquisition last year were
not repeated.

   The maker of Adderall XR, the world's best-selling drug for attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder, acquired Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. for $1.6 billion
last year in order to reduce its reliance on Adderall XR, which provides half of
its product revenues.

   Net income was $87.2 million, or 17 cents a share, compared with a loss of
$630.7 million, or $1.26, in the same quarter last year, said the drugmaker,
which is based in Basingstoke, England.

   Revenue rose 19 percent to $449.4 million from $376.1 million a year ago, as
the company introduced new products such as the attention deficit patch,
Daytrana.

   "It's been an excellent quarter across all areas of our business," said
Wayne-based chief executive officer Matthew Emmens. "We are upgrading our
revenue guidance for the full year." Shire, Britain's third-largest drug
company, employs about 600 people in the Chesterbrook Corporate Center.

   The company raised its 2006 revenue forecast to between 12 and 14 percent,
from "low double-digit" growth.

   Shire and marketing partner, New River Pharmaceuticals Inc., received an
"approvable letter" earlier this month from the Food and Drug Administration to
sell a new ADHD drug, known by the FDA number NRP104. Shire said today it
expects to begin marketing the drug in the second quarter next year.

   Shire and New River said NRP104 delivers the same kind of stimulant as the
most popular hyperactivity drugs, but through a process in which the medicine
can be activated only by a stomach enzyme. The drug is designed to be harder to
abuse.

   Shares in Shire rose 52 cents, or 0.96 percent, to $54.87 in midday trading
on the Nasdaq.

   Contact staff writer Linda Loyd at 215-854-2831 or lloyd@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2006


                              596 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            October 27, 2006 Friday

LENGTH: 444 words

HEADLINE: Shire revenue rose 19% as share of ADHD market grows

BYLINE: Linda Loyd, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Shire P.L.C. today reported a 19 percent rise in third-quarter revenue as it
continues to expand its share of the U.S. market for attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder medicines.

   The British drugmaker, which has major operations in Wayne, makes the world's
best-selling ADHD drug, Adderall XR. Shire said its total share of the U.S. ADHD
market rose to 29 percent from 26 percent at the end of June.

   For its third quarter that ended Sept. 30, Shire posted net income of $87.2
million, or 17 cents a share, compared with a loss of $630.7 million, or $1.26,
in the same quarter last year.

   Revenue rose to $449.4 million from $376.1 million a year ago, as Shire
introduced products such as the attention-deficit patch Daytrana.

   The maker of Adderall XR lost nearly $631 million in the year-earlier quarter
after writing off research and development related to its $1.6 billion
acquisition last year of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., of Cambridge, Mass.

   "It's been an excellent quarter across all areas of our business," said
Wayne-based chief executive officer Matthew Emmens. "Our execution plan is well
on track, and therefore we are upgrading our revenue guidance for the full
year."

   The company is now projecting 2006 revenue growth of between 12 and 14
percent, up from earlier predictions in the "low double-digit range." Shire,
Britain's third-largest drug company, employs about 600 people in the
Chesterbrook Corporate Center.

   Adderall XR sales rose 25 percent, to $207.6 million from $165.9 million in
the same quarter a year ago. Adderall XR accounts for half of Shire's product
revenues. Combining Adderall XR and Daytrana sales, Shire said its share of the
U.S. ADHD market was 29 percent.

   Shire, which is based in Basingstoke, England, reported revenue in the
third-quarter from three new products.

   Daytrana, the ADHD patch, with $9.9 million in sales; Elaprase for the rare
condition of Hunter syndrome, with sales of $4.3 million; and Replagal, a
therapy for a rare genetic disorder called Fabry disease, which had $32.4
million in sales.

   Shire and partner New River Pharmaceuticals Inc. are planning to launch an
ADHD drug, known by the FDA number NRP104, in the second quarter next year.

   Shire and New River said NRP104 delivers the same kind of stimulant as the
most popular hyperactivity drugs, but through a process in which the medicine
can be activated only by a stomach enzyme. The drug is designed to be more
difficult to abuse.

   Today, American depositary shares of Shire closed down 31 cents, or 0.5
percent, at $54.04 on the Nasdaq. For the year, Shire ADS have risen 39 percent.

   Contact staff writer Linda Loyd at 215-854-2831 or lloyd@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2006


                              597 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2006 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           October 26, 2006 Thursday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Business; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 554 words

HEADLINE: OGI campus finds a buyer at $44 million

BYLINE: TED SICKINGER, The Oregonian

BODY:

   SUMMARY: Undisclosed   | OHSU is not prepared to reveal the pending owner of
the 40 acres and 15 buildings in Hillsboro

   Oregon Health & Science University has agreed to sell its Oregon Graduate
Institute campus in Hillsboro for approximately $44 million.

   University officials on Wednesday declined to identify the buyer, saying they
are bound for now by a confidentiality agreement. Brad King, OHSU's chief
financial officer, offered preliminary details of the sale to the university's
board of directors as part of a review of the university's financial
projections.

   King, in an interview, said the university agreed to sell the land for a
price close to its listing --$44 million --and would recognize a $26 million
gain over seven years while it leases back part of the land.

   Gary Griff, a broker with Cushman & Wakefield, which is marketing the
property for OHSU, said it had been under contract with an institutional
investor --not a developer --for about two weeks. He expects the transaction to
close by the end of November.

   The 40-acre property encompasses 270,000 square feet of space in 15
buildings. That includes the 85,000-square-foot Bronson Creek office building,
which houses the OGI dean's office and the school's biomedical engineering
department.

   OGI intends to vacate much of the Bronson Creek building, the most marketable
office space. The university's biomedical engineering department will move into
its new Center for Health & Healing in Portland, but OHSU plans to lease back
much of the OGI campus until it can build a new medical campus on the South
Waterfront.

   Since the two schools merged five years ago, OGI has lost faculty, students
and grant support. As computer science and electrical engineering faculty have
decamped from the school, OHSU has turned its focus to medical engineering,
closer to its own research interests. With 42 full-time faculty, OGI is a
relatively small piece of OHSU today.

   OHSU will continue to maintain a substantial presence in Hillsboro in the
form of its primate center, the Neurological Sciences Institute, and the Vaccine
and Gene Therapy Institute. The university had planned to sell a second 50-acre
chunk of its 140-acre campus, but has taken that off the market as it
contemplates how big a buffer it might need around its remaining activities.

   OHSU had said earlier that it would use proceeds of the sale to help fund a
planned $60 million endowment for OGI. Jonathan Modie, a university spokesman,
said OHSU was still "working out numbers as to how much we could put into the
endowment."

   A unit of Principal Financial Group bought the AmberGlen Business Center, a
217-acre office complex west of the OGI land, in 2004 for $114.56 million. That
was one of the largest commercial real estate deals in the Portland area in
recent years.

   Meanwhile, officials with the city of Hillsboro are developing a master plan
for 582 acres of land in the city's east end that encompass the OGI parcel,
AmberGlen and other land.

   "There's a lot of employment in the area," said Wink Brooks, planning
director for the city of Hillsboro. "There's a potential for creating a much
more intensive mixed-use employment and residential center that would provide a
better jobs/housing balance."

   Dylan Rivera contributed to this report

   Ted Sickinger: 503-221-8505; tedsickinger@news.oregonian.com

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2006


                              598 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 The Columbus Dispatch
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                            October 24, 2006 Tuesday
                               Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01D

LENGTH: 575 words

HEADLINE: HUNTER SYNDROME;
Medicine gives boy's family reason to hope

BYLINE: Misti Crane, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   Sharon Cochenour didn't expect her oldest son to live this long, to almost 9.

   And even though she organized fundraisers for research money in earnest,
Cochenour really didn't think she'd see a medicine for Hunter syndrome in
Andrew's lifetime.

   Yesterday, the Ross County boy received his first infusion of a treatment
that is supposed to stall the progress of the genetic disorder, and possibly
reverse some of the damage it's done so far.

   Andrew is the first central Ohio resident treated with Elaprase, which
replaces an enzyme his body doesn't produce naturally. Without the enzyme, the
body doesn't break down complex sugars.

   The buildup of waste products stunts growth, causes problems in the joints,
heart and lungs, enlarges the liver and spleen, and creates a coarsening of
facial features.

   Children with Hunter syndrome also decline mentally and die young. Hunter
syndrome is diagnosed in approximately 1 out of 65,000 to 132,000 births and was
previously untreatable.

   Andrew is unable to talk. He has respiratory problems, swollen organs that
distend his belly, and, most seriously, an enlarged heart with valves that don't
close properly.

   He will be treated at Children's Hospital weekly, through a port in his
chest. The treatment will cost about $300,000 to $400,000 a year and is covered
by insurance.

   "Most of us thought there would never be a treatment," said Cochenour, who
keeps in touch regularly with parents of other Hunter syndrome children.

   "We're hopeful that it will keep his disease from progressing and that we'll
see some improvement."

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved Elaprase in July under a
program for drugs that treat rare diseases. A study of 96 patients showed that
those treated with the enzyme had a significant improvement in the distance they
could walk in six minutes.

   That measure shows they had skeletal improvements as well as improved
function of the heart and lungs, said Dr. Kip Martha, senior vice president and
chief medical officer of Shire Human Genetic Therapies, the Massachusetts
company that makes Elaprase.

   Shire has one other similar treatment on the market and another in the
pipeline.

   "You're just replacing a normal substance that's missing," Martha said.

   Researchers, who worked on the treatment for a decade, discovered a pathway
that gets the missing enzyme into the cell, where it can make a difference.

   "This is actually quite cool; it gets exactly to where it needs to go," said
Dr. Kim McBride, the genetic specialist who cares for Andrew.

   He said Andrew's disease is moderately advanced, and he expects the therapy
to significantly improve his quality of life. It is not a cure.

   For McBride, the opportunity to treat genetic abnormalities is a joy.

   "As a genetic doctor, most of the time you're left with saying, 'I can tell
you what's going to happen, but I can't treat it.'

   "Now, I can actually do something."

   Theoretically, if a child is treated before symptoms show up (usually when
they're toddlers), they should never develop the signs and symptoms, Martha
said.

   But that has not been proved or tested at this point.

   The largest risk of the treatment is allergic reaction, but no children
involved in the research had to stop the treatments, Martha said.

   Andrew's family is hopeful the treatment will give him comfort and give them
many more happy times with him, said his aunt, Barbara Pryor.

   "He is the happiest kid. We've learned to take every day and cherish it."

   mcrane@dispatch.com

GRAPHIC: Photo, DAN SMITHCHILDREN'S HOSPITAL, Eight-year-old Andrew Cochenour
sits on his mother's lap while being looked over by Dr. Kim McBride.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2006


                              599 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           October 18, 2006 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 779 words

HEADLINE: The Nation;
Gene Therapy Trials Show Promise Against Parkinson's;
Two studies benefit patients without adverse effects, but more tests are needed
to be sure.

BYLINE: Thomas H. Maugh II, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   The first studies of human gene therapy for Parkinson's disease have shown
that the technique is safe and can reduce symptoms for patients, two groups of
researchers have reported.

   All of the 24 patients who received therapy in the two separate trials
received some benefit and none had any significant side effects, researchers
reported at neuroscience meetings Tuesday and last week.

   Gene therapy has a tarnished reputation because of problems encountered in
trials involving other diseases, said Katie Hood, deputy chief executive officer
of the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research.

   The Food and Drug Administration temporarily halted gene therapy trials in
1999 after an 18-year-old being treated for a mild genetic disorder died after a
violent reaction to the procedure. Trials were halted in 2005 after three French
children being treated for inherited immunodeficiency disease developed leukemia
and one of them died.

   "It's very encouraging that two companies were able to show benefits with no
significant adverse effects," Hood said. "Safety is obviously the first hurdle."

   Experts and the researchers themselves, however, cautioned patients against
investing too much hope in the findings because Parkinson's studies are
notorious for showing placebo effects.

   Only when the techniques are tested in controlled trials, now in the planning
stages, will researchers be able to determine whether the benefits are real and
lasting.

   Parkinson's, which strikes as many as 100,000 Americans each year, is
characterized by severe tremors and rigidity in the limbs, and loss of muscle
control. It results from the death of brain cells that produce the
neurotransmitter dopamine, which plays a key role in transmitting commands from
the brain's muscle-control centers. The disorder's cause is unknown.

   Both teams used the same gene therapy technology, inserting a desired gene
into the common adeno-associated virus. AAV readily infects humans but has never
been shown to cause disease.

   One team, led by Dr. Matthew J. During of the Weill Cornell Medical Center in
New York, used a gene that is the blueprint for an enzyme called glutamic acid
decarboxylase. That enzyme converts chemicals in the cell into a
neurotransmitter called GABA, which is essential for controlling muscle
movements.

   Earlier studies have shown that Parkinson's disease is marked by a deficiency
of GABA in a part of the brain called the subthalamic nucleus. Injecting GABA
into the brain can ease disease symptoms, but the neurotransmitter is quickly
cleared, limiting its benefits.

   During's team injected one side of the brains of 12 patients with one of
three different concentrations of the gene therapy agent.

   He told Tuesday's meeting of the Society for Neuroscience in Atlanta that all
12 patients had an improvement of at least 25% on a conventional scoring system
used to assess the severity of Parkinson's symptoms, four of whom improved at
least 37% and five others 40% to 65%.

   The benefits have persisted for a year. Placebo benefits are usually
transient, researchers noted.

   Brain imaging showed an increase in metabolism on the side where patients
received the gene therapy, and the amount of increase correlated with the degree
of improvement in symptoms, During said.

   The gene therapy agent was manufactured by Neurologix Inc. of Fort Lee, N.J.,
a company created by During and his colleagues to commercialize the technology.
Neurologix paid for the study. During said the neurologists who assessed the
patients' condition had no financial ties to the company.

   The second study, led by Dr. William J. Marks Jr. of UC San Francisco, used
the gene for a growth factor called neurturin, which is closely related to the
better-known growth factor GDNF.

   Studies have shown that injecting GDNF into the section of the brain known as
the putamen can impede, and possibly reverse, the loss of dopaminesecreting
cells.

   Marks and his colleagues injected 12 Parkinson's patients with one of two
doses of the gene therapy agent. Patients receiving the lower dose had a 40%
decrease in Parkinson's symptoms, and those receiving the higher dose had a 50%
reduction, he reported at last week's American Neurological Assn. meeting in
Chicago. The researchers have monitored the patients for nine months.

   "This is a clinically meaningful benefit that has been sustained over time,"
Marks said.

   The gene therapy agent used by Marks was developed by Ceregene Inc. of San
Diego. Marks said he had no financial ties to Ceregene.

   The company paid for the trial with the Fox foundation. The foundation
recently announced it would invest $1.9 million in a controlled trial of the
approach.

   *

   thomas.maugh@latimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2006


                              600 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            October 15, 2006 Sunday
                                 FIRST EDITION

SECTION: SPECIAL; Pg. U13

LENGTH: 694 words

HEADLINE: ENGINEERING AND SCIENCE

BYLINE: Tab

BODY:

   Abbie Goodman, executive director of the Engineering Center, fears that in
coming years there will not be enough engineers to design our country's
essential infrastructure. "Associations like ours are concerned about getting
children interested in engineering," she said, pointing out that many baby
boomers in the field are now reaching retirement age.

   Many young graduates are going into high-tech careers, not realizing the
contributions they can make by designing our roads and bridges, water systems,
school and office buildings, and manufacturing facilities. Qualified
professional engineers are also increasingly in demand for environmental cleanup
projects.

   For professional and career connections, check nspe.org, engineers.org, and
sciencecareers.org.

   BIOLOGICAL SCIENTISTS

   Average salary: $69,780

   Demand: Improving. Studies of gene therapies, Alzheimer's disease, and issues
related to cancer and AIDS present new opportunities for PhD scientists, but
government restrictions and tough competition for funding impose limitations on
research jobs.

   Qualifications: Doctorate needed for independent research; for sales,
marketing, and applied research, a master's works well.

   CHEMISTS

   Average salary: $72,700

   Demand: Fairly good. Competition is keen, but there are good jobs in medical
and environmental research, as well as in pharmaceuticals and household
products.

   Qualifications: PhD for independent research; master's for applied research.

   CHEMICAL ENGINEERS

   Average salary: $83,480

   Demand: Mostly strong. Energy and pollution control are providing good
opportunities in chemical engineering, but some work is going offshore.

   Qualifications: Bachelor's degree

   CIVIL ENGINEERS

   Average salary: $73,330

   Demand: Very good. Critical shortages are developing for engineers needed to
design and maintain roads, bridges, power and water systems, and buildings, and
to clean up environmental damage.

   Qualifications: Bachelor's and professional state licensure. Experience and
knowledge of new technologies are important.

   ELECTRICAL AND

   ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS

   Average salary: $85,750 (electrical); $82,830 (electronics)

   Demand: Strong (electrical); fair (electronics). Critical need for electrical
engineers for wiring and other infrastructure work, and for communications,
defense, energy projects; offshore work is cutting into electronics engineering.

   Qualifications: Bachelor's, plus continuing courses in new technologies;
creativity and analytical abilities crucial.

   ENGINEERING AND NATURAL SCIENCE MANAGERS

   Average salary: $118,450 (engineering); $143,120 (natural science)

   Demand: Strong. Some of the greatest demands in civil, environmental, and
mechanical engineering are at management levels. Those with experience and
business savvy command good salaries.

   Qualifications: Engineering degree plus field experience, strong technical
and communications skills. Additional business or engineering management degrees
add to opportunities and pay.

   MECHANICAL ENGINEERS

   Average salary: $78,520

   Demand: Good. Mechanical engineers are needed for design of power,
sanitation, and environmental control systems.

   Qualifications: Mechanical engineering degree, plus continuing courses in new
technologies.

   GEOLOGISTS, GEOPHYSICISTS,

   AND OCEANOGRAPHERS

   Average salary: $73,290 (geoscientists); $87,740 (oceanographers)

   Demand: Steady. Needed for finding energy sources and studying environmental
health of oceans and undersea life. New imaging techniques are advancing work in
protecting whales and studying ecosystems, shipwrecks, and tectonic plate
movements, and retirements are creating some openings.

   Qualifications: Geology or geophysics degree for entry-level jobs; graduate
degrees for research work.

   PHYSICISTS AND ASTRONOMERS

   Average salary: $99,860 (physicists); $130,660 (astronomers)

   Demand: Mixed. Research funding is limited in these highly competitive
markets, but opportunities are good in energy and defense-related fields, and in
applied research and technology.

   Qualifications: Most research and teaching positions require PhD and
postdoctoral training; those with master's can do applied research and product
development; bachelor's in physics qualifies for engineering, computer work.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2007
