
                               4 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          December 11, 1999, Saturday

SECTION: FOREIGN NEWS; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 476 words

HEADLINE: US DISQUIET OVER DEATH OF TEENAGER IN GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: Mary Dejevsky In Washington

BODY:


    A FURORE has broken out in the upper reaches of the American scientific and
medical establishment following the death of a young man who was being treated
in an experimental gene therapy programme. The circumstances surrounding the
death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger were the subject of a tumultuous three-day
conference near Washington, which ended yesterday with calls for far tougher
regulation of this pioneering sector.

    Jesse, who suffered from a chronic liver condition, died in September, four
days after being injected with a virus designed to carry the gene into his body.
Researchers hoped that this would cure him permanently. Instead, he developed a
high temperature, breathing difficulties and other complications that proved
fatal.

    Jesse was a volunteer in the programme, which was based at one of the most
respected medical research centres in the US, at the University of Pennsylvania
in Philadelphia. Taking part in experimental programmes at teaching hospitals is
one way that people who are chronically ill, and so uninsurable in the US system
of private health-care, can obtain state of the art treatment.

    At the time, Jesse Gelsinger's death was not directly attributed to the gene
treatment. It was only late last month that a report established that it
probably killed him. It transpired that as many as three people may have died as
a result of experimental gene therapy in the US, but Jesse Gelsinger's is the
first case to be documented.

    Gene therapy, which is still at a very early experimental stage, holds out
the prospect of curing genetically transmitted diseases if the faulty gene can
be corrected or replaced. Experiments on rats had produced hopeful results, and
the University of Pennsylvania obtained funding for human treatment.

    With the stakes so high, this week's conference at the National Institutes
of Health uncovered depths of passion that were exceptional in the normally cool
and collected world of medical science.

    Several of the researchers, including the head of the programme, James
Wilson, apologised for breaches of the regulations, while parents of sick
children begged for the experiments to be allowed to continue. However,
participants also heard revelations about the University of Pennsylvania
programme that cast serious doubt both on its effectivenessand reliability.

    Officials from the US Food and Drug Administration, which oversees the
introduction of new drug treatments, said that they had not been told of deaths
among monkeys more than a year before Jesse Gelsinger died. The university
researchers for their part admitted that they had accepted Jesse even though he
did not strictly qualify under FDA regulations.

    The FDA is expected to respond by announcing a new study to consider how the
regulations can be tightened to reduce the risks to patient.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1999


                               7 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                December 3, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1114 words

HEADLINE: HOW THE NET IS CHOKING ROMANCE

BYLINE: Henry Porter

BODY:


    YOU can hardly enter a pub or dinner party these days without finding
someone wearing a furtive smile and betraying a lunatic gleam in their eyes.

    Instantly you recognise the signs of Internet fever, and very soon they are
taking you by the elbow and telling you in a series of oblique hints that
they've got a website idea which no one else has thought of and which will bring
them undreamed-of wealth in a matter of months.

    I have met three people in the past fortnight who have Web plans, but I'm
sure there are far more of my colleagues and friends secretly plotting their
futures as 21st-century billionaires, with half an eye dancing over the foreign
property pages of Country Life.

    Some are merely fantasists, others have ideas which might just conceivably
take off, provided the tricky problem of sorting out revenue on the Net is
worked out soon. But they have all grasped the point that the path to a fortune
is paved with small overheads. They see themselves at the centre of lean little
outfits, which are run by a co-operative of new century techno hipsters. Wealth,
youth, freedom are the words that fuel the Net business fantasy, which is of
course adaptable to practically any line of work.

    The second point they have taken to heart is the need for secrecy, although
the atmosphere is nothing like it is in the States, where the understanding and
use of the Internet is between two and two-and-a-half years ahead of us.

    In New York a few weeks ago I heard the acronym NDA for the first time, when
I was talking to a couple of doctors working in gene therapy.

    "If this conversation goes any further," said one jokingly, "I'll have to
slap an NDA on you." I had no idea what an NDA was until a week later, when the
Wall Street Journal charted the history of the Non Dis-closure Agreement, a
legal document which is issued between friends and lovers, prohibiting the
disclosure of valuable information learned during their association.

    If you're any kind of a cheese in Silicon Valley, you take the NDA very
seriously indeed, because there's no knowing what you might blurt out in your
sleep or in a tender exchange on the way to bed.

    An idea can be ripped off and put to work in weeks on the Net, so before you
have any kind of Net conversation or begin a relationship you produce an NDA and
ask the party in question to sign it. The Journal produced a rather moving story
of man who waited for the right moment to pop the question to his girlfriend not
about going to bed, but about signing the NDA before they went to bed.

    It cannot be long before we see the first NDA hit these shores, adding an
extra dimension of intrigue to the humdrum life of the e-commerce dreamer.

    How the Net is choking romance

    Meet the man who saved grandfather

    THREE weeks ago I wrote a piece here about how a man named Garfitt had saved
my grandfather's life in the First World War. When I toasted him on Remembrance
Sunday I had little idea that within a week I would be talking to a descendant
of the long-lost hero of my mother's family - the man to whom 15 people owe
their lives. The story was this: sometime during the heavy bombardment of 31
October in the first Battle of Ypres, my grandfather, Beauchamp Seymour,
received a serious wound in the head. His batman, John Garfitt, carried him from
the trenches to the casualty clearing station where he overheard the medics say
that Beauchamp was too badly injured to be treated.

    Garfitt thought otherwise. Without permission or papers of any kind he
managed to transport Beauchamp to the Channel, find a berth on a boat bound for
England, then got him on a train to London where he was treated for the head
wound. The important point is that Garfitt went absent without leave, a crime
punishable by summary execution.

    Owing to the ingenuity of Karen Douglas on the Evening Standard news desk I
was able to trace Olive Garfitt, who turned out to be one of two daughters born
to John Garfitt just after the First World War.

    She had some knowledge of the officer saved by her late father (he died in
the 1950s) because he told her about the war in a series of what must have been
dramatic bedtime stories.

    She has now sent me a photograph of him as a young man, sitting proud and
determined at the wheel of a car. It gave me some pause to see this stranger
from the other end of the century for the first time. I wonder about his
character and the impulse which made him take the action he did. A lot hangs on
a moment like that on 31 October 1914 in the Casualty Clearing Station, when the
battle-weary rifleman might so easily, and understandably, have left Beauchamp
to die.

    Happily for me and 14 of my relations, he did not.

    Mandelson's next move

    IF I were Robin Cook I'd be rather nervous about Peter Mandelson's virtuoso
display of diplomatic skills which culminated in the handover of powers in
Northern Ireland this week. Peter will surely not stay happy in Stormont Castle
for long and after the next election will be looking enviously at the Foreign
Office and the Foreign Secretary's use of his Chevening country house. I cannot
see how Blair will be able to resist him, and so Peter will move closer to the
international role once assumed by that master of intrigue during the Napoleonic
era, Prince de Talleyrand. Read any book about Talleyrand and you will see the
remarkable similarities between the two. I hesitate to resurrect Napoleon's
description of Talleyrand - "a lump of shit in a silk stocking" - because this
week Peter deserves our heartfelt thanks.

    Liberty isn't in Tony's genes

    NO one has made the connection between the decoding of Chromosome 22 on the
human genome and the picture of Tony Blair proffering the inside of his mouth
for a DNA sample to back measures for the compulsory DNA testing of all
suspects. And that is because few people understand the enormous potential of
the human genome project and what it will tell us about each person. In a few
years the entire genome will be decoded and from this it will be possible to
deduce anything about a person's makeup - from their level of addictability to
their innate potential for violence, maths, music or muscular dystrophy.

    You cannot conceive of anything more personal or private than an
individual's genetic profile. Which is why this Government is slyly seizing the
opportunity provided by universal ignorance to pass legislation that will enable
the police to demand DNA tests from suspects who have not been convicted of a
crime. The measure is wrong and sinister and gives another clue to the
essentially illiberal character of Tony Blair's brave new world.


GRAPHIC: HERO: JOHN GARFITT, CENTRE, PICTURED C1914 OPEN WIDE, PRIME MINISTER:
BLAIR GIVING A DNA SAMPLE THIS WEEK

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1999


                               8 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          December 1, 1999, Wednesday

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 687 words

HEADLINE: PODIUM: OUR FUTURE COULD BE JUST TOO MUCH FUN;
 TAKEN FROM THE RICHARD DIMBLEBY LECTURE GIVEN BY THE DIRECTOR OF THE ROYAL
INSTITUTION AND PROFESSOR OF PHARMACOLOGY

BYLINE: Susan Greenfield

BODY:


    THE COMING of a new century throws into sharp focus the age-old question:
"What am I doing with my life?" Traditionally, science has had little truck with
inner feelings and outpourings of emotion - facts of life traditionally
ring-fenced by the arts - but I want to suggest that, for the first time,
science, and more specifically neuroscience, could challenge that status quo. We
might also have to face up to some difficult questions, redefining personal
responsibility and even personal identity.

    What are the benefits of having a brain? What does a brain do other than act
as a bank for facts? Surely it allows us to have understanding. Understanding
occurs when we can appreciate a fact in the light of what we have learned
previously. The facts that people have at their disposal may be the same, but
their understanding of them will be different.

    One of the problems in the rise of information technology is that it is just
that: information. The danger may lie not so much in the technology itself but
in the risk that we could mistake the acquisition of facts for the attainment of
"understanding".

    Today, we approach the brain not just from the outside, via the senses, but
from deep within us, too. Molecular biologists have already discovered the rogue
gene for certain diseases, such as cystic fibrosis and the disorder of movement
known as Huntington's chorea. However, these remarkable advances can beguile
some into thinking that there is a single gene "for" almost anything. Indeed
some might even see it as just a matter of time before the gene "for", say,
shyness, good cooking or good motherhood need only be tweaked a fraction to
produce the perfect person.

    Silicon-carbon interchanges cannot account for an individual mind, and
neither can genes on their own. Eventually, those suffering from genetic
conditions will benefit enormously from identification of the relevant gene,
followed by appropriate "gene therapy". The problem is that if people hope to
tweak their genes to make them better people, they may not be selectively
targeting a particular behaviour or trait.

    And, in the case of Huntington's chorea, the movement impairments do not
usually occur until middle age. Therefore, is this not the start of prescribing
only perfect individuals, destined to live a long and perfect life? I can see no
clear line, no Rubicon, between an acceptable disease and an unacceptable one,
between a physical or mental trait that is merely undesirable and one that
threatens physical or mental well-being.

    There is a further way in which we can look at the brain - in which we will
eventually be able to see it changing all the time. Consciousness entails a
shifting from one moment to another, where each fleeting experience is unique. I
would like to suggest that the more we experience strong sensual, sensational
moments, the more we relinquish, just for the moment, our individuality: we "let
ourselves go".

    With increased leisure time, greater availability of drugs and more
modification to our senses all awaiting us in the coming century, the future
could be just too much fun. If facts alone are futile without the ability to use
imagination and translate them into understanding the only recourse may be to
stay on the sensual kicks of the moment.

    We may be set on a course for a literally sensational life, where we shall
be purely hedonistic, pursuing a life of unadulterated fun. Surely I'm being a
Calvinist - why, for most of us, is living for the moment so bad? Well, we have
never simply craved fun. Look at the mega-rich, who could be sipping cocktails
on a yacht but are chasing power, with all the hard work that entails.
Throughout civilisation, human beings have wanted to become individuals, to
impose their retaliatory mark on the world, to develop their minds.

    As we face a future that may standardise the individual, not just
genetically but by an IT-dominated environment - surely we should have, as a
priority, the need to retain and celebrate our individuality.

    The lecture will be shown in its entirety tonight on BBC1 at 10.50pm

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1999


                              12 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           November 19, 1999, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 340 words

HEADLINE: CHINK DISCOVERED IN ARMOUR OF THE COMMON COLD

BYLINE: Steve Connor

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS HAVE discovered a vital chink in the armour of the common cold
virus that they say could one day lead to a cure for the infection.

    Medical researchers at the Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, New
York, have found out how one form of the cold virus attacks human tissues in the
nose and throat.

    The discovery, reported in the journal Science, could lead to the
development of new drugs that can block the virus from binding to human cells,
said Paul Freimuth, a biologist at Brookhaven and a member of the research team.

    "Viruses have to bind to cells to infect them. If you could interrupt that
binding, the virus would be dead in the water," Dr Freimuth said. "That, in
essence, is what the body's immune system does when it produces antibodies. The
antibodies bind to the virus so the virus can't bind to the cell."

    However, for the immune system to launch an attack on an invading virus
takes time, allowing it to multiply within the respiratory tract, which is why
the symptoms of a cold can linger for days or even weeks.

    Dr Freimuth, working with John Flanagan and other colleagues at Brookhaven,
used high-intensity X-rays to show the structure of proteins used by one type of
common cold virus, called adenovirus, which are used as "grappling hooks" for
attacking human cells.

    From there, they worked backwards to discover the dimensions of the human
proteins which the virus uses to grip the respiratory tract cell it is
infecting. By determining the structure of these proteins, the scientists should
be able to design drugs that mimic the effect, causing the virus to lose its
vital grappling hooks.

    Dr Freimuth believes the research will help other scientists working on gene
therapy and cancer treatments. "If you understand the way a virus attaches to a
specific cell, you might be able to modify the virus to precisely target
specific cells, such as those that make up a tumour," he said. It would also
help in the design of more effective vaccines directed at binding sites.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1999


                              16 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           October 26, 1999, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 223 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC LAB WORKER KILLED IN ACCIDENT

BYLINE: Jack O'Sullivan

BODY:


    A WORKER in a British laboratory researching human genetics died yesterday
after an accident involving liquid nitrogen.

    The police and the Health and Safety Executive yesterday began an immediate
investigation into the death at the Medical Research Council laboratory in the
Western General Hospital, Edinburgh.

    The unit carries out research and clinical work in areas such as gene
"mapping" and gene therapy for diseases such as cystic fibrosis. Set up in 1967,
the laboratory is at the forefront of research in its field.

    The victim, employed at the centre for more than a decade, had been working
with liquid nitrogen at the time of the incident, said Professor Nicholas
Hastie, director of the unit. He said liquid nitrogen was used regularly to
preserve material such as tumour samples.

    "In all laboratories there are chemicals that under normal circumstances can
be dangerous, but we have very strict health and safety guidelines," he said.
"We have no idea why this poor individual died... Everybody is terribly
distressed."

    About 250 people were evacuated from the building. Of four people injured in
the incident, three were discharged from hospital soon after admission and the
condition of the fourth was said not to be life-threatening. A council
spokeswoman stressed that the public was not at risk.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1999


                              20 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           October 21, 1999, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 215 words

HEADLINE: BREAKTHROUGH RAISES GENE THERAPY HOPES

BYLINE: Charles Arthur Technology Editor

BODY:


    THE POTENTIAL to alter our own genetic make-up for ever has come a step
closer, after Canadian scientists produced mice with an artificial chromosome
that was passed to the animals' offspring.

    The experiment, which currently would be illegal in humans, marks another
significant step in the progress of "gene therapy", a technology intended to
ease or eradicate the effects of gene-related diseases such as cystic fibrosis.
The mice were bred by a team at Chromos Molecular Systems, based in British
Columbia, and had an artificial chromosome - a collection of genes - inserted
into their cells while they were still embryos. That chromosome was then taken
up by every cell in the mice's bodies, including the sperm and eggs. When the
genetically engineered mice mated with normal mice, the chromosome, carrying its
new genes, was passed on.

    Such "germline" gene therapy could have a big effect on humans, since the
offspring of treated patients would also get such an extra chromosome. That
might lead to the eradication of diseases caused by faulty genes - but it could
also lead to "designer" babies. "This is obviously going to open up the debate
again in the field of germline gene therapy," said Norman Nevin, who chairs the
Gene Therapy Advisory Committee in Britain.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1999


                              21 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           October 21, 1999, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 487 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS UNVEIL NEW 'VACCINE' FOR CANCER PROSTATE CANCER

BYLINE: Cherry Norton Health Correspondent

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS HAVE created genetically engineered "vaccines" that have been
used for the first time to treat prostate cancer in humans.

    The "personalised vaccines" were made using cancer cells from individual
patients and were found to boost their immune systems, enabling them to fight
the disease. Cancer specialists believe the breakthrough could lead to gene
therapy being used alongside surgery, chemotherapy and radiation therapies.

    "We were astounded to find that every part of the immune system was alerted
and turned on," said Dr Jonathan Simons, an associate professor of oncology and
urology at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, who led the study.

    "Using gene therapy, we re-educated the immune system to recognise prostate
cancer cells as a potential infection and attack."

    In Britain, prostate cancer is the second biggest cancer killer for men
after lung cancer. Each year nearly 16,000 men are diagnosed with the disease
and only 43 per cent survive for more than five years. About 10,000 men a year
die from it.

    The scientists, who published their work in the latest issue of the journal
Cancer Research, found that although vaccines did not cure any of their
patients, it activated the immune system to fight the cancer. The initial phase
of the research was done two years ago on 11 patients, none of whom have died.

    The medical team took cancer from the patients' own prostate tumours and
grew them in a laboratory dish. They inserted the gene, which produces a protein
that activates the immune system to recognise tumours, into the cancer cells.
They used a retrovirus to carry the gene into the cells but said their technique
was safe because the virus does not normally infect people, and because the work
was done outside the patients' bodies.

    Then they zapped the cells with X-rays to make sure the cells did not
themselves cause more cancer and injected them into the patients. Within four
weeks, the researchers found immune cells known as B-cells circulating and
producing antibodies against prostate cancer cells. Another kind of immune cell,
T-cells, were directly attacking the tumour.

    Dr William Nelson, part of the medical team, said: "The gene we used to turn
on the immune system is so good that it activates everything. Such a complete
and thorough activation of the immune system against prostate cancer has never
before been seen."

    Dr Nelson said they were unclear about why the first vaccine had not cured
any patients. "If we give more vaccine will we be better off? Or perhaps a
booster will help."

    Surgery or radiation therapy can cure many cases of cancer. But sometimes
cancer cells are missed, which can start secondary tumours elsewhere in the
body.

    Now the researchers are testing another gene therapy vaccine using a non-
personalised approach. If it works, it could be used in conjunction with
chemotherapy and radiotherapy.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1999


                              22 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            October 15, 1999, Friday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1795 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE: FOUR MEN WHO SHOOK THE WORLD

BYLINE: Steve Connor

BODY:


    They are the Oscars of science. This week's three Nobel Prizes, worth pounds
600,000 each, represent a lifetime's achievement in chemistry, physics and
medicine. Four scientists from around the world now join an exalted list of
names that includes Albert Einstein, Jim Watson and Francis Crick. Steve Connor
looks at how this year's winners changed the world of science.
  Medicine

    GUNTER BLOBEL

    Each one of the 100,000 billion cells that make up the human body is a
vastly complex, if microscopic, chemical factory. A human cell contains about
one billion protein molecules, which would be a recipe for total anarchy if it
were a car factory making a similar number of models.

    It was Gunter Blobel, the winner of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine, who worked out how the cell controls the movements of protein products
from their production conveyor belts to their final position in the body. He
likened it to the postal codes used to send letters to their correct
destinations.

    The cytoplasm of a cell - the stuff outside the central nucleus - is far
from being the inactive, jelly-like substance once portrayed in biology
textbooks. It is riddled with lipid membranes, folded into intricate,
three-dimensional patterns that are now known to be the crucial highways along
which the protein products of a cell are transported.

    Proteins are themselves highly complex molecules. Each is manufactured by
using the genetic code of a gene as its template. Some are used as building
-blocks for the cells themselves, and are used to make hair, eyes, skin, blood,
bone and other tissues. But most proteins are enzymes, the biological catalysts
that speed up biochemical reactions within our bodies to ensure that we can
digest and release the energy locked up in food, make more living cells to
replace those that are worn out, and excrete waste products.

    Each protein is composed of a certain sequence of the 20 different amino
acids. The total number of amino acids in a protein chain can number anything
from about 50 to several thousand.

    A key finding of Professor Blobel, a cell and molecular biologist at the
Rockefeller University in New York, was that an extra sequence - which may be
between 10 and 30 amino acids long - is added to the protein during the
manufacturing process. This, he proposed, acted as a "luggage tag" to tell the
cell where the protein belonged.

    Blobel, who was born in Waltersdorf in Germany but emigrated to the US more
than 30 years ago, in the Sixties began to examine the problem of how large
proteins are transported around the cell. At that time this was an immense
puzzle, because it was known that the internal lipid membranes of the cell were
tightly sealed. How could a protein get across the membrane surrounding an
internal cell structure, known as an "organelle", scientists wondered?

    In 1971, Blobel formulated the first version of his "signal hypothesis"
whereby he proposed an internal signalling mechanism being somehow incorporated
into each protein. In 1975 he showed in a series of elegant biochemical
experiments that the signal was a sequence of amino acids which, he suggested,
acted as a key that opened the molecular gates of the lipid membranes. Five
years later he formulated the general principles of how these membrane channels
work, allowing some proteins through and blocking the path of others.

    "Gunter Blobel's discovery has had an immense impact on modern cell
biological research," says the Nobel Assembly of the Karolinska Institute in
Stockholm, which awarded the prize.

    "When a cell divides, large amounts of proteins are being made and new
organelles are formed. If the cell is to function correctly, the proteins have
to be targeted to their proper locations."

    The discovery has opened up new approaches to the treatment of those genetic
diseases that result from the incorrect "postal code" being added to a protein.
One such disease, hereditary hyperoxaluria, results in children developing
kidney stones. Blobel's work will eventually play an important role in bringing
the fruits of the Human Genome Project to medicine. It will also be crucial to
the successful genetic reprogramming of cells - the key aim of gene therapy.

    Physics

    GERARDUS 'T HOOFT

    MARTINUS JG VELTMAN

    There is arguably no other branch of science quite as esoteric as particle
physics - the study of the particles within atoms and the forces that may or may
not hold them together.

    Particle physics tells us not only something about the fundamental basis of
matter, but also how it may have been created at the beginning of the Universe,
some 12 billion years ago. At its heart lies the theory of quantum
electrodynamics, which, among other things, describes to a high degree of
accuracy the interactions of subatomic particles such as electrons and
positrons, and light at low energies.

    This year's Nobel Prize in Physics was won jointly by two pioneers in this
difficult field, Gerardus 't Hooft, of the University of Utrecht in the
Netherlands, and Martinus JG Veltman, a retired professor from the same
university.

    When Veltman was asked on Dutch television to explain his work, he gave an
honest reply: "It is a difficult and abstract subject, something that I have
never been able to explain to my wife and children," he said.

    According to the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in Stockholm, who awarded
the prize, the two scientists have helped to place particle physics "on a firmer
mathematical foundation". Their predictions have been so accurate that recent
experiments with the particle accelerator at the European Particle Physics
Laboratory - Cern - in Geneva, Switzerland, have confirmed their calculated
expectations.

    At the heart of particle physics is the "standard model", which groups all
the elementary particles into three families of quarks and leptons. These
interact, with the help of "exchange particles", and are involved in the strong
and electro-weak forces of matter.

    "The theoretical foundation of the standard model was at first incomplete
mathematically; in particular it was unclear whether the theory could be used at
all for detailed calculations of physical quantities," the academy says. The
work of 't Hooft and Veltman put it on to a firmer footing by providing a
"well-functioning 'mathematical machinery' that can be used for, among other
things, predicting the properties of new particles".

    Their work was vital in calculating the mass of a subatomic particle known
as the top quark, which was observed for the first time in 1995 at the Fermilab
accelerator in Batavia, Illinois. Their theory has also predicted the existence
of the Higgs particle, which has not yet been observed. Fermilab plans to use
its new accelerator, the Main Injector, to hunt for the elusive Higgs particle.
This theoretical particle will also be pursued in the Large Hadron Collider, to
be built at Cern, which is expected to be ready in 2005.

    Gerardus 't Hooft learnt about his award when he was giving a talk in
Bologna, Italy, last Tuesday morning, to physicists who were working on the new
Cern accelerator. He was surprised when some in the audience started to applaud.

    "Someone had picked it up from the Internet," he explained. "They let me
finish my short talk and then everyone started to applaud.

    "It is an award for research that we did in the Seventies, but only more
recently has the importance of this research become clear. And I am extremely
happy that it has now been recognised by Stockholm."

    Although few people outside the rarefied atmosphere of particle physics
understand the precise details of why these physicists have won the most
prestigious award in science, their colleagues are emphatic about the importance
of what 't Hooft and Veltman have done.

    "This is the entire framework we (particle physicists) use when calculating.
We'll get finite answers. Earlier calculations only resulted in nonsense,"
commented Lars Brink, a professor at Chalmers Technical Institute and a member
of the Swedish academy.

    Chemistry

    AHMED ZEWAIL

    The fastest camera in the world has recorded the chemical reactions that
underpin everything from the way the eye sees to how a plant captures the energy
of a sunbeam. It has also resulted in this year's Nobel Prize in Chemistry being
won by Ahmed Zewail, a professor of chemistry at the California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, who pioneered the camera to study the almost unbelievably
fast events that unfold during a chemical reaction.

    Zewail, who was born in Egypt but moved to the United States, where he has
dual nationality, virtually invented the branch of science known as
femtochemistry, named after the processes that can take place within a matter of
femtoseconds - one femtosecond being one thousandth of a millionth of a
millionth of a second. To give an idea of the scale on which he works, one
femtosecond is to a second what one second is to 32 million years.

    "Femtochemistry enables us to understand why certain chemical reactions take
place, but not others," says the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in Stockholm
in its explanation of why it has given the prize to Zewail. Scientists are using
his femtosecond camera technique to study reactions in gases, liquids and
solids.

    "Applications range from how catalysts function and how molecular electronic
components must be designed, to the most delicate mechanisms in life processes
and how the medicines of the future should be produced," the academy says.

    The high-speed laser camera uses laser flashes that are no longer than a few
femtoseconds in duration, which is about the time it takes for the molecules
involved in a chemical reaction to come and go.

    One of the immediate benefits of being able to "observe" this is that
scientists are able to discover the nature of the extremely short-lived
intermediate molecules involved. Heating is known to kick the energy of most
chemicals over the barrier that has to be overcome before a reaction takes
place, enabling chemical bonds to break and new ones to form. The camera used by
Zewail enables chemists to look at the path of a molecule as it goes over this
barrier and to see the changes that occur as it goes through the transition
state.

    "The contribution for which Zewail is to receive the Nobel Prize means that
we have reached the end of the road; no chemical reactions take place faster
than this," says the Swedish Academy of Sciences.

    "Femtochemistry has fundamentally changed our view of chemical reactions.
From a phenomenon described in relatively vague metaphors such as 'activation'
and 'transition state', we can now see the movements of individual atoms as we
imagine them."

GRAPHIC: Gunter Blobel: his discovery has had 'an immense impact on modern
biological research' Stuart Ramson; Veltman (left) and 't Hooft: happy to be
recognised AP/Renato Ferrini; Ahmed Zewail: fast reaction pioneer Chris;
Pizzello

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1999


                              42 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 August 4, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 17

LENGTH: 196 words

HEADLINE: Surgeon suspended over gene therapy goes back to work

BYLINE: Zoe Morris

BODY:


    THE SURGEON at the centre of an investigation into genetic research at a
leading London teaching hospital has been allowed to return to work, writes Zo'
Morris.

    Nagi Habib was suspended from Hammersmith Hospital at the beginning of last
month amid allegations that he breached safety controls while conducting
pioneering gene therapy research on dying liver patients. The hospital agreed
last week for Mr Habib to return to work while an investigation into his
treatment of private Danish patients was set up.

    He stands accused of injecting 20 patients with a cocktail of human liver
cells and a flu virus before being given permission by the Government's
regulatory body - the gene therapy advisory committee.

    A hospital spokeswoman said: "We carried out a preliminary inquiry and
decided there was no reason Mr Habib could not return to the hospital to fulfil
his NHS commitments."

    A spokesman for the London regional office of the National Health Service
Executive said: "We are setting up an independent inquiry over allegations of
the treatment of some private patients at Hammersmith Hospital. It would be
inappropriate to comment further."


LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1999


                              50 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                              July 5, 1999, Monday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 190 words

HEADLINE: INQUIRY OVER RISKS IN CANCER THERAPY

BYLINE: Tim Moynihan

BODY:


    A SENIOR doctor has been suspended amid allegations that safety controls
were breached at London's Hammersmith Hospital in a pioneering gene-therapy
trial on overseas patients dying of liver cancer.

    The treatment involved using an influenza virus - one of the most infectious
viruses known to man, it was said.

    An inquiry is expected, to investigate what safety controls were in place to
prevent the spread of infection and exactly what experiments took place at the
Hammersmith, one of Britain's top teaching hospitals.

    It is claimed that doctors involved in the joint British-Danish research
project did not keep their patients in isolation for the three days required.

    A spokesman for the Hammersmith Hospitals Trust said: "The trust can confirm
that a senior member of the academic clinical staff has been suspended pending
an independent inquiry.

    "The allegations relate to the possible use of gene therapy, and, because of
the complex nature of the matters under investigation and the fact that overseas
patients are involved, the inquiry is being set up by the London regional office
of the NHS executive."

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1999


                              55 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             June 29, 1999, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 274 words

HEADLINE: 'MAGIC SPONGE' CAN MEND BONES

BYLINE: Charles Arthur Technology Editor

BODY:


    FOOTBALLERS MIGHT kill for it; their trainers will clamour for it. For
scientists have developed a "magic sponge" that really does seem to help mend
broken bones.

    The "sponge" is made from cow collagen, the same material as ligaments, and
impregnated with genes that promote bone growth. It can be implanted into the
fracture to encourage recovery. Tests on dogs have been encouraging, say
scientists at the biotechnology company Selective Genetics in San Diego,
California.

    If the technique can be extended to humans it would have an immediate
application in the elderly, where hip fractures often leave otherwise healthy
people immobile.

    The American tests, reported today in the journal Nature Medicine, involved
a "gene activated matrix" (GAM) containing mobile loops of DNA called plasmids.
These contained a gene that leads to the promotion of bone growth.

    The team inserted the gene-carrying sponge into the broken bones of three
dogs and measured the bone density by X-ray. Fractures usually take six weeks to
heal. In the experiments, by two to six weeks after implantation there was an
increase in new bone formation at the fracture site compared to fractures
without the GAM.

    The technique overcomes many of the stumbling blocks associated with gene
therapy. In theory, adding extra genes could compensate for flaws in an
individual's DNA or - as in this case - provide a boost for processes already
under way. But repeated problems include getting them to work only where and
when needed.

    The plasmid method shows promise because the additional genes are restricted
to the site where they are needed.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 1999


                              56 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             June 29, 1999, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 284 words

HEADLINE: 'SPONGE' MENDS BROKEN BONES

BYLINE: Charles Arthur Technology Editor

BODY:


    FOOTBALLERS MIGHT kill for it; their trainers will clamour for it. For
scientists have developed a "magic sponge" that really does seem to help mend
broken bones.

    The "sponge" is made from cow collagen, the same material as ligaments, and
impregnated with genes that promote bone growth. It can be implanted into the
fracture to encourage recovery. Tests on dogs have been encouraging, say
scientists at the biotechnology company Selective Genetics in San Diego,
California.

    If the technique can be extended to humans it would have an immediate
application in the elderly, where hip fractures often leave otherwise healthy
people immobile.

    The American tests, reported today in the journal Nature Medicine, involved
a "gene activated matrix" (GAM) containing mobile loops of DNA called plasmids.
These contained a gene that leads to the promotion of bone growth.

    The team inserted the gene-carrying sponge into the broken bones of three
dogs and measured the bone density by X-ray. Fractures usually take six weeks to
heal. In the experiments, by two to six weeks after implantation there was an
increase in new bone formation at the fracture site compared to fractures
without the GAM.

    The technique overcomes many of the stumbling blocks associated with gene
therapy. In theory, adding extra genes could compensate for flaws in an
individual's DNA or - as in this case - provide a boost for processes already
underway.

    But repeated problems include getting the new genes incorporated into the
host's DNA, and getting them to work only where and when needed.

    The plasmid method shows promise because the additional genes are restricted
to the site where they are needed.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 1999


                              57 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                              June 4, 1999, Friday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 351 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE: UPDATE

BYLINE: Steve Connor

BODY:


    THE SUN is getting brighter. This is not a judgement on Britain's most
infamous tabloid, but a sign that global warming may be happening faster than we
think.

    Scientists have discovered that the Sun's magnetic field - a measure of its
immense power output - has doubled this century, indicating that global warming
may become a bigger problem than predicted.

    Professor Mike Lockwood and colleagues at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory
in Didcot used data from the Ulysses spacecraft - the first to fly over the
poles of the Sun - to build up a three-dimensional picture of the magnetic field
of our own star. The scientists compared this with fluctuations in the Sun's
magnetic field as estimated by its effects on the Earth's, which has been
monitored since 1868. "The results indicate that almost all of the observed
global warming up to about 1930 can be ascribed to an increase in the brightness
of the Sun - but only about a half of it for the period 1930-1970 and less than
a third since 1970," Professor Lockwood said. "This confirms that the onset of
man-made effects (of global warming) appears to be rather later, but
considerably more sudden, than previously thought."

    The results, published in Nature, show that though the changes in the Sun
make a considerable contribution to global warming, man-made influences have
become more important towards the end of this century.

    A MIDDLE-AGED American man with haemophilia has become the first person in
the world to undergo in vivo gene therapy for this disorder. The aim is to
restore the missing clotting factor in the man's blood, said Margaret Ragni,
professor of medicine at the University of Pittsburgh. The 50-year- old suffers
from haemophilia A and lacks the factor VIII clotting protein owing to a defect
in his gene. The phase 1 small-scale trial is primarily designed to test for
safety. "Our hope is that this... will produce enough factor VIII protein to
protect patients from spontaneous recurrent bleeding and thereby avoid some of
the chronic disabilities associated with the disease," said Professor Ragni.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1999


                              61 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             May 6, 1999, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES

LENGTH: 1752 words

HEADLINE: TIME TO HONOUR A DEGREE OF OPENNESS;
 AN ACTRESS, A BISHOP AND A KEY FIGURE IN THE NORTHERN IRELAND PEACE PR OCESS
ARE AMONG THOSE BEING HONOURED BY THE OU THIS YEAR WITH HONORARY DEGREES AT THIS
WEEKEND'S GRADUATION CEREMONIES.

BODY:


    Honorary degrees are the academic equivalent of peerages - the highest
praise for achievement to the great and the good that a university can bestow.
With the emphasis on recognising the advancement of openness, they recognise
extraordinary service to the university, to society, or to both.

    Even so, it may be argued that they are an anachronism. But, as graduating
students appreciate, they have another function: they enliven the proceedings of
a graduation ceremony at which each attending graduand has otherwise to sit
through several hundred other awards of degrees. Honorary Grads are invited to
speak, and (hopefully) to entertain. They are therefore elected only after
considered selection...

    Fiona Shaw is best known for her theatre work - having won three Best
Actress Olivier awards, an Evening Standard Award and a London Critics' Award.
On Saturday, she adds the honorary degree of DUniv (Doctor of the University)
for her services to theatre and education.

    Born and educated in Cork, she received a BA Honours degree in philosophy in
1979. She studied acting at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts, joined the Royal
Shakespeare Company, and has lived and worked mainly in England since.

    Throughout her career she has pushed the boundaries of theatre. Her
performance in the title role of Shakespeare's Richard II for the National
Theatre in London, for example, demanded that the audience look afresh at the
action of the play.

    For several years she has worked as Artistic Associate with the OU/BBC
Shakespeare Multimedia Research Project, where she has approached the teaching
of drama through new technology with enthusiasm and commitment.

    She has appeared in such films as My Left Foot, Jane Eyre and The Avengers.
Television appearances include: Fireworks for Elspeth, Sherlock Holmes and Hedda
Gabler.

    As David Sheppard, Lord Sheppard of Liverpool was a world-class cricketer
who became one of Britain's best-loved bishops. On Saturday he will be awarded a
DUniv degree for his contribution to the cultural well-being of society,
particularly for his efforts to tackle problems of social exclusion and
injustice.

    Sheppard played for Sussex when he was just 18 and was awarded a county cap
the same season. He read history at Trinity Hall Cambridge and captained the
University cricket team, before returning to Sussex and gaining 22 England caps.

    However, he declined the England captaincy in favour of ordination. His
entire ordained ministry - from 1955 until his retirement in 1997 - was spent in
urban areas. When he began his 12 years as Warden of the Mayflower Family Centre
in Canning Town he worked unobtrusively, but found himself in the limelight when
he refused to participate in the tour by the South African cricket team in 1960.

    From then, he increasingly spoke on issues of social injustice. In 1969,
aged 40, he was appointed Bishop of Woolwich. He became Chairman of the
Evangelical Urban Training Project, the Martin Luther King Foundation, and the
Urban Ministry Project.

    In 1975 he was appointed Bishop of Liverpool. His mission to reduce social
exclusion has led in various ways to his promoting second chance learning. He
feels that there is much God-given intelligence to be liberated, which has lain
dormant or been discouraged in early years. He was made a Life Peer as Lord
Sheppard of Liverpool in 1998. David Sheppard's books have included Parson's
Pitch, Built as a City, Bias to the Poor and, jointly with the late Archbishop
Derek Worlock, Better Together and With Hope in our Hearts.

    Computer expert Hugh Darwen will be awarded an MUniv for academic and
scholarly distinction. He has an international reputation as a specialist in
database technology, in particular the theory and practice of relational
databases.

    He has been an Open University tutor for ten years and is the industrial
assessor for the OU's masters level database course. Some 2,500 undergraduate
students are taking a Level 3 database course that has been influenced by his
contributions.

    Hugh Darwen began a medical education before joining IBM as a computer
programmer in 1967, working from 1969 to 1982 in an international centre
developing an information system for business people. He found that there are
certain principles, based on mathematical theory, which can be used to construct
relational databases.

    He has represented the UK on the development of international standards for
SQL, one of the most widely-used languages used in the development of relational
databases. He still works for IBM and is a visiting lecturer at six British
universities. He has co-authored several books with C J Date, a leading computer
author, culminating in their controversial Foundation for Object/Relational
Databases: The Third Manifesto (1998).

    Alistair Graham made his name as a leading moderniser in industrial
relations, but now faces the toughest challenge of his career - as chairman of
the Parades Commission in Northern Ireland. He will be awarded a DUniv.

    Born in Hexham, Alistair Graham explored the legal profession and hospital
administration before his transfer to the Royal Sussex County Hospital in
Brighton led to a strong involvement in trade union work, through NALGO, and
political work, standing for parliament in 1966.

    In the 1980s, as General Secretary of the largest civil service union, the
CPSA, he soon became associated with the "new realism" - encouraging unions to
come to terms with a changing environment both in the labour market and with new
legislation governing union activities.

    In 1986 he became Director of the Industrial Society, working to strengthen
links between management and the workforce through improved communications and
management.

    Between 1988 and 1997 he was a member of the Open University Council,
including six years as Chairman of the Staff Policy Committee.

    A return to his northern roots came with his appointment as chief executive
of the training and enterprise council at Calderdale and Kirklees. He was there
for five years before taking up his current post as Chief Executive of Leeds
TEC.

    He now combines this local role with an additional national one: as Chairman
of the Parades Commission in Northern Ireland. He has visited the province 100
times in two years, regulating contentious parades such as the annual Drumcree
Parade in Portadown.

    A lover of music and theatre, Alistair Graham is also a Director of Opera
North.

    Planning the education system and mapping the humane genome

    John Tomlinson has been widely regarded as one of the principal architects
of the education system in England and Wales for more than three decades. He
becomes DUniv for his work in areas of special educational concern to the Open
University.

    John Tomlinson's career has been in educational administration and teacher
education. He first worked in Shropshire, then Lancashire, before becoming Chief
Education Officer for Cheshire in 1972 - a role in which he won respect for
inspired leadership and professionalism.

    He was Director of the Institute of Education at Warwick University. He has
chaired the Further Education Unit; the Schools Council; the Arts in Schools
Curriculum Project and the campaign for a general teaching council.

    As chair of the Further Education Funding Council's enquiry into the
education of adults with learning difficulties (1993-1996), he was charged with
introducing fundamental reform into the FE system; the committee became known as
the Tomlinson Committee.

    In 1997, colleagues from many parts of the education service presented him
with a Festschrift entitled Living Education to mark a lifetime's commitment to
education.

    Tomlinson is currently Chair of the Gulbenkian Foundation enquiry into the
curriculum of personal and social education in schools, and Academic Secretary
of the Universities' Council for the Education of Teachers.

    Kay Davies, a leading specialist in genetics, receives the award of DUniv
for academic and scholarly distinction. She is Dr Lee's Professor of Anatomy at
Oxford University, and has been closely associated with the human genome project
from the outset.

    From 1992 to 1994 she was Vice President of the International Human Genome
Organisation (HUGO).

    During this period she also chaired the expert working group set up by the
Office of Science and Technology (UK) to identify priorities and opportunities
in genome research.

    Professor Davies has an active interest in the ethical implications of
biotechnology and the promotion of the public understanding of science. She is
currently a member of the UK Government Advisory Committee on Genetic Testing
(ACGT) and chair of the Advisory Committee on Genetic Modification (ACGM).

    Her research interests lie in the molecular analysis of human genetic
disease.  Her research programmes concern diagnosis, molecular basis of genetic
disease and gene therapy.

    Professor Davies's pioneering work in this field has led to the unravelling
of the flawed genes which cause a number of major inherited illnesses, including
Fragile X syndrome - a disorder that results in mental retardation in males -
and muscular dystrophy, the progressive degenerative muscle disease.

    Emeritus professors

    Russell Stannard joined the OU in 1969. Formerly Pro-Vice-Chancellor, he
retired in 1997. He was Vice-President of the Institute of Physics from 1987 to
1991, and is a member of the Center for Theological Inquiry at Princeton. In
1986, he received the Templeton UK Project Award for his contributions to
science and religion, and in 1998 an OBE.

    Stuart Hall, one of the founding fathers of modern social sciences, won a
Rhodes Scholarship to Oxford and became a central figure in establishing a field
of study that flourished internationally. He joined the OU in 1979 as Professor
of Sociology and his work has explored how the dynamics of racism and ethnicity
have shaped the development of English and British politics and culture. He has
been a formative influence on students and colleagues across the world.

    David Murray has been Professor of Government since 1969. He was a member of
the general management committee in the initial years, chairman of the
Examinations and Assessment Committee during a formative period and Pro-Vice
-Chancellor.

    He has chaired courses including Decision Making in Britain, and contributed
to many others. He has published extensively on public administration and
government.

GRAPHIC: Honorary doctorates: Fiona Shaw, for services to theatre and education,
and; Lord Sheppard - pictured in his days as an England cricketer - for his
contribution to the cultural well-being of society

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1999


                              71 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 16, 1999, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1165 words

HEADLINE: MARKET REPORTS: VEBA'S GREAT ESCAPE UPSETS FOOTSIE'S DAY

BYLINE: Derek Pain

BODY:


    THE GERMANS killed any hopes of the market ringing up gains. From the
opening bell equities were in retreat, unsettled by the sale by Veba, the German
utility, of its 10.2 per cent stake in Cable & Wireless.

    Telecoms led the retreat, with Footsie ending 75.4 points off at 6,206.8. At
one time it was down 122.8.

    C&W tumbled 79.5p to 751p, Telewest Communications 20.5p to 243.5p, and Colt
Telecom 51p to 939p. BT dropped 26.5p to 1,058p.

    In their hurry to unload the C&W interest, the Germans accepted a 724.2p- a
-share deal from ABN Amro, NM Rothschild and Cazenove. The trio went on to place
the shares at 735p. With C&W closing at 830.5p on Friday, institutions found the
yawning discount irresistible and clamoured to buy the 246 million shares.

    Just why Veba was prepared to sell at a price so far below Friday's close is
something of a mystery. Certainly it set alarm bells ringing, rousing nagging
fears that the first crack had appeared in the seemingly unstoppable telecoms
charge. The sale also created doubts about C&W's prospects, with the Germans
displaying an apparent lack of faith in the telecoms giant.

    It also destroyed most of the day's planned trading. Institutions were left
short of cash. They had to find around pounds 1.8bn with settlement due at the
end of the week for their C&W shares, so cash they had provisionally earmarked
for any other buying operations had to be transferred to their C&W coffers. Few
would want to sell shares for special early delivery because of the extra
charges involved. Much better, therefore, to put all available resources behind
their bids in the C&W auction and delay any buying plans.

    With C&W's share turnover a massive 528.6 million, the day's volume almost
touched 1.5 billion, one of the highest on record.

    With so much attention centred on C&W the rest of the market played an
almost inaudible second fiddle. The supporting indices lost their enthusiasm.
The mid cap's remarkable 15-day winning streak came to an abrupt end with a 41.9
fall to 5,518.9; the small cap slipped 1.2 to 2,366.6.

    The small cap is still being influenced by management buyouts. Housebuilder
Cala jumped 50p to 157.5p as a bid of 165p a share was mooted. In a variation on
the buyout bandwagon Somic, up 10p at 80p, seems likely to sell its fabrics
business to management for around pounds 850,000 and become a cash sell called
Tarpan.

    Fibernet, although ending talks with possible bidders, firmed 5p to 447.5p
and SCi Entertainment ended 22p higher at 81.5p, although the company said it
knew of no reason for the advance.

    Terranova, the foods group, held at 104.5p despite rejecting an offer of
125p (thought to be from Unigate), and volatile Tracker Network added another
70p to 580p following Friday's management buyout statement.

    First Choice, the holidays group, fell 14.5p to 173p after agreeing a merger
with Kuoni of Switzerland. Talk of a possible German counter-offer from Preussag
continues to be heard. There were vague reports of an Airtours deal, with the
shares firm at 507.5p. Constructor Bandt firmed 1p to 32p on bid hopes.

    London International, the condom maker where bid talks are on, firmed 2p to
153p in two-way trading. The shares have been unloved since Safeskin, the US
group touted as the most likely bidder, posted a shock profits warning.

    Manchester United firmed 9p to 240p, a peak, on weekend suggestions that
profits from pay-as-you-view television could force BSkyB to increase its bid,
currently under Westminster consideration.

    Psion, the hand-held computer group, was one of the day's best performers,
jumping 105p to 860p on reports that it is moving into mini-notebook computers
with IBM selling the equipment in the US; a new trading alliance by its Symbian
joint venture was another bullish influence.

    Tomkins, on its share buyback, fell 10p to 224.5p, but Reed International,
after its recent decline following results, recovered some lost ground, up 25.5p
to 525.5p. PowerGen, ahead of analyst meetings this week, rose 13p to 683p.
Supermarkets, ruffled in recent weeks by the alleged price war, perked up on
hopes that the Office of Fair Trading report will be less draconian than
expected.

    Enterprise Oil had a shaky time, off 38.25p to 303p. The market is uneasy
about the possibility of the planned union with Lasmo failing to materialise.
The sale of 1.2 million shares by Mercury Asset Management, part of Merrill
Lynch, increased the doubt factor.

    HW, a recruitment group, followed Corporate Services with a profits warning
and fell 37.5p to 82.5p; Superscape, an IT group, dropped 41p to 149p on a
warning.

    Queens Moat Houses, once seemingly destined for the corporate graveyard, was
little changed at 26.5p after Merrill Lynch upgraded its advice to accumulate.
The ending of the hotel chain's interest-payment holiday will lower profits over
the next two years but "good management is progressively improving the structure
and position of the company".

    Viridian, the former Northern Ireland Electricity, was little changed at
693.5p as Warburg Dillon Read increased its target price by 50p to 800p. Shire
Pharmaceuticals, after Friday's profits surge, rose 43p to 516.5p, and pub chain
JD Wetherspoon frothed a further 15.5p to 273p on its results.

    BATM Advanced Communications jumped 32p to 295p ahead of a presentation at
stockbroker Shore Capital. Highbury House Communications joined the Internet
party, climbing 4p to 17.25p. The company has launched a joint venture to
explore various Internet publishing initiatives.

    Oxford Biomedica, a gene-therapy group, rose 9p to 27p, apparently on
indications that Colin Blackbourn had acquired shares. He gained a reputation as
a small company investor with AromaScan, a recent success. The shares have
climbed from 1.75p in September to 17.5p (up 0.5p) after being revamped. He
claims Oxford, raising cash through a rights issue, has nine promising products
in development.

    SEAQ VOLUME: 1.49bn

    SEAQ TRADES: 94,310

    GILTS INDEX: 115.23 -0.05

    RICHARD THOMPSON, whose business career has included chairing the struggling
first division football club Queens Park Rangers, has become chairman of
Whitchurch. He intends to take the former food group into the film and
television industries.

    He is buying the food operations - largely meat processing and pet-food
businesses - for pounds 6.5m. The shares held at 32p. As a food group Whitchurch
has struggled; its shares were 65p four years ago.

    PETRA DIAMONDS, with interests in Angola, held at 71.5p. Seymour Pierce has
become the group's stockbroker, replacing IA Pritchard, which appears to have
abandoned its corporate operations.

    Petra now has Gold Fields of South Africa as a shareholder. In exchange for
shares, it acquired the diamond interests of Gold Fields, which cover rights
over 10 properties in South Africa. Petra shares topped 150p last summer; they
were floated at 30p by IA Pritchard.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 1999


                              75 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 3, 1999, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 284 words

HEADLINE: POLICE WARN OF ILLEGAL CLONING

BYLINE: Jason Bennetto

BODY:


    AN ILLEGAL trade in cloned body parts and genetically engineered children
has been identified by an elite British police squad as a future market for
organised crime.

    The head of a new research unit at the National Criminal Intelligence
Service (NCIS) also issued a warning yesterday about money laundering and
illegal gambling on the Internet as well as a potential new addiction to
"virtual reality drugs".

    Crime groups are already becoming involved in the international sale of
transplant organs, such as kidneys, said Robert Hall, the head of analysis at
NCIS. "Genetic commerce also has a very lucrative potential not only for the
scientists but also the unscrupulous practitioner or criminal who wishes to make
easy money. At its simplest, there is the organised criminal who sells illegally
acquired, genetically engineered body parts.

    "At the more complex, there is the bogus agent offering gene therapy to the
unwary or desperate parent, or even customising genetic changes into a newly
conceived child."

    Speaking yesterday at a conference on international crime held in London, Mr
Hall described some of the developments that could be illegally traded in the
future. "By 2020, 95 per cent of human body parts could be replaceable by
laboratory-grown organs. Cloning will enable parents to select and improve the
character and health of their children."

    The NCIS is also investigating organised crime's role in environmental
issues, such as dumping toxic waste, and the trade in endangered species.

    "There is evidence that toxic dumping is very prevalent in the United
States. We know it happens here, but we do not yet know the extent of the
problem," Mr Hall said.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1999


                              78 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                               February 17, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 56

LENGTH: 445 words

HEADLINE: The hacks more frightening than Frankenstein;
REPORTING BACK

BYLINE: Mark Hughes-Morgan

BODY:


    AS GENETIC food scares flood the front pages, geneticist Steve Jones of
University College, London, wonders why the media is so gullible when it comes
to science: Journalists seem to lose all sense of scepticism when faced with
scientific reports. They are deeply cynical about the companies and the ethics,
but don't quarrel with the science. When I interview students about what they
want to do, a lot say gene therapy, to cure genetic diseases. But they can't
cure anything with gene therapy: the reason they think so, is because the press
thinks so.

    There are hundreds of companies trying to capitalise on genetic engineering;
most of them have produced bugger all, and have gone bust after people have had
their fingers burnt buying shares. With plant genomics people are much less
liable to the constant hyping, because companies are actually succeeding. Then
companies are demonised for wanting to make money out of this new technology.

    But what are corporations for, for goodness' sake?

    The irony is, there are risks in the technology, but the benefits are
potentially unutterably spectacular, and you don't hear about them.

    What I find bizarre is that there is more concern with plant gene
manipulation - the Prince Charles issue - than there is with human abortion,
which strikes me as downright eccentric. Genetics has made prenatal diagnosis
much more effective than it was. This creates tremendous ethical dilemmas.

    But you never hear a word about it.

    You hear the worry about interfering with God's work in beet fields. I think
to myself "get real".

    It's the sci-fi thing that sells papers. The classic example is the picture
that appears everywhere of a mouse with an ear supposedly growing on its back. A
moment's thought would have told anyone with O-level common sense that this was
a schoolboy trick. A mouse with a loose skin underneath which had been implanted
a plastic or collagen model of a human ear. With the latest scare, rats and
potatoes, the rats were fed a poisonous substance that damaged their stomachs.
And everyone is saying it is down to the genetic modification.

    And who are these scientists standing up for the findings? Has anyone really
examined their credentials?

    To pick up these non-stories when there are real stories out there is odd.

    You can now have your partner tested to see if you both carry a gene for a
certain disease: if you carry the cystic fibrosis gene, does she have to tell
you whether she does or not? There you've got real here-and-now issues, whereas
the public is being whipped into a frenzy by things that are not happening."

    Interview by Mark Hughes-Morgan '


LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1999


                              80 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           February 15, 1999, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Page 8

LENGTH: 1383 words

HEADLINE: Age-old syndrome of prejudice; The accepted view of Down's sufferers
leading limited lives and dying young is being challenged by new research. By
Paul Vallely

BYLINE: By Paul Vallely

BODY:

    Norman reckons there's a touch of the James Bond about him as he stands on
his skis at the top of the slope. Or so he announces. "Weee- har!" he shouts as
he pushes off. The cry may not be part of the original vocabulary coined for
007, but you get the idea. This was glamorous and exciting. Not the kind of
adjectives usually associated with people like Norman.

    For Norman has Down's Syndrome. Only a generation ago that would have led to
him being shut away in an institution for his entire natural life.  But, as the
scene on that Belfast dry ski-slope showed last week, quite a lot has changed in
a comparatively short time.

    The rest of us have some way to go to catch up. Children with Down's
Syndrome can be recognised by their slanted eyes, flat faces, fat little bodies
and learning difficulties of such severity that they must always be treated as
overgrown infants. Such is the stereotype most of us carry, and buried in it are
a whole bundle of distastes and prejudices whose harshness we attempt to offset
with platitudes about how such children love music and respond warmly to
physical affection.

    It is a view which is as out of date as it is ignorant, as will be shown
later this month with the publication of two major new studies of the nation's
most common learning disability. Both have taken place within Northern Ireland,
the part of the UK with the highest incidence of the condition, chiefly because
both Catholic and Protestant communities there have a tradition of large
families which means that the number of babies born to older women - the high
risk category for Down's - is much greater.  All this has also produced a
culture which has fostered notable advances in the treatment of the syndrome.

    In one of the two studies, Dr Norman Nevin, Professor of Genetics at Belfast
City Hospital, has tracked every baby born with Down's Syndrome in the province
in the past 25 years to determine the changing pattern of the disorder. In the
other, Dr Chris Conliffe of the Institute for Counselling and Personal
Development, has surveyed the entire Down's population in the province - the
first time a total survey has been done anywhere in the UK.

    He discovered that the incidence is a lot higher than was previously
thought, and that people with Down's are surviving much longer than was supposed
- he even came across a woman aged 77 with the condition. But Northern Ireland
is special in another way. Over the past two decades, a group of activist
parents have established a network of support groups under the umbrella of the
Northern Ireland Down's Syndrome Association which has profoundly altered the
lives of children with the condition.  And it has led them to achieve far more
than the experts had thought possible.

    Norman, and the group of other young adults on the dry ski-slope in Belfast
last week, were the pinnacle of that achievement. (They were practising for a
parent-free skiing holiday in France next weekend.) He and others have recently
completed their Duke of Edinburgh gold award, which involved four days
unaccompanied orienteering and survival in a German forest.  At home, many now
in their twenties have found jobs and are preparing to leave home for
semi-independent housing schemes. One has passed a driving test and drives her
own car.

    It is all a long way from how people with Down's Syndrome have been viewed
in the past. The condition was first identified in 1866 by Dr John Langdon Down,
a supporter of the eugenics movement which saw mental and physical handicaps as
a manifestation of degeneracy - a philosophy which led eventually to the entire
Down's Syndrome population of Germany being experimented on and exterminated in
the Nazi Holocaust. And if more modern reactions were less extreme, there was
until as recently as 20 years ago a routine recommendation in this country that
such children be placed for life in an institution.

    A number of factors have changed that. Central to them, according to Dr
Conliffe, has been the insistence by families that they will look after their
Down's children at home. This has not just provided the children with more
intensive stimulation. It has also created a network of vocal advocates who
continually challenge the medical and education systems.

    Thirty years ago, half of Down's children died before the age of five;
today, thanks to advances in surgery on the heart and bowel disorders which
affect them, 80 per cent survive to 30 and beyond, and most have a life
expectancy of over 50. At home, early physiotherapy and speech therapy has been
evolved. In education, Down's children have been discovered to have better
visual than auditory skills and their IQ can virtually double when measured this
way. As a result, their traditional special schools have been augmented, thanks
to parental pressure, by the option of integrating them into mainstream schools.

    Despite all this, the stereotypes are slow to change. "I've always tried to
educate the general public but I don't think I'm winning," sighed Elizabeth
Doherty as she watched her son, Kieran, 23, follow Norman down the dry
ski-slope. "Their looks are a barrier they find hard to get over," she said.

    Kieran has an NVQ in Retailing and has just had a job interview on the open
job market. But perhaps the most interesting finding of this month's reports are
the unexplained clusters of babies born with Down's in particular areas at
particular times. "I'm becoming more and more convinced that external factors
might play a part," said Professor Nevin. "Down's Syndrome is caused by an
additional chromosome and we know that the chances of this increase with the
mother's age. But there could also be an environmental influence. We have looked
at a number of things - diet, drugs, chemicals.  There could well be some other
factor which acts on the eggs of old mothers and triggers it off."

    The Post Office has now provided him with post-code computer software to
plot his 25 years of figures on a map. "We will look for things like whether
there is clustering around land-fill sites, for example," he said.  "Clusters
may give a clue, though there are so many variables that finding something can
be down to luck."

    The research could provide spin-offs for the rest of the population.  People
with Down's Syndrome undergo an acceleration in the process of ageing. By the
age of 35, they have undergone the brain changes the rest of the population
suffer in old age. Many also develop early Alzheimer's Disease. "If the
molecular geneticists can find out what accelerates ageing in Down's," said
Professor Nevin, who is also the chair of UK Gene Therapy Advisory Committee,
"then we may be able to find ways to retard the development of Alzheimer's for
the entire population."

    In the meantime, it throws up other issues. "Now this is no longer a disease
where you expect early death, we need to think of how we provide for this ageing
population," said Dr Conliffe, whose report will propose that senior citizenship
begins at the age of 40 for people with Down's.  It will also require a
reappraisal among social service planners who have hitherto seriously
underestimated the number of older people with the condition.

    "There is no social service provision to help those who are over 20," Dr
Conliffe said. "They leave their peers behind when they leave school so there
are social issues. Then their health needs to be looked at with greater
intensity, as does their greater incidence of depression. And there is a double
jeopardy in the later years - as well as accelerated ageing they have to deal
with the fact that their carers are getting old too."

    Meanwhile, those carers in the Down's Syndrome Association are finding new
ways of living with the daily reality of the condition. They provide courses in
numeracy and money management alongside those in keep-fit, bowling, swimming,
gymnastics, horse-riding and five-a-side football.  They also do line-dancing
and drama - in which another of the skiiers, Mark, does a mean Elvis
impersonation.

    "He has a much better social life than I do," said his mother, Elizabeth
Robinson, as she watched him take off his ski-boots. She was smiling.  And there
was, in her words, not an iota of complaint.


LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1999


                              82 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 29, 1999, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Page 7

LENGTH: 37 words

HEADLINE: HIV used in 'gene therapy' tests

BODY:

    SCIENTISTS TRYING to carry out "gene therapy" - the futuristic method of
replacing flawed DNA in a patient - have taken the step of using a weakened form
of HIV to insert working genes in experiments with mice.


LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1999


                              85 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           January 23, 1999, Saturday

SECTION: COMMENT; Page 7

LENGTH: 2071 words

HEADLINE: The Saturday Essay: We must not let genes become the gods of our age;
When we try to understand ourselves as individual, free, conscious beings, DNA
has no special status whatever

BYLINE: John Durant

BODY:

    TOWARDS THE end of last year, BMW launched its new model 3 series with a TV
advertisement in which the car is driven between Perspex sheets covered in DNA
"fingerprints". The voice-over tells viewers: "DNA is the very foundation of
life. It is responsible for the transmission of hereditary characteristics like
strength and power and good looks."

    DNA is not just "the very foundation of life"; it is also, it seems, the
very height of fashion. In using DNA to launch their latest model in the UK, BMW
were merely following in the footsteps of another European car manufacturer.
For Renault had already appropriated the DNA fingerprint image (along with
Professor Steve Jones of University College London) for use in their own TV
commercials earlier in the year. In both cases, the car companies used evolution
and genetics to convey the notion of progressive improvement through a series of
generations.

    But, more than this, they used DNA because of its "powerful imagery", as BMW
put it in its accompanying literature. Today, this imagery is to be found not
only in TV advertisements, but also in company logos and cartoon strips, on
billboards, and in perfumes and "alco-pop" drinks.  In Britain, a prominent
publisher recently advertised its popular science list under the slogan, "Sex,
drugs and DNA". Whether this is taken as a spin on sex, lies and videotape, or
"sex'n'drugs'n'rock'n'roll", the point remains the same: DNA is glamorous; DNA
sells.

    In one sense, this is hardly surprising. The spectacular success of
molecular genetics in the second half of our century has served to project DNA
into the public consciousness in a uniquely powerful way. It may seem hard to
believe now, but after Crick and Watson announced their Double Helix in 1953, it
took several years before the BBC saw fit to give it any significant radio or TV
coverage at all. What seems obvious now - a recent poll in this newspaper showed
a clear consensus that Crick and Watson's was the single most important
scientific discovery of the 20th century - was not so obvious then. In the
Sixties, the Double Helix steadily gained wider currency as a rather beautiful
theory of inheritance; but it wasn't until the Seventies that it became clear to
most people that this theory could in fact be put to practical use by direct
manipulation of DNA itself.

    More than anything else, it has been the resulting cascade of new gene
technologies that has made DNA so famous. The role of DNA fingerprinting
evidence in the OJ Simpson trial probably did more to project DNA into public
consciousness than all the popularising efforts of scientists and science
journalists put together. Over the period from 1988 to 1996, the British
public's factual knowledge about most scientific subjects increased only
slightly; but during the same period, the number of people who knew that DNA is
the material basis of biological inheritance roughly doubled, from 43 per cent
to 81 per cent.

    Of course, not everything connected with DNA has been universally welcomed.
At the same time that many forensic and medical uses of gene technology have
been widely hailed, some agricultural uses of gene technology - for example, in
the development of genetically modified (GM) foods - have come under a cloud of
suspicion. According to the Prince of Wales, for example: "Mixing genetic
material from species that cannot breed naturally, takes us into areas that
should be left to God. We should not be meddling with the building blocks of
life in this way." (The Prince of Wales's online forum on GM food is at
http://www.princeofwales.gov.uk)

    This is the view also taken by the food retailer Iceland, which has begun to
advertise its products on the basis of the fact that they do not contain any GM
ingredients.

    Thus, we have a curious situation in which some companies are promoting
their products by association with gene technology, while others are doing so by
freeing their products from that very same association. In Advertising Land, it
seems that it's OK for cars to "evolve"; but it's not OK for plants to be
"engineered", even if - according to a report published earlier this week on the
regulation of genetic modification in agriculture by the House of Lords Select
Committee on the European Communities - such engineering could offer "great
potential benefits to agriculture, industry, consumers and even to the
environment".

    As Monsanto has discovered, opposition to GM foods is greater in Europe than
it is in North America. As part of an international research programme designed
to map changing attitudes to gene technology in Europe, my colleague George
Gaskell, at the London School of Economics, has found that significantly more
Europeans than Americans possess what he calls "menacing images" of GM foods.
Asked a series of identical questions, 30 per cent of Europeans, but only 7 per
cent of Americans, agreed that, "ordinary tomatoes do not contain genes while
genetically modified tomatoes do". Similarly, 24 per cent of Europeans, but only
8 per cent of Americans, agreed that "by eating a genetically modified fruit, a
person's genes could also become modified".

    In other words, it seems that quite a lot of Europeans are inclined to
believe two rather scary things: first, that it's only genetically modified
foods that contain genes; and second, that by eating such foods a person's own
genes could somehow be affected or even infected. Small wonder, you may think,
that GM foods have become so controversial in Europe. If the American
sociologist Dorothy Nelkin is right in thinking that what she calls "The DNA
Mystique" has projected the gene as a cultural icon, then it seems that this
icon is powerful enough to evoke anxiety as well as admiration.

    Anxiety about DNA is also apparent in the area of medical science. The Human
Genome Project is making rapid progress with mapping and sequencing our entire
genetic make-up. In just a few years, we shall know the position and the precise
structure of every single gene we possess. Of course, we shan't know what all of
these genes do. But, even now, there is a long and growing list of genes
associated with medically significant characteristics.

    In one sense, the simplest of these to deal with are the single genes (such
as those for Friedrich's ataxia and cystic fibrosis) that cause serious genetic
disease. Once these genes can be easily identified, it is possible to offer
genetic counselling to couples who may be at risk of having an affected child.
But how shall we deal with genes that merely increase the probability of
disease, or genes that are linked with much less serious complaints?

    A recent brochure from the pharmaceutical company SmithKline Beecham reviews
current research on "a new gene that might affect appetite", as well as work on
the genetic basis of heart disease, diabetes, hypertension, Alzheimer's disease,
depression and schizophrenia. If you are inclined to doubt that some or all of
these diseases are less serious than, say, cystic fibrosis, then simply change
the examples to suit your preferences.  For the fact is that virtually every
significant physical or mental characteristic we possess is going to turn out to
be influenced by one or more genes within the human genome.

    The vertiginous prospect of knowing - and being able to influence - the
genetic roots of the human condition is, rightly, the cause of a great deal of
concern. In Britain today, there is a plethora of government advisory committees
dealing with different aspects of human molecular genetics.  There are
committees on genetic modification, on scientific advances in genetics, on
genetic testing, on gene therapy, and on "xenotransplantation" (the creation of
transgenic animals whose organs may be suitable for transplant into humans); and
another committee on genetics and insurance is currently being planned. All of
these are in addition to an overarching Human Genetics Advisory Commission and a
statutory Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority.

    Another, equally complicated, set of committees looks after the uses of gene
technology in agriculture and food production. Not surprisingly, perhaps, the
Government is currently reviewing this baroque committee structure involved in
regulating the way we exploit our knowledge of DNA, with a view to simplifying
it and making it more open and more accessible to the public.

    This is obviously important, but I don't think it's the only challenge
ahead.  As we continue to learn more about the genetics of the human condition,
we are continually tempted to credit DNA with almost supernatural powers; to see
it almost as a modern, secular substitute for the old, mythological life force.
The very success of the molecular geneticists in identifying genes associated
with so many different physical and mental characteristics has recently
encouraged a great deal of speculation about the existence of "genes for" all
sorts of nebulous traits - from mental ability and sexual orientation, to
parenting styles and criminality. We await only a full-blown genetic theory of
voting behaviour in general elections before handing over the entire domain of
the social sciences and humanities to the safe care of biologists.

    This is obviously rubbish. We might be tempted to indulge it as mildly
amusing rubbish, were it not for the fact (much bemoaned by more thoughtful
biologists) that the long-standing myth of the unalterability of genetic traits
shows no sign of being displaced in popular culture by a more scientifically
realistic idea of the role of genetics in human affairs. With DNA riding high as
a cultural icon, it is continually tempting for headline-writers and pundits to
lapse into a crude form of genetic determinism in which anatomy (this time in
the form of the Double Helix) is destiny.

    This is where headlines in the tabloids about "gay genes" ultimately come
from; and it's also where a spate of ghastly, fatalistic "don't- help-yourself"
books have recently come from in the United States. In a rather different sense,
even our own Brian Appleyard trips up over this issue in his recent book, Brave
New Worlds (HarperCollins). In typically intemperate style, Appleyard argues
that once we accept a genetic approach to the human condition, we must end by
conceding to the gene our human dignity and freedom.

    If this were true, then modern genetics would indeed be a threat to
traditional humanistic (and, indeed, all religious and spiritual) values. In
fact, it simply isn't so. Of course, we are made of DNA; but we are also made of
sinew and muscle; and besides all that, we're the stuff of dreams.  All of these
statements are true in their way, but none of them is true as a complete and
adequate account of what we are.

    When it comes to understanding the evolution of the human race, DNA has
special status; for it is through the selection of changes in DNA that human
beings evolved. But when it comes to understanding who we are as individual,
conscious, free beings, DNA has no special status whatever.  It is simply one of
the physical ingredients in the mix that went into our development. Knowing more
about this ingredient cannot change what we already know about ourselves - that
we are feeling, thinking, hopeful creatures; weak and imperfect, to be sure, and
much inclined to doubt and indecision, but nonetheless perfectly capable of
surprising ourselves and those around us by occasionally choosing to do the
right thing.

    In all of our current efforts to deal with the implications of what we can
do with DNA, we need to make sure that we keep this extraordinary molecule in
proper perspective. We can alleviate our condition in this world to a very
considerable extent by the wise application of our genetic understanding; but if
we are too uncritical in our zeal for DNA as a cultural icon, then we may be
tempted to forget what we know about ourselves, and accept instead a crude
caricature drawn more from the images created by smart advertising executives
than from either science or sober reflection.  This would be too high a price to
pay for the genetic revolution. Fortunately for us, there is no need whatsoever
to pay it.

    The author is director of science communication at the Science Museum, and
professor of public understanding of science at Imperial College, London


LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1999


                              86 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 22, 1999, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Page 2

LENGTH: 312 words

HEADLINE: Germ warfare 'could target ethnic groups'

BYLINE: By Charles Arthur

BODY:

    GENETICALLY engineered biological weapons capable of targeting particular
ethnic groups could become reality within 10 years, an expert panel warned
yesterday.

    Viruses and other micro- organisms tailored to detect the differences in the
DNA of races could offer warmakers and terrorists of the future a new means to
carry out "ethnic cleansing", said the panel convened by the British Medical
Association (BMA).

    Yet the scientific advances that would make such weapons possible will be a
spin-off of two areas of medicine with potentially huge benefits.  The first is
the Human Genome Project, which aims to unravel the 100,000 or so genes in human
DNA by 2003. The other is the nascent technology of gene therapy, which tries to
repair defective genes in the body.

    Launching a book entitled Biotechnology, Weapons and Humanity, members of
the panel insisted yesterday that they were not scaremongering. "We went into
this being very sceptical, with a position that 'It can't be done'," said
Professor Vivienne Nathanson, the BMA's head of health policy and research. "But
then after examining what is going on we decided that it might be possible after
all."

    The idea of "genetic weapons", which the panel said are at present just a
theoretical possibility, added urgency to the need to add verification
procedures to the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention. Though first signed
in 1972 by the UK, US and Russia, and now having 140 signatory nations, the BWC
differs from other weapons conventions in having no mechanisms for oversight, to
ensure that signatories obey its rules.

    Russia was among the countries that attempted to produce a genetically
enhanced version of the anthrax virus during the Cold War. The Aum Shinrikyo
religious terrorists in Japan also sought genetically to enhance bacteria they
had acquired, but failed.


LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1999


                              87 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          January 20, 1999, Wednesday

SECTION: COMMENT; Page 5

LENGTH: 793 words

HEADLINE: Wednesday Book: Drawing repellent conclusions

BYLINE: David Papineau

BODY:

    BRAVE NEW WORLDS

    BY BRIAN APPLEYARD, HARPERCOLLINS, pounds 16.99

    THOMAS HENRY Huxley rose from humble beginnings to become one of the most
eminent of Victorian bioogists, but along the way he lost his faith to
scientific reason. When his son died aged three, he was denied the traditional
comforts of religion. In the depth of his grief he wrote to his friend Charles
Kingsley: "I could have fancied a devil scoffing at me. . . and asking what
profit it was to have stripped myself of the hopes and consolations of the mass
of mankind? To which my only reply was and is: 'Oh devil! Truth is much better
than profit.'"

    There is something noble about Huxley's commitment to his scientific
beliefs, but his story also shows how the rise of science has made the world a
crueller place. Instead of a heaven and earth created for man by a benevolent
God, we now have a random universe in which natural selection blindly arranges
matter into strange animal shapes.

    Brian Appleyard has been urging for some years that we should not just stand
by and let science destroy our values. In his earlier book, Understanding the
Present, he argues that the scientific world view subverts religion and culture,
yet offers nothing in its place. This new volume continues the message, with an
emphasis on recent advances in genetic science.  In Appleyard's view, the
unravelling of the DNA code is "the most important discovery in human history",
which "will leave nothing unchanged".

    He begins with a standard run-through of the brave new technologies on the
horizon, including genetic scanning, selective abortion, gene therapy and cloned
body parts. Yet Appleyard does little to help us judge which prospects are
likely to graduate from fantasy to fact, since he makes no attempt to explain
the science of DNA. This is disappointing from a journalist who made his name by
distilling complex subjects for a mass audience, and it compares badly with a
recent Penguin by Philip Kitcher, The Lives to Come, which covers the same
ground as Appleyard, yet engages seriously with the issues that depend on
scientific understanding.

    Much of Appleyard's agitation about the new genetics seems misplaced.  He
devotes a great deal of attention to the history of eugenic thinking, from the
Spanish Inquisition to research on IQ differences between races.  He is, of
course, right that eugenic ideas are destructive of civilised values, as Nazism
proved, but the trouble is that eugenics owes nothing to the discovery of DNA.
Even the most modern investigations into genetic IQ depend on statistical
techniques that have been around since the beginning of this century, and are
independent of assumptions about the molecular basis of inheritance.

    Appleyard gets increasingly entangled in his eagerness to demonstrate that
genetic science is the root of all amorality. On IQ, for example, most sane
commentators would agree that, while inheritance does make a difference, many
other factors do too. But Appleyard will have none of this. As he sees it, once
we start down the path of genetic science, we must conclude that everything
important is genetic, all inequalities are justified, and the human bloodstock
is in danger of degeneration.  At one point, Appleyard suddenly seems to notice
that he is in danger of ending up on the wrong side, and inserts a paragraph
explaining that he does not necessarily endorse these ideas, but that "there is
a logic which has to be followed through if we are ever to understand what
genetics is all about". He adds: "Precisely what I personally think about all
this will become clear later."

    Unfortunately, it doesn't. Appleyard suggests at the end that the solution
is to deny the truth of scientific ideas. But it is surely too late for that. As
Huxley's sad story shows, we cannot put the cat of scientific truth back into
the bag of ignorance. Of course, not all scientific claims are proven, and we
should do well to treat many revelations with a pinch of salt. But there is
enough in science, including genetic science, that cannot be denied and must be
come to terms with if we are to get our values straight.

    What we need are writers who can explain the relevant science to the public,
and allow us to shape our values intelligently to the new information.  Brian
Appleyard's previous work has shown that he is as good at this as anybody. But
in this book he is in danger of giving the game to the enemy.  In his impatience
to damn science, he ends up drawing repellent conclusions from inescapable
scientific truths. Just as well that his arguments don't hold water, given that
science will not go away.

    The reviewer is professor of the philosophy of science at King's College,
London


LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1999


                              90 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1999 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 15, 1999, Friday

SECTION: FEATURES; Page 9

LENGTH: 411 words

HEADLINE: Science: Update

BYLINE: Charles Arthur

BODY:

    AN EARLY use of gene therapy on unborn monkeys could presage its use on
human foetuses. Next month a team at the Alton Ochsner Medical Foundation in New
Orleans will try injecting a mutated cold virus carrying a "repair" gene for
cystic fibrosis (CF) into the amniotic fluid of pregnant monkeys, reports New
Scientist. Though the foetuses will not have CF, the researchers will look for
high levels of activity of the repair gene.  Positive results could lead to
tests on women whose foetuses have CF.  The scheme would require regulatory
approval, because such gene therapy might possibly affect reproductive tissues.

    THE ARRANGEMENT of blood vessels in our heads may act as a heat exchanger to
cool blood before it enters the brain, and a failure of this system may be a
cause of cot death, according to British scientists. A team at the Institute of
Neurology in London investigated the temperature of monkeys' carotid artery
blood. This was lower than brain tissue temperatures, suggesting that incoming
blood helps cool the active brain.

    If that function fails in a baby, the team suggests, cot death may follow.
But the work was described as "far from proven" by other researchers.

    PROMISCUITY IS healthy if you are a queen bee, say scientists who believe
they have discovered why female bees may mate with up to 20 males in their
nuptial dance. A study into the mating habits of the bumblebee found that sex
with multiple partners improves the ability of subsequent generations to ward of
parasites and infectious diseases.

    The researchers artificially inseminated queen bumblebees with sperm of
either high or low genetic diversity - to mimic the effects of mating with many
males - and exposed the resulting colonies to parasites. They found that
colonies from highly diverse sperm were less likely to suffer parasitic attack,
which supports the general view that genetic diversity is a way of keeping pace
with the continual arms race between parasites and their host organisms.

    Two Swiss scientists at ETH Zurich concluded that sex with multiple partners
strengthens offspring against parasites and disease. Writing in the journal
Nature, they said: "Colonies headed by queens inseminated by highly diverse
sperm had lower intensities of infection and lower prevalence of infection, as
compared with colonies with low genetic diversity, by both of the major
parasites seen in our area of Switzerland."

    Charles Arthur


LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1999


                              96 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           December 18, 1998, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Page 9

LENGTH: 49 words

HEADLINE: Scientific advisers put to the tes

BODY:

    t

    THE GOVERNMENT is to review the way it collects data on biotechnology issues
including cloning and genetically modified food. The inquiry will reassess the
value of 15 scientific advisory bodies set up to deal with issues such as human
embryology, pesticides and gene therapy.


LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1998


                              100 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           December 15, 1998, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Page 17

LENGTH: 964 words

HEADLINE: US Tiger fund takes a bite of WPP; Market Report

BYLINE: Derek Pain

BODY:

    ADVERTISING AGENCY WPP was one of the more active Footsie constituents as
Tiger Management, the famed American hedge fund, emerged as a 3.91 per cent
shareholder.

    The US group, where Baroness Thatcher is a consultant, has taken an active
interest in London shares this year. It determinedly built a 12.15 per cent
stake in the Next fashion chain but when the one-time high- flyer failed to
recover, it trimmed its holding to 10.99 per cent.

    It could see WPP, headed by high earner Martin Sorrell, as a recovery play.
The big advertising group fell to 202p in the October blood bath; in the summer
it was 467p. Goldman Sachs believes the shares, up 10.75p to 323.75p, should go
to 400p.

    The Tiger pounce helped enliven a downbeat session with, in moderate
trading, Footsie falling 7.2 points to 5,534.5. It was at one time down 73.3.
For the first time the Stock Exchange's new Volume-Weighted Average Price
calculation was used to determine closing order book prices.

    In the past the final price has been based on the last order book trade.
Under the new system a few prices were adjusted with, for example, Prudential
Corporation being accorded an 847p close against an order book price of 849.5p
and Vodafone 903p against 908p.

    Despite late programme trades and some bed and breakfast exercises the usual
festive lethargy was evident and this year there is the added excuse of the
euro's arrival for institutions to adopt a no play policy.

    The stock market is taking the new currency's debut so seriously that for
the first time in living memory the market will be closed on New Year's Eve and
open for only half a day on 30 December. Supporting shares had another
depressing session with the mid cap index off 30.4 to 4,706.5 and the small cap
4.8 to 2,007.8.

    Richard Jeffrey at Charterhouse Tilney points out that small cap shares have
under performed by 40 per cent in the past two years. "Seldom has a fall from
grace been so spectacular," he said. "The combination of economic slowdown and
deteriorating profit margins makes it likely that investors will continue to
shun small cap stocks in the early months of 1999."

    Still the lot of under card shares could start to improve around the middle
of next year, prompted by "escalating corporate activity as larger companies
also seek to exploit the lowly ratings of their smaller brethren".

    First Choice Holidays, a mid cap constituent, was one to buck the trend,
gaining 1.5p to 101p. Year's results are due today. Helped by acquisitions,
profits are expected to soar from pounds 15.4m to pounds 48m.

    Railtrack, after being shunted into the sidings last week following
regulatory strictures, rebounded, gaining 130p to 1,5311 with WestLB Panmure
among those advocating buying the shares.

    The advance was helped by suggestions that the group could play a
significant role in the revamp of the London Underground.

    But Pearson, the banking and media group, was weak, falling 33p to 1,062p on
worries about a trading statement, due today. The market is braced for a
cautious tone and profit downgradings are expected to follow. The market's
expectations are currently around pounds 348m. Last year's figure was pounds
128.6m.

    Shell's restructuring left the shares 3.5p lower at 350.5p but Southern
Electric brightened 30p to 665p as Scottish Hydro-Electric's takeover obtained
regulatory approval and with 79.1 per cent support went unconditional.  General
Electric Co's late bid to join the European defence merger talks left its shares
18p off at 521p. The market felt its last minute arrival would mean it would be
forced to negotiate from a position of weakness.  British Aerospace, little
changed at 501.75p, is believed to be near to clinching a deal with Germany's
DaimlerChrysler Aerospace.

    Emap fell 74p to 1,050p. The publisher confirmed it may buy a US magazine
group; the rumoured price is pounds 655m.

    National Grid, splashing out pounds 1.9bn on a US electricity group and
looking for more overseas deals, fell 10.5p to 488p.

    A profits warning cut into PIC International, the remnants of the old
Dalgety food group. The pig breeder's shares plunged 23.5p to 73p.

    MFI fell 3p to 26p on worries it will slump into losses today and little
Cadora, the Capolito Roma retailer, fell 0.25p to 1p following losses and
signals more cash may be needed.

    Greycoat hardened 6p to 162.5p after admitting to unfruitful merger talks
with Wates City of London Properties. Wates, off 1p at 73p, has 2.1 per cent of
Greycoat.

    Servisair, the airline support group, rose 9p to 125p after it said it had
received approaches but was not currently involved in any talks.

    Newcastle Utd, said to be putting together a pounds 50m cash-raising
exercise in New York, gained 9p to 105p.

    LITTLE Oxford Biomedica rose 2.25p to 12p, reflecting a gene therapy
licensing link with the giant Rhone-Poulenc Rorer. Dr Stephen Osborne at
stockbroker Beeson Gregory calculates the value of the deal, including royalty
payments, is at least 30p a share and could be as high as 87p.  However, losses
will continue; he forecasts pounds 3.7m this year and pounds 3.1m next. The
shares, recently down to 8p, brushed 60p two years ago.

    FARLAKE, the reshaped fund manager, should make further headway this year
with stockbroker Teather & Greenwood shooting for profits of nearly pounds 1.2m
against pounds 805,000. Next year's forecast from analyst Martin Cross is pounds
1.25m. The company has pounds 380m under management split between PEPs, pension
plans and private client portfolios. The shares held at 325p, just below their
year's high. In 1996 they were up to a 475p peak.

    SEAQ VOLUME: 792.5m

    SEAQ TRADES: 61,433

    GILT INDEX: 114.95 +0.61


LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1998


                              109 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           December 3, 1998, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Page 11

LENGTH: 1017 words

HEADLINE: Your implant will diagnose you now: a vision of medicine in the 21st
century

BYLINE: By Glenda Cooper and Charles Arthur

BODY:

    IT IS A DREAM for some, a nightmare for others. Designer babies, "Star Trek"
medical devices, brain implants and womb transplants may sound like fantasy but
could all become commonplace in the next half century.

    Rather than visiting the local GP, we will increasingly live in "intelligent
houses" which monitor our health through body implants and consult the Internet
to find the expert in our problem.

    But alongside the array of technological breakthroughs, the darker side of
future medicine conjures up a picture of a Brave New World, where brain function
could be assessed in the womb and parents who continue with pregnancy knowing
their child carries an illness could face stigma and be forced to meet the costs
of treatment.

    These are some of the predictions made in "Clinical Futures", an analysis of
likely changes in medicine over the next 50 years, published today by the
British Medical Journal publishing group.

    According to David Delpy, Professor of Medical Physics at University
College, London, an instant diagnostic device might well work using near-
infrared light which can penetrate deep layers of body tissue. "Given
developments in computing, allied to the ability of near-infrared light to
distinguish the absorption arising from different molecules in the body, we may
yet see the day when, like Dr McCoy in Star Trek, the doctor merely waves a
machine with flashing lights over the patient to make an instant diagnosis,"
said Professor Delpy.

    He added that there would be increased growth in patients looking after
their own health. "Technology is going to push diagnosis right down to the local
level," he said. "People are going to diagnose themselves, buying small testing
kits in Boots, and monitor their own health, driven increasingly by healthcare
insurance."

    He suggested there might be lower premiums or no claims bonuses on
healthcare insurance for those who monitored their own health carefully. "People
are also going to be consulting across the Internet, finding the consultant who
has the most expertise in their particular problem and then dashing around
Europe to get themselves treated. This also means the role of doctors is going
to change quite significantly."

    Professor Delpy foresees a world where body implants would monitor blood
pressure, heart rate and other health indicators. They could be linked to the
"intelligent house" which would continuously monitor data from the implants,
spotting anything from a cold to an impending heart attack.

    Seen as particularly useful device for elderly people living alone, the
house could look after its inhabitant by booking appointments with doctors or
adjusting a diet by controlling the ordering or cooking of the right foods.

    "Everybody will be so interlinked that a large part of routine functions
will go on around you without you knowing," said Professor Delpy. "Your car will
be driven out ready for you in the morning and your breakfast will start cooking
itself."

    In cancer treatment, one specialist predicted that a "golden age" of drug
discovery and gene therapy would begin.

    Early forms of gene therapy for cancer are being attempted and more would be
tried. One approach would be to tag cancer cells to make them more visible to
the body's immune system. Alternatively, cancer cells could be tagged with genes
that make them better targets for anti-cancer drugs.

    With an ageing population, cancer incidence will inevitably rise. But Karol
Sikora, Professor of International Cancer Medicine at the Imperial College
School of Medicine, said that by 2020 concerted action against smoking could
reduce cancer incidence by 20 per cent, and dietary modifications a further 20
per cent.

    Leslie Iverson, Visiting Professor at the department of pharmacology at
Oxford University, predicted remarkable developments in brain and nerve repair.
Brain cell transplants, when foetal cells are injected into the damaged area of
the brain, would help tackle degenerative diseases such as Parkinson's and
Alzheimer's.

    New techniques will also be used to regenerate nerve fibres, by finding ways
to bridge the scarring between damaged nerves, using powerful chemical promoters
of nerve cell growth. "The prospect of making the blind see again and the deaf
hear will remain an elusive but not impossible goal in this field of research,"
he said.

    For those with weight problems, anti-obesity drugs which target the centres
of the brain which control weight could be developed. Then it may be possible to
provide a treatment regime that would permanently readjust the body weight
control system downwards (or upwards for anorexics).

    Genes that predispose people to mental illnesses such as schizophrenia,
manic depression, and even addiction to drugs or alcohol, would be identified
and screened out.

    But Catherine Peckham, Professor of Paediatric Medicine at the Institute of
Child Health, said that the advances in technology must be accompanied by a
debate on the influence this had on society.

    She predicted that artificial wombs could become a reality within 10 years.
And by cloning sections of DNA that contribute to physical or mental fitness,
and screening out unwanted characteristics, genetic engineers would have the
ability to produce designer babies. "I think they could become a possibility,
but I hope they won't," she said yesterday.

    Because of the inherent risks in multiple births, pressure to abort one of
naturally occurring twins could be brought to bear in order to reduce the risk
of disability.

    Increased knowledge of how childhood development affects adult health might
promote aggressive state "nannyism".

    "In an era when adoptable children will become increasingly scarce, child
confiscation might become the preferred method of enhancing living conditions
for children, rather than attempts at across-the-board improvements," she said.

    Despite this the scientists all said they saw the future as optimistic.
"There is great potential and it is very exciting," said Professor Peckham.


LOAD-DATE: December 03, 1998


                              122 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            October 16, 1998, Friday

SECTION: FEATURES; Page 9

LENGTH: 569 words

HEADLINE: Science: The Truth About ... Designer Babies

BYLINE: Charles Arthur

BODY:

    THE PHRASE "designer babies" means different things to different people. To
some it smacks of eugenics, to others an ideal means of ridding humanity of
inherited illnesses. The idea that we can now alter a person's genes is becoming
embedded in the public consciousness. However, the fact is that at present,
despite millions of pounds spent on various projects, scientists have not yet
successfully altered the DNA of humans to cure a single genetic defect.

    "Gene therapy" is the scientific term given to the procedure of trying to
replace the faulty genes of a patient with a genetic illness with a healthy,
working alternative. Most of the research has been done on animals, with the
eventual aim of treating people carrying a potentially fatal mutation of a
single gene. A classic example is cystic fibrosis, where a person who has two
flawed copies of the CF gene suffers a condition where their lungs produce too
much mucus.

    The first problem scientists attempting gene therapy face is: how do you
introduce the new gene into the cells which need it? In the case of CF, the
important cells are in the nose and lungs. Research in the United States has
focussed on adding copies of the working CF gene to cold viruses (since they
invade the nose and lungs, and make the cells generate their proteins -
including that of CF). In Britain, efforts have focussed more on delivering the
genes via fat molecules called lipids.

    But neither method has yet cured a patient. Adding a gene to a cell that is
part of a working, living body is far more complicated than creating a
transgenic animal: in the latter, the gene is added to an embryo outside the
womb, which is then re-implanted and allowed to mature.

    Even then, not all attempts succeed. A couple of years ago a more radical
idea for performing gene therapy was suggested: use a weakened form of a
retrovirus, which inserts its DNA into that of the cell it invades.  If it
inserts a healthy gene, that can't be bad. There are some dangers to this
approach: the virus may become harmful again, or perhaps it might incorporate
genetic material into the patient's reproductive, or "germ" cells, which make
sperm in men and eggs in women.

    The idea that gene therapy could affect the germ cells - and so pass on any
changes to the patients' descendants - has raised some of the greatest ethical
concerns about the technology. In Britain, anyone proposing a gene therapy trial
must also show that the additional gene cannot be passed into the germ line. In
CF patients, this means only performing the trials on men, because their illness
also renders them sterile.

    This restriction also prevents scientists trying gene therapy on foetuses or
embryos, which would be an "infinitely easier" means of adding a gene, to quote
Leroy Hood of the University of Washington, Seattle. "We have terrific ways to
do that," he adds. Those embryos would grow up into people with the new genes in
every cell of their body. Those in favour of such "germ-line gene therapy" say
it means we might be able to eradicate genetic diseases for good and so choose
how we evolve.

    For the moment, such research is outlawed because of the many scientific
uncertainties surrounding what would happen if gene therapy was performed on
germ-line cells. Designer babies will remain an ingredient of science fiction
for some time to come.

    Charles Arthur


LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1998


                              125 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           October 8, 1998, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Page 3

LENGTH: 342 words

HEADLINE: Gene tests on foetuses planned

BYLINE: Charles Arthur Technology Editor

BODY:

    AMERICAN SCIENTISTS are considering a controversial experiment to alter the
genes of foetuses which are due for abortion, to test how well such "gene
therapy" works.

    If the experiment is successful, the treatment could cure foetuses scheduled
for abortion because of a potentially fatal genetic disorder - creating an
unprecedented ethical dilemma.

    The idea, proposed by Dr French Anderson of the University of Southern
California in Los Angeles, would try to replace faulty genes in two diseases:
those which cause the inherited blood disease alpha-thalassaemia, and those
which lead to "severe combined immune deficiency.

    Dr Anderson admitted that if his experiments succeeded, then the aborted
foetus might survive and thus remove the reason the parents wanted an abortion
in the first place.

    "The parents and researchers will have this guilt that I'm not sure it's
possible to emotionally prepare for," he told New Scientist magazine.

    Gene therapy aims to alter an individual's DNA - the blueprint for the body
- and replace faulty genes with working copies in body cells.

    Millions of pounds have been spent in the past few years around the world on
hundreds of experiments, but none has so far cured any patients.

    Women whose babies have inherited the faulty genes that lead to alpha-
thalassaemia often develop the potentially fatal condition called pre-
eclampsia, which can kill the mother in a matter of hours.

    When alpha-thalassaemia is detected by genetic tests, many will choose to
abort the foetus. Dr Anderson intends to ask women who have made that decision
to let him try gene therapy to correct it.

    Dr Anderson made the proposal last month to a panel at the National
Institutes of Health.

    But one panelist, Louise Markert, an immunologist, said: "Is it morally
right to experiment on the foetus when it can give no consent and there is no
way for it to benefit from the therapy?"

    Dr Anderson said he would not be ready to carry out the experiments for at
least three years.


LOAD-DATE: October 08, 1998


                              126 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            October 2, 1998, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Page 5

LENGTH: 529 words

HEADLINE: Vaccine may buy time in cancer cases

BYLINE: Jeremy Laurance, Health Editor

BODY:

    A BREAST CANCER vaccine that could prolong the lives of women in the
advanced stages of the disease is to be tested on 900 patients around the world.

    Results from early, small studies suggest that the vaccine, injected once a
month, can keep the disease at bay once patients have had chemotherapy and are
in remission.

    If the protective effect is confirmed, the vaccine could eventually be used
against the disease in its earlier stages. Dr David Miles, co- head of the
Imperial Cancer Research Fund's breast cancer unit at Guy's Hospital, London,
and co-ordinator of the British arm of the study, said: "If we can demonstrate
that this vaccine contributes to treatment of the disease in its advanced state
then maybe we should be using it before we get to that stage."

    The vaccine, Theratope, has been developed by a Canadian biotechnology
company, which has isolated a molecule associated with breast cancer.  It hopes
the molecule will kick-start the body's immune system into fighting the disease.

    "Our early data shows it is not going to eradicate the disease, but, for
women who have undergone chemotherapy, it will act as an adjunct to hopefully
keep the disease at bay, and prolong patients' lives," Dr Miles said.

    The new vaccine works by targeting abnormalities in a type of sugar
molecule, known as STn, found in breast cancer but not normally traced by the
body's immune system.

    Scientists hope that by signalling the presence of that abnormality to the
body using Theratope, the immune system will be provoked into producing the
antibodies necessary to attack the disease.

    The British arm of the trial will include 200 women who will be treated at
Guy's Hospital. Women will be selected on the basis of very specific criteria,
and patients wanting to be considered would have to be referred by their own GPs
to Dr Miles's team.

    If proved successful, the vaccine could be licensed in four to five years.

    The vaccine trial is one of three research projects being undertaken by the
research fund group at Guy's aimed at stimulating the female immune system to
fight breast cancer.

    Laboratory studies into the gene for mucin, a molecule that is changed in
breast cancer cells, are intended to make the molecule recognisable by the
body's immune system so that it is open to attack.

    Scientists have identified the chemical building blocks that make up the
mucin core and, by giving patients the synthesised versions of them, can help
the body to recognise that the mucin in the cancer cells is abnormal.

    The third project is based on a gene therapy approach using a modified form
of the Vaccinia virus. When a virus invades the body, its genetic material
enters the cells. In the Vaccinia trial, the modified virus is used to transport
the gene for mucin into the patient's cancer cells, providing a target for the
body's immune system.

    The trial is being carried out on women with advanced breast cancer and the
treatment is being given by injection every three to four weeks. The primary aim
is to keep the disease under control, but scientists also hope treatment may
cause the tumours to shrink.


LOAD-DATE: October 02, 1998


                              131 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                August 13, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 35

LENGTH: 215 words

HEADLINE: Oxford confident of finding bio partner

BYLINE: David Lister

BODY:


    OXFORD Biomedica, the gene therapy group still struggling to recover from
its disastrous flotation in 1996, said today it expected to bring a strategic
partner on board by the end of next year.

    A spokesman said: "There are advanced negotiations going on and I think we
would be surprised if we hadn't managed to attract at least one partner by the
time we have to raise money again."

    He said representatives from the world's top 10 pharmaceuticals giants had
all approached Oxford about using its Lentivectors "toolbox" technology.

    Lentivec-tors, developed by Professor Alan Kingsman and his wife Sue, offers
a potentially new way of treating neurological diseases.

    The news came as Oxford's losses deepened to £1.83 million in the six months
to 30 June from £1.2 million in the comparative nine-month trading period last
year. Cash reserves stood at £5.1 million, following a £6 million placing and
rights issue completed earlier this year.

    Non-executive director Alan Goodman has taken over as chairman following the
departure of Sir Brian Richards, best known as the cofounder of British Biotech.
Clinical trials of a treatment for breast cancer should begin later this year
and trials for ovarian cancer are expected to follow.

    There is no dividend.


LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1998


                              149 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 25, 1998, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Page 3

LENGTH: 627 words

HEADLINE: Why life in 2020 may be short on joy

BYLINE: Diane Coyle Economics Editor

BODY:

    TWO-HOUR space-shuttle flights to Sydney or San Francisco, a 25-hour working
week, one in five fathers staying at home as house-husbands, 350mph trains for
commuting to work, and automatic lawn mowing - just a few of the delights in
store by the year 2020.

    The chances are that within the next two decades Britons will be a lot
healthier and wealthier, with more leisure and more technological goodies,
according to a new report published today. It will be a world of economic
opportunity - for those on the right side of the fence.

    In its assessment of the future, the Henley Centre puts the odds on an
economic and social crisis at just one in five.

    And if that happens, it will be due to an unforeseen global event such as an
earthquake in Japan or crash in world stock markets.

    So let's bask in its glowing vision of prosperity.

    For example, in the world of work, the report predicts less commuting.

    Superconductive magnetic levitation trains will zoom into the cities,
cutting travel times. "The longest commuter journey will be just under two
hours, mainly for the very wealthy using the space shuttle."

    Most people will work fewer than 25 hours each week over three or four days,
spending their free days involved in community work. This will expand as people
take on many welfare roles previously filled by the state, says author Graeme
Leach.

    With a desktop computer in 2020 "as powerful as all the computers in Silicon
Valley today" we will shop on-line, get our entertainment on-line, and even find
romance on-line. For, apparently, this is the way many couples will meet.

    That must be partly because the Henley Centre is predicting the demise of
the office. A tenth of the biggest companies will be entirely "virtual", with no
physical HQ, and a quarter of all workers will operate from home.

    It foresees an even more flexible world of work, with more self-employment
and job hopping. We might spend as much as a month every year out of work, it
speculates, in the new world of "friction-free capitalism".

    Luckily, home is going to be even more attractive. Falling land prices and a
relaxation of green-belt legislation will cut the cost of building an idyllic
suburban retreat. Young people will live in the cities but will move out when
they start a family.

    Technology in the home will have reduced the burden of housework, with
robots that vacuum the carpet automatically and intelligent house management
systems - nice for the growing army of husbands in pinnies.

    To cap it all, we will live longer, thanks to gene therapy, and be healthier
as a result of preventative medicine.

    Unfortunately, we will not be any happier, the report reckons. Rather, there
will be a growing "crisis of unmet expectations" triggered by the vast array of
new products and services available. There will be social tensions too.

    The welfare state will retreat further, and Britain could see the spread of
US-style "gated communities" that keep out the dangerous riff-raff.

    And, as the report concedes, there is a small chance of a much bleaker
future.

    Unemployment could return to 1930s rates and conflict between the haves and
have-nots escalate.

    Spending and employment would plummet in a "hellish downward spiral".

    Not surprisingly for a report sponsored by Barclays Life, it offers one
solution.

    We could all put a lot more effort into saving for hard times.

    Nigel Waite, marketing director, draws his own conclusion from the report:
"The need for people to make their own financial provisions for retirement and
the future is ever increasing."

    r 2020 Vision, pounds 300 from Barclays Life, with all proceeds to Marie
Curie Cancer Care, 0171 489 1995 ext 3911.


LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1998


                              154 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 1, 1998, Wednesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Page C2

LENGTH: 431 words

HEADLINE: Cancer Research Campaign: Gaining the upper hand in a fight for life;
We may not yet have the cure for cancer - but we're getting closer, writes Lee
Rodwell

BYLINE: Lee Rodwell

BODY:

    Cancer - one word for a disease that can have more than 200 forms.  Breast
cancer, bowel cancer, prostate cancer - the list seems endless.  One in three of
us get it. And one in four of us still die of it.

    But there is good news. On some fronts we are winning the war against
cancer. We know more about prevention than our parents did. There are better
treatments available. And genetic discoveries offer new hope that a cure will be
found.

    In the 1920s, no one knew that smoking caused cancer, that it was important
to keep out of the sun or that what you ate could make a difference.

    If children got cancer, they nearly always died. For women with breast or
cervical cancer, the long-term chances of survival were slim. There was little
help for men with prostate or testicular cancer. In fact, surgery was the only
treatment that offered any prospect of a cure. And even with surgery, cure rates
were very low. In the 75 years since the Cancer Research Campaign was founded -
by a group of clinicians impatient at the slow pace at which lab- oratory
research benefited patients - there have been many changes.

    Professor Gordon McVie, director general of the charity explains: "Surgery
got better, anaesthetics improved, surgeons learned more about fundamental
aetiology, the way cancer could spread. Radiotherapy was in the kindergarten in
the 1920s but now we can use it not only to fight disease, but to add to the
quality of life.

    "Then there were drugs. In the 1940s it was recognised that if cancer was
spread via the bloodstream we needed a substance to combat it which did the
same. Stilboestrol was developed first for breast cancer, then found to be
better for prostate cancer. That was the start."

    So things are different now. Today, more than 60 per cent of children with
cancer survive. For childhood leukaemia the figure is higher. Caught early,
cervical cancer is no longer a killer. New drugs and treatments for breast
cancer are improving survival rates and quality of life. Nine out of ten cases
of testicular cancer can be cured.

    But the war continues. We need to know more about the enemy, why genes are
altered in cancer cells and how gene therapy could reverse the process.  We need
to know more about how cancer drugs work, how best to use them in conjunction
with surgery and radiotherapy. We need to know more about what causes cancers,
why some people develop them and others do not.

    Hopefully, research will provide the answers. And one day - maybe even in
our children's lifetime - cancer will become history.


LOAD-DATE: April 02, 1998


                              155 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 1, 1998, Wednesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Page C5

LENGTH: 927 words

HEADLINE: Cancer Research Campaign: Testicular cancer: it's not the tight pants

BYLINE: Cherrill Hicks

BODY:

    The bad news about testicular cancer is that it is on the increase,
particularly among men in their twenties. The good news is that, unlike other
adult cancers, it is curable in over 90 per cent of cases - even when the
disease has spread.

    "I hesitate to use the word cure in terms of cancer," says Stan Kaye,
professor of the CRC Department of Medical Oncology at Glasgow University.  "But
there are now thousands of young men who have been treated successfully for
testicular cancer and who, 20 years later, show no sign of any recurrence."

    Although rare at the beginning of the century, the incidence of testicular
cancer has risen markedly in the last 20-30 years, especially among younger men.
It is now the commonest cancer among men aged 20 to 34, with about 1,500 to
2,000 new cases a year.

    "We do not know for sure, but it may be this rise is related to an
environmental factor such as excess oestrogens, which may affect the foetus
growing in the womb," says Professor Kaye.

    Testicular cancer is thought to be triggered by something going wrong during
foetal development, which would explain why it is sometimes associated with
other problems of the male reproductive system - low sperm counts, infertility
in men and undescended testicles in boys.

    "We think there is another trigger for the cancer 15 to 20 years later, but
we do not know what it is. Again, it could be something to do with 20th century
living," he adds.

    The disease is one of the few cancers to be related to higher social class
and is occasionally hereditary. However, Professor Kaye points out that
testicular cancer cannot be caused by tight underpants, taking exercise or being
kicked - all common myths. "And studies linking it with vasectomy have not held
up."

    There are two types of testicular cancer. Seminoma, occurs in men in their
30s and 40s and is easier to treat. The second, teratoma, occurs mainly in
younger men. Teratoma spreads quite early on in the disease, to the lungs,
lymph, abdomen, liver and brain.Thirty years ago it was usually fatal. Today,
for the majority of patients, the outlook is very good indeed.

    "The big breakthrough came in the mid-1970s when researchers discovered the
powerful effects of platinum," says the professor. Using the metal on testicular
cancer patients sent cure rates soaring from about 10 per cent to 60-70 per
cent. Used in combination with other drugs, the improvement has been even
greater.

    The platinum drug, cisplatin, is highly toxic. "It was nearly abandoned
because of its side effects, but we have now learned to control them.  We put
the patient on a drip to ensure he has plenty of fluids to avoid kidney damage,"
says Professor Kaye.

    A multinational trial has been set up to see whether it is possible to
reduce the standard four courses of treatment to three, and thereby reduce toxic
side effects.

    One reason cisplatin is extremely effective for testicular cancer is that
these cancer cells have a different molecular structure to other adult cancer
cells, which makes them unable to resist the drug. "The next big step for
researchers is to understand the difference between testicular cancer cells
which are killed by chemotherapy and those found in other adult cancers which
are resistant to drug treatment. By using gene therapy we may be able to make
the latter behave like the former - and become more sensitive to chemotherapy."

    The high cure rates in testicular cancer are also thanks to the development
of specialist centres - such as the Beatson Oncology Centre in Glasgow - where
staff have gained the experience to manage this comparatively rare disease.
Another valuable advance is being able to predict which men need aggressive drug
treatment and which will do just as well with surgery alone. And the development
of sensitive markers in the blood which can detect the disease before it is
clinically evident, also means patients with early stage disease who do not have
chemotherapy can be carefully monitored for any recurrence.

    In addition, by developing a special type of scan, researchers are hoping to
be able to predict which men will need further surgery after drug treatment to
prevent the cancer returning. At present, this major operation to remove lymph
glands in the abdomen is carried out on some 20 to 30 per cent of patients.

    For the small group of patients with extensive disease who do not respond
well to treatment, the cure rate is about 30 to 40 per cent. CRC researchers are
now trying to find more effective treatments by looking at new drugs to add to
the current cocktail: clinical trials of the drug Taxol, which was derived from
the yew tree and is used in both breast and ovarian cancer, have already
started.

    Although testicular cancer can be successfully treated, Professor Kaye
thinks the psychological effect is often underestimated. "Young men worry about
whether the disease or the treatment will affect their fertility," he says.

    Losing one testicle, he points out, has no effect on sperm or hormone
production. Chemotherapy can cause a temporary effect on fertility, but in the
majority of cases it recovers within two or three years and it is possible to
store sperm for in vitro fertilisation later, as a precaution.

    "Plenty of men who have had testicular cancer go on to have healthy
children," says Professor Kaye. "Often these are young men who thought cancer
meant they were going to die. The reassuring news is that the vast majority
return to live normal, healthy lives."


LOAD-DATE: April 02, 1998


                              156 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 1, 1998, Wednesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Page C7

LENGTH: 782 words

HEADLINE: Cancer Research Campaign: We've seen the future - and it could work

BYLINE: Barbara Rowlands

BODY:

    If war is an appropriate metaphor for cancer, then researchers are the
strategists sitting in the bunkers planning various modes of attack.  Every so
often they come up with a bright idea for a shiny new weapon that will wipe out
the enemy, but when the troops test it, it is found to be useless.

    That's the common perception of cancer research. Yet cancer researchers and
oncologists are more positive about the future than they have been for decades
and disappointed that the inroads they have made in terms of prevention and
treatment are not more widely known.

    "There's a widespread belief that cancer deaths are going up but this belief
is wrong. Cancer deaths are going down. It may seem more people are dying of
cancer but this because heart and respiratory disease are going down even
faster," says Richard Peto, professor of medical statistics at Oxford
University.

    Although tobacco consumption has plummeted from an annual consumption of 135
billion cigarettes a year after the war to 80 billion now, seasoned smokers are
now developing lung and bladder cancer and will continue to do so, even though
deaths from lung cancer have gone down by half since their peak in 1965.
Tobacco-related cancers account for a third of all cancer.

    "The figure for cure rates for cancer in adults has improved year on year
for the last 14 years," says Professor McVie. "On average 5,000 fewer people
have been of dying of cancer each year since 1990. If you take non-tobacco
cancers out of the equation there is a very satisfactory improvement.

    "We've notched up a 12-14 per cent increase in cure rates in breast cancer
and that's all treatment related. And in children's cancer, treatment is wildly
successful."

    Breakthrough treatments have been in rare cancers, such as testicular
cancer, childhood leukaemia, Hodgkin's disease and lymphoma. Unless the cancer
is localised it is still difficult to treat. But cancer researchers predict that
within 10 to15 years new drugs, based on molecular biology, should be available
that will tackle the three big cancers - lung, colon, breast. In other words,
doctors will be able to treat cancers that have spread.

    Scientists now understand, in far more detail than ever before, the
structure of a tumour and the way in which it grows and are devising ways of
blocking tumour growth and destroying cancer cells through gene therapy, the
development of molecules that can block cancer pathways or drugs that can home
in on specific cancer cells.

    Tumour vaccines are being developed, as are drugs to cut off the blood to
tumours which will shrink to a manageable size. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy
are being refined, as are surgical techniques.

    "We've never had a more exciting time, more avenues to go up and more
combinations of therapies to look at," says Professor McVie. "At the very basic
level, a treatment such as ADEPT (see below) represents the chance to do
something for people with advanced bowel cancer. But if it does something for
bowel cancer it will certainly do something for breast cancer, and probably lung
and bladder cancer. It will then be applicable to umpteen other cancers and
there will be an explosion of clinical trials.

    "I predict that in the near future patients will not only have a pathology
report describing the cancer but also a genetic report describing the gene
abnormalities in that specific cancer," he continues. "The gene information will
tell you how aggressive the cancer is, whether it's likely to spread, whether or
not it is sensitive to drugs and whether it would be suitable for gene therapy."

    Large inoperable tumours will increasingly be treated with chemotherapy to
shrink them and make it easier to operate on them. There will be less
disfigurement and a better chance of reconstructive surgery. The type of
chemotherapy used will be determined by the outcome of genetic tests, for
certain genes make some tumours more resistant to drug treatment and
radiotherapy.

    But it seems unlikely there will be a "magic bullet" that will wipe out the
disease. "It won't be a quick fix," says Karol Sikora, professor of Clinical
Oncology at the Hammersmith Hospital, London. "You won't go to a nice shiny
building and come out cured - that may never happen. Diabetes is the best
analogy. Someone with diabetes has to have injection for the rest of their life
and if it's well controlled your life span in pretty normal. That will be the
same for cancer. You can live quite happily with a malignant tumour in you. The
drug may not cure you but it will mean that sentence 'I'm sorry there's nothing
more we can do for you' will become a thing of the past."


LOAD-DATE: April 02, 1998


                              157 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 1, 1998, Wednesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Page C7

LENGTH: 562 words

HEADLINE: Cancer Research Campaign: Grounds for hope: treatments to come

BYLINE: Barbara Rowlands

BODY:

    ADEPT

    ADEPT - antibody-directed enzyme prodrug therapy - is a two stage therapy.
The patient is given an injection containing millions of antibodies each of
which has a specific enzyme, unique to the body, fixed on its back.  The
antibody binds on to cancer cells, taking the enzyme with it. Two days later the
patient is injected with the toxic cancer drug, the prodrug, but it is activated
only by the enzyme already on the cancer cells, destroying the cancer within
minutes, but leaving healthy cells alone. Scientists have been working on it for
11 years and clinical studies on bowel cancer patients have just started at the
Royal Free Hospital, London.

    GDEPT

    GDEPT - gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy - is one of a raft of gene
therapy tehcniques being studied. Here the enzyme is transferred directly into
the cells. Research is at an early stage.

    P53 tumour suppressor genes

    The p53 protein, the "guardian angel gene" protects the body against the
proliferation of fast-multiplying cancer cells by instructing them to "commit
suicide" and acts as a natural brake on the spread of cancer.

    In about 60 per cent of all cancers, p53 is either absent or defective, so
allowing cancer cells to replicate unchecked. The gene was discovered 19 years
ago by Professor David Lane, now heading a CRC programme of molecular oncolcogy
at Dundee University. Various ways of correcting the p53 gene are being looked
at including importing a new pristine p53 into the damaged cells, perhaps by
using the common cold virus to piggy back it into the cancer cells.

    A test for damaged p53 genes could be available in five year's time.

    Temozolomide

    People with glioma - the most common brain cancer - die unless the tumour
can be surgically removed. Unlike most brain cancer drugs, Temozolomide can get
across the blood-brain barrier, it can be taken by mouth and the side-effects
are not severe. It is hoped it will be available next year under the name of
Temodal.

    Vascular targeting (Angiogenisis inhibitors)

    These work by cutting the blood supply to the tumour. In order to grow
beyond the size of a small pea, tumour cells need to acquire a blood supply and
these blood vessels grow into the tumour rapidly and chaotically.  Drugs such as
Combretastatin A4 have had remarkable success in acting on the blood vessels,
causing vascular shutdown, which means that the tumour shrinks. Laboratory tests
show that Combretastatin could kill up to 95 per cent of solid tumour cells,
leaving healthy cells untouched.

    Antisense drugs

    Another type of genetic drug which targets gene defects in cancerous cells,
rather than killing cells wholesale. Our genes hold DNA, the genetic blueprint,
and RNA, the copy. In some cancers, the RNA instructions are faulty and the cell
becomes cancerous. The idea is to correct the faulty instruction before the cell
"reads" it. The Cancer Research Campaign is funding research into antisense
targeting of mutations of the Ki-ras gene, implicated in four out of 10 cases of
bowel cancer.

    New treatments developed by the Cancer Research Campaign would never reach
the patient without technology transfer. This is done in the UK by Cancer
Research Campaign Technology, which patents discoveries, licenses them to
industry and returns profits to the Campaign.

    - Barbara Rowlands


LOAD-DATE: April 02, 1998


                              159 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          February 26, 1998, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Page 2

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: Vaccine that makes jabs obsolete

BYLINE: Charles Arthur Science Editor

BODY:

    VACCINATIONS of the future could consist of having a liquid rubbed into your
skin, rather than the pain of a needle prick - and all because of cholera.

    US army scientists have discovered that the toxin produced by the cholera
bacterium stimulates an immune response even when it is put on the skin, and
that it speeds up immune responses to any other foreign protein added to it.

    Tests on laboratory mice have confirmed cholera's effectiveness in helping
the body to generate antibodies to diphtheria and tetanus.

    Trials on humans are due to start at the end of next month. If all goes well
the needle-free system could be available commercially within the next five to
10 years.

    "We can take an off-the- shelf vaccine, mix it with cholera toxin and get a
very nice immune response from that off-the-shelf type vaccine," said Dr Gregory
Glenn, of the department of biochemistry at the Walter Reed Army Institute of
Research, in Washington DC.

    "The implications are that one could eliminate needles."

    The army scientists' work is reported today in the science journal Nature.

    The method could revolutionise vaccination programmes in developing
countries, where the cost of needles for injections can be prohibitive.

    The idea of using a potentially dangerous disease to produce medical
benefits - the basis of immunisation - is also being suggested for techniques
such as gene therapy.

    Some scientists have suggested using a weakened form of HIV, the virus that
causes Aids, to carry out gene therapy for genetic diseases such as cystic
fibrosis.

    Because HIV adds its own genetic material to the host, it could act as the
carrier for helpful genes - such as those to cure cystic fibrosis.  However,
that work is still in its early stages.

    Cholera is a more promising candidate for pain-free immunisation. Though
widely feared as a disease, its real danger lies in its dehydrating effects.

    When consumed (usually through infected water), the bacteria produce a toxin
which inflames the gut and leads to diarrhoea and vomiting. The rapid fluid loss
can seriously weaken the body. But if the lost fluids are replaced from
uncontaminated sources, the immune system can usually overcome the infection.

    In that sense, the cholera toxin is not deadly - instead, the principal risk
arises from its side-effects.

    Thus it makes an ideal candidate as an "adjuvant" for helping provoke an
immune response.


LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1998


                              162 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1998 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          February 14, 1998, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Page 4

LENGTH: 133 words

HEADLINE: Genetic therapy for damaged hearts

BYLINE: Nicholas Schoon

BODY:

    GENETIC engineering is being used to mend broken hearts, the conference
heard yesterday, writes Nicholas Schoon.

    Clinical trials have started in a New York hospital in which genes are
injected directly into patients' damaged hearts to help restore their blood
circulation. The genes, carried in the same virus that causes the common cold,
stimulate new blood vessels to grow. These bypass the damaged, clogged up ones
which cause heart disease.

    Dr Ronald Crystal of New York Hospital, Cornell Medical Center, who heads
the research, says that within a few years gene injections could replace open
chest heart-bypass surgery for some patients with chronic cardio- vascular
disease. Dr Crystal's team also did pioneering work on using gene therapy to
combat cystic fibrosis.


LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1998


                              165 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                January 20, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 33

LENGTH: 202 words

HEADLINE: Biotechs put their f loats on hold;
BUSINESS DAY

BYLINE: David Lister

BODY:


    TWO of Britain's biggest biotechnology hopes have delayed flotation plans as
the City's favour for the sector has all but come to an end,

    Cambridge's Bioscience Innovation Centre, which was planned as an
American-style incubator to take stakes in start-up biotech outfits and advise
them on commercialising their research, has postponed plans to come to the
Alternative Investment Market, originally scheduled for last year.

    Therexsys, a gene therapy company based in Staffordshire, is also scaling
back its ambitions and is now unlikely to come to the market until next year.

    Both groups are understood to have delayed plans in part because of
difficult conditions on the Stock Exchange.

    Over the past 12 months confidence in the biotech sector has been shattered
by a number of disappointments, including drugs failures from Celltech,
Biocompatibles and Scotia.

    Therexsys finance director Richard Moulson said the group was delaying its
float in part due to changes to its own research programme, but also because of
market volatility. A spokesman for BIC, being advised by stockbrokers Teather &
Greenwood, admitted it had been hit by problems but it was hoping to float this
year.


LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1998


                              166 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                January 20, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 34

LENGTH: 402 words

BODY:


    IN BRIEF Boots spreads Irish roots BOOTS today furthered its ambition in the
Republic of Ireland with the purchase of the country's largest chemist chain.

    It has bought Hayes, Con-yngham and Robinson, for an undisclosed sum,
thought to be around £10 million.

    The chain numbers 15 stores in Dublin and Cork, offering Boots access to
more than half the Irish population.

    Boots launched itself on the Irish retail market just over a year ago with
the opening of a Dublin store. Before today's deal it had increased its presence
in the Republic to seven shops.

    Sales grow at Barbour DEMAND for its new electronic products lifted sales at
business information group Barbour Index in the first half although profits
dipped 4% to £1.83 million.

    Sales in the six months to 31 October were ahead 3% on last year at £7.5
million.

    Chairman Brian Griffin said the company, whose main business is supplying a
products "bible" for the construction industry, was likely to show an increase
in profits at the full year as its sales are normally heavily weighted towards
the second half.

    Earnings per share slipped 4% to 7.2p. Shareholders will receive an interim
dividend of 3.3p, up 5%.

    Biotechs put floats on hold TWO of Britain's biggest biotechnology hopes
have delayed flotation plans as the City's favour for the sector has all but
come to an end.

    Cambridge's Bioscience Innovation Centre, which was planned as a US-style
incubator to take stakes in start-up biotech outfits and advise them on
commercialising their research, has postponed plans to come to AIM.

    Gene therapy company Therexsys is also scaling back its ambitions and is now
unlikely to come to the market until next year. Both groups are understood to
have delayed plans in part because of difficult conditions on the Stock
Exchange.

    Ted Baker looking good SHOPPERS forking out £70 for a shirt or £100 for a
fleece helped retailer Ted Baker to a buoyant Christmas.

    The small chain with a loyal following said that like-for-like sales from 1
November to 24 December were up 11%. Total sales, including new space, rose by
30%.

    Gross margins were maintained at the same level as last year and new stores
are trading well.

    "Sales over Christmas were strong and have continued on target," said Ted
Baker chief executive Ray Kelvin.

    The shares, which floated last July at 135p, rose 5p to 157 1/2 p.


LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1998


                              167 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                               December 31, 1997

SECTION: Pg. 9

LENGTH: 2094 words

HEADLINE: I have seen;
And, despite what the experts say, it looks pretty bleak to me , WHAT THE GURUS
ARE PREDICTING

BYLINE: Christopher Hudson

BODY:


    A galaxy of writers, individually expert in everything from germs to
cosmology, have spelled out their predictions for the 21st century. Most of them
claim a cautious optimism. But CHRISTOPHER HUDSON, having read between the
lines, has come away with a long face. He explains why

    THE LAST recorded utterance of the Delphic Oracle was a wordless wail. By
that time, in the middle of the 4th century AD, when the Emperor Julian the
Apostate came to question it, the Oracle's role had been superseded by
Christianity with its more sophisticated forecasting service but even so,
reading these 10 little books in which an impressive array of scholars predict
the future in their field of expertise, I thought of the Oracle's wail and a
chill ran up my spine. There's something about the assiduous optimism with which
these writers gaze into the 21st century that put me in mind of men in white
coats coming to take me away to a comfortably padded room from which can faintly
be heard the sound of screaming.

    Here is Francois Heisbourg, who for many years was Director of the Institute
of Strategic Studies, reassuring us that the threat of a nuclear holocaust has
passed now that the Cold War has evaporated, and noting that conflicts in parts
of Africa, Central America and Indo-China have also died away in the absence of
superpower confrontation. If there is a major war, spy satellites should be able
to direct "smart" weapons with pinpoint accuracy to strategic targets, sparing
civilian populations.

    Meanwhile Professor Bernard Lewis reminds us that in the Middle East, the
departure of the imperial powers gives the Arab nations the chance to guide
their own destinies; and the historian Hugh Thomas looks with equanimity on the
notion of a federal future for Europe.

    That brilliant controversialist Matt Ridley, writing about one of mankind's
greatest anxieties, the spread of contagious disease, is almost Panglossian.
Most germs can now be defeated, he says, and although diseases such as malaria
will always be with us, improved living conditions make it highly unlikely there
will be another plague. Viruses, which use our own metabolism against us, are
tougher to defeat - but casual-contact diseases such as flu "are mild and
getting milder" and the most lethal of them, like the Ebola virus, kill
themselves in the host before they can spread widely.

    Of course germs keep adapting to defeat antibiotics, but Dr Ridley
confidently predicts that molecular research will help us produce whole new
breeds of chemical resisters, including DNA vaccines which make the virus work
against itself.

    Robert Winston, Professor of Fertility Studies at the University of London,
is just as sunny about the future of genetic manipulation. He sees "substantial
and real benefit" in human genetic engineering: not just infertility treatment
and gene therapy to reverse gene defects in embryos, but eventually the cloning
of human beings, since according to Lord Winston, identical twins are much
closer to carbon copies than clones would be. This might seem to be one of many
medical advances that could cloud the future of men - but according to Dave
Hill, who writes in The Guardian, men in the 21st century will be just fine so
long as they adjust to becoming Guardian-type men, nurturing, humorous,
accepting the feminine in themselves.

    John Clarke, writing about population, is bullish about the fact that world
population growth is decelerating at a rate never believed possible even 10
years ago, and should plateau out in about 60 years at some 12 billion (only
about four billion above what most demographers regard as the sustainable
limit).

    AS for climate, Andrew Goudie reminds us that we are living in the
delightfully temperate period called the Holocene Interglacial, and although a
new Ice Age may happen along any time, we shouldn't lose any sleep over the
risks of accelerated global warming.

    In cosmology too, according to John Gribbin, the outlook for the universe in
the next few years is comforting. It's expanding, of course - you knew that -
but at least we can now be fairly sure that the Big Bang theory is correct and
that everything began from nothing between 10 and 20 billion years ago.

    If all's right with the world, indeed with the universe, how is it that a
chill runs down my spine?

    The answer is that, reading between the lines, it is clear that these
predictions could be blown off-course in a hundred ways by the slightest puff of
ill fortune - and hideous sea-monsters are gathering, should our frail craft
capsize.

    The Cold War has ended, but as Francois Heisbourg himself points out, that
opens new opportunities for "rogue state" wars (eg Libya), wars of secession (in
India, for example), wars of terrorist disruption (perhaps computer terrorism
within the United States) and classical wars - he observes that East Asia in
2014 may bear an uncanny resemblance to Europe in 1914. He also notes that
biotechnology can now create new strains of disease for which there is no
antidote.

    Instead of a nuclear bomb in his suitcase, tomorrow's terrorist will
probably be carrying a flask of viruses or toxins, easy to acquire, impossible
to trace and capable of exterminating a city.

    It might be a Japanese religious fanatic, or an Arab militant pursuing a
jihad against the West (something Bernard Lewis doesn't rule out), or an
equivalent of the Oklahoma bomber trained in one of America's biological-weapons
establishments. It might be anyone. And if it isn't human, then for all Matt
Ridley's optimism, it plainly could be a 21st century plague. Dr Ridley claims
that "easy contagion and high virulence do not go together" - but what about the
1918 flu epidemic which killed more than 20 million people? Air-transmitted
viral diseases caught from animals are the most potentially catastrophic, as he
admits. He mentions dogs, cows, pigs, ducks, rats, horses, monkeys and bats, but
not Hong Kong chickens, which are being slaughtered to try to prevent another
such epidemic.

    If war and disease don't carry us off, the omens would still give the
Delphic Oracle pause for thought. In an England of surrogate mothers and
designer babies, in which women already constitute the majority of the paid
workforce, men will feel increasingly irrelevant. No wonder, as Dave Hill
remarks, the incidence of male suicide has increased by 70 per cent in the past
dozen years. At least fewer will then become centenarians, of whom Professor
Clarke predicts England and Wales to have more than 45,000 by 2030 - by which
time developed countries will contain only about 14 per cent of the world's
population and be menaced by Third World "mega-cities" wanting a piece of the
action.

    This scenario will only occur, of course, if a fractional further increase
in global warming has not diverted the Gulf Stream away from Britain and given
us the climate of northern Canada or indeed if the universe itself, possibly
trembling on the hairline between eternal expansion and sudden recollapse (as
John Gribbin lets us know in passing), doesn't propel us all down a black hole
from which even Lewis Carroll's White Rabbit might emerge with his watch telling
a very different time.

    But don't send to know for whom the bell tolls; it may fall silent.

    According to Felipe Fernandez-Armesto writing on the future of religion,
traditional Christianity could yet fade away - and besides, there are bats in
that belfry which have a nasty bite.

    WHAT THE GURUS ARE PREDICTING

    COSMOLOGY

    John Gribbin, author and Visiting Fellow in Astronomy at the University of
Sussex, reckons that as scientists get closer to discovering the innermost
secret of the universe - how it came into being, even before the Big Bang - we
stand on the brink of the greatest revolution in science since Copernicus
dislodged the earth from the centre of the solar system. One discovery may well
be that the universe is absolutely flat.

    WARFARE

    Francois Heisbourg, now chief strategist at the defence and aerospace firm
Matras, charts how warfare is moving away from battleships and tanks towards
video-arcade technology in which computer experts playing real-life video-games
unleash electronic Pearl Harbors on the enemy, using "smart" weapons to take out
enemy targets with pinpoint accuracy. Among potential 21st century flashpoints,
Heisbourg identifies a possible East Asian version of the Third World War,
centred upon the South China Sea.

    DISEASE

    Matt Ridley, author and former science editor of The Economist, predicts
that the "old" diseases such as malaria, TB, typhoid and cholera will continue
to be contained, and that the greatest danger of a 21st century epidemic will
come from sexually transmitted diseases, of which Aids may just be a precursor.

    Germs will continue to find ways around increasingly powerful antibiotics,
but Dr Ridley foresees new vaccines based upon DNA, the basic building code of
life, which will revolutionise medical treatment.

    CLIMATE

    Andrew Goudie, Professor of Geography at Oxford, foresees human behaviour -
in the form of increased rice-planting, overgrazing, the cutting down of
rainforests and the burning of fossil fuels - for the first time having the
potential to modify the global climate, creating erosion, desertification and
flooding of low-lying coastal areas.

    Nevertheless, he says, the climate will continue to change of its own
accord, and more dramatically than anything man is likely to accomplish.

    MEN The freelance writer Dave Hill predicts that British men will have to
continue to redefine their identity in the light of the increasing feminisation
of the labour market and the pressures on their masculinity from women's
equality, political correctness, gay emancipation and surrogate motherhood. He
argues that new challenges will bring new opportunities if men can adapt
themselves to a less dominant, more egalitarian role in 21st century society.

    GENETIC MANIPULATION

    Robert Winston, author, broadcaster and consultant gynaecologist and
obstetrician at Hammersmith Hospital, expects major new advances in infertility
treatments, gene therapy, transgenic technology and cloning - including
fertilisation with the use of immature eggs recovered from the ovary, widespread
screening of human embryos for genetic defects and the introduction of new genes
to

    cure them, sex selection, and the cloning of human tissues and organs to
replace defective ones. He argues that in most cases the medical advantages of
these developments deserve to outweigh our ethical scruples.

    POPULATION

    John Clarke, emeritus professor at the University of Durham, predicts that
the rate of population growth will continue to decline in the 21st century,
calming anxieties that the world will be unable to sustain its population.

    Problems will come with increased pressure for migration from the populous
Third World into the relatively under-populated developed nations, with the
continuing exodus from interiors to coasts and from marginal areas into huge
mega-cities, which will

    exacerbate poverty and unemployment.

    MIDDLE EAST

    Bernard Lewis, a world-respected authority on Islamic and Middle Eastern
history, foresees strife in the Middle East unless the Arab nations can reach an
accommodation with Israel and with one another. Apart from the generic
Arab-Israeli conflict, Libya, Syria and Iraq remain warlike, and Iran could be
subject to revolution from within. Unless the Arab nations modernise themselves,
they may be unable to deal with the consequences of their oil, and water,
running out during the 21st century.

    EUROPE

    The distinguished historian Hugh Thomas traces the history of English policy
towards the concept of a unified Europe and its present dilemma as to whether
European Union represents a sensible way forward or will simply aggravate old
nationalisms. He sets out his own hopes for what the Union could achieve in the
years ahead.

    RELIGION

    The historian and author of Millennium, Felipe Fernandez-Armesto, sets out
the threats to established religion in the next century: secularism,
quasi-religious sects and cults, materialistic "designer-label" faiths, and a
general withering away of the churches under a feeble, ecumenical desire to be
all things to all men. He nevertheless believes that the churches may survive
and even prosper, as moral anarchy, scientific nihilism and apocalyptic
forebodings drive people back to the comforting certainties of traditional
religion.


GRAPHIC: SOLDIERS IN THE GULFWAR:BUT IN TOMORROW'S WARS A TERRORIST WITH A FLASK
OF VIRUSES COULD ELIMINATE A CITY, DEATH, PESTILENCE, PLAGUE AND FAMINE: THE
FOUR HORSEMEN OF THE APOCALYPSE TOMORROW'S MEN: THEY WILL NEED TO NUR TURE THEIR
FEMININE SIDE TO SURVIVE , SPACE EXPLORATION MAY YET BE STYMIED BY THE DISCOVERY
THAT THE UNIVERSE IS FLAT, ENCROACHING DESERTS: FOR THE FIRST TIME HUMAN
BEHAVIOUR HAS THE POTENTIAL TO MODIFY THE GLOBAL CLIMATE

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1998


                              168 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                               December 18, 1997

SECTION: Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1020 words

HEADLINE: Why we risk drowning in the gene pool;
The latest research about what we are makes uncomfortable reading, says GEORGE
WALDEN. And it is not just the insurance companies who should be worried

BYLINE: George Walden

BODY:


    SO the Association of British Insurers is not going to insist that we be
genetically tested when we apply for cover. All we shall have to do, when asked
a "relevant question", is to supply such genetic information as we may happen to
have. Does that dispose of the matter? On the contrary: what the British
insurers' decision shows is that the genetic iceberg is slowly nosing above the
surface. Far from soothing us, their announcement should set us thinking in a
way we have preferred not to think before.

    In the face of the genetic revolution, the most profound assault in modern
times on what it means to be a human being, well-meaning "codes of practice" are
a frail defence. As scientists provide more and more evidence of genetic
determinism, how will humanity, insurers included, react? It is futile to
believe that, in the interests of a quiet life and to avoid disturbing
traditional notions of what constitutes the human personality, insurers,
politicians or philosophers will turn a blind eye. Hoping that the inconvenient
consequences of genetic discoveries can be easily accommodated in our lives is
like persuading oneself that a tiger is, after all, only a cat, or that
constructing a tin shelter at the bottom of your garden will shield you from a
nuclear onslaught.

    The decision by the British insurers is the thin end of a colossal wedge.

    They may not be insisting on genetic readouts now, but when the deciphering
of genetic information becomes more reliable and the technology easily
available, how long before they become routine and - should you wish to be even
considered for insurance - compulsory? How often in the history of science have
we chosen to close our eyes to incontrovertible knowledge, especially when
commercial interests are involved?

    The unscrambling of the human genome is gathering pace. Facts about our
genetic makeup are accumulating faster than our ability to handle them.

    Whether in the staid world of insurance men or the highly emotive fields of
politics and ethics, we have seen nothing yet. As the genetic story unravels
many of our assumptions about the balance between nature and nurture - how much
of our physical characteristics and behaviour are due to inheritance and how
much to our environment are likely to unravel with it, as scientific evidence
shifts the balance overwhelmingly in the direction of nature.

    If we find ourselves relying on insurance men to keep us up to date, there
are reasons.

    Scientists avoid dramatising the results of their work on genetics not
because they are blind to the questions it poses, which are widely discussed in
scientific literature, popular as well as technical. The reasons they tend to
minimise the problems genetics are in the process of throwing up are twofold:
either they genuinely believe they are soluble, or they would prefer not to
think about them because they can see no answers.

    Scientists are by and large rational people, though no more free of social
or political instincts and assumptions than the rest of us. The genetic
revolution will impinge on almost every social, economic and political question
you can think of, from equality and welfare budgets to the combustible issue of
race. What if it is shown that some people are destined to remain poor and
rather stupid? What would be the point of trying to educate them? And what if it
were shown that the Asians had certain genetic advantages that some other races
could not match? Compared to that, whether you are genetically prone to heart
attacks, and therefore a bad insurance risk, is a relatively simple matter.
Genetics are far more than a means of measuring our predisposition to this or
that disease for actuarial purposes.

    It is not so much a matter of how and when we die - after all, we are going
on longer - as of how we live our lives in the face of this new and profoundly
subversive knowledge.

    The assumption is that, like nuclear technology, genetics has its pluses and
minuses.

    Just as the atom gives us power to heat our homes as well as the potential
to destroy them together with ourselves, so genetics, it is hoped, will help
eliminate diseases. If this is indeed the way of the future the benefits appear
slow in coming.

    GENE therapy is not just in its infancy; to judge by results it is scarcely
born.

    Time and again we hear of startling advances that, the headlines once made,
we hear little more about. The ingenuity of science has cured appalling diseases
in the past, yet this time it is beginning to seem that the discovery through
genetics of the origins of diseases far outruns its ability to cure them.

    Alternatively scientists console us with the news that genetics prove not
how different we are, but that we are 99 per cent the same. This flatters our
egalitarian instincts - until we reflect on how vital that one per cent
difference can be. It is of small comfort for me to tell you that genetics show
that I am 99 per cent like you, except that, in certain conditions, I am prone
to insanity.

    Geneticists also tend to stress that our environment can still be decisive,
for example in whether or not a certain predisposition in our personality is
more or less likely to emerge. The trouble with that argument is that our human
environment is itself largely determined by other people's genes. So we are back
where we started.

    The really big question about genetics is asked in a forthcoming book by
Bryan Appleyard, author of Understanding the Present. This one, Brave New
Worlds: Staying Human in the Genetic Future, will appear next spring. The
dilemma he poses is one both scientists and laymen would prefer to evade.

    When science confronts us with proof of our inequality, or with evidence
that some races may be genetically different to others, how are we to maintain
our humanitarian values in the face of evidence that their rational basis is
being progressively eroded? The challenge of genetics, Apple-yard argues, is
ultimately spiritual. We shall need something a little more wide-ranging than an
insurers' code of conduct to deal with it.


LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1997


                              176 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           October 4, 1997, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Page  3

LENGTH: 500 words

HEADLINE: Dream of gene therapy comes a step closer

BYLINE: Charles Arthur

BODY:

    Doctors of the future may use gene therapy routinely to cure cancer.  A new
trial from Canada may offer some hope. Charles Arthur, Science Editor, unravels
the blueprint for a new cure.

    The elusive promise of "gene therapy", in which cancers and inherited
genetic defects could be treated by injecting replacement functional genes, may
have begun to be fulfilled.

    A conference in Paris next week will hear that a Canadian company has
successfully managed to get new genes to seek out secondary tumours in
laboratory animals. There, the replacement genes take over from the faulty genes
which are allowing uncontrolled growth.

    Although the technique is in its early stages - it has only so far been
demonstrated with "marker" genes, rather than anti-cancer genes - and would have
to pass a number of clinical hurdles before being used in humans, it suggests
that the multi-pronged approach to gene therapy may begin to pay off in a few
years.

    That in turn would mean relief, and perhaps even a cure, for thousands of
people both with cancers and inherited disorders such as cystic fibrosis.

    The new system has been developed by a Canadian company, Inex
Pharmaceuticals of Vancouver, and uses artificial "packages" to carry the new
genes to the disease site. The packages, called transmembrane carrier systems,
are made up essentially of fat droplets and are injected into the bloodstream.
They contain a package of genes: in Inex's trials, these were tumour suppressor
genes, which carry the code to make proteins which stop cells from reproducing
wildly. The trials found that the genes' proteins were being produced in
secondary tumours.

    If the findings are confirmed, and can be carried over to humans, it will be
an important step forward for the technique. So far, human clinical trials of
gene therapy have promised much but delivered little. The first ailment to be
attacked was cystic fibrosis (CF), in which a faulty gene causes overproduction
of mucus in the lungs, with fatal results.

    One of the first trials attempting to use gene therapy to replace a faulty
CF gene was carried out in Britain. It incorporated the gene into a modified
retrovirus - the class of viruses including HIV, which causes Aids - because
retroviruses add their genetic material to that of their target cells.  The hope
was that the working CF gene would be incorporated into the lung's lining, and
prevent the overproduction of mucus. However, the results have been
disappointing, and success using retroviruses has remained elusive.

    But the Inex technique of using fats, which is being followed by a number of
other gene therapy companies, may eventually show more promise, even though it
relies on an artificial package for the genes. Dr John Warner, head of Inex's
gene therapy division, said: "Today, one of the main limitations in gene therapy
is the inability to get genes to metastatic or widespread disease. Our
technology has the potential to do just this."


LOAD-DATE: October 06, 1997


                              177 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                               September 25, 1997

SECTION: Pg. 16

LENGTH: 746 words

HEADLINE: ETHICAL DEBATE OVER A PATIENT'S RIGHT TO KNOW THE FUTURE

BYLINE: Patrick Sawer

BODY:


    Ethical debate GENE testing that claims to show who is likely to develop
cancer was at the centre of an ethical debate today over whether the tests
should be done when the NHS cannot afford to deal with the consequences?

    The debate, organised by the King's Fund, drew together philosophers and
doctors to discuss one of the biggest questions facing the health service.

    The demand for genetic testing to identify the families and patients most at
risk is growing from the public and research scientists. Yet the gene therapy
available to prevent those diseases is still in its infancy.

    There is mounting concern that some patients may simply be unable to cope
with the knowledge that they carry within them a piece of DNA for which there is
no effective remedy.

    "Individuals have a right not to know information which is too burdensome
and which does not offer enough treatment choices," said Ruth Chadwick, a
professor of moral philosophy.

    She added: "The costs, both psychological and economic, are simply too high
a price to pay and cannot be afforded by the NHS."

    Nigel Bundred, a reader in surgical oncology at the University Hospital of
South Manchester, felt that testing could be inaccurate, and that the UK needed
far more research before members of the public were worried unnecessarily.

    He said: "We really don't have the evidence that these tests are beneficial
at the moment."

    For three years scientists have been able to test women for the breast
cancer genes BRCA1 or BRCA2, if they are known to have two or more close
relatives in the family with the disease. It leaves them with the choice of
waiting for the disease to occur, or having a mastectomy.

    Mr Bundred said: "A woman from a family where four relatives have died from
breast cancer, and who the gene for it, will have a 85 per cent chance of
developing the disease, but that falls to 50 per cent in families with a lower
incidence.

    "It could be less than one in two for some women, and we know there is a one
in 10 chance of having it anyway."

    Mr Bundred said there was no published evidence that preventive mastectomies
in high-risk women saved lives. "The limited money we have should be spent on
mammographies for women over 65, because we know it could save about 6,000 lives
a year."

    Others, however, such as Gordon McVie, head of the Cancer Research Campaign,
believe passionately that in the long term, screening will save the NHS a lot of
money.

    He said: "We do not have the right to deny people information about it
because we are not in the business of playing God."

    "Money needs to be made available now to deal with the consequences of
testing because the health service's first priority is to save lives.

    The NHS cannot bury its head in the sand over this issue."

    He pointed out that a genetic profile would in the future help doctors
decide which drugs were more likely to work on some patients than others.

    Dr James Mackay, a consultant in cancer genetics at Addenbrooke's Hospital
in Cambridge, said: "For people who are at high risk of breast or ovarian
cancer, genetic testing may offer either peace of mind if they do not carry the
gene, or widen their options on how to deal with it if they do."

    SCREENING PUTS ME IN CONTROL

    ANDREA SHORE'S mother died of breast cancer at the age of 43, and her aunt
was 46.

    Mrs Shore, 38, is determined the same fate will not befall her and is about
to undergo tests to discover if she carries the fatal gene that could lead to
breast cancer.

    If she tests positive she will undergo surgery to remove both her breasts.

    Finding out she was eligible for genetic screening was a huge relief to the
PE teacher from Buckingham. "I slept for the first time in months," she said. "I
had been desperate for information, without it I could not make any decisions.
Finally I am in control of my of life."

    She sought screening when her 40-year-old cousin was diagnosed with breast
cancer in November. She qualified because she is from a high-risk family.

    A sample of her cousin's blood is being analysed. If the faulty gene is
found Mrs Shore will be tested for a matching gene.

    However, if tests on her cousin's blood fail to find a faulty gene Mrs Shore
will still have the double mastectomy.

    She said: "If I test negative then I cancel the operation, but if they can't
give me a definite answer I'm not prepared to wait any longer. At my age I don't
have the time."


LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1997


                              179 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          September 16, 1997, Tuesday

SECTION: NETWORK; Page  N9

LENGTH: 306 words

HEADLINE: Theoretically: Pacific unrest/ German fraud/ Thalidomide back

BYLINE: Charles Arthur

BODY:

    Sea-level rises caused by global warming will have a direct effect on a some
tiny Pacific island nations, which are preparing for a showdown with Australia
over its fight against compulsory greenhouse gas cuts.  On Wednesday, 16 nations
will meet in Raratonga, capital of the Cook Islands, to press Australia to make
a commitment. Bikenibeu Paeniu, prime minister of Tuvalu, has warned Australia's
prime minister John Howard that he faces a tougher diplomatic storm than that
directed at France over its South Pacific nuclear tests in 1995. Australia faces
substantial economic loss if it cuts greenhouse gas output, so it appears
determined to stick to its position.

    The meeting brings together Australia, Cook Islands, Federated States of
Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.

    Germany's scientific fraud case is developing more twists than an airport
novel. Earlier this year, two two scientists were accused of having faked
results used in more than 30 papers on gene therapy and molecular medicine.
One, Marion Brach, admitted forging data in some papers and implicated her
colleague Friedhelm Herrmann. He has not admitted doing so, and now says that he
will sue investigators on the case for DM10 million (about pounds 3.3m).
Meanwhile, other analysis of the pair's early work suggests that they both faked
results earlier in their careers.

    Thalidomide should be used to treat leprosy, says a panel of experts
advising the US Food and Drug Administration, following results from trials.
But to avoid birth defects, which was the cause of the drug's notoriety, the
panel said it should not be prescribed for women of childbearing age unless they
are taking two forms of birth control.


LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1997


                              180 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          September 13, 1997, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Page  21

LENGTH: 111 words

HEADLINE: DTI grant for gene therapy company

BODY:

    Oxford Biomedica, the gene therapy company, has won a Department of Trade
and Industry grant for almost a quarter of a million pounds to develop a process
for the production of retroviral vector particles for gene therapy. The
AIM-listed company said the funding would be used over a three-year period to
develop the technology, which it says "has the potential to deliver genes at
efficiencies higher than any of the current available methods, opening a raft of
opportunities". Oxford Biomedica specialises in gene-based therapeutics for the
treatment of disease.  The company made a pre-tax loss of pounds 1.25m for the
nine months to 30 June 1997.


LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1997


                              183 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 26, 1997, Tuesday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Page  14

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: Theoretically...

BODY:

    Staff at the Royal Greenwich Observatory are drawing up a business plan to
enable them to retain their expertise in designing telescopes and providing
technical support in a non-profit organisation. It would remain at the present
Cambridge site. The RGO has been earmarked for closure by the Government, with
astronomy work being consolidated at the Edinburgh observatory.

    US researchers have worked out how the tuberculosis bacterium and leprosy,
its biological cousin, invade cells - a finding that could open the way to new
treatments. In Science, Washington University in St Louis reported that the
bacteria hijack a protein left over from the natural breakdown of part of the
immune system. They then use this to piggyback into macrophages - the
"scavengers" of the immune system - where they eventually kill them. A vaccine
or an antibiotic could introduce an antibody to block the connection between the
complement breakdown protein, called C2a, and the bacteria. Tuberculosis
currently infects one-third of the world's population, and kills 3 million a
year. It is spreading once again in industrialised countries.

    Among cancer researchers, the p53 tumour suppressor gene is a byword.  But
now they have found a close relation, p73. Reporting in Cell, a team led by
Frank McKeon of Harvard Medical School report that p73 is found on the very tip
of chromosome 1 - an area missing in many cancer cells.  The discovery of p73,
which also seems to be a tumour suppressor, could be significant in developing
gene therapies.

    New Labour, new House of Commons Select Committee on Science and Technology
- and almost all have science or engineering qualifications. Included are five
PhDs, a former ICI R&D manager, a food and biotechnology consultant and a former
computer programmer - the Lib Dem Nigel Jones. In the past, the committee tended
to include lawyers rather than scientists - reflecting the demographics of MPs
rather than the population.


LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1997


                              185 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 19, 1997, Tuesday

SECTION: NETWORK +; Page  N7

LENGTH: 1134 words

HEADLINE: Can HIV resist a cure?; Science A surprisingly common genetic mutation
that protects against full- blown Aids, offers hope for all HIV sufferers.
Michael Hanlon reports

BYLINE: Michael Hanlon

BODY:

    An HIV-positive blood test, it used to be assumed, was tantamount to a death
sentence. Inevitably (the thinking went), carriers of the human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) would start to develop the skin lesions, fungal infections, lung
problems and tumours that mark the progression of the resultant disease of Aids
through a dying body - its immune system damaged, leaving the victim open to
infection from any source. Treatments such as the drug AZT would offer hope to
some, but, in the end, the future seemed to hold the promise only of crippling
illness and a slow death.

    But that thinking is rapidly being discarded. It is becoming clear that
thousands of people all over the world have some, if not total, resistance to
the disease. Prostitutes in Africa, where Aids has reached epidemic proportions,
have been exposed to HIV through years of unprotected sex, yet fail to pick up
the virus. Others become infected, yet remain healthy for decades. Some people,
indeed, may be totally immune either to the effects of HIV, or to infection
itself. Now, a team of scientists in the US may have found the answer to the
question why some people are apparently able to fight HIV infection - and this
new research offers the tantalising possibility of an effective treatment, using
widely available drugs, for a disease that is claiming the lives of tens of
thousands of people every year around the world.

    Last year Bill Paxton, a Glaswegian molecular biologist working in New York,
announced the discovery of a mutation, present in about 1 per cent of white
Europeans, that appeared to confer a degree of immunity to HIV.  The mutation
occurs in a matched pair of genes - the segments of DNA that programme cells to
manufacture particular proteins. In this case, the proteins are found in the
membranes of white blood cells, which make up the core of the body's immune
system. It is these cells which are attacked by the virus.

    For the immunity to be effective, both copies of the mutated gene, which is
known as CCR5, must be present. The result is that the white cells lack the CCR5
protein - which HIV needs in order to attack them. Studies by Belgian scientists
have shown that the mutation did not seem to occur in people of African or
Japanese origin. About 20 per cent of Caucasians have at least one copy of the
gene, and 1 per cent have both - rendering them apparently immune to Aids. One
such case is Steve Crohn, a freelance travel editor living in New York, who
remains uninfected despite multiple exposure over years.

    Because it is found in only one racial group, scientists think that the
mutation is recent, perhaps dating back only 4,000 years or so. However, the
latest research, published in Science magazine, has uncovered another genetic
mutation, this time found in between 15 and 20 per cent of people of all races.

    This beneficial genetic mutation offers no protection against picking up
HIV, but instead appears to slow down the onset of Aids dramatically.  A team
working at the US-government-funded National Cancer Institute in Maryland has
discovered the mutation, which affects the gene for a chemokine receptor, a
structure in the white blood cell membrane that forms the entry point for HIV.
This gene is known as CCR2. Chemokine receptors are normally beneficial, helping
the body to marshal its forces in the fight against infection. But HIV attacks
these defences, using the chemokine receptors to gain a bridgehead into the
immune system. It is thought that the change in the cell membrane may interfere
in some way with HIV, rendering it less effective. Dr Michael Dean, one of the
molecular geneticists working on the project, described the discovery as a real
breakthrough.

    "We have known for a long time that there are people out there who survive
for a long time after infection. There are people who have been infected for
about 10 or 20 years who have not developed Aids," he told The Independent.  He
thinks it likely that a host of genetic factors may be coming into play.

    "It seems that the CCR2 gene has no effect on whether or not infection
occurs; it comes into effect after infection. There have been well-studied
cohorts of prostitutes in the Gambia and other places who have not developed
Aids. I think there are probably other genes coming into play here as well, that
we don't know about yet."

    In the study carried out by the Maryland team, 3,003 HIV-positive patients
all over the US and in other countries were studied, and it was found that a
large number of the long-term survivors - those who had avoided Aids for 16
years or more after HIV infection - carried the mutant CCR2 gene.

    The effect of the CCR2 mutation is all the more surprising because it is
caused by such a small change in the cell's DNA. One gene consists of several
hundred base pairs (guanine, thymine, adenine, and cytosine) on the DNA strand,
arranged in triplets of base pairs called codons. Each codon tells the cell to
manufacture a single amino acid - the building blocks of proteins. The CCR2
mutation is caused by a change in a single codon, a tiny fraction of a whole
gene, like a single spelling mistake in one chapter of a book. What originally
caused it is unknown, but the fact that it occurs in all racial groups shows
that it is very old - hundreds of thousands of years old. "It is surprising that
this small mutation has such a big effect," said Dr Dean.

    The discovery could have profound implications for treating Aids patients.
If a disease is susceptible to being beaten off by a simple genetic mutation,
then it could be possible to treat a patient using "gene therapy" - introducing
into the body cells containing the mutant genes. Michael Dean thinks there may
be even simpler ways forward in the immediate future.

    "Gene therapy is hard to do, and I think that is a long way off," he said.
"However, one thing that is interesting is that the chemokine receptors are
involved in a lot of other diseases, such as asthma. Drug companies already have
a lot of products on the shelves which may be useful against chemokine
receptors, and these drugs could be used in HIV therapy," he added.

    These drugs, which have already been safety tested, could, within a year,
end up being used in the treatment of Aids patients, according to the Maryland
team.

    Michael Dean is optimistic that science is finally making significant
breakthroughs in the fight against the disease. "We are beginning to figure out
why some people are resistant to infection or have a delay in coming down with
Aids. If you can figure out why they are doing so, then we may be able to come
up with strategies to help the rest of the population"

    The monthly stars column and theoretically . . . will be back next week


LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1997


                              186 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 18, 1997, Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Page  2

LENGTH: 183 words

HEADLINE: DEFENCE 'Ethnic weapon' nightmare ahead

BODY:

    Military experts are warning of a terrifying new generation of biological
weapons, resistant to treatment and designed to attack specific ethnic groups.
The Pentagon has produced an internal report, which warns that biological agents
could be genetically engineered to produce new lethal weapons.

    These engineered agents would be able to resist detection, identification
and treatment.

    Professor Malcolm Dando, of Bradford University's Department of Peace
Studies, explained there was a growing scientific capability to interfere with
genetics.

    "The human species is very diverse with differences in genetics and blood
groups, for example," he said. "It does not take a rocket scientist to work out
that if you put that together with what we are beginning to develop in gene
therapy, you could end up with an ethnic weapon."

    There is no definite confirmation that such fearsome weapons have yet been
developed. However, it is believed that Iraq considered using camel pox during
the Gulf War on Allied troops without the natural immunities in the blood of
locals.


LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1997


                              188 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 2, 1997, Saturday

SECTION: LEADER; Page  15

LENGTH: 358 words

HEADLINE: Letter: Gene patenting would benefit medical companies, not patients

BYLINE: Roberta Tweedy

BODY:

    Sir: It should be understood that the main issue in gene patenting (Letters,
31 July) is not whether patent protection should be offered for the development
of an inventive diagnostic kit or of a new vehicle for a genetic therapy. These
would be inventions in themselves, thus patentable anyway, and we endorse fully
a directive which clarifies the whole situation and protects intellectual
property rights when appropriate.

    Our objection is to the fact that one article in the directive states:

    an element isolated from the human body or otherwise produced by means of a
technical process including the structure or partial structure of a gene may
constitute a patentable invention, even if the structure of that element is
identical to that of a natural element.

    Therefore, as it stands, the directive does mean that naturally occurring
gene sequences are patentable because, in order to do anything with a gene or
gene sequence, it has to be isolated from the body.

    Although an industrial application has to be stated, this can be something
as simple as looking for faults in the gene. This means that any genetic test,
using any technique, would be subject to the payment of royalties and licence
fees. A biomedical company would not have to develop an inventive kit or develop
a therapy to earn money. Indeed, rather than encourage the development of these
tests and therapies, it would create a monopoly in which only the patent holder
would gain, without the necessity to do anything inventive. The actual gene
itself would probably never be used in therapy without some vector to deliver it
to the body. Therefore, any therapy derived from the gene would be subject to a
double patent.

    It is the wording of this one article in the directive that is so vital.
There is no guarantee that this directive, as it is worded, will help patients
with genetic disorders. However, it will cost the NHS dearly, probably restrict
access to genetic tests and create a field day for biomedical companies and
lawyers.

    ROBERTA TWEEDY

    Director, The Neurofibromatosis Association

    Kingston upon Thames, Surrey


LOAD-DATE: August 04, 1997


                              191 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            July 31, 1997, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Page  2

LENGTH: 79 words

HEADLINE: Baby's gene therapy postponed

BODY:

    Pioneering surgery on a 10-month-old baby who is to undergo the world's
first gene therapy operation of its kind has been postponed.

    The baby girl, who suffers from Hurler Disease,which is caused by a faulty
gene, was due to have her own bone marrow - which has been genetically altered
in a laboratory - transplanted back into her yesterday. Dr Ed Wraith, part of
the team treating the child, said the operation had not been put off for any
medical reason.


LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1997


                              194 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 July 30, 1997

SECTION: Pg. 18

LENGTH: 574 words

HEADLINE: Biggs set to stay in Brazil

BODY:



    GREAT train robber Ronnie Biggs looks set to escape British justice after
all as Brazilian authorities announced today he would not be covered by new
extradition laws.

    Insiders familiar with the complex Brazilian justice system said they
doubted that the extradition of Biggs, 67, would take place because the
country's laws were not retroactive

    Widow rewards Radley with £ 1/4 m

    A GRATEFUL widow has left £250,000 to one of the country's leading public
schools, Radley College, to thank it for the food parcels the school sent to her
husband while he was a Second World War prisoner.

    Elizabeth Radford, 90, of Dorchester, bequeathed the money as a token of her
appreciation for the food parcels which were sent to Brigadier Walter Radford
between 1940 and 1945.

    -

    .  New stars for West Side Story

    RISING stars Katie Knight-Adams and David Habbin were introduced at the Ritz
today as the new leads in the 40th anniversary production of West Side Story.

    Katie, 24, and 28-year-old David were picked after a yearlong search by the
producers of the £1 million Bernstein musical.

    The show starts a British tour in Plymouth next week and is due in the West
End next summerBaby's pioneering gene operation A BABY aged 10 months made
medical history today by undergoing the first gene therapy operation of its kind
in order to save her life.

    The girl, who suffers from a genetic disorder known as Hurler Syndrome, was
having her own bone marrow transplanted back after it had been genetically
altered in a laboratory. The operation was being conducted at the Royal
Manchester Children's Hospital.


LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1997


                              195 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            July 30, 1997, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Page  7

LENGTH: 252 words

HEADLINE: Baby's gene therapy could help hundreds

BYLINE: Kate Watson-Smyth

BODY:

    A 10-month-old baby will make medical history today when she has a
pioneering gene therapy operation.

    The girl, who suffers from Hurler Disease which is caused by a faulty gene,
will have her own bone marrow transplanted back into her body after it has been
genetically altered in a laboratory.

    Last week her bone marrow was taken out and transported to a laboratory at
the Paterson Institute at the Christie Hospital in Manchester, to be treated.

    A normal gene was inserted into it, which doctors hope will override the
faulty one, and the marrow will be returned to her in the operation later today.

    The operation, which will take place at the Royal Manchester Children's
Hospital, could help hundreds of people if it is successful.

    Professor Mike Dexter, Director of the Paterson Institute, who is part of
the team carrying out the operation, said it was a medical breakthrough.

    "It is the first gene therapy operation on this group of patients in the
world," he said.

    "There are very few people suffering from the disease in the UK, and they
usually die before they are 10 years old.

    "We don't know if the operation will work, but if it does we will be very
pleased.

    "We should know within a fortnight if it has been a success," he added.

    The girl's mother, who has asked to remain anonymous, said: "We are very
relieved that she has been given the chance to have this treatment because there
was no other option for her and this is her only chance."


LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1997


                              198 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             July 25, 1997, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Page  3

LENGTH: 553 words

HEADLINE: After Dolly comes Polly, the sheep with human genes

BYLINE: Charles Arthur Science Editor

BODY:

    After Dolly, the cloned sheep, say hello to Polly - the cloned sheep with
human genes.

    PPL Therapeutics, the Scottish biotechnology company, stunned the world in
February by announcing that it had produced a lamb from a single cell of an
adult sheep. Yesterday it followed that up by announcing that five lambs have
been born carrying a human gene - providing proof of a technique which could
eventually make human proteins, new drugs and even replacement organs.

    Using the cloning technique that produced Dolly could, in future, guarantee
flocks of genetically-identical animals which would be certain to produce
exactly the same product, a system PPL has dubbed "pharming".

    Previously, scientists could produce a single "transgenic" animal carrying
another species' genes, or they could produce cloned animals. But they had not
combined the techniques.

    Polly and her four near-identical sisters were not produced by the same
cloning method used to breed Dolly, which was the first mammal cloned from an
adult cell. The new sheep were created by fusing a cell from a foetus to an egg
cell. This is a slightly easier method of cloning, as embryonic cells are
"totipotent" - they naturally have the potential to grow into complete animals,
rather than being inclined to develop into skin, brain or muscle cells.

    This time, the PPL team genetically modified the foetal cells before cloning
them. As adding genes is a hit-and-miss affair, two of the five lambs have
so-called marker genes - which are easy for scientists to find and verify in the
animal - two have the human gene but not the marker, and only Polly has both.

    "It was what we told everybody we were going to do, but it's nice to be able
to say we have done it," said Ron James, managing director of PPL. "Three of
them are carrying are carrying a human gene of therapeutic value. I'm not going
to say what it is."

    The company already has uncloned transgenic sheep producing
alpha-1-antitrypsin, a blood protein used to treat the symptoms of cystic
fibrosis.

    They also have been genetically engineered to produce fibrinogen, factor VII
and factor IX - all blood clotting products - and activated protein C, which
prevents clotting.

    The five lambs, all born within the past month to different mothers, did not
come from the Scottish-based company's scrapie-free herd, so they will not be
used to produce any commercial products, James said. Instead, they will be
monitored and scientists will try to duplicate the technique in sheep guaranteed
free of the brain-wasting disease.

    But Dr James said the company did not intend to produce herds of clones.
"We would only ever produce a few. We would then breed naturally to get the
numbers needed for production, both because natural breeding is more effective
and we have time to do that while trials are going on."

    PPL's first cloned sheep, Megan and Morag, were announced to the world in
1996. They have now each had lambs, showing they are normal enough to reproduce.

    The five new lambs will also breed eventually, Dr James said. If their human
genes carry on into the lambs, the company has a winner. "It provides a solid
platform from which PPL can now develop additional medical products using sheep
and, hopefully, cows and pigs," he said.


LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1997


                              199 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            July 19, 1997, Saturday

SECTION: COMMENT; Page  17

LENGTH: 1272 words

HEADLINE: Who will be the master of the science genie?; Society's problem is
that scientific discovery is moving so fast

BYLINE: Trevor Phillips

BODY:

    The nerds are out of control; but it's not their fault - it's ours for being
stupid, lazy and credulous about science. This century has been dominated by the
creation of atomic and chemical weaponry, transformed by the design of reliable
birth control and revolutionised by the silicon chip. The planet has been
shrunken by the satellite, the internal combustion and jet engines. Yet we still
don't seem to get the point. The unprecedented speed and spread of technological
discovery is the only thing that matters; yet we do not, will not, treat it
seriously or take control of it.

    Did many of us care that the Internet virtually crashed this week? Not
really.  But give it three years, when Bill Gates of Microsoft promises
(threatens?) that half of all Americans will be wired up, and doing their
business, shopping and being paid through the Net; get ready for ructions.
Closer to home, the Norwich Union Building Society discovered to its
embarrassment this week that rumours circulated on e-mail were not, as the
correspondents probably thought, the Nineties equivalent of coffee-machine
gossip; they were, instead, nearly half-a-million pounds' worth of libel. And
let us not even contemplate the extent to which the interactive media are
becoming the highway for anti-human pornography and racism; let us merely note
that things which could never have found an audience of a hundred before can now
be made available to millions at the touch of a mouse.

    This week's advance for science is the so-called artificial womb produced in
Japan, which will no doubt trigger yet another dumb and ill-informed "moral"
debate about scientists' right to play God. The facts don't actually support
that this is what's happening - the "womb" is really just a superior piece of
intensive care kit - but it carries the echoes of Frankenstein's doomed attempt
to animate life without divine intervention.

    We shudder, and say that it can't happen here - but we've said that about
virtually every scientific advance since the war. If things gets too sticky, as
in the case of fertility techniques or BSE, our elected representatives throw up
their hands in despair and cry "I don't know what's going on" and turn it over
to a committee of philosophers, who have even less clue than the politicians.
Last and most desperate of all, it falls into the hands of the lawyers, whose
very rationale is to make the issues unintelligible.  The poor naive scientist,
whose only interest is in understanding why some little corner of the universe
works, and to try to explain it to the rest of us, is left carrying the can for
public policy.

    Our problem as a society is that scientific discovery is moving along so
fast - we have turned out more new inventions in the past 50 years than in the
whole of previous human history - that our culture can do little more than
consume its products. Our democracy has no tools by which to give the people
real choices about how best to use new knowledge. Yes, the market will
ultimately provide a crude measure of the people's assent or otherwise; but it
will not do the other things that a proper democracy does - such as protect the
rights of the vulnerable, or try to combat a debasement of public tastes and
morals.

    Few of us have much clue how the machines we use work, what makes them go
wrong or what impact they have on the wider environment - until the damage is
done. In relation to the motor car, for example, we are only now closing the
door on the stable years after most of the horses have bolted. And we blame the
scientists.

    As a society we are still ambivalent about scientists. Having served my own
time at the bench in our leading temple to science and technology, Imperial
College, I can confirm that those who labour to create latter- day miracles are
no more or less remarkable than anyone else. They like football, go to movies,
have children and moan about their bosses. Yet our culture carries two hugely
oversimplified pictures of them. One is Indiana Jones - wearing learning so
lightly that you wouldn't notice the horn-rimmed spectacles and white coat, and
given to glamorous adventures on the edge of the unknown. Into this category we
can put handsome doctors who produce new treatments and techniques to confound
disease and death.  We can also point to the astronauts who risk their lives to
see if The Truth Really Is Out There. Our Man on Mir must already on be on his
way to his first million from the movie rights to his story alone.

    But there's another image of the scientist which is more disturbing, and in
some ways closer to the truth. This is not because scientists are bad guys, but
because we fail to care enough about them and their work.  This image is that of
the super-brainy, hyperactive child, endlessly curious and intrusive, poking his
or her fingers into every dark hole just to see what's there. With children, we
erect a protective framework, making the home a little safer, being a smidgeon
more vigilant. But with atom- smashers, or gene therapy, or space vehicles, you
can't just say "That's far enough". With the sums involved and the huge promises
made for the enhancement of the human condition, who could say no?

    I don't go all the way with those who say that scientific advance is the new
religion. Religious belief does not, by and large, involve true revelation or
discovery; prophets tend to tell us what we want to hear in terms that we
already understand. But science does demand faith and it does have its high
priests. Scientists introduce us to things we didn't even know were there, and
in doing so they transform our way of living.  Without the steam engine and
railway, there would be no great cities.  Without the printing press there would
have been no revolutions. Without the Pill, there would be no march towards
equality of choice for women.  Mostly science has made things cheaper, better or
simply more widely available.  Occasionally it has offered a completely new
human experience - being able to talk to someone you can't see or hear with the
unaided voice via the telephone is possibly the best example of the latter. But
all these changes come to most of us accidentally, or at the behest of clever,
powerful or rich people.

    For a democracy, this is not good enough. We are not all equal in talents;
but we should all have the right to a say in the shape of our culture.  However,
we can't use that right without three things happening. The scientists have to
be forced by the media and the Government to be more open about their work; the
days of the refusal to publish for commercial or professional reasons should be
numbered under the Government's Freedom of Information plans.  Second, we have
to be educated in the language of science. That means tougher standards in
maths, and more hours given over to science in the curriculum, either by
extending the school year, or by dropping other subjects.

    Third, the task of deciding on how we handle the consequences of scientific
discovery should be kept out of the courts if at all possible - lawyers are
neither equipped nor able to guide us by themselves. How one might do this is
hard to say, and it would be an issue that the Prime Minister or the Home
Secretary, both lawyers themselves, might turn over to someone with the right
qualifications. The name of the distinguished physicist Lord Flowers comes to
mind. Or, if they wanted a scientist with a keen mind, legal training and vast
experience of public life, with lots of time on her hands, they don't have to
look very far. Step forward, Baroness Thatcher.


LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1997


                              200 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            July 2, 1997, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Page  7

LENGTH: 558 words

HEADLINE: Genetic weapons to provide force for high-tech ethnic war

BYLINE: Jeremy Laurance Health Editor

BODY:

    Genetic weapons that could be targeted at specific racial groups in a form
of hi-tech ethnic warfare are to be investigated by the British Medical
Association.

    They do not exist but could be available in five to 10 years, the
association said. Doctors fear developments in genetic therapy to cure disease
might be turned to evil ends in the hands of a dictator.

    Biological or chemical weapons could theoretically be targeted by addition
of a gene marker to attack a specific part of the human body. The genetically
engineered toxin might be sprayed into the air or added to food and water.  If
clusters of genes only seen in particular ethnic groups could be identified, it
might be possible to devise an ethnic weapon. Vivienne Nathanson, head of
science and ethics at the BMA, said: "It is clearly a very frightening scenario.
We are trying to prevent new weapons being developed and distributed.  We want
to know whether genetic weapons are feasible and how to control or stop them."

    The investigation, commissioned by the association's board of science, was
announced at the BMA's annual conference in Edinburgh. It is due for completion
in 12 months. Scientists expect to be able to produce the first genetically
targeted drugs in five years. The drugs would repair faulty DNA within the cell
and might be used to treat conditions such as diabetes and cystic fibrosis. Dr
Nathanson said: "No one has been able to tell me why, if we can produce
genetically targeted drugs with a good effect, we won't be able to produce
similar drugs with a bad effect in the same time-scale."

    The Human Genome Project, which is mapping the entire human genetic code,
might produce enough information to allow specific genetic types to be
identified. "We know the genes for hair colour, eye colour and height.  If 90
per cent of the enemy have blue eyes, blond hair and are over six feet tall,
that could be the cluster you are looking for." Certain blood types were
commoner in different ethnic groups and could also be targeted, she said.

    Earlier the conference called for the manufacture and supply of instruments
of torture to be banned after hearing of British companies that had sold the
equipment abroad.

    An iron foundry in Birmingham had produced leg and arm shackles and other
companies had made hi-tech torture chambers, which used low-level noise to drive
victims mad, and a mass gallows for export to Saudi Arabia, the conference was
told. Investigations by Amnesty International had found a number of companies
exploiting legal loopholes to manufacture and export the equipment.

    James Barrett, a member of the BMA council and chairman of the medical group
of Amnesty International, said shackles made by the Birmingham company were
deliberately designed to crush the radial nerve in the arm when tightened.
"They made good profits," he said.

    Sandy Macara, chairman of the BMA, said: "There is nothing good about the
profits made out of this trade".

    The conference called for the creation of mechanisms in every country
through which doctors could report human-rights abuses and torture.

    It supported the Government's ban on land mines, which was announced last
May following an appeal by Diana, Princess of Wales, and said the money saved on
the defence budget should be used to clear them.


LOAD-DATE: July 02, 1997


                              202 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            June 26, 1997, Thursday

SECTION: LEADER; Page  19

LENGTH: 964 words

HEADLINE: Leading article: In the long run, health means responsibility

BODY:

    Frank Dobson, Secretary of State for Health, is an admirer of Napoleon. In
quieter moments he will regale you with the line-up at Marengo and tactics at
Austerlitz. Like Bonaparte, Mr Dobson faces a tough winter campaign when - it is
widely predicted - waiting lists will grow rather than fall, patients will be
refused admission to cash-strapped hospitals and the health unions will become
restive. If the doctors were to perform heart surgery on the health secretary
they would find stamped on that tough muscle the same word that tormented his
predecessors back to Aneurin Bevan - money.

    Predictably, then, Mr Dobson's speech yesterday to the NHS Confederation was
greeted as if it were a promissory note - in this case promising to try not to
pay for the public's expectations of health care raised by Labour's election
commitments. A mention of amalgamating health authorities and closing hospitals
in his speech was taken to signal his desperate search for savings while the
proposal to create "Health Action Zones" was read as a bid to get other people
to do the Government's dirty work of cutting and crimping the NHS. Meanwhile, in
another neck of the woods, much significance was attached to references to
"hypothecation" by Patricia Hewitt who, though a fresher MP, is well plugged
into Blairite policy wonk circles. In layman's speak, that means a health tax or
some other device for dedicating a flow of funds into "saving the service".
There are, it's undeniable, big holes in NHS finances, in the short run. They
were graphically described by, among others, the Institute of Fiscal Studies
before the election and have receded since. Too many health trusts ended the
last financial year carrying forward deficits for there not to be anguished
cries in the winter months. But health politics are a perennial round of
knife-edging and wound- binding. Besides, there are substantive questions facing
the NHS which do not have much to do with the aggregate budget - such as the
excess in the system of a particular kind of hospital bed. The growth of day
surgery and changes in treatment regimes fostered by the doctors themselves have
reduced demand for "acute" beds, but not uniformly across the country. Frank
Dobson could soon face the perplexing task of justifying keeping beds going in
London (where patient demand has been rising, whatever the health planners
intended) while closing them down elsewhere.

    Any health secretary in a government which thinks itself worth at least two
terms in office would be derelict in his duty if he did not, even at this early
stage, start thinking hard about the medium to long run.  And that, though his
critics may have missed it, is just what Frank Dobson started to do yesterday.
Health Action Zones could turn out to be ineffectual talking shops where, not
for the first time, the medics dominate and other interests get pushed to the
margins. But they could become a means by which a health revolution is
accomplished. That is big talk, but the new government's emerging health
thinking does appear ambitious. Since its inception the National Health Service
has of course been nothing of the kind. It has been the national disease and
accident service. Health - what we all need if we are to stay out of doctors'
surgeries and hospital wards - was relegated to local authorities and
marginalised doctors. When, not long after Margaret Thatcher came to power, Sir
Douglas Black reported that public health was adversely affected by life
chances, he was stating the obvious. But the obvious consequences for "national
health" were ignored.  Now Tessa Jowell has dusted off the work and if the
Department of Health - by all accounts not yet the most coordinated of Whitehall
departments - can pull its arms and legs together there is at least the prospect
of renewed attention to the simple truth that people by and large make their own
health, within the economic and social circumstances in which they find
themselves. Being healthy is, for most of us, a life choice.

    Health Action Zones could be much more than vehicles to give him cover for
closing down unwanted acute beds. They could, for example, start thinking about
public health and what it takes to improve it. Yesterday we reported on the
front page extrapolations of recent trends in the incidence of cancer.  They
made for a scary headline. Even if we re-weigh the figures for demography (old
people have to die of something, so proportionately more old people must mean
proportionately more cancer death), cancer cases will grow. But a trend is not a
fate. The incidence of cancer reflects, in part, life-style choices: to smoke,
to lie in the noonday sun, to eat unhealthy foods. Those choices are ours.
However successful Frank Dobson might or might not be in wresting funds from the
Treasury, whatever progress is made in gene therapy, however fine the screening
nets for breast or bowel cancer, it will still be down to us to raise or lower
the risk of certain cancers by our own actions. By "health maintenance
organisation" the Americans mean a plan guaranteeing access to care by dint of
having paid a subscription cum insurance premium. What if Frank Dobson's zones
became health maintenance organisations in the common or garden sense, Weight
Watchers writ large, community mechanisms to foster healthy behaviour?  Only if
people start to "own" their health rather than contracting it out to the NHS
will those cancer trends not be realised. There is another benefit, admittedly
not one that is going to bail Frank Dobson out in the short run. It is money.
The more public health we enjoy - health as a personal, family and community
responsibility - the less need there will be for the NHS to be continually
racked by crisis.


LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1997


                              205 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            May 28, 1997, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Page  22

LENGTH: 948 words

HEADLINE: Small is still beautiful for biotech companies coming to market;
Celltech's recent setback has not cured firms' enthusiasm for public listings,
reports Sameena Ahmad

BYLINE: Sameena Ahmad

BODY:

    A rising tide of young biotechnology companies is planning to float on the
UK stock market over the next few years - undeterred by Celltech's shock
revelation last week that its leading drug for septic shock works no better than
a sugar pill.

    The crash in Celltech's shares will undoubtedly affect investor sentiment,
which is vital for stock market debutants. Patrick Rousseau, CEO of Thallia, a
French health food company hoping for a $ 100m (pounds 61m) float says: "I have
heard of six IPOs initial public offerings due this summer now delaying until
the autumn after Celltech."

    But behind these delays, a huge queue of hopefuls is building up. Michael
Ward, editor of biotechnology newsletter BioBusiness, estimates there are 700
European bioscience companies looking to raise public money over the next
decade. Of the UK companies seeking to float in London, three - Powderject,
Ethical Holdings and Galen - announced valuation details before Celltech's
bombshell.

    Waiting in the wings are Oxford Glycosciences, which recently appointed
James Noble, former finance director of British Biotech, to its board, chemical
designer Oxford Asymmetry, Cambridge-based Cenes, gene-therapy group Therexsys
and cancer specialist, Antisoma.

    Even more are eyeing up the UK from the Continent. Jeremy Curnock Cook, head
of Rothschild's biotechnology investment fund, sees enormous growth in
biotechnology in Europe. "These companies are 10 years behind the US in
commercialising their research, but are now ready to raise serious money."
France dominates this list which includes Biocom, a computer software group;
IDM, a gene-therapy company; Cerep, a chemical screening specialist;
gene-delivery company, Transgene, and drug delivery group, Biovector
Therapeutics. Coming from Germany are Morphosys, which has developed a peptide
antibody library and IDEA, which hopes to list on AIM. Brussels is offering IBT,
Spain, PharmaMar, which makes drugs from marine plants and from Australia the
agricultural genetic engineer, ForBio, is looking for a secondary listing this
year. Pharming, the Dutch company which was planning a London summer listing,
may now delay until the autumn, say sources.

    Mr Ward of BioBusiness also notes a new trend for US-listed biotechs to seek
a secondary quotation on the less crowded European markets. "Some of these US
companies don't get much exposure at home where there are 300 plus biotechs. The
UK has just 20 or so. Also many have subsidiaries on the Continent and so it is
natural to seek more investors there." Sugen, which has a German base and is 20
per cent owned by Zeneca, plans to float in London late summer while US
compatriot, Verigen, which has a Danish subsidiary, will list on AIM.

    How many of these hopefuls will actually make it? Though Celltech was a
sharp reminder of the volatility of biotechnology shares, most believe prospects
for the right sort of newcomer remain good long term.

    One reason is a growing understanding that failures are meant to happen in
drug research. David Horrobin, chief executive of Scotia, one of the UK's
largest listed biotechs, says: "Most small molecules fail. For every 10,000
evaluated, only one makes it to market." John Padfield, chief executive of
Chiroscience, points out that biotechnology companies are particularly exposed
to good and bad news: "Biotechs walk around naked - everything we say or do is
scrutinised. Drugs die all the time within the big pharmaceutical companies, but
investors never know about it."

    The complexity of biotechnology companies is partly to blame for the
collective panic in share prices after bad news from one company. Robert
Alington Maguire of Baring Brothers says: "It is precisely because
pharmaceutical companies are very complex and very different that people tend to
judge them as the same." The small size of the UK biotech market is also
critical.  Dr Horrobin says: "There is still a lack of qualified analysts and
journalists here. If people don't understand the technology it is easy for them
to become wildly enthusiastic or overly negative."

    However, that is changing. As Mr Curnock Cook notes: "A bigger market
attracts more money, institutions have to take a position and more analysts
start to follow the sector seriously." This results in a keener ability to
differentiate companies on quality. Louis Nisbet, chief executive of Xenova, the
recently floated UK group, says: "Institutions are becoming very clued up and
are starting to recruit medically qualified fund managers." The realisation that
biotechs are worth a serious look is also being driven by the growing number of
alliances with big pharma groups eager to find innovative new products.

    In addition, as Mark Brewer, analyst at Hoare Govett, points out, not all
biotechs carry equal risk: "Not every company develops drugs from scratch. There
is plenty in this sector for investors with a lower appetite for risk." Of the
imminent floats, Galen is a mini-pharma company profitable for 30 years.
Powderject doesn't make drugs at all but develops devices to deliver them. None
has plans to scale back their flotation valuations post Celltech.

    Nor should investors forget the potential for biotechs to rise from the
dead. Cantab's shares, which crashed to little over 100p in 1995 after a lead
drug failed, now trade at 917.5p. British Biotech, which lost its first cancer
drug batimastat, is now capitalised at almost pounds 1.7bn.  As Dr Horrobin
points out: "Anyone who invested in biotechs at flotation have done much better
than if they'd put the money in big drug company shares. We are all pretty
successful investments."


LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1997


                              207 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                              May 6, 1997, Tuesday

SECTION: LEADER PAGE; Page  15

LENGTH: 111 words

HEADLINE: A very human endgame

BODY:

    So a computer, Deep Blue, beats Garry Kasparov at chess. Its makers, IBM,
are jumping up and down with glee. More than that, they are trying to assure the
world that the chess game, and all the technological development which was
poured into it, was really about creating a better world. After the Kasparov
game, IBM will be better able to forecast the weather, develop gene therapies
and so on. Maybe. But let us not be fooled. Weather forecasting wasn't why a
bunch of programmers created Deep Blue any more than rocket scientists are
really trying to develop better toasters. They wanted to beat Kasparov. It is a
very human thing to want to do.


LOAD-DATE: May 06, 1997


                              208 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                              May 6, 1997, Tuesday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Page  8

LENGTH: 450 words

HEADLINE: theoretically...

BODY:

    Bacteria which are not killed by vancomycin, known as the antibiotic of last
resort, are worrying Japanese scientists. With a growing number of hospitals
becoming worried about "superbug" strains of MRSA - methicillin- resistant
staphylococcus aureus - the Japanese team has found S. aureus strains which are
not killed by vancomycin, reports New Scientist. Microbiologists had forecast
that vancomycin-resistant S. aureus would emerge, after the discovery of
resistant strains of the enterococcus bacteria. If MRSA strains also gain
vancomycin resistance, the result could be "a nightmare", said one specialist.
No new antibiotics have been developed since the 1970s.

    The view that ice ages in the last two to three million years were probably
caused by variations in the Earth's orbital path has won extra backing.  Science
published a report by a team who compared the past climate - as laid down in
ocean corals from Barbados and samples from the Arizona desert.  The corals
indicated that the time of the sea-level change during the last ice age matches
the idea that variations in the Earth's orbit changed our climate. The desert
samples provided a "clock" against which to measure the corals' chronology.

    South Korea's lack of guidelines over use of gene therapy hasn't stopped a
group from carrying it out on a 33-year-old woman suffering from breast cancer.
They treated her with a retrovirus with the interleukin-12 gene, which is
reckoned to spark off the immune system to act against cancer cells, reported
Nature. While the treatment might make sense, use of an advanced medical
technique in the absence of a medical and legal framework might be cause for
concern. One of the researchers, Sunyoung Kim, said that setting up government
guidelines was taking too long and that "it would not be fair to be left behind"
just because of their absence.

    When hearts go wrong, could it be the fault of a single piece of the
contraction mechanism? After all, your heart contracts more than three billion
times in a lifetime - even a tiny defect would eventually turn into something
dramatic. That's the suggestion of a team at the University of Maryland School
of Medicine in the latest issue of Science. If they're right, high blood
pressure (hypertension) could lead to a progressive decrease in the heart's
ability to contract. The team points out that people with hypertension have
heart cells that grow larger to compensate for the increased pressure. The
over-large cells can't contract well, leading to a breakdown of the contraction
mechanism. But the same flaw was also found in failing hearts - a clue, perhaps,
that the same defect underlies the trouble.


LOAD-DATE: May 06, 1997


                              209 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 3, 1997, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Page  2

LENGTH: 141 words

HEADLINE: Synthetic aid for genetic disorder

BODY:

    A synthetic miniature chromosome has been created for the first time by a
team of scientists in Ohio, US, who hope it will eventually help in the battle
against genetic disease.

    The new artificial chromosome is about one-fifth to one-tenth the size of a
real human chromosome, which is a threadlike structure found in every human
cell, responsible for carrying our genetic material. Scientists hope the
synthetic construction may be useful in carrying healthy genes into the faulty
cells of people with genetic diseases, such as cystic fibrosis or a form of
muscular dystrophy. "People have been so frustrated by gene therapy, which has
not lived up to the hype," said Huntington Willard, a geneticist from Case
Western Reserve University and an author of the report, published in the journal
Nature Genetics.  Annabel Ferriman


LOAD-DATE: April 03, 1997


                              212 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 15, 1997, Saturday

SECTION: GAZETTE; Page  18

LENGTH: 768 words

HEADLINE: Faith and reason: Creation and procreation: we tread on holy ground;
The possibility of human cloning shows that shared moral values are not enough.
Society needs to recover a sense of 'the good', argues Cardinal Basil Hume.

BYLINE: Cardinal Basil Hume

BODY:

    One of the most striking facts about our society today is the apparent loss
of hope. There is a pessimism which pervades much of our cultural life,
reflecting a profound disenchantment of the human spirit, and an absence of
faith in the possibility of transformation and redemption.  We have stopped
relying on God, but find humanity to be wanting.

    "The great tragedy of modern civilisation is to be found in the failure of
material progress to satisfy human needs," wrote Christopher Dawson in 1939 as
the Nazi threat was beginning to take shape in Germany. The world, he said,
needed to recover a "spiritual vitality". Nearly 70 years later that need is
even more urgent.

    For many today something only exists if it can be immediately known and
verified by the five senses. What cannot be examined under a microscope or
observed through a telescope, does not exist. There is no such thing as the
spiritual; the non-material has no existence, it is said.

    There is, I suspect, a general consensus over what are the basic moral
values; values such as kindness, honesty, faithfulness in relationships, respect
for others, for the environment, for justice and for law. Recently the Schools
Curriculum and Assessment Authority found an extensive agreement between people
of different faiths and no faith, across social groups, on a range of moral
values. But to the question "What is the good?", which addresses the source and
authority of those values, it is common today is to assert that there is no true
answer: morality is a matter of opinion.

    In the Judaeo-Christian tradition the Ten Commandments, as the revelation of
God, offer objective moral norms. They set out a framework of morality which not
only defines our obligations to others, but at a deep level resonates with what
we know to be required for human well-being and life in community. Far from
being arbitrary external requirements of one tradition, they offer all peoples
insights into the true nature of humanity. They disclose the fundamental duties,
and therefore, indirectly, the inalienable rights of the human person. They
apply to all of us because we share a common humanity. Indeed, it is from a
deeper appreciation of our common humanity that we can more readily consider the
ways we should behave towards each other.

    Three consequences stand out. First, we need to respect and protect human
life itself, from conception to its natural end. Secondly, our shared humanity
requires us to acknowledge the rights of all to what is needed to live a fully
human life - including food, clothing, shelter, education and employment.
Thirdly, we have to recognise that we owe certain duties to others.

    Yet our society has become, in some respects, morally desensitised, and is
therefore ill-prepared to grapple with a looming issue which I have no doubt is
fast becoming one of the major moral problems of our age, namely the
implications of breathtaking developments in genetics and biotechnology.  I
heard last week of a distinguished scientist imagining, apparently with complete
equanimity, a future in which children were the product of three different sets
of parents: biological parents, gestational parents, and a third set who were
bringing them up. If we separate these three relationships then we in some way
undermine something which is specifically human.

    There are undoubted benefits which gene therapy might bring. I do fear for
the future, however, if the language of bodily human love is gradually replaced
by an artificial process, if pro-creation becomes production, or even
reproduction, and if the individual human being becomes valued as a product to
be ordered rather than a gift to be received.

    Our human nature is delicate and fragile. There are boundaries which we
cannot cross without fundamentally altering the way we relate to others, and see
ourselves. Furthermore, we have no experience of the potential lifelong
consequences which could follow from bringing human life into the world in new
artificial ways. We must act with extreme caution, for bringing new life into
the world is the nearest human beings come to creation.  We tread on holy
ground.

    Our society badly needs to recover a deeper knowledge of what it means to be
human. Without more people who are fully alive, seized of their duties to
others, committed to building a better world, the outlook for our society is
bleak. This is why spiritual vitality is so urgent, and why schools should be
committed to the cultivation of goodness before success.

    'Faith & Reason' is edited by Paul Vallely


LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1997


                              213 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 15, 1997, Saturday

SECTION: GAZETTE; Page  18

LENGTH: 768 words

HEADLINE: Faith and reason: Creation and procreation: we tread on holy ground;
The possibility of human cloning shows that shared moral values are not enough.
Society needs to recover a sense of 'the good', argues Cardinal Basil Hume.

BYLINE: Cardinal Basil Hume

BODY:

    One of the most striking facts about our society today is the apparent loss
of hope. There is a pessimism which pervades much of our cultural life,
reflecting a profound disenchantment of the human spirit, and an absence of
faith in the possibility of transformation and redemption.  We have stopped
relying on God, but find humanity to be wanting.

    "The great tragedy of modern civilisation is to be found in the failure of
material progress to satisfy human needs," wrote Christopher Dawson in 1939 as
the Nazi threat was beginning to take shape in Germany. The world, he said,
needed to recover a "spiritual vitality". Nearly 70 years later that need is
even more urgent.

    For many today something only exists if it can be immediately known and
verified by the five senses. What cannot be examined under a microscope or
observed through a telescope, does not exist. There is no such thing as the
spiritual; the non-material has no existence, it is said.

    There is, I suspect, a general consensus over what are the basic moral
values; values such as kindness, honesty, faithfulness in relationships, respect
for others, for the environment, for justice and for law. Recently the Schools
Curriculum and Assessment Authority found an extensive agreement between people
of different faiths and no faith, across social groups, on a range of moral
values. But to the question "What is the good?", which addresses the source and
authority of those values, it is common today is to assert that there is no true
answer: morality is a matter of opinion.

    In the Judaeo-Christian tradition the Ten Commandments, as the revelation of
God, offer objective moral norms. They set out a framework of morality which not
only defines our obligations to others, but at a deep level resonates with what
we know to be required for human well-being and life in community. Far from
being arbitrary external requirements of one tradition, they offer all peoples
insights into the true nature of humanity. They disclose the fundamental duties,
and therefore, indirectly, the inalienable rights of the human person. They
apply to all of us because we share a common humanity. Indeed, it is from a
deeper appreciation of our common humanity that we can more readily consider the
ways we should behave towards each other.

    Three consequences stand out. First, we need to respect and protect human
life itself, from conception to its natural end. Secondly, our shared humanity
requires us to acknowledge the rights of all to what is needed to live a fully
human life - including food, clothing, shelter, education and employment.
Thirdly, we have to recognise that we owe certain duties to others.

    Yet our society has become, in some respects, morally desensitised, and is
therefore ill-prepared to grapple with a looming issue which I have no doubt is
fast becoming one of the major moral problems of our age, namely the
implications of breathtaking developments in genetics and biotechnology.  I
heard last week of a distinguished scientist imagining, apparently with complete
equanimity, a future in which children were the product of three different sets
of parents: biological parents, gestational parents, and a third set who were
bringing them up. If we separate these three relationships then we in some way
undermine something which is specifically human.

    There are undoubted benefits which gene therapy might bring. I do fear for
the future, however, if the language of bodily human love is gradually replaced
by an artificial process, if pro-creation becomes production, or even
reproduction, and if the individual human being becomes valued as a product to
be ordered rather than a gift to be received.

    Our human nature is delicate and fragile. There are boundaries which we
cannot cross without fundamentally altering the way we relate to others, and see
ourselves. Furthermore, we have no experience of the potential lifelong
consequences which could follow from bringing human life into the world in new
artificial ways. We must act with extreme caution, for bringing new life into
the world is the nearest human beings come to creation.  We tread on holy
ground.

    Our society badly needs to recover a deeper knowledge of what it means to be
human. Without more people who are fully alive, seized of their duties to
others, committed to building a better world, the outlook for our society is
bleak. This is why spiritual vitality is so urgent, and why schools should be
committed to the cultivation of goodness before success.

    'Faith & Reason' is edited by Paul Vallely


LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1997


                              214 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           March 12, 1997, Wednesday

SECTION: TELEVISION; Page  36

LENGTH: 719 words

HEADLINE: TV Review of Network First; Cloning

BYLINE: Thomas Sutcliffe

BODY:

    Network First's documentary about cloning (ITV) offered a textbook example
of the way in which the content of a film can be at odds with its style.
Christopher Martin's film was the original source of the recent press reports
about Dolly - woolly harbinger of dystopian horror if you believe the
pessimists, bleating pioneer of a dazzling medical future if you take the
optimistic line. And now that the foam of reflex hysteria has crashed on to the
beach, the documentary itself brings up the rear - by and large sober and
judicious in its explanations, at least at the verbal level.

    It sketched in the background to genetic research and the possible medical
applications, as well as the ethical disquiets these advances arouse.  In its
structure, there was no question that it had taken on an advocate's role - it
swiftly introduced the sort of children who might benefit from improved gene
therapy (sick children being a notoriously resistance-crunching tactic) and it
even offered a benign sylvan alternative to those visions of brigades of Saddam
Husseins marching in lockstep across the land. A group of bereaved parents were
planting a memorial wood, each sapling representing a dead child and each
sapling cloned from the Great Oak in Sherwood Forest. Not all of the
reassurances offered were entirely successful - Robert Winston, for example,
brushed away fears that insurance companies might use genetic testing to create
a society of genetic haves and have- nots: "To my mind", he said, "that's pretty
fatuous, because it doesn't show a good understanding of how genes actually
work." But whoever said insurance companies had to behave reasonably? Given that
they already discriminate on the basis of postal codes, it seems unlikely that
they would draw the line at biological ones; and it would be scant consolation
in such circumstances to know that they were acting fatuously.

    On the whole, though, Network First worked to placate unreasonable fears.
As if to press home its point, after some concessions to the anxious in the
final third of the programme, it concluded with the sight of two small boys
suffering from MPS, a genetic disorder which results in stunted growth, brain
damage and premature death. There could hardly have been a more vivid
demonstration of the perversity of giving more argumentative weight to imaginary
monsters than the deforming sadness of real diseases. The hopes of the doctors
in the programme, even when expressed with some caution, brought home to you the
fact that we are living right now in the future's unregretted past, a time to
which people may well look back and say, "Thank God I didn't live then - before
gene therapy was perfected."

    All the more strange, then, that the film should resort so often to
established television shorthand for scientific dread. It began with a sheep
anaesthetised on an operating table, and supported that vaguely disquieting
surrealism with an X Files soundtrack, a familiar combination of menacing chimes
and icy sostenuto. As the film proceeded, research was consistently represented
by the visual vocabulary of the mad scientist's lab - frothing beakers spilling
out a sinister mist, the inhuman robotic motions of automated equipment, even,
most striking of all, a carefully modernised version of the levitating spark
indispensable to Thirties horror movies. As the voiceover intoned the fateful
words "The moment when life is created", you cut suddenly from microscopic film
of a human egg to a flashing oscilloscope.  The soundtrack fizzed with the sound
of an electrical arc.

    This was not a detail the film-makers had stumbled across in their travels -
oscilloscopes don't make such a noise unless you make them and, in any case,
it's hard to imagine one being employed in the procedure being filmed.  This
image had been created quite specifically to say "Frankenstein" without actually
having to voice the word. While the spoken text of the programme was in effect
telling you to calm down, the visual images were prying loose buried
associations of superstition, the primitive sense of transgression so often
evoked by advances in knowledge. Perhaps this is now assumed to be the only
currency with which the general public can be bribed to watch a work of
scientific exposition.


LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1997


                              215 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           March 12, 1997, Wednesday

SECTION: TELEVISION; Page  36

LENGTH: 719 words

HEADLINE: TV Review of Network First; Cloning

BYLINE: Thomas Sutcliffe

BODY:

    Network First's documentary about cloning (ITV) offered a textbook example
of the way in which the content of a film can be at odds with its style.
Christopher Martin's film was the original source of the recent press reports
about Dolly - woolly harbinger of dystopian horror if you believe the
pessimists, bleating pioneer of a dazzling medical future if you take the
optimistic line. And now that the foam of reflex hysteria has crashed on to the
beach, the documentary itself brings up the rear - by and large sober and
judicious in its explanations, at least at the verbal level.

    It sketched in the background to genetic research and the possible medical
applications, as well as the ethical disquiets these advances arouse.  In its
structure, there was no question that it had taken on an advocate's role - it
swiftly introduced the sort of children who might benefit from improved gene
therapy (sick children being a notoriously resistance-crunching tactic) and it
even offered a benign sylvan alternative to those visions of brigades of Saddam
Husseins marching in lockstep across the land. A group of bereaved parents were
planting a memorial wood, each sapling representing a dead child and each
sapling cloned from the Great Oak in Sherwood Forest. Not all of the
reassurances offered were entirely successful - Robert Winston, for example,
brushed away fears that insurance companies might use genetic testing to create
a society of genetic haves and have- nots: "To my mind", he said, "that's pretty
fatuous, because it doesn't show a good understanding of how genes actually
work." But whoever said insurance companies had to behave reasonably? Given that
they already discriminate on the basis of postal codes, it seems unlikely that
they would draw the line at biological ones; and it would be scant consolation
in such circumstances to know that they were acting fatuously.

    On the whole, though, Network First worked to placate unreasonable fears.
As if to press home its point, after some concessions to the anxious in the
final third of the programme, it concluded with the sight of two small boys
suffering from MPS, a genetic disorder which results in stunted growth, brain
damage and premature death. There could hardly have been a more vivid
demonstration of the perversity of giving more argumentative weight to imaginary
monsters than the deforming sadness of real diseases. The hopes of the doctors
in the programme, even when expressed with some caution, brought home to you the
fact that we are living right now in the future's unregretted past, a time to
which people may well look back and say, "Thank God I didn't live then - before
gene therapy was perfected."

    All the more strange, then, that the film should resort so often to
established television shorthand for scientific dread. It began with a sheep
anaesthetised on an operating table, and supported that vaguely disquieting
surrealism with an X Files soundtrack, a familiar combination of menacing chimes
and icy sostenuto. As the film proceeded, research was consistently represented
by the visual vocabulary of the mad scientist's lab - frothing beakers spilling
out a sinister mist, the inhuman robotic motions of automated equipment, even,
most striking of all, a carefully modernised version of the levitating spark
indispensable to Thirties horror movies. As the voiceover intoned the fateful
words "The moment when life is created", you cut suddenly from microscopic film
of a human egg to a flashing oscilloscope.  The soundtrack fizzed with the sound
of an electrical arc.

    This was not a detail the film-makers had stumbled across in their travels -
oscilloscopes don't make such a noise unless you make them and, in any case,
it's hard to imagine one being employed in the procedure being filmed.  This
image had been created quite specifically to say "Frankenstein" without actually
having to voice the word. While the spoken text of the programme was in effect
telling you to calm down, the visual images were prying loose buried
associations of superstition, the primitive sense of transgression so often
evoked by advances in knowledge. Perhaps this is now assumed to be the only
currency with which the general public can be bribed to watch a work of
scientific exposition.


LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1997


                              216 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 8, 1997, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Page  9

LENGTH: 325 words

HEADLINE: Hume warns of cloning danger

BYLINE: Paul Vallely

BODY:

    Modern society has become "morally de-sensitised" and is ill-equipped to
handle the ethical issues thrown up by the cloning of Dolly the sheep, Cardinal
Basil Hume, leader of the Catholic Church in England, said yesterday.

    The Archbishop of Westminster was speaking a day after the scientist who
cloned a sheep told a House of Commons select committee it would be possible to
clone a human being in "one or two years".

    "We must act with extreme caution, for bringing new life into the world is
the nearest human beings come to creation," the Cardinal said, in an address to
governors of independent schools in London yesterday: "We tread on holy ground."

    The great tragedy of modern civilisation is that material progress has
failed to satisfy elemental human needs. "Our society has become, in some
respects, morally de-sensitised, and is therefore ill-prepared to grapple with a
looming issue which I have no doubt is fast becoming one of the major problems
of our age, namely the implications of the breathtaking developments in genetics
and bio-technology," he said.

    He spoke with alarm of an eminent scientist who had imagined "apparently
with complete equanimity" a future in which children were the product of three
different sets of parents: biological parents, gestational parents and a third
set who were bringing them up.

    "If we separate these three relationships, then we in some way undermine
something which is specifically human."

    There were undoubted potential benefits in gene therapy, he said, but added:
"I do fear for the future if the language of bodily human love is gradually
replaced by an artificial process, if procreation becomes production, or even
reproduction, and if the individual human being becomes valued as a product to
be ordered rather than a gift to be received."

    Contemporary society badly needs to recover a deeper knowledge of what it
means to be human, he said.


LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1997


                              218 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             March 4, 1997, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Page  5

LENGTH: 344 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy offers hope for cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: Charles Arthur

BODY:

    British scientists have taken "an important step forward" by showing that
cells in people with cystic fibrosis can be repaired by replacing faulty genes
with working ones.

    A clinical trial has now begun with more than 10 patients in London to try
to introduce genes into cells in the lungs of patients, following the latest
successes. In those, two clinical trials - one in Edinburgh and another in
Oxford and Cambridge - showed that genes which correct the cause of cystic
fibrosis can be delivered to cells in the nose lining by using fatty cells known
as liposomes.

    "We were looking for safety and the actual transfer of the genes," said Dr
Martin Scott, of the Cystic Fibrosis Trust.

    "Both studies have shown that this system is safe, and have produced weak
signals that the gene instructions are being switched on."

    He added that "things are on course, from the cystic fibrosis point of view"
towards an eventual cure by gene therapy.

    Cystic fibrosis, which causes the body's glands to overproduce mucus, is the
most common life-threatening inherited disease in the United Kingdom, affecting
one in 2,500 babies. The single gene which causes it was identified in 1989.

    The idea of replacing faulty genes with working ones has been held out as a
hope for years to sufferers. But nobody was sure genes introduced into body
cells would perform the function they were meant to.

    The latest studies, published in the journal Gene Therapy, follow years of
mixed fortunes for those trying to develop gene therapy cures for cystic
fibrosis.

    Britain's first gene therapy patient, Carly Todd, received genes intended to
correct her cystic fibrosis in 1993. But a year after the operation doctors
could find no traces of the new genes. She recently had a bone marrow
transplant.

    The author of work in Edinburgh, Professor David Porteous, of the MRC Human
Genetics Unit and Edinburgh University, said: "There is a long way still to go
before we have a cure for cystic fibrosis, but we are moving in the right
direction."


LOAD-DATE: March 04, 1997


                              222 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 1, 1997, Saturday

SECTION: FEATURES; Page  46

LENGTH: 479 words

HEADLINE: GENERATION X

BYLINE: Pru Irvine

BODY:

    Ever since genetics became sexy, I've been terribly attracted to the idea of
gene therapy. It has a sort of gentle, masseur feel to it. I picture all my soft
and blobby genes swishing around in an aromatic bath of blue water, getting
clean and therapised. My husband, on the other hand, is upset at the way some
supermarkets are offering perfect, genetically engineered fruit and vegetables.
He bemoans the lack of seasonality and connects it with the arrival of the
perfect, tasteless bunch of baby grapes.  I love it all - the perfection of the
baby grape, its size and the fact that it's so expensive. All this appeals to my
inner need for new and exciting forms of retail therapy.  I just like therapy -
anything to make it all better.

    Of course, you can't buy gene therapy in the supermarket yet. Contrary to my
view of the world as a giant supermarket, it doesn't come in bottles.  And it's
all very well being seduced by the appliance of science over tasty morsels, but
the idea of the perfect grape sours when you think of the possibility of the
perfect person.

    The question of the perfect person raised its ugly head at the Scottish
Regional Fragile X conference recently. Although it's one of the most common
inherited forms of mental handicap, little has been known about Fragile X until
now. One of the guest speakers addressed the issue of prenatal screening and
gene therapy for Fragile X foetuses. I think it means that if, let's say, in 20
years' time, someone like me who has one Fragile X child already, becomes
pregnant, gets screened and discovers the next baby is mentally handicapped as
well, a brave new world of opportunity and choice opens up: have the baby as is,
have an abortion, or offer up the foetus to allow that all-important gene on the
X chromosome to be "turned on" again. We can imagine the consequences of the
first two choices.  And the third? Hello perfect, "normal" person - a blonde, I
imagine.

    When I compare Henry, my son who has Fragile X and suffers from "global
development delay with behavioural difficulties", to a genetically engineered
grape, I'm glad this gene therapy is not around yet. But when I think of him in
a supermarket, homicide comes to mind. Last weekend, for example, both my boys
insisted on coming shopping with me - Henry, who's four, because he thinks I'll
buy him sweets, and Lewis, eight, because he thinks I'll buy him anything he
wants with the right amount of pressure.  I'm already a bit sweaty, but it's my
angst not theirs, I keep telling myself. For God's sake, it's only the
supermarket. I spend the journey telling them what's going to happen if they
don't behave themselves.  Lewis looks sullen and Henry, who suffers from a
serious speech repetition disorder, repeats "behave selves" maybe 50 times.

    We get through fruit and veg without a hitch.  The trouble starts

LOAD-DATE: March 03, 1997


                              223 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          February 26, 1997, Wednesday

SECTION: TITLE; Page  1

LENGTH: 761 words

HEADLINE: The spectre of a human clone

BYLINE: Charles Arthur Science Editor Rupert Cornwell Washington

BODY:

    International calls for new laws to prevent the cloning of humans are
growing as the full implications of the cloning of a sheep by scientists in
Edinburgh begin to dawn.

    Some scientists even compared the possible effects on humanity to that of
the atomic bomb, while US President, Bill Clinton, said the cloning of Dolly the
sheep raised "serious ethical questions, particularly with respect to the
possible use of this technology to clone human embryos". He told a panel of
bioethics experts to report back to him in 90 days on the ethical and legal
implications of the Edinburgh work.

    Since the news first emerged on Sunday, the cloning breakthrough has
enthralled the US. That same day the story led the New York Times, the country's
most prestigious newspaper. It has dominated television news, provoked weighty
leading articles and provided endless grist for the talkshows.

    The fascination partly reflects an obsession with scientific and medical
news in a country where tenuous results from routine health studies make
front-page headlines. But it is also a measure of the ethical and legal
conundrums raised by the possible cloning of humans. In France Philippe Vasseur,
the farm minister, raised the bizarre spectre of "six-legged chickens" and
promised stiff new controls if the technology led to "monstrous" experiments
with nature.

    More material benefits of the work showed up in a booming share price for
PPL Therapeutics, which carried out the work with scientists at the Roslin
Institute in Edinburgh. PPL's shares have risen by more than one- third since
Monday morning, increasing its market value by pounds 25m.

    However, the Roslin scientists own no shares in the company, and will not
benefit directly from their breakthrough. The cloning technology has been
patented jointly by PPL and the Institute, though that might not prevent a
determined - and very wealthy - person from spending millions of pounds to put
together a cloning laboratory for their personal immortalisation.

    The UK, Spain, Germany, Canada and Denmark have laws against cloning humans,
as do some individual states in the US. France and Portugal also have very
restrictive laws on the use of cloning. But many countries do not. That has
raised the possibility that the publication tomorrow in Nature, the scientific
journal, of the technique involved in using a cell from an adult sheep to
produce Dolly could be used to clone people.

    Professor Martin Johnson, of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology
Authority, said yesterday: "The important thing isn't to raise fears about what
might go on in the UK , but elsewhere.  There's a general consensus that cloning
people would be negative, but the legal framework isn't unified." In the US, for
example, federal funds cannot be used to fund research on human embryos. But the
position is unclear for privately funded science.

    Joseph Rotblat, the British physicist who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1995
after battling for years against nuclear weapons, said: "My worry is that other
advances in science may result in other means of mass destruction, maybe more
readily available even than nuclear weapons. Genetic engineering is quite a
possible area, because of these dreadful developments that are taking place."

    It is still uncertain whether it would be possible to clone a human from an
adult cell. Dolly was produced by taking a cell from an adult sheep and putting
it into a "genetic coma". The nucleus and DNA of that cell were then put into an
unfertilised egg from which the DNA had been removed, and the resultant cell
implanted into a ewe.

    In theory the same principle might work in humans. But it has failed in
frogs and mice, because it is more difficult to put their cells into the
required form of genetic coma. Scientists instead now want to try the technique
on pigs and cows.

    Professor Grahame Bulfield, director of the Roslin Institute, insisted
yesterday that they would not allow cloning to be used in harmful ways, and
especially not for work on humans. Instead, he said, the breakthrough could in
the long term lead to a myriad of new ways to help humans. Herds of transgenic
animals could be farmed for proteins, blood and organs.  Gene therapy, with its
ability to replace faulty genes with good ones, could provide cures for fatal
diseases

    It could take years for the technology to be proven and field-tested
sufficiently to be licensed. But after that it could be worth millions of pounds
annually, with a huge number of applications.


LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1997


                              224 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          February 26, 1997, Wednesday

SECTION: TITLE; Page  1

LENGTH: 761 words

HEADLINE: The spectre of a human clone

BYLINE: Charles Arthur Science Editor Rupert Cornwell Washington

BODY:

    International calls for new laws to prevent the cloning of humans are
growing as the full implications of the cloning of a sheep by scientists in
Edinburgh begin to dawn.

    Some scientists even compared the possible effects on humanity to that of
the atomic bomb, while US President, Bill Clinton, said the cloning of Dolly the
sheep raised "serious ethical questions, particularly with respect to the
possible use of this technology to clone human embryos". He told a panel of
bioethics experts to report back to him in 90 days on the ethical and legal
implications of the Edinburgh work.

    Since the news first emerged on Sunday, the cloning breakthrough has
enthralled the US. That same day the story led the New York Times, the country's
most prestigious newspaper. It has dominated television news, provoked weighty
leading articles and provided endless grist for the talkshows.

    The fascination partly reflects an obsession with scientific and medical
news in a country where tenuous results from routine health studies make
front-page headlines. But it is also a measure of the ethical and legal
conundrums raised by the possible cloning of humans. In France Philippe Vasseur,
the farm minister, raised the bizarre spectre of "six-legged chickens" and
promised stiff new controls if the technology led to "monstrous" experiments
with nature.

    More material benefits of the work showed up in a booming share price for
PPL Therapeutics, which carried out the work with scientists at the Roslin
Institute in Edinburgh. PPL's shares have risen by more than one- third since
Monday morning, increasing its market value by pounds 25m.

    However, the Roslin scientists own no shares in the company, and will not
benefit directly from their breakthrough. The cloning technology has been
patented jointly by PPL and the Institute, though that might not prevent a
determined - and very wealthy - person from spending millions of pounds to put
together a cloning laboratory for their personal immortalisation.

    The UK, Spain, Germany, Canada and Denmark have laws against cloning humans,
as do some individual states in the US. France and Portugal also have very
restrictive laws on the use of cloning. But many countries do not. That has
raised the possibility that the publication tomorrow in Nature, the scientific
journal, of the technique involved in using a cell from an adult sheep to
produce Dolly could be used to clone people.

    Professor Martin Johnson, of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology
Authority, said yesterday: "The important thing isn't to raise fears about what
might go on in the UK , but elsewhere.  There's a general consensus that cloning
people would be negative, but the legal framework isn't unified." In the US, for
example, federal funds cannot be used to fund research on human embryos. But the
position is unclear for privately funded science.

    Joseph Rotblat, the British physicist who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1995
after battling for years against nuclear weapons, said: "My worry is that other
advances in science may result in other means of mass destruction, maybe more
readily available even than nuclear weapons. Genetic engineering is quite a
possible area, because of these dreadful developments that are taking place."

    It is still uncertain whether it would be possible to clone a human from an
adult cell. Dolly was produced by taking a cell from an adult sheep and putting
it into a "genetic coma". The nucleus and DNA of that cell were then put into an
unfertilised egg from which the DNA had been removed, and the resultant cell
implanted into a ewe.

    In theory the same principle might work in humans. But it has failed in
frogs and mice, because it is more difficult to put their cells into the
required form of genetic coma. Scientists instead now want to try the technique
on pigs and cows.

    Professor Grahame Bulfield, director of the Roslin Institute, insisted
yesterday that they would not allow cloning to be used in harmful ways, and
especially not for work on humans. Instead, he said, the breakthrough could in
the long term lead to a myriad of new ways to help humans. Herds of transgenic
animals could be farmed for proteins, blood and organs.  Gene therapy, with its
ability to replace faulty genes with good ones, could provide cures for fatal
diseases

    It could take years for the technology to be proven and field-tested
sufficiently to be licensed. But after that it could be worth millions of pounds
annually, with a huge number of applications.


LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1997


                              226 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          February 13, 1997, Thursday

SECTION: MANAGEMENT; Page  17

LENGTH: 923 words

HEADLINE: Cell certainties; If Darwinian competition between cells is analogous
to relationships between employees, what lessons can we draw?

BYLINE: Hugh Aldersey- Williams

BODY:

    Many of the most creative and successful enterprises turn out to be composed
of a cluster of no more than a few hundred people. This rule of thumb applies to
everything from advertising agencies to scientific research teams.

    Gerard Fairtlough, the founding chief executive of the biotechnology company
Celltech, is not the only person to have made this observation.  But he is the
only one to have developed it into a model for business organisation based on
the biological cell.

    In doing so, Fairtlough takes the business fashion for drawing metaphors
from the biological sciences to a new level of detail.

    Writing in the current issue of the Demos quarterly, the Financial Times
columnist Samuel Brittan acknowledges similarities between modern economics and
current theories of evolution: "In principle, economists try to derive their
theories from the behaviour of individuals maximising their utility within the
constraints of finite resources and limited time, while neo- Darwinists try to
take the principle down to the level of the gene in accounting for human
propensities."

    In business competition, consumers drive a selection process that favours
those companies best adapted to the market. Product innovation works like the
species variation that enables evolution to proceed.

    The analogy is not complete. There is no parallel in Darwin's theory for the
company that wilfully suppresses an innovation in order to maintain a cosy
status quo, for example. But it is sufficiently robust to be taken further.

    In his book Creative Compartments: A Design for Future Organisation
(Adamantine, 1994), Fairtlough shows how competition not between companies, but
between compartments within an organisation, can improve its fitness - just as
it does among the cells of an organism.

    Having led companies large and small, Fairtlough is keen to advise others
how to reshape their corporations, whatever their size, into such compartments.
"Within 10 years," he says, "there will be very few construction or
manufacturing activities that require more than a few hundred people."

    After working his way up to managing director at Shell Chemicals, Fairtlough
departed to make the fledgling Celltech his prototypical "creative compartment".

    These groups share certain skills, aims and concerns, he maintains. The
people within them communicate effectively and non-hierarchically. These
properties give creative compartments certain intrinsic qualities. For example,
it is these groups that are in reality responsible for the establishment of such
key criteria in competitiveness as the prevailing standards of excellence, even
though these may appear to be decreed by legislation or management.

    Celltech succeeded in part because it facilitated easy communication between
scientists and managers and between scientists of different disciplines.  In the
youthful field of biotechnology, old rules and hierarchies were rendered
invalid, as they often may be in a company where the ability to innovate is
crucial for success.

    The "cells" function well within themselves, and small companies are like
unicellular organisms, in Fairtlough's scheme of things. In large companies,
cells must communicate with one another as well as they must in large organisms.

    With an organisation structured in such a way, Fairtlough believes, good
things will emerge as if by magic, even though no one has instructed them to
happen or even imagined their possibility.

    And just as nature overproduces in order to guarantee survival, so a happily
constituted creative compartment will generate a plethora of ideas - many more,
in fact, than can realistically be used. Fortunately, Fairtlough also has ideas
on how to control and select from this overabundance of creativity.

    The biological models described by Brittan and Fairtlough are not valid in a
scientific sense; they are not even necessarily consistent. "These ideas are
abstracted from biology because they seem useful, not because they are
rigorously applicable to the way people organise themselves," says Fairtlough.
They should be seen in the context not of rigorous science, but of the - highly
fallible - models conventionally used by economists.  "These models aid thinking
and creativity but they in no way prove anything about the way things work and
shouldn't occasion particular expectations."

    Following his own advice, Fairtlough pruned back once again in his business
activity, becoming chairman of a new biotechnology start-up company, Therexsys.
The appointment fulfilled a condition imposed by venture capitalists that the
company should have professional top management. In a second round of
capitalisation last year, Therexsys raised pounds 22m, sufficient to see it
through several years of research and development in its quest for alternative
gene therapies that do not rely for their efficacy on potentially troublesome
viruses. Last October, Fairtlough stepped aside for David Gibbons, formerly
chairman of the Abbott UK pharmaceuticals company, to take over the helm.

    Fairtlough is currently working with the Demos think-tank on a new
publication extending his ideas into the social sphere. Democracy itself would
work better if society were reorganised into creative compartments, he says.

    "These are not luvvie communities where nothing gets done," he maintains.
Creative compartments, whether in business or society at large, are task-
oriented. "People get real when they have responsibilities"n


LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1997


                              227 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           January 30, 1997, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Page  2

LENGTH: 178 words

HEADLINE: GENETICS: Hope for spine injury treatment

BYLINE: Charles Arthur

BODY:

    Spinal injuries and damage to the central nervous system could eventually be
repaired using genetic technology, following the discovery by American and Swiss
scientists of a gene which makes nerves regrow. They report in today's edition
of the science journal Nature that a gene known as bcl-2, which produces a
protein of the same name, helped severed nerve axons in mice to regrow.

    The finding is significant because axons, unlike other body cells, do not
spontaneously regenerate after injury. This is why cranial or spinal injuries -
such as that suffered by the actor Christopher Reeve - are almost always
permanent.

    Future treatments might use gene therapy, attaching a human form of the
bcl-2 gene to affected nerves, or supplying the protein it makes to affected
sites. The researchers, from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the
Glaxo Institute in Geneva, say their finding "provides a basis for the design of
new therapeutic strategies for treatment of brain and spinal injuries, as well
as many neurodegenerative diseases".


LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1997


                              232 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                               December 13, 1996

SECTION: Pg. 35

LENGTH: 254 words

BODY:



    AIM debutant Oxford BioMedica opened trading today at a massive discount to
its offer price as the jittery stock market and a row with the underwriters
during the week left market-makers nervous of the biotech stock.

    The cancer and HIV gene therapy company was due to launch on the junior
stock market with a price of 88p per share, valuing the company at just over £50
million.

    Market-makers, however, were showing an indicative mid-price before trading
of 44 1/2p.

    When the market opened the stock was traded at 42 1/2p before rising to 50
1/2p in mid-morning buying.


LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1996


                              233 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          December 11, 1996, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Page  2

LENGTH: 91 words

HEADLINE: 'Breakthrough'on arthritis

BODY:

    A 68-year-old American woman has become the first recipient of gene therapy
to treat rheumatoid arthritis, scientists said yesterday.

    Initial results of the trial at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center
indicate that the insertion of a new, anti-arthritic gene into the patient was
successful. It is not known whether the protein will continue to inhibit the
disease in the long term, but it is being hailed as a breakthrough which paves
the way for a new approach. The disease affects about 600,000 people in the UK.
Liz Hunt


LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1996


                              234 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          December 11, 1996, Wednesday

SECTION: THE COMMENTATORS; Page  15

LENGTH: 1181 words

HEADLINE: Nothing to fear from techno-corn; Genetic engineers have encountered
apathy and uninformed hostility from the public

BYLINE: Nicholas Schoon

BODY:

    Within the next 20 years something, somewhere, is going to go badly wrong
with genetic engineering. A man-made species of bacterium, virus, plant or
animal will take on an uncontrollable life of its own and cause havoc. Grave
economic damage will be done, and dozens, perhaps hundreds, of people will be
killed.

    There will be an outcry followed by a succession of inquests, public
inquiries, perhaps even a Royal Commission. Politicians and the press will
demand ministerial resignations and the multiple warnings made in the Seventies
and Eighties about the inherent dangers in the new technology of swapping genes
between unrelated species will be dug up and triumphantly flourished with cries
of "You were warned."

    People will recall the mad cow epidemic, which killed several hundred (it
could be several thousand) people - most of them Britons - between 1995 and
2015. They will recite the old, old wisdom, that to go against nature is to
invite calamity. Just as feeding the ground-up remains of dead cattle to live
cattle was weird, wrong, asking for trouble, so too is shifting a gene which
evolved in a bacterium or a plant into an animal - or vice versa.

    They may recall a speech of King Charles, made when he was still Prince of
Wales, to organic farmers in September 1996. "I believe we have now reached a
moral and ethical watershed," he said. "What actual right do we have to
experiment, Frankenstein-like, with the very stuff of life?"

    But after a few weeks or months the fuss will die away. Why? Because society
will quietly, grudgingly, accept that genetic engineering has become
indispensable and that the benefits this technology has brought vastly outweigh
the damages it has wrought.

    By 2016 a vast range of gene therapies, drugs, industrial chemicals, food
additives, crop plants and farm animals will be produced using this technology.
The global turnover of these industries will have run into trillions of pounds
and they will have saved or extended millions of human lives.

    Genetic engineering was invented a quarter-century ago, mainly by US
geneticists and biochemists. They developed a toolkit of enzymes and techniques
for snipping DNA, the extraordinarily long hereditary molecule shared by
virtually all life forms, in a predictable, repeatable way. They found out how
to move fragments of DNA carrying entire genes between different kinds of
bacteria and viruses.

    The mind-boggling implications of this were instantly recognised. Mankind
could take a selected attribute from one creature and transfer it to a
completely unrelated one. Thus a bacterium could be made to make insulin, the
indispensable human hormone which diabetics lack.

    The dangers were also recognised at the time. What if a man-made organism
also acquired a destructive attribute and was able to flourish, out of control?
These fears led to a brief moratorium on genetic engineering research in the
mid-Seventies.

    Having satisfied themselves and governments that these fears were
exaggerated, the researchers continued, aided by a flood of stock-market money
pouring into the new genetic engineering firms. But making the new technology
work turned out to be much harder than had been hoped.

    Even the simplest bacterium is an extraordinarily complex machine.
Persuading it to take in an alien gene from an unrelated species and incorporate
it so that it was passed on from generation to generation was hard enough.
Getting it to express that gene vigorously - using it to make copious quantities
of the enzyme or hormone which the gene "coded" for and was the desired end
product, was harder still.

    Those difficulties caused delays and disillusion with the development of
genetic engineering in the Eighties. Now, however, the new technology is rushing
into our lives. There are dozens of products from medicine, agriculture and
industry which rely on GMOs - genetically modified organisms.  Already a variety
of common food additives (vitamins, amino acids) across the Western world are
made using GMOs.

    And Europe is about to receive much more GMO food. For the United States,
the country which has done most to develop the technology and debate its
application, has decided to allow GMO varieties of two of its most important
crops, sweet corn and soya, to be grown in large quantities for the first time
this year. They have already been harvested, mixed with the ordinary kind of
grain and bean and exported.

    The European Union has licensed use of this soya, which has been modified to
make it resistant to a weedkiller. It has not yet given approval to the
genetically modified sweet corn, which belongs to the Swiss drugs and chemicals
giant CIBA, even though it has now reached Europe.

    Corn and soya are used in a variety of processed foods and the US is the
biggest exporter of these crops - so very soon products with some GMO content
will be splattered all over the supermarket shelves. Free trade and the American
decision to embrace the new technology have made a mockery of the intention of
Britain's supermarkets to label all foods containing GMOs because that is what
their customers wanted.

    Were they to stick with that policy, they would soon either have to label a
huge variety of products or begin "negative labelling". That means sourcing
products which have no GMO content, and declaring them as such. Because such
products will soon be minority items, they will also become more expensive.

    The large number of geneticists who have wanted the maximum of public
information and debate about the appliance of their new science find this deeply
frustrating. For years they have been trying to make the public and the press
take an interest in genetic engineering, battling against the fact that you
really need to understand molecular genetics to at least A-level standard to
grapple with it.

    There have been several symposia and exercises aimed at making ordinary
people judge the new technology on an informed basis. But mostly the scientists
and a handful of policy makers have encountered apathy and uninformed hostility
from the public and press alike. And now, abruptly, genetic engineering has
arrived in our midst en masse.

    It sounds, and is, a regrettable state of affairs. But we ought to be
optimistic about the abilities of our societies to handle new technologies.  By
and large, we embrace them only if the benefits outweigh the costs - and we also
try, continuously, to reduce those costs. Think of the car as an example.

    If a technology turns out to be a loser, we are also capable of rejecting
it. Think of nuclear power, which is in retreat across most of the world despite
decades of backing from the most powerful organisations in the world, the
governments of nation states.

    Genetic engineering will bring mishaps and stupidities in its wake. But,
overall, it's highly likely to be a good thing, for which the benefits
handsomely outweigh the risks. Enjoy the corn. Enjoy the beans. They may have
been snuck in on us, but they'll still make a wholesome meal.


LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1996


                              235 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            December 9, 1996, Monday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Page  18

LENGTH: 499 words

HEADLINE: Science: Theoretically ...

BODY:

    Faces aren't enough to recognise a person, according to researchers at the
Massachussetts Institute of Technology, who report in Nature. Countering the
long-standing thinking that we remember a face by storing data about relative
positions of eyes, nose and mouth, they say that you also need to know about
shape and position of their head. They demonstrated the effect using digitally
manipulated pictures of Bill Clinton and Al Gore.  Where they found people who
could remember what Mr Gore looks like isn't recorded.

    Why don't models of ozone depletion in the Arctic match reality? Because,
say a team in Paris in the latest Nature, the computer models can't reproduce
the tiny variations in spatial distribution of the ozone-eating chemicals.
These could account for big discrepancies between forecast and observed ozone
depletion around the North Pole, they say. While models work well with the
Antarctic, the polar air circulation is less uniform in our hemisphere. To back
up their suggestion, the researchers used an ultra high-resolution model to show
that ozone depletion really is sensitive to small-scale differences. For the
winter of 1994-95, the effect is large enough to account for the Arctic ozone
depletion being 40 per cent greater than models predicted.

    The River Nile's great bend, where it zigzags from its northerly path to
head southwest for almost 200 miles before heading north again, is probably due
to tectonic forces. A report in Science based on radar-sensing data from the
Nasa space shuttle suggests that the southwesterly movement is comparatively
recent, caused by geological uplift from faults in younger rock beneath it. The
northwards flow dates from Precambrian strata. So it's not civil engineering to
make the cruises longer.

    Family-linked cases of Alzheimer's disease tend to occur at an earlier age
than the "spontaneous" forms. The role of the genetic link - a gene known as PS2
- is becoming clearer. New US research has found that PS2 mutation produces a
molecule which makes neurons more likely to commit "cell suicide" (apoptosis).
Perhaps, say the team at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda,
Maryland, the molecule makes neurons more sensitive to the "normal insults" of
ageing, adding to the toxic burden in the patients' brains.

    Massively fat, diabetic and infertile: it's no fun being a mouse deficient
in leptin. That's the hormone encoded by the "Ob" (for obese) gene which helps
you lose weight by suppressing appetite and stimulating your metabolism.  But as
dieters will have suspected, leptin isn't the only player in the weight
charades. A neuropeptide called NPY, known to regulate energy balance, reaches
high levels in leptin-deficient mice. But mice that don't produce leptin or NPY
are less obese than their leptin-deficient mates and suffer less from diabetes
or sterility. Gene therapy for weight loss? The day might not be far off. It's
just that you would have to mediate a lot of genes.


LOAD-DATE: December 09, 1996


                              236 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           November 25, 1996, Monday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Page  20

LENGTH: 441 words

HEADLINE: Theoretically

BODY:

    "Like assembling a snowflake in a blast furnace" was how one scientist at
the Fermi National Accelerator in Batavia, Illinois, described the process of
making antimatter here on Earth. But the Fermilab last week made seven atoms of
antihydrogen - a positron and an antiproton. That was first achieved in January
by Europe's CERN, but the Fermilab hopes to go into mass production of
antimatter.

    Aspirin's wonder drug status has been further enhanced: it protects against
nerve cell death. A team in Italy has reported in Science how giving it to rats,
in the concentrations used to treat chronic muscle and joint inflammation, also
prevents the neurotransmitter glutamate from killing neurons. That's on top of
aspirin's ability to lessen the risk of strokes and heart attacks when taken
over the long term. It's cheap, too.

    Gene hunters are closing in on two more diseases. Millennium Pharmaceuticals
of Cambridge, Massachusettsidentified a gene that leads to type II diabetes,
which makes up about 90 per cent of cases. Meanwhile a team at the National
Center for Human Genome Research in Bethesda, Maryland, narrowed the search for
a gene mutation implicated in 3 per cent of prostate cancers to part of
chromosome 1. They now intend to pin down the exact location for the gene, which
causes about one-third of hereditary prostate cancers.

    Maize really is strange stuff, say a team who have studied its genome and
found it to be full of genetic additions that could weaken, kill or drastically
alter the plant's cells - but don't. The extra material resembles retroviruses -
which insert their genetic material into that of the host (HIV is a well-known
example). Some may be fragments of infectious retroviruses picked up in the
plant's evolution. Maize somehow stops damage from the extra genetic material by
keeping it away from active genes.  The data could give genetic engineers a
better blueprint to change maize plants, and perhaps help to develop more
efficient techniques for human gene therapy.

    Fish that change sex - yes, again. A British report two weeks ago said it
was all the fault of natural oestrogen rather than chemicals from the Pill.
Dutch scientists now say that chemicals in the environment are causing the
trouble. Sylvia Gimeno and colleagues in Delft told Nature that they exposed
young carp to TPP, a common industrial chemical. In common with another group of
fish exposed to oestrogen, male fish developed an oviduct, which female fish use
to lay eggs. The team suggested using their test to check the effects of other
chemicals in the environment.  What the fish think isn't clear.


LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1996


                              237 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          November 21, 1996, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Page  27

LENGTH: 364 words

HEADLINE: Gates and Allen take stake in Chiroscience

BYLINE: Magnus Grimond

BODY:

    Bill Gates and Paul Allen, the two founders of US software giant Microsoft,
will emerge with a 6 per cent stake in Chiroscience, the British biotechnology
group, following a $ 120m (pounds 72m) takeover deal announced yesterday.

    Chiroscience is buying Darwin Molecular Corporation, a US gene-based drug
discovery company started in 1991 with backing from Messrs Gates and Allen and
several venture capital groups.

    The all-share deal will see the two men convert their 14 per cent stakes in
Darwin for holdings of slightly more than 3 per cent each in Chiroscience.

    The news initially sent shares in the British group 24p higher and they
settled 10p up at 358.5p

    Darwin is involved in investigating the human genetic make-up to determine
whether people's genes predispose them to diseases such as cancer and asthma.
Chiroscience hopes that the combination of Darwin's gene discovery capability
with its own expertise in "chiral" chemistry - a way of purifying compounds -
will enhance its ability to discover new drugs. The group has already identified
key genes involved in two genetic disorders, Werner's Syndrome, which
accelerates the ageing process, and early-stage Alzheimer's disease. It is also
claims to be on the way to identifying genes involved in psoriasis and
osteoporosis, or brittle bone disease.

    Mr Gates welcomed the deal yesterday. "There is a strong synergy between
these two companies which should accelerate the translation of Darwin's
excellent science into therapeutic products. This merger is the right move for
both companies."

    Those sentiments were echoed by John Padfield, Chiroscience chief executive.
"This deal creates a unique bio-science company. Nothing similar exists in the
biotech world which goes from gene to drug."

    Dr Padfield described Darwin as a drug-hunting company, not involved in
genome sequencing or gene therapy.

    The idea would be for the combined group to identify a gene target, then
some molecules to hit the target, followed by the development of a suitable
drug.

    "The aim is to build a broad portfolio of targets and molecules. It improves
your hit rates," he said.

    Comment, page 23


LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1996


                              241 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            July 18, 1996, Thursday

SECTION: COMMENTATORS; Page  17

LENGTH: 1098 words

HEADLINE: Abortion: why we must think again; Women now have complete freedom to
choose whether to continue a pregnancy. But society should not tolerate the
consequences

BYLINE: BRYAN APPLEYARD

BODY:

    Partial birth abortion involves withdrawing the foetus until only the head
remains inside, then piercing the skull and sucking the brains out until the
head collapses. It is routinely used in America, but it is not known how often
it happens in this country. A recent Parliamentary question from David Alton
failed to elicit a figure from the Department of Health. Meanwhile, more than 50
MPs have signed an Early Day Motion, promoted by the Tory Elizabeth Peacock,
attacking the practice.

    Of course, the more familiar suction method of abortion - in which the
foetus emerges in pieces which have to be counted to ensure nothing has been
left behind - might be said to be just as horrific as partial birth.  Either way
a human body is butchered by the doctors.

    So maybe Mrs Peacock's motion is irrelevant to the abortion debate.  The
details of abortion are always going to be nasty and they only add an emotional
layer to an ethical argument already clouded, especially in the US, by
irrational and occasionally lethal outbursts. Pro-lifers in this country are not
so fierce and, as a result, most people probably think the abortion debate is an
issue of the past.

    This is a big mistake. The real abortion debate has yet to begin. It is now
almost 30 years since abortion was legalised and things have gone badly wrong.

    There are now 184,000 terminations annually in this country and 98 per cent
of them are done for social reasons. Abortion is in effect available on demand -
something that was specifically not intended by Parliament - and even the clause
that allowed a social justification was added only as an afterthought during the
bill's progress. Furthermore, subsequent legislation, although reducing the
legal limit on foetal age from 28 to 24 weeks, also made later abortions legal
in cases of handicap. But, since handicap was not defined, almost any disorder,
however mild, can now be used as a justification.

    So it is evident that, because of the way legislation has been framed, a
huge gap has opened up between the pro-choice rhetoric of the Sixties and the
actual practice of abortion. Abortion is available on demand when it was never
intended to be and the hard cases - rape, incest and disability - which were
used to convince people of the justice of the cause now only account for 2 per
cent of terminations.

    Maybe, even in the light of these facts, Parliament does not want to return
to these difficult matters. But, sadly for quietist MPs, developments are likely
to make things worse.

    First there is the matter of foetal suffering. Today a pro-life group of
MPs, which includes Mrs Peacock, is to issue a report based on medical evidence
- notably from Professor Nicholas Fisk at Queen Charlotte's Hospital in London -
that strongly suggests that the foetus feels the pain of abortion.  This raises
a serious moral challenge to pro-choicers. It means, if true, that the foetus is
not a mere piece of the mother, but a sentient being.  The element of innocent
pain enters the abortion calculus.

    Secondly, we are at the start of an era in which there will be more reasons
than ever to abort. The expanding science of genetics is transforming our
ability to diagnose pre-natally. Assuming, as is likely, cheap and safe methods
of isolating foetal cells are found, then, by reading the DNA, we shall soon be
able to provide a bewildering array of forecasts about our child's future.

    We can already know, for example, if the foetus carries any of the 4,000
rare but often disastrous single-gene disorders, such as cystic fibrosis,
muscular dystrophy or Huntingdon's chorea. The next stage - on which billions of
pounds of research funds are being spent - is to identify the genes involved in
the more common polygenic disorders. These may include heart disease, cancer,
schizophrenia and manic depression. And they may also include conditions we
might not regard as disorders at all - a predisposition to homosexuality,
shortness or even a tendency to criminal behaviour.

    Huge problems arise with these kind of diagnoses. They will often, for
example, be presented in statistical terms - your child has an X per cent chance
of being schizophrenic or having a heart attack by the age of 40.  Do you abort
and try for something better? They will also create a new category of illness,
in which people who are perfectly healthy at the moment might be considered to
be diseased because of their genetic make- up. But the most serious problem is
that the only treatment doctors can offer for most genetic disorders is
abortion.

    Pre-natal testing is all about abortion. Geneticists may argue that knowing
you are predisposed to heart disease gives you vital information which will
encourage you to modify your lifestyle. But such testing can be done after
birth. Testing before birth is just a way of leaving the abortion option open.

    This will continue to be the case for the foreseeable future. In spite of
the deluge of stories about scientists finding the genes for disease or
behavioural abnormalities - happiness was the latest - the reality is that there
is, as yet, no sure route from the gene to treatment. Nobody can yet be said
with certainty to have been cured by gene therapy and devising new drugs on the
basis of genetic insights is a slow process that will not necessarily be
successful. Furthermore, there is intense controversy over whether genes are the
whole story. The idea of genes "for" something may yet prove far too simple an
approach to have any medical relevance.

    The one certainty is that pre-natal testing and genetic information will
increase rapidly in the next decade and the one sure treatment - abortion - will
ever more frequently be applied. The handicap clause on our legislation may be
invoked not just to cover muscular dystrophy but also predisposition to heart
disease or even potential for criminality.  By then it should be absolutely
clear that our legal framework is largely meaningless.

    Of course, hard pro-choicers will still say parental freedom must be
protected - an unwanted child is a worse crime than abortion and reproductive
decisions are too intimate for the state to get involved. But more lucid
thinkers will see that society has an interest in its future and cannot simply
stand by while an avalanche of technology, much based on highly speculative
science, promotes fundamental changes in our social structures.  Mrs Peacock is
right to try and stimulate the "yuk" response in her fellow MPs. Abortion is the
issue of the future, not the past.


LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1996


                              250 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             May 1, 1996, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Page  4

LENGTH: 286 words

HEADLINE: Hospital at the heart of Britain

BODY:

    The Royal Brompton Hospital NHS Trust today launches a new campaign, backed
by Mirror Group newspapers, to establish itself as a national and European
centre for heart and lung medicine.

    The Heart of Britain campaign aims to get people "cardiactive" and reduce
the risk of heart disease while raising funds for the trust to strengthen its
treatment and research programmes.

    The Royal Brompton, founded in 1844, has a long history of "medical firsts",
including the first heart/lung transplant in the UK; the first umbrella device
to close holes in the heart of "blue babies"; and the first use of a heart laser
to treat patients with intractable angina.

    The hospital houses the largest unit in the UK for treatment of occupational
and environmental asthma, and the largest cystic fibrosis unit in Europe, caring
for 800-plus patients. Doctors and scientists from the hospital are at the
leading edge of research into gene therapy for this disease.

    The highlight of the Heart of Britain campaign coincides with the British
Heart Foundation's British Heart Week - from 29 June to 7 July - when members of
the public will be invited to take part in an open photographic competition,
reflecting their view of the Heart of Britain in nine categories.  These
include, Tomorrow's Britain, Young Britain, Caring Britain, Animal Britain, and
Good Time Britain.

    The 300 best photographs will be published in a full colour book sold to
generate funds for the hospital. The entry fee for the competition is pounds 2
for up to three prints and pounds 5 for up to 10 prints, with all proceeds going
to the campaign.

    t For more details of the campaign and the competition, telephone 0171 351
8571.


LOAD-DATE: May 01, 1996


                              251 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 15, 1996, Monday

SECTION: ESSAY; Page  13

LENGTH: 1654 words

HEADLINE: Do our genes control us?

BYLINE: Michael Rutter

BODY:

    Hardly a week goes by without a startling discovery in genetic research.
Last week, one of the most startling yet was delivered - isolation of a gene
which might help explain why we age.

    Genetic research means we might identify what causes previously intractable
illnesses and disorders. Four thousand of the estimated 50,000 to 100,000 genes
that provide the blueprint for our development have been identified.  Almost all
of them may be known within a decade.

    This research once concentrated almost exclusively on explaining hereditary
components in conditions such as haemophilia or disorders such as schizophrenia.
Yet it may be possible soon to test every facet of our genetic inheritance.
Some of the most radical new geneticists say it is becoming possible to identify
genes which may encourage depression, religious commitment and alcoholism.

    It is this development which worries people who fear genetic discoveries
will be misused to stigmatise groups of people. More prosaically, the idea that
we might find genetic explanations for behaviour throws up a host of ethical and
moral questions. Could gene tests be used to discriminate against people in
employment or insurance? Could genetic engineering create a master race of
children with perfect personalities and features?

    Here, we publish an essay by Professor Michael Rutter, arguably Britain's
leading genetic researcher and certainly one of its most controversial.  He
argues for a new synthesis between nature and nurture, genetic and environmental
explanations for behaviour, a synthesis which allows for the influence of
genetics, but only by admitting how complex that influence is. We plan further
contributions to the genetics debate in coming weeks.

    The old-fashioned notion that nature and nurture act as separate,
independent influences is dead. Rather, genetic evidence has been crucial in
indicating how the interplay between the two may operate. Of course, to study
that interplay, it is necessary to use research methods that differentiate
genetic and environmental effects. Advances in molecular genetics that allow
actual genes to be identified take things a step further. We can now find out
what genes actually do. Genes "code for" (influence) proteins, not behaviour; it
makes no sense to talk of a gene for crime. The path between a gene, the protein
it produces and behaviour involves a new search, which will be indirect and
uncertain, dealing in tendencies and possibilities.

    Quantitative genetic studies have shown that both genetic and environmental
factors are influential in variations in almost all kinds of human behaviour.
The relative strength of genetic and environmental effects varies across
behaviour, as well as across social circumstances. Nevertheless, it would be a
fair generalisation to say the strength of genetic and environmental effects on
human behaviour is roughly equal.

    That does not sound a very exciting conclusion but it incorporates some
findings that shape our thinking about nature and nurture in several important,
and surprising, ways.

    To begin with, it firmly rejects any biologically deterministic view that
genes could directly cause human behaviours. That is not how genes work and, in
any case, environmental influences play a major role. Yet there is an equally
necessary parallel rejection of environmental determinism.

    People vary enormously in their behaviour; in part, this may reflect their
upbringing or social circumstances, but in an equal part, it is likely to
reflect their genes.

    Three aspects of this finding tend to take people aback. First, genetics can
affect characteristics such as religiosity or empathy as well as disorders such
as schizophrenia or autism. It is not that genes determine religious beliefs;
that would be ridiculous. But they do play a contributory (not deterministic)
role in shaping personality features that influence how likely it is that a
person will become heavily committed to religious beliefs. Genes, of course,
will not determine the specific content of those beliefs.

    Second, genetics also affects differences in people's experiences of stress
or adversity. Initially, that sounds implausible, but genes come into the
picture in two main ways. Parents pass on genes as well as experiences to their
children and, to some extent, the two are connected. Parents who get drunk and
quarrel are providing a discordant, disruptive family environment. But genes
will be playing a role in the personality characteristics that make them such
difficult parents and these genes will be passed on, too. It becomes an
important question - do behavioural risks to children reared in such families
come from genes or environment (or a mixture of the two).

    The other role of genes comes from the fact that, by our behaviour, we all
shape and select our environments. For example, some children are popular,
well-liked by all, and tend to be the centre of rewarding "fun" activities.
Others are disliked, rejected or isolated, left out of birthday parties and last
chosen for favoured activities. The life experiences of these two groups of
children will be quite different, and that will influence their behaviour.  But
the fact that their experiences are so different will be in part a consequence
of what they are like as people, and genes will have helped shape those personal
characteristics.

    The third finding that tends to surprise people is that genes can influence
traits such as sociability or emotionality, and not just diseases. Such
genetically influenced characteristics play an important part in making people
susceptible to serious mental disorders.

    There is a general recognition that some diseases are inherited; most people
know about cystic fibrosis or haemophilia. In the field of mental disorders,
too, it is recognised that there are rare hereditary conditions such as
Huntington's disease. How could the same thinking apply to depression,
alcoholism or antisocial behaviour? It doesn't. But most medical conditions have
multiple causes. For example, you don't inherit heart attacks, but genetic
factors play a role in cholesterol levels and these constitute part of the risk
pattern behind coronary artery disease.

    Take another example. A few weeks ago, two groups of scientists reported
localising a gene that contributed to a personality feature usually called
novelty seeking or sensation seeking. Two aspects of this finding aroused
excitement in the scientific community; first, this feature plays a part in the
liability to engage in anti-social behaviour and, second, the gene is concerned
with neurotransmitters in the brain thought to influence behaviour.

    It is too early as yet to know whether the finding will hold up but it
carries the promise of beginning to understand how genetic factors might play a
role in some types of anti-social behaviour. If science could deliver on that
promise, it would be immensely useful in planning better programmes of
prevention and intervention.

    Some crucial caveats, however, have to be inserted. First, sensation-
seeking is only one of several factors that might be behind anti-social
behaviour; in no way does it constitute the cause. Second, seeking novelty is
not in itself a bad thing. It may lead to mountaineering, or the stock market or
scientific discovery, or crime. The next challenge, then, is to discover
circumstances which lead this trait to have beneficial outcomes rather than
adverse ones.

    Three consequences follow. Genes cannot be divided into "good" genes and
"bad" genes. Only very rarely will it make sense to think of gene therapy to
replace supposedly "bad" genes. As several genes are involved and because they
are influential only alongside environmental factors, genetic discoveries should
not be used to label individuals. The potential of genetic research lies in the
discovery of how causal processes work and not in individual prediction.

    A crucial feature of genetic studies lies in their power to demonstrate the
true extent of environmental influences of behaviour. A few examples serve to
illustrate this little-appreciated strength of genetic research.  A study of
twins, which makes it easier to identify genetic and environmental influences,
has shown that much of the genetic risk of people having major depressive
disorders lies in the genetic influence on the development of neuroticism, or
emotionality. This genetic influence seems to operate, in part, by creating a
vulnerability to environmental stresses.

    A more striking example is schizophrenia, a mental disorder that involves a
strong genetic component. Psychiatrists have long been puzzled by the
observation that schizophrenia is much commoner in people in the UK of
Afro-Caribbean origin. The finding that it is not more common in those actually
living in the Caribbean points strongly to the operation of some sort of
environmentally mediated, psycho-social risk.

    This whole field of research points to some important issues for which some
sort of environmental explanation is likely to be required. For example, the
rise in recent decades in frequency of suicide in young males (but not in older
people) cannot be attributed to genes - the gene pool does not change that
quickly. Similarly, the explanation for the US murder rate being 15 times that
in the UK will not be due to genes (it is more likely due to lack of gun
control).

    If the challenge of understanding how the interplay operates is to be met,
genetic researchers, psychosocial researchers and developmental researchers must
work together in ways that has happened all too rarely in the past.  That is
what the Social, Genetic, and Developmental Psychiatry Research Centre has been
set up to achieve.

    Professor Michael Rutter is honorary director of the MRC Child Psychiatry
Unit, Institute of Psychiatry, in London.


LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1996


                              252 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 15, 1996, Monday

SECTION: COMMENT; Page  14

LENGTH: 44 words

HEADLINE: Letter: 150 years of gloom

BYLINE: Shirley Coulson

BODY:

    Sir: You report (12 April) that "gene therapy or drugs might prolong active
human life to 150 years".

    If only the rest of the day's news had encouraged me to think that this
would be a good thing.

    Shirley Coulson

    Milton Keynes,

    Buckinghamshire


LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1996


                              254 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 12, 1996, Friday

SECTION: TITLE; Page  1

LENGTH: 359 words

HEADLINE: Scientists unlock the key to mortality

BYLINE: TOM WILKIE

BODY:

    A gene that controls ageing has been found by US researchers, raising the
possibility that gene therapy or drugs might prolong active human life to 150
years.

    By isolating and identifying the gene, researchers hope they may be able to
devise treatments that could slow the process of ageing. A team led by Dr Gerard
Schellenberg at the Veterans Health Care System, in Seattle, report the gene's
discovery in today's issue of the US journal, Science.

    They discovered the gene by looking at people with Werner's syndrome - a
form of premature ageing - which results from inheriting an abnormal variant of
the gene. There are estimated to be up to 1,000 people with Werner's syndrome in
Britain, according to Professor Sydney Shall, an expert on the disease at Sussex
University. The average age of death is 45, but some last until their 50s, he
said.

    Professor Shall speculated that Werner's syndrome might actually have been
the primordial human standard and that "normal" people evolved the extra gene to
acquire our present longevity.

    The gene appears to slow ageing. "What if we put in another one?", he asked.
"One hundred and fifty years is not an unreasonable human lifespan and we are
talking about healthy, vigorous life."

    People with Werner's develop normally until about the age of 10, when they
stop growing, and adults seldom exceed 5ft. By their 30s they have severe
atherosclerosis - narrowing of the arteries associated with old age. They can
develop diabetes in their 30s, cancer, osteoporosis and rheumatoid arthritis.
"They look twice as old as they really are," Professor Shall said.

    Body cells taken from patients with Werner's syndrome have "dramatic and
odd" limitations when cultured in the laboratory. They stop growing some five or
six times faster than normal cells. "The positive function of the gene is to
keep cells growing for a much longer time," professor Shall said.

    It appears that the protein produced by the gene has a role in unzipping the
double helix of DNA. The identification of the gene will allow parents to have a
prenatal diagnosis where there is a risk to a foetus.


LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1996


                              255 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 12, 1996, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Page  3

LENGTH: 331 words

HEADLINE: Scientists point way to a life of 150 years

BYLINE: TOM WILKIE Science Editor

BODY:

    A gene that controls ageing has been found by US researchers, raising the
possibility that gene therapy or drugs might prolong active human life to 150
years. or longer.

    By isolating and identifying the gene, researchers hope they may be able to
devise treatments that could slow the process of ageing.

    A team led by Dr Gerard Schellenberg at the Veterans Health Care System, in
Seattle, together with the Darwin Molecular company, reports the gene's
discovery in today's issue of the US journal, Science.

    They discovered the gene by looking at people with Werner's syndrome - a
form of premature ageing - which results from inheriting an abnormal variant of
the gene. There are an estimated 1,000 people with Werner's syndrome in Britain,
according to Professor Sydney Shall, an expert on the disease at Sussex
University. The average age of death is 45, but some last until their 50s.

    Professor Shall suggested Werner's syndrome may have been the primordial
human standard, while "normal" people evolved the extra gene to acquire our
present longevity.

    The gene appears to slow ageing. "What if we put in another one?" he asked.
"One hundred and fifty years is not an unreasonable human lifespan and we are
talking about healthy, vigorous life, not sick old people, not 25 years of
sitting in a bath chair."

    Scientists have already transplanted genes to correct inherited diseases,
such as cystic fibrosis.

    People with Werner's develop normally until they are about 10, when they
stop growing.  By their 30s they have severe atherosclerosis - narrowing of the
arteries associated with old age, and can develop diabetes, cancer, osteoporosis
and rheumatoid arthritis.

    n Men who find themselves becoming grumpier and more forgetful as they grow
older may now have an explanation.

    Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania found that men's brains shrink
as they grow older, with slowing of response time and a loss of sense of humour.


LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1996


                              256 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 5, 1996, Friday

SECTION: COMMENT; Page  21

LENGTH: 1185 words

HEADLINE: Revenge of the mutant organisms; Our trust in biotechnology and faith
in the quick fix expose our ignorance - and leave us vulnerable

BYLINE: BRYAN APPLEYARD

BODY:

    Unnoticed beneath the mounds of mad cows last week was a strange
coincidence. While ministers struggled with the nuances of scientific truth and
the voter appeal of beef burning, a small document crept quietly out of the
Prime Minister's office. This document was also about science and rogue
fragments of organic chemistry. But it was not about cows, it was about GMOs -
genetically modified organisms.

    To understand the full resonance of this coincidence it is necessary to
understand what the mad cow story is really about. It is about a group of people
who, like the Bourbons, remember everything and learn nothing.  Who exactly
these people are I don't know, but they are evidently technologists and
scientists of some kind. What they did was feed sheep to cows just as they
previously fed hens to hens. As a result they probably transferred the
malevolent prion that causes BSE and CJD across the species barrier first to
cows and then to us.

    This was a stupid thing to do because, as anybody with any biological
knowledge could have told them, creating such a dietary closed circuit would
instantly magnify any risk factors. It was doubly stupid because it echoed a
mistake made by an earlier generation of technologists who blithely killed
insects with DDT while assuring the world that the amounts involved were too
small to affect other creatures.In fact, they simply did not understand the
system with which they were tinkering - the DDT also killed birds because of the
concentrating effects of the food chain.  With both BSE and DDT eager
technologists took an excessively simple-minded view of the workings of nature
and we all paid the price.

    Now back to GMOs. Ever since the early 1970s we have been able to manipulate
DNA and thereby change the genetic structure of living creatures. When this
first became a possibility the scientists panicked and imposed a moratorium on
all recombinant DNA experiments. Biological anxiety swept through the culture:
rogue organisms - "superbugs" - might escape from the lab, devastating crops or
people. Michael Crichton, inevitably, wrote a paranoid movie - The Andromeda
Strain - about the possibility. Once released these organisms could never be
recaptured, spreading through the biosphere - raging, destructive mutants.

    But nothing happened and the biological anxiety subsided. The original
analysis of the biologists appeared to be correct - statistically, artificial
modifications would be highly unlikely to result in any organism that could
compete in the wild. Natural selection over billions of years has produced a
robust, competitive ecology. The chances of a released GMO being competitively
superior to nature's products was vanishingly remote.  There was a risk but it
was too small to quantify.

    Since then biological knowledge has increased geometrically. Agriculture is
being transformed by genetic engineering. Plants and animals - remember the
cloned sheep - have had their genotypes adjusted to suit human demands.  Viruses
and bacteria are manipulated to improve crops or target disease.  And, as the
biologists, backed by vast sums of money, close in on the total human genome, we
have become the next in line.

    The Anglo-American view of this has been straightforwardly optimistic - the
dangers were exaggerated, the possible benefits are vast. In Europe, however,
there has been caution. In Germany genetics is viewed with intense suspicion.
There Nazism provided a brutal demonstration of how genetic theory could become
eugenic practice. When Hitler was in prison his primary reading matter was a
text book of genetics. It was a book that was wrong in almost every respect, but
it provided convenient justification for mass murder.

    As a result, EU genetic law has been substantially more cautious than
American. Now British environmentalists, catching up with their European
colleagues, have begun to take an interest. The Government Panel on Sustainable
Development, chaired by Sir Crispin Tickell and established by John Major,
reported in January and called for a conference to establish international
standards to control the release of GMOs. Last week's document was the
Government's response.

    The response is remarkable because, although it dispenses the usual flannel
about things being pretty much OK as they are, it also accepts the panel's call
to set up a conference within the next 12 months on possible biotechnological
hazards. This would aim for international agreement on the control of GMOs.

    This is a startling commitment which indicates a certain admirable
seriousness within the Government about biotechnology. The response was
certainly written well before BSE took off as an issue. So clearly, somewhere in
Whitehall, somebody was thinking seriously about biology before the cows drove
us mad.

    Seriousness in this area is welcome because BSE has highlighted something we
should have known - that a little biological knowledge is a very dangerous
thing. And, when set against the fabulous complexity of the living world, the
sum total of all human biological knowledge remains very small indeed.  We have
acquired ingenious methods for manipulating the code of life, but, beyond that,
our ignorance is vast. In Darwin biology may have had its Galileo, but it has
yet to have its Newton or Einstein. This places us in a dangerous phase of
scientific history. The eerie, mechanical simplicity of the DNA molecule
resonates in our imaginations, tempting us to think that the whole of life is
also simple. Meanwhile, money and hubris conspire to convince us we can do more
than we can. And the naive contemporary belief in the quick fix, the magic
bullet, the wonder drug leads us to place uncritical faith in the claims of the
biologists. Even they have grown nervous at this state of affairs. Harold
Varmus, the head of the National Institutes of Health in Washington, recently
told geneticists to stop making inflated claims for gene therapy - it was giving
science a bad name and raising false hopes in the desperately ill.

    The reality is that living systems have revealed themselves as far more
complex, subtle and interdependent than we could ever have imagined. And it is
the interdependence that we know least about. In the last paragraph of On the
Origin of the Species Darwin wrote in wonder of "an entangled bank" in which
plants, birds, insects, worms lived in incalculably complex interaction. Now we
could add billions of viruses and bacteria to Darwin's list, we could talk of
DNA of which Darwin knew nothing - but we could not claim to be any nearer
penetrating all the mysteries of even that humble ecology.

    Yet in ignorance we apply DDT, prescribe thalidomide or turn farm animals
into cannibals. Similarly - though, so far, not catastrophically - we release
GMOs to engineer the living world. But in the light of what we now know the
soothing statistical faith of the scientists in the 1970s looks profoundly
unconvincing. Our ignorance of living systems has been exposed once too often.
Biological anxiety is back, this time for good.


LOAD-DATE: April 09, 1996


                              257 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 5, 1996, Friday

SECTION: COMMENT; Page  21

LENGTH: 1185 words

HEADLINE: Revenge of the mutant organisms; Our trust in biotechnology and faith
in the quick fix expose our ignorance - and leave us vulnerable

BYLINE: BRYAN APPLEYARD

BODY:

    Unnoticed beneath the mounds of mad cows last week was a strange
coincidence. While ministers struggled with the nuances of scientific truth and
the voter appeal of beef burning, a small document crept quietly out of the
Prime Minister's office. This document was also about science and rogue
fragments of organic chemistry. But it was not about cows, it was about GMOs -
genetically modified organisms.

    To understand the full resonance of this coincidence it is necessary to
understand what the mad cow story is really about. It is about a group of people
who, like the Bourbons, remember everything and learn nothing.  Who exactly
these people are I don't know, but they are evidently technologists and
scientists of some kind. What they did was feed sheep to cows just as they
previously fed hens to hens. As a result they probably transferred the
malevolent prion that causes BSE and CJD across the species barrier first to
cows and then to us.

    This was a stupid thing to do because, as anybody with any biological
knowledge could have told them, creating such a dietary closed circuit would
instantly magnify any risk factors. It was doubly stupid because it echoed a
mistake made by an earlier generation of technologists who blithely killed
insects with DDT while assuring the world that the amounts involved were too
small to affect other creatures.In fact, they simply did not understand the
system with which they were tinkering - the DDT also killed birds because of the
concentrating effects of the food chain.  With both BSE and DDT eager
technologists took an excessively simple-minded view of the workings of nature
and we all paid the price.

    Now back to GMOs. Ever since the early 1970s we have been able to manipulate
DNA and thereby change the genetic structure of living creatures. When this
first became a possibility the scientists panicked and imposed a moratorium on
all recombinant DNA experiments. Biological anxiety swept through the culture:
rogue organisms - "superbugs" - might escape from the lab, devastating crops or
people. Michael Crichton, inevitably, wrote a paranoid movie - The Andromeda
Strain - about the possibility. Once released these organisms could never be
recaptured, spreading through the biosphere - raging, destructive mutants.

    But nothing happened and the biological anxiety subsided. The original
analysis of the biologists appeared to be correct - statistically, artificial
modifications would be highly unlikely to result in any organism that could
compete in the wild. Natural selection over billions of years has produced a
robust, competitive ecology. The chances of a released GMO being competitively
superior to nature's products was vanishingly remote.  There was a risk but it
was too small to quantify.

    Since then biological knowledge has increased geometrically. Agriculture is
being transformed by genetic engineering. Plants and animals - remember the
cloned sheep - have had their genotypes adjusted to suit human demands.  Viruses
and bacteria are manipulated to improve crops or target disease.  And, as the
biologists, backed by vast sums of money, close in on the total human genome, we
have become the next in line.

    The Anglo-American view of this has been straightforwardly optimistic - the
dangers were exaggerated, the possible benefits are vast. In Europe, however,
there has been caution. In Germany genetics is viewed with intense suspicion.
There Nazism provided a brutal demonstration of how genetic theory could become
eugenic practice. When Hitler was in prison his primary reading matter was a
text book of genetics. It was a book that was wrong in almost every respect, but
it provided convenient justification for mass murder.

    As a result, EU genetic law has been substantially more cautious than
American. Now British environmentalists, catching up with their European
colleagues, have begun to take an interest. The Government Panel on Sustainable
Development, chaired by Sir Crispin Tickell and established by John Major,
reported in January and called for a conference to establish international
standards to control the release of GMOs. Last week's document was the
Government's response.

    The response is remarkable because, although it dispenses the usual flannel
about things being pretty much OK as they are, it also accepts the panel's call
to set up a conference within the next 12 months on possible biotechnological
hazards. This would aim for international agreement on the control of GMOs.

    This is a startling commitment which indicates a certain admirable
seriousness within the Government about biotechnology. The response was
certainly written well before BSE took off as an issue. So clearly, somewhere in
Whitehall, somebody was thinking seriously about biology before the cows drove
us mad.

    Seriousness in this area is welcome because BSE has highlighted something we
should have known - that a little biological knowledge is a very dangerous
thing. And, when set against the fabulous complexity of the living world, the
sum total of all human biological knowledge remains very small indeed.  We have
acquired ingenious methods for manipulating the code of life, but, beyond that,
our ignorance is vast. In Darwin biology may have had its Galileo, but it has
yet to have its Newton or Einstein. This places us in a dangerous phase of
scientific history. The eerie, mechanical simplicity of the DNA molecule
resonates in our imaginations, tempting us to think that the whole of life is
also simple. Meanwhile, money and hubris conspire to convince us we can do more
than we can. And the naive contemporary belief in the quick fix, the magic
bullet, the wonder drug leads us to place uncritical faith in the claims of the
biologists. Even they have grown nervous at this state of affairs. Harold
Varmus, the head of the National Institutes of Health in Washington, recently
told geneticists to stop making inflated claims for gene therapy - it was giving
science a bad name and raising false hopes in the desperately ill.

    The reality is that living systems have revealed themselves as far more
complex, subtle and interdependent than we could ever have imagined. And it is
the interdependence that we know least about. In the last paragraph of On the
Origin of the Species Darwin wrote in wonder of "an entangled bank" in which
plants, birds, insects, worms lived in incalculably complex interaction. Now we
could add billions of viruses and bacteria to Darwin's list, we could talk of
DNA of which Darwin knew nothing - but we could not claim to be any nearer
penetrating all the mysteries of even that humble ecology.

    Yet in ignorance we apply DDT, prescribe thalidomide or turn farm animals
into cannibals. Similarly - though, so far, not catastrophically - we release
GMOs to engineer the living world. But in the light of what we now know the
soothing statistical faith of the scientists in the 1970s looks profoundly
unconvincing. Our ignorance of living systems has been exposed once too often.
Biological anxiety is back, this time for good.


LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1996


                              259 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             March 18, 1996, Monday

SECTION: COMMENT; Page  15

LENGTH: 1121 words

HEADLINE: Making some sense of our world; National Science Week isn't just some
celebration fit for anoraks - it's for everyone, says Tom Wilkie

BODY:

    Dr Watson was once deeply shocked to discover that Sherlock Holmes did not
know that the earth went round the sun. Nor did he care.

    A master of contemporary forensic chemistry, Holmes told Watson that
astronomy was simply not useful knowledge for him. That dismissive judgement by
Britain's greatest fictional detective comes into the hard focus of reality this
week now that Britain's third national festival of science, engineering and
technology - SET '96 - is in full swing.

    From trips to the labs behind the showcases at the Natural History Museum in
London to late night table-top demonstrations of science at the Insomnia Cafe in
Glasgow, more than 5,000 events are being held around the country.

    And yet, there are questions. One of the most basic is why should anyone who
is not intending to become a scientist actually get interested?

    In his lectures on the two cultures, CP Snow set the second law of
thermodynamics as his criterion for scientific literacy. But it is rather
difficult to see how knowing that the entropy of the universe increases (which
is one formulation of the second law) really helps with defrosting the fridge.
Personally, having been trained as a physicist, I was once able to solve James
Clerk Maxwell's equations for the propagation of electromagnetic waves - which
is how radio and television are transmitted to my home - but I cannot programme
the video recorder. I knew the theory of electron transport in semiconductors,
but it doesn't help me with the intricacies of wordprocessing on Microsoft Word
- even though my computer depends on semiconductors for its operation.

    Functional literacy in technical society does not depend on a knowledge of
scientific facts. Nor does living in the modern world depend on what might be
called a scientific attitude of mind. We live in a society founded on division
of labour and, outside the laboratory, the scientist's disciplined curiosity is
a positive hindrance to the smooth running of our lives.

    For example, none of the distinguished academic scientists who from time to
time take the train from Oxford to London would expect to have the right first
to tap the wheels of the train to verify their integrity.Even in matters of life
and death, we subcontract our fate to others.

    It is probably not possible even in principle for any one individual to
understand all the science and technology that go into making a transatlantic
plane flight possible and safe. To do so would require enough metallurgy to
understand the alloys used in modern airframes, a knowledge of modern jet
engines, the electronics of the control and navigation equipment and of the
software involved in the air traffic control system which guides aeroplanes.  No
one individual could possibly comprehend all that.

    In fact, the most important questions about the safety of aeroplanes are
social, not scientific. The laws of aerodynamics apply equally to aircraft
belonging to Lufthansa or to Aeroflot. Yet Lufthansa's planes have not fallen
from the sky with the disconcerting frequency of those belonging to the former
Soviet Union's airline. The outcome is different although the science is the
same; what differed was the social institutions to ensure engineering quality
and the "safety culture" of the German civil aviation industry and that of the
Soviet Union.

    When a train crashes on the west coast mainline near Stafford, we do not
worry that the laws of physics might have broken down. Instead, our response is
social, we worry that privatisation might be weakening safety standards and we
seek to examine the procedures in place at Railtrack.

    What, then, is science, and national science week, for? The conventional
answer is a utilitarian one. Only those who understand science, it is argued,
will be able to cope with the world around them in the 21st century because that
will be a world totally dominated by the products of science.

    And yet. Last week, representatives of the Save British Science Society
pointed out that British industry clearly does not want science or scientists.
For UK companies' investment in science to match that of our more successful
competitors, they would need to recruit at least 70,000 more scientists and
engineers. If SET '96 enthuses children so much that they decide to make a
career in science, they will soon find themselves jobless.

    That said, there are good reasons why people should take an intelligent
interest in science. One is to make sure that we are in control of what science
does. There can hardly be anyone who has not directly or indirectly been
affected by the discovery in the late Thirties of atomic fission.  This
seemingly obscure branch of applied quantum mechanics led both to the atomic and
the hydrogen bombs that have dominated post-war politics and cast long shadows
of fear over our lives.

    As the century draws to its end, there is another scientific development
that promises to touch our lives more nearly and more intimately: the startling
advances in molecular genetics. These developments have already given rise to
genetically engineered food on our supermarket shelves; human beings undergoing
gene therapy to correct inborn defects, not to mention moral disquiet over the
"cloning" of sheep.

    Properly understood, these developments bring, in the worlds of the late,
great medical researcher Sir Peter Medawar, "the Hope of Progress". But
scientific knowledge, like the sword of justice, has a double edge: it can be
used for ill as well as for good. We need to understand not so much the
scientific details of, say, sheep cloning, but the broader question of how
scientific discoveries come into our lives and how from among the options for
the future we can choose the ones we feel will be beneficial.

    Perhaps the best reason for non-specialists to try to understand science is
a cultural one without any pragmatic value. It is simply that science provides a
profoundly satisfying way of looking at and making sense of the world in which
we live. It tells us that we can make some sense of the world, that it is not
all arbitrary and chaotic. The astonishing thing is not that we know so little
but that we can make so much sense of the universe.

    For example, there has been life on earth for about 3.5 billion years.
Throughout all that time, its growth and its development has been directed by
the double helix molecule of DNA and by its close chemical relative RNA. Amid
all the diversity of life on earth past and present, we are the first creatures
in existence to be aware of the existence, structure and function of this thin
filament of life.

    This week, that is indeed something to celebrate.


LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1996


                              261 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             March 8, 1996, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Page  18

LENGTH: 576 words

HEADLINE: Swiss create chemical solution despite wars, cartels and spillages

BYLINE: John Shepherd

BODY:

    There is more than a touch of deja vu about the proposed marriage between
Sandoz and Ciba-Geigy. The companies have long and similar histories and worked
extremely closely together for the first half of this century, writes John
Shepherd.

    Ciba-Geigy started life in 1758 when Johann Geigy started selling spices and
natural dyes. The Ciba part of the business was not really formed until almost a
century later when Alexander Clavel started to take advantage of the development
of synthetic dyes.

    By 1900, Ciba, an acronym for Gesellschaft fur Chemische Industrie im Basle,
had become Switzerland's leading chemical company and benefited greatly for a
few years from the collapse of the huge German chemical cartel during the First
World War. However, the German cartel was reassembled as IG Farben soon after
the war and the Swiss had little option but to form their own cartel called
Basel AG, comprising Ciba, Geigy, and Sandoz.

    The Swiss companies, which shared profits, technology and markets, quickly
started to do much better than the German cartel and diversified into
pharmaceuticals and other chemicals.

    In 1929, the German and Swiss cartels merged and a couple of years later the
French and British equivalents were brought into the fold. The so- called
Quadrapartite Cartel lasted until the outbreak of the Second World War, leaving
only the cosy Swiss grouping intact.

    The Swiss also made a big breakthrough during the first year of the Second
World War when Paul Muller, a scientist at Geigy, invented DDT - a compound
which won him a Nobel prize.

    The cartel lasted until 1951 when the three Swiss companies decided that
they no longer needed the protective cartel umbrella and went their separate
ways.

    Ciba and Geigy continued to diversify. During the 1950s Geigy expanded
rapidly, finding new markets in agricultural chemicals. By the late 1960s its
sales were greater than Ciba's.

    Fresh and intense competition from foreign companies such as Imperial
Chemical Industries brought Ciba and Geigy back together again. Ciba and Geigy
merged in 1970 and expanded rapidly through acquisitions in the US, including
Airwick Industries and Funk Seeds.

    The acquisitive policy continued in the 1980s, and Ciba-Geigy also began
forming joint ventures. One of the most notable was the link-up in 1986 with
Chiron to produce and market genetically engineered vaccines. It bought Maag AG,
the agrochemicals business, from Hoffmann-La Roche in 1990. Following the
break-up of the Swiss cartel, Sandoz was busily diversifying.  It moved into the
seeds business, buying Minneapolis-based Northrup, King & Company and the
Dutch-based Zaadunie.

    During the 1980s it bought Wasa, a Swedish crispbread company, and the
Master Builders construction chemicals business from Martin Marietta.

    All the success, however, was marred in the company's centenary year in 1986
when a warehouse fire spilled tons of chemicals into the Rhine, killing fish and
contaminating water as far away as the North Sea.

    The 1990s has again been a period of diversification, involving buying
investments in two American biotechnology companies - Genetic Therapy and
SyStemix.

    Today, some 45 per cent of sales come from pharmaceuticals, 18 per cent from
nutrition products, 14 per cent from chemicals and the rest from agroproducts,
seeds, and construction and environmental chemicals.

    Additional reporting by Bloomberg


LOAD-DATE: March 08, 1996


                              271 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1996 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 12, 1996, Friday

SECTION: COMMENT; Page  15

LENGTH: 717 words

HEADLINE: Let's hope it's not in our genes; By failing to control the use of
genetic data, the Government will encourage discrimination, says Alastair Kent

BYLINE: Alastair Kent

BODY:

    Yesterday, the Government failed dismally to grasp an opportunity to prevent
abuses of our rapidly developing knowledge of human genetics.  By choosing to
rely on existing mechanisms, which experts already regard as inadequate, the
Government's official response to the report of the Science and Technology
Select Committee on Human Genetics is deeply disappointing.

    The news that the genetic code is being unravelled much faster than was
originally thought possible must bring hope to the millions of people in
families who are at risk from genetic disorders. Most of these are very rare,
but together they are one of the major causes of ill health and disability in
this country: more than 2.5 million people are members of families at risk from
an inherited condition; 15,000 babies are born each year with significant
disabilities, and almost half of all childhood deaths in Britain are the result
of genetic disease.

    Among the 200,000-odd genes that comprise our genetic code, we all have a
few that - if we have children by a partner who carries the same defective genes
- potentially produce disabling, life-threatening or even fatal conditions. As
scientific understanding advances, more of the genes that increase the risk of
our developing illnesses such as cancer or Alzheimer's disease are being
discovered.

    It is not all good news, though. Discovering the gene allows precise
diagnosis, and will eventually lead to the development of new forms of therapy
that will treat and perhaps even cure these conditions. But the gap between
locating the gene and being able to cure the condition is a huge one. Gene
therapy trials are at a very early stage, and it is not yet clear which
conditions will be amenable to treatment. For the foreseeable future, the
principle benefit of this new genetic knowledge will be antenatal diagnosis of
affected pregnancies, giving parents the option of a termination.

    Just as information about your genetic make-up gives you control over
aspects of your life, so that same information in the wrong hands will give
others power over you. Employers might, for example, want to know if female
applicants had an increased risk of breast cancer, so they could choose not to
employ them. Insurance companies might not want to provide cover for people at
an increased risk of developing long-term diseases such as Alzheimer's. People
with a genetic predisposition to certain forms of heart disease might not be
able to afford to protect the payments on their mortgage because of the loaded
premiums demanded.

    Genetics will have an impact on all our lives. Scientific advances are
coming too quickly for us to assimilate. Last summer, the Commons Select
Committee on Science and Technology produced a report on the implications of our
new knowledge. The report was widely welcomed and many urged the Government to
act quickly, implement its recommendations and introduce powerful and effective
monitoring and control to prevent the abuse of genetic information.

    On Wednesday, the Government rejected virtually all the recommendations in
the report, preferring to rely on existing mechanisms which, in the view of the
Select Committee and others, are already inadequate. The Advisory Committee on
Genetic Testing which actually is to be set up has far too narrow a remit so it
will, in effect, be unable to address issues relating to employment, insurance
and the non-medical uses of genetic information.

    Last summer, the Government deliberately excluded those with genetic
predispositions from protection under the Disability Discrimination Bill then
being discussed in Parliament. The Government preferred, it said, to wait for
the forthcoming Select Committee report. It is, therefore, all the more
disappointing that it on Wednesday it again failed to provide for proper
legislation to prevent genetic discrimination in employment.

    Indeed, by turning its back on legislation, the Government has gone further
and created a positive incentive to discriminate early, because it will not be
possible for employers, insurers or any other service provider to do so once
symptoms are manifest. The Government's response on Wednesday amounts to a
Discriminator's Charter.

    The writer is director of the Genetic Interest Group


LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1996


                              274 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                               November 13, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 37

LENGTH: 1854 words

HEADLINE: First citizen who is a cut above the rest

BYLINE: Jim Levi

BODY:


    WHETHER YOU HAD a heart attack or merely a hangover, the City used to be a
good place to fall ill. Not any more. The wise among us had long realised that
when the chips were really down, it was Bart's, not the Bank of England, that
was the most important institution in the Square Mile. The Government's decision
to close the place, a haven for the sick for nearly 900 years, has already meant
the transfer of accident and emergency cases from Bart's to either Homerton or
the Royal London hospitals.

    And John Chalstrey, who ought to know since he has been a surgeon at Bart's
since the mid-Fifties, warns that Homerton is so busy at times that its
emergency unit has to shut down.

    But do not despair. Chalstrey has now become the Lord Maor of London - and
he is the first surgeon ever to hold the office. Naturally, some of us suspect
this is all part of a fiendish plot by the City Corporation to reverse
Whitehall's stance on its local hospital.

    Reassuringly, Chalstrey already notes that the replacing of the accident and
emergency unit with a minor injuries unit - they could probably still handle
your hangover - is the only change of note at the place at present.

    "The rest of the hospital is very busy because the process of refurbishing
and rebuilding the Royal London means they are having to decant patients to
Bart's," he says.

    "That will be the situation for a minimum of five years but could be for up
to 10 years. A lot can happen in that time." Indeed.

    Not that Chalstrey is against Health Service reform. Now in his 65th year
and on the verge of retirement, he remains thankful that he has worked for the
NHS during what he calls its golden years when the issues were always medical
and surgical and "nobody really took too much notice of the financial
implications".

    That attitude, he concedes, is probably at the root of the current problems.
"There is a general realisation that the amount of money available for
healthcare is not inexhaustible," he says. "One needs value for money and a lot
of the principles underlying the changes have been right - it is in their
implementation where things have gone wrong."

    Apart from the ability of provincial hospitals to do operations more cheaply
than the great London teaching hospitals, he is concerned that GPs and their
patients are now robbed of choice because "unless you have private medicine or
your GP is a fundholder, he will have to send you wherever your local health
authority has decided to purchase their surgery".

    On Bart's itself, Chalstrey says: "I think most of the staff recognise
rationalisation of health services needed to happen in London and were prepared
to co-operate.

    "What upset a lot of them was the decision that the only way to do it was to
have a single-site hospital atWhitechapel." Although Whitechapel has a large
resident population, he claims its facilities were not as good as Bart's and
"although the City does not have much of a resident population, there is a
tremendous working population of a third of a million people.

    They are missing Bart's very much".

    While he is Lord Mayor, Chalstrey plans to visit South Africa, China,
Israel, Egypt and the Ukraine in his role as roving ambassador for the City.
But back home he will bang on about his belief that "any world-class commercial
city like London needs a first-class health system as part of the
infrastructure".

    "When you look at why the City is ahead of the pack as an international
financial centre, it is because it has become a sophisticated centre of
excellence and because it has a technological edge," he says.

    But he fears other centres such as Paris and Frankfurt will catch up -
particularly on technology.

    "At some point - maybe only in five years' time - the issue which is going
to sway people to go on working here is whether it is a good place to work, and
that means a good health system as well as freedom from pollution, low crime
levels, a pleasant environment and a good transport system," he says.  He hopes
the latest plans rumoured for Bart's - to make it the new home for the London
School of Economics - will not succeed.

    The City Corporation supports the idea of converting a wing to a community
hospital but Chalstrey himself touts the idea that Bart's should have one of
several satellite casualty departments in inner London.  "Historically, capital
cities anywhere in the world have relied on big hospitals for their emergency
care because on the whole GPs prefer to work in the leafy suburbs and the
country rather than inner cities, whereas hospital doctors tend to want to be at
the centre of the action in places like Whitechapel and Southwark."

    If he is not as well-versed in the world of finance as some of his
predecessors, he is certainly not entering his year of office without careful
induction.

    FOR FOUR YEARS, he acted as minute-taking secretary to a monthly breakfast
club where the chairman of the Stock Exchange, the chairman of Lloyd's, a senior
Bank of England official and key figures from the clearing and merchant banks
meet the Lord Mayor to exchange views. "It was thought a useful training ground
for me given my non-financial background," he says.

    He has also met the heads of a number of our top pharmaceuticals companies,
including Sir Richard Sykes of Glaxo Wellcome and David Barnes of Zeneca, as he
lays plans to promote the healthcare industry in foreign markets during his year
of office.

    "In biotechnology and gene therapy, we have centres of excellence in Britain
which are well ahead with the research," he says. "It is terribly important we
don't let it all go off to the US where they are more entrepreneurial about
developing these new industries. "It would be nice to get our own merchant
bankers more involved in its development, though I believe they are less ready
to take risks than our American cousins.'

    Chalstrey also sees his year of office as an opportunity to promote the
health of the nation, and a Department of Health official has been seconded to
his office to help him.

    "Not that the aldermen and prime wardens need fear a diet of carrot juice,
nut cutlets and muesli during my term," he says.

    A non-smoker but not teetotal, he says he likes the definition of an
alcoholic as "someone who drinks more than their doctor".

    CHALSTREY hails from Staffordshire, the son of two schoolteachers. After
national service in the army, he had planned to read natural sciences at
Cambridge with the intention of doing medical research But he persuaded his
college to let him read medicine to give him status as a researcher. He went
from Cambridge to clinical work at Bart's and was soon convinced he wanted to be
a surgeon.

    "There is tremendous job satisfaction," he says. "More often than not, you
can put the patient's problem right with surgery."

    He joined the Corporation in 1981 when he stoo as a councilman. Four years
later, he became an alderman. It is by no means automatic that each of the 25
City aldermen take their turn as Lord Mayor.

    There is a kind of continuous assessment of would-be candidates by other
aldermen and Chalstrey found himself shuffled into the job two years earlier
than expected when one of his colleagues failed to pass muster.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1995


                              278 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           October 24, 1995, Tuesday

SECTION: COVER STORY; Page  2,

LENGTH: 1914 words

HEADLINE: Miracle cure, or mere illusion?; There's a snag with the media's
favourite answer to humanity's most stubborn diseases. So far, gene therapy
doesn't work. Tom Wilkie reports

BYLINE: TOM WILKIE

BODY:

    Carly Todd, Britain's first gene therapy patient, recently celebrated her
third birthday. Two years ago, she made front-page headlines. Doctors were going
to correct an inherited defect in her immune system by genetically engineering
some of the cells in her body.

    It was the ultimate in high-technology medicine, combining the human
interest of a baby at risk with the icon of post-war science, the double helix
of DNA. One of the oldest and most firmly fixed facts of human existence - that
our genetic constitution is given to us and is unalterable and inescapable - was
to fall to the inexorable advance of scientific progress.

    Carly had inherited defective genes from her parents. This meant her immune
system was unable to produce a vital protein, leaving her vulnerable to
infections - even those which, for the rest of us, would cause no more than a
sniffle. The condition was similar to that of the famous case in Texas of the
"boy in the bubble" who had to be kept in a germ-free environment to protect him
from the chance of infection even by his parents - a story later turned into a
Hollywood film starring a young John Travolta. Gene therapy offered hope of a
permanent cure for this rare but devastating condition. Carly's parents had
already lost a son to the disease, only days before she was born. By
transplanting "correct" genes into the cells of her bone marrow, doctors hoped
that these cells would be able to make the vital protein and so create a
functioning immune system.

    But it didn't work. A year after the operation, Carly's doctors were unable
to find any trace of the corrected genes in her bone marrow cells.  She is alive
and reasonably well now thanks to more conventional treatment: she receives the
protein in the form of regular injections, costing around pounds 1,000 each.

    After the high expectations, enthusiasm is waning. "No human disease has
been cured by human gene transfer and it is not clear when this will be
accomplished," according to a review of human gene therapy published last week
in the American journal Science. "All of the human gene transfer studies have
been plagued with inconsistent results," the article continued.

    Despite this, gene therapy is already big business. According to research
from the Science Policy Research Unit at Sussex University, more than 100
clinical trials are under way or about to start in the United States alone. And
the work, in the US at least, is being driven in part by commercial
considerations. Stock market investors have stumped up around $ 1bn to set up
some 20 dedicated gene therapy companies, ready to cash in on what is seen as a
potentially lucrative new sector of the health-care business.

    The European Commission is worried that Europe, with only four gene therapy
companies, may be missing out on a lucrative medical market. Most of the
experimental work on gene therapy is still being carried out by public sector
bodies, such as universities and the NHS, often funded by charity.  Next month
the Commission is starting a project to assess how to develop a strong European
gene therapy industry.

    But so far there has been more hype than substance. Carly Todd's gene
therapy followed the pioneering case of Ashanti DeSilva, a little girl with the
same condition as Carly and who made history in 1990 when, at the age of four,
she became the world's first authorised gene therapy patient. In the American
tradition, Ashanti last year testified to the US Congress on the success of her
gene transplant, prompting George Brown, then chairman of the House of
Representatives Science Committee to describe her as "living proof that a
miracle has occurred".

    Yet it is not clear whether Ashanti, any more than Carly Todd, has benefited
from her gene therapy. The work has not been written up and published in the
scientific literature and it is impossible to establish if she is alive and well
today because of the gene therapy or because she, too, has been continuing to
receive conventional injections of the missing protein.

    In Britain, the hype has been less intense, but gene therapy has entered the
public consciousness as if it were an established fact rather than a
yet-to-be-proven possibility. In the past three months alone, media accounts
have cited gene therapy in connection with the crippled Superman actor,
Christopher Reeve, as a possible way of getting nerve cells to regrow (there is
no work in humans along these lines); as a "best hope" for the Aberdeen
footballer Brian Irvine who has developed multiple sclerosis (again, there are
no protocols for gene therapy as an answer to this condition); as a cure for
baldness; and to deal with cancer.

    Internationally, Britain is the leading gene therapy nation behind the
Americans. By the beginning of October, 44 patients in Britain had received gene
transplants and a total of 12 applications to conduct gene therapy trials had
been approved by the Government's Gene Therapy Advisory Committee (GTAC). Not
all these have yet been carried out. Although inherited diseases were expected
to be the main target for this therapy, the focus of most applications is
cancer. However, very few cancers are inherited, most arise instead from genetic
damage sustained during adult life.

    Cancers and HIV are among the targets for Britain's leading gene therapy
company, Therexsys. The company, founded in 1992 and based at Keele University
Science Park, hopes to commence clinical trials of its HIV therapy next year. It
has already succeeded in raising pounds 6.4m and next month will begin a second
round of financing. "We see genes as medicines," says Dr Roger Craig, its chief
scientific officer. "You have to deliver to the right target cell and you have
to control the potency of the medicine. You also have to manufacture at scale."
There will be no shortage of genes to use, Dr Craig says. "The issue becomes:
how do you wrap up your DNA so that it will be taken into cells?".

    As Dr Craig indicates, the most fundamental aspect of gene therapy - getting
the new gene inside the cells where it is supposed to substitute for the
patient's own damaged or defective genes - is proving to be the most difficult.
Carly Todd's doctors deliberately infected cells taken from her bone marrow with
a virus of a type known to infiltrate its genes into human DNA. The researchers
used genetic engineering to get the human gene into the virus and to ensure that
the virus was no longer pathogenic.  But although the virus ought to have been a
perfect vehicle to carry the genes inside her cells, her gene transplant failed
to "take".

    A few months later, researchers at the Royal Brompton Hospital in London
used fatty globules, known as liposomes, to carry the genes into the airways of
their patients suffering from the inherited lung disease cystic fibrosis.  The
idea was that the fatty membrane of the liposome would unite with that of the
patients' cells, thus enabling the genes to get inside the cells and do their
therapeutic work. But the researchers found that they could get the genes into
the cells in only five out of nine patients and that the effect lasted only
about a week.

    Dr Craig believes that Therexsys can target tissues and organs precisely
with its "virus-like particle" technology. It is, he says, "quite a novel
solution". Moreover, Therexsys has a second piece of technology which he
believes will allow it to control the expression of the gene once it is in the
tissue. But the gene therapy unit that the Cancer Research Campaign hopes to set
up at the Beatson Cancer Research Institute in Glasgow will take a very
different approach. Instead of trying to target tumour tissue, researchers there
intend to flood all the cells in the body with a tumour suppressor gene that
will be harmless in normal tissue but which will persuade cancerous cells to
commit suicide.

    The two approaches are radically different yet are supposed to achieve the
same thing. Their inconsistency suggests that something pretty basic is lacking
from current techniques. Yet in the US, those investors will soon start
demanding a return on their money, piling on commercial pressure for more
widespread use of gene therapy.

    Other major pharmaceutical companies - even those most aggressively pursuing
genetics - are sceptical about the potential of gene therapy. "We have no
investigations going on and no intention of being involved in gene therapy in
the future," Dr George Poste, chairman of Pharmaceuticals Research for
SmithKline Beecham says. "There is not one tabulated example of efficacy of gene
therapy in one patient."

    The techniques have not been properly regulated in the US, he continues.
"There has been close to an abdication of regulatory oversight in the US",
consequent on "the hype that goes with it". Researchers have been allowed to
carry out "saturation bombing" of patients' DNA without regard to the
possibility that the genes might insert in the wrong place and disrupt intact
genes - which could cause tumours. As in Britain the focus for gene therapy has
been on the terminal stages of fatal diseases, such as Aids and cancer. Only
"when that shifts to less threatening diseases, then the regulatory agencies
will toughen it up", Dr Poste says.

    Although Department of Health officials believe there has been less hype in
Britain than in the US, the Government's regulator, GTAC, has warned that "Many
of these gene therapy research trials are unlikely to benefit individual
patients significantly and the importance of communicating the value of such
trials while not raising false hopes in patients and their families, no matter
how well meant, is a special challenge".

    In his recent book, Science and the Quiet Art, Sir David Weatherall, regius
professor of medicine at Oxford University and one of the world's leading
experts on human genetic disease, notes that it can take decades for scientific
discoveries to leave the laboratory and enter the hospital clinics as proven and
effective therapies. Some researchers fear that if the public becomes
disenchanted with gene therapy because of false expectations that cannot be
fulfilled, this may spill over into antagonism against the more limited but
still useful things that modern genetics can achieve.

    In July, the House of Commons Select Committee on Science and Technology
published the results of a major investigation into the science of human
genetics. Gene therapy occupied only 19 out of 289 paragraphs of the report.
More important than therapeutics, as far as the committee was concerned, was the
diagnostic potential of modern genetics. It recommended that there should be a
regulatory body to monitor genetic testing. But public policy has hitherto been
driven by the popular mystique of gene therapy, which led to the formation two
years ago of a gene therapy advisory committee . In contrast, the Government has
yet to respond to the Select Committee's proposals on gene testing.

    Early next year, at the Royal Brompton Hospital in London, researchers will
start the second phase of their gene therapy for cystic fibrosis.  The doctor in
charge, Duncan Geddes, is a model of cautious, professional propriety: "Progress
is slower than some people thought. Everybody is confident that it will come
right, but it will be in years not months.  We're testing safety and gene
transfer. Nobody's at the stage yet of trying to make people better."


LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1995


                              279 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            October 6, 1995, Friday

SECTION: FIT FOR LIFE; Page  8

LENGTH: 747 words

HEADLINE: Multiple choice Sclerosis; Beta-interferon is just the latest
treatment for MS sufferers. Nick Walker looks at the bewildering array of
therapies

BYLINE: NICK WALKER

BODY:

    The Multiple Sclerosis Therapy Centre is a squat brick building on the
outskirts of London. My diagnosis came at the beginning of this year after
months of tests. There is no known cause, my neurologist told me, no prognosis
and no cure.

    MS involves the breaking down of the sheaths which cover the nerves.  No one
knows why, but there are theories: environmental factors, food allergies,
mercury in fillings, viral, genetic. And so on.

    In one corner of the centre, a notice board is pinned with newspaper
cuttings. Reports of new drugs and new research:Copolymer 1. Combination
therapy. Gene therapy. Nerve conduction enhancers. Anti-viral agents.
Non-specific immunosuppressants. "Could maybe lead to a cure" in five, 10 . . .
20 years.

    No cure. Not yet. But for every theory there is a therapy, and for every
therapy a theory, stretching from the stock of traditional neurology to the
outer fringes of alternative medicine. Hyperbaric oxygen treatment.  Diets high
in polyunsaturates. Reflexology. Yoga. Chinese medicine. Cranberry juice.
Vegetable oil. Vegetable oil and cranberry juice. A glass every morning.

    According to Complementary Medicine: New Approaches to Good Practice,
published by the British Medical Association in 1993: " 'Complementary'
therapies are those which can work alongside, and in conjunction with, orthodox
medical treatment.'Alternative' therapies could be seen as those given in place
of orthodox medical treatment." But when it comes to Multiple Sclerosis,
complementary seems a misnomer. Complement what? What alternative?

    "I have a slight problem with the word 'alternative'," says the therapy
centre's Lynn Hurst. "It implies that conventional medicine has something to
offer. It's not really like that with MS. It's more about managing the
symptoms."

    Judy Graham, in Multiple Sclerosis: A Self-Help Guide, says this of
non-traditional medicine, or 'holistic medicine' as she describes therapies from
applied kinesiology to aromatherapy: "The mistake some patients make is to view
a particular alternative therapy as just a technique. If you want any kind of
holistic therapy to be helpful, you have to be an active participant in the
healing process, and not just a passive recipient."

    Traditional medicine suggested that I eat well, try evening primrose oil and
exercise regularly. Beta-interferon, which helps regulate the immune system and
is the latest drug hope, was not mentioned. But I left my diagnosis with the
comfort that it wasn't the Grim Reaper standing at my shoulder, clip board in
hand. And I had an explanation as to why I would wake up, my hands cold as ice,
why fatigue would crash over me like a wave and five minutes later be gone, why
one morning last Christmas I woke up with legs as weak as water, and then, a day
later, found they were fine. Why all of this had disappeared and then come back.

    Multiple Sclerosis Therapy Centres are charities that work in tandem with
the MS Society and offer three main types of therapy at some 50 centres:
hyperbaric oxygen treatment (breathing pure oxygen under pressure), nutritional
advice (studies have shown the incidence of MS is related to eating saturated
fats such as in dairy produce) and physiotherapy to help limb control and
improve strength. "We don't make any claims that what we provide is a cure,"
explains Hurst. "It's all part of the jigsaw.  All these things feed in."

    Hurst continues: "While you're doing one therapy, stick to it. You're never
going to know what has an effect if you chop and change." The MS Society offers
a further caveat: "Each person's MS is different. You have to work with your
doctor. They are better versed in how the disease has affected you than anyone
else. You need an objective person to monitor your progress, whether you're
trying a new drug or using a less orthodox therapy."

    The holistic argument seems cyclical: this therapy could change your life -
but you have to change your life before it will work. I'm worried that I won't
muster the proper degree of belief. I could hardly bear the failure to be mine,
thank you. (How quickly would you swap your entire lifestyle in the hope that
your fingers no longer feel cold in the morning?) Spurred on by theMS Society, I
have booked another appointment with my neurologist. Having thought about my
options, I now realise we have a lot to talk about.

    The MS Society: 0171 371 8000. Federation of MS Therapy Centres: 01234 325
781.


LOAD-DATE: October 06, 1995


                              280 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            October 3, 1995, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Page  6

LENGTH: 473 words

HEADLINE: Routine operations on hit-list

BYLINE: LIZ HUNT Health Editor

BODY:

    Since the inception of the NHS in 1948, new treatments and procedures have
been introduced in a piecemeal and haphazard fashion. The rationale for
implementation appeared to be "if it is new, it must be better and we must have
it".

    In fact, it is estimated that less than 15 per cent of health service
"interventions" have been proved to be beneficial to patients. It comes as no
surprise to learn that in the new cost-conscious, market-style NHS, some of
these interventions are to be phased out.

    Stephen Dorrell, Secretary of State for Health, declined yesterday to spell
out which treatments would be phased out of routine use in NHS hospitals and
clinics but it is not difficult to guess what they might be.

    John Yates, a former government adviser, has said that of the top 10
operations performed in NHS hospitals, only hernia repair and cataract surgery
are widely regarded as sound procedures with a high degree of clinical agreement
about who will benefit and when the operations should be done.

    The more questionable operations include hysterectomy, tonsillectomy, D&C or
womb scrape before the age of 40, and the insertion of grommets to treat glue
ear. In the latter case, 80 per cent or more clear up without treatment.

    There are some "innovations" that have assumed popularity without adequate
investigation of their use or proper training of the people who use them:
keyhole surgery is one example. Several patients have suffered long-term
internal damage after inappropriate use of keyhole surgery or less than optimum
handling of the equipment.

    Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) was hailed as a major advance in pre- natal
diagnostic testing as doctors were able to perform it weeks earlier than
existing tests such amniocentesis. It was widely reported in newspapers and was
adopted for routine use prematurely, according to some doctors, as women
demanded the test from their obstetricians. Subsequently, a link was established
between CVS before 10 weeks and limb defects in babies.  Now CVS is performed
after 10 weeks.

    Obstetrics in general has a reputation for adopting, wholesale, new
techniques without good evidence for their benefits. Mass foetal screening - the
use of probes attached to the foetal scalp during labour to monitor its status
regardless of a problematic delivery or not - is widely believed to have caused
more difficulties than it solved. Meanwhile, cheap and proven treatments, such
as steroidal drugs to help mature the lungs of babies likely to be born early,
went unheeded.

    Stephen Dorrell yesterday called time on inefficient, obsolete treatments
and those that are expensive and have limited application. They are likely to be
replaced with innovations such as gene therapy, designer drugs, robotics in
surgery, and more accurate diagnostic tests.


LOAD-DATE: October 03, 1995


                              283 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                               September 28, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1334 words

HEADLINE: Curing cancer with computers

BYLINE: Jo Revill

BODY:


    THERE will be a 'golden era' in the prevention and cure of cancer over the
next 25 years, according to a new report today by more than 30 leading
scientists and doctors. While deaths from the disease will soar to 222,000 in
the year 2020 because of an ageing population, if current forms of care
continue, scientists believe that there will be a revolution which could cut
mortality rates by up to a third.

    New diagnostic techniques involving molecular genetics will enable early
detection of pre-cancerous cells and the identification of high-risk groups.
Computers will be able to create three-dimensional images of what the patient's
tumour looks like, allowing radiotherapy to be better targeted.

    But the scientists also warned that people will be living longer with
cancers under control and will need support when traditional sources - the
Church, families and social services - will be under pressure.

    Sir Walter Bodmer, director-general of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund,
said: 'The last 15 years have seen astonishing advances in the laboratory.  It
has indeed been a golden era of research in biological science. Our challenge
now is to translate our understanding into new approaches to preventing and
curing cancer - a process which has now begun and which will accelerate as we
move into the next millennium. The coming golden era will be in applied
research.'

    The report, Our Vision for Cancer, stresses that the future depends heavily
on translating the excitement generated by scientific discoveries into a
collective will to make advances possible.

    The Government's Expert Advisory Group on Cancer has already recommended
setting up specialist cancer centres around the country.

    Certain initiatives hold out the prospect of reducing deaths from the most
common cancers - lung, breast and bowel. Statistician Dr Jack Cuzick believes
that by 2020, projected changes in cigarette-smoking could cut lung cancer
deaths by 30 per cent. 'Deaths from bowel cancer could, by 2020, be cut by 40
per cent with increasingly sophisticated methods for screening,' he said.  It is
thought that preventative drugs given to women at high risk of breast cancer
might prevent one quarter of deaths.

    A revolution in cancer drug discovery based on logical drug designs using
molecular graphics is also expected during the next decade.  Up until now, the
largest problem confronting scientists has been the undetected spread of cancer
to other organs while the original tumour is being treated.

    The prospects of gene therapy mean new treatments will become available.
Drugs may be designed to generate immune system killer cells solely around the
tumour. A harmless chemical may be injected in the bloodstream, turning into a
lethal anti-cancer drug where it finds cancerous cells.

    "Blocker drugs" can also be used to get in the way of hormones which lock
onto the surface of a cancer cell and transmit the message to multiply.

    The ICRF's Professor Karol Sikora said: 'Today a cancer diagnosis causes
distress because far too many people cannot be cured. As a halfway house, we
shall see many more people with incurable cancer living longer, more active
lives, with their disease being managed. But in the future, much more cancer
will be regarded as curable.'


    Longer lives need new care structure

    THE breakdown of traditional forms of help for the sick - the Church,
cohesive families and social services - will make it essential to provide
alternative support systems.

    In the longer term, treatments will be increasingly sophisticated and
patients will need to be involved in decisions about those they wish to receive.
By the end of the century, patients are likely to have a much bigger say in
their care, and will be told far more about the impact of treatment on their
life.

    Professor Karol Sikora said: 'Highly-skilled nurse specialists will be
assigned to each patient to guide them through the available services and help
co-ordinate their care.'


    3-D images for surgeons of the future

    THE SURGEON of the next century will be a highly skilled expert in robotics
and in computer-driven systems which can reconstruct a 3-D image of a tumour.

    Machines will have taken over most of the planning of treatment. New
techniques will help doctors pinpoint the exact spot where tumour meets normal
tissue, so minimal damage is done to other organs, particularly crucial in the
brain.

    Using the latest fibre-optic information highways, the surgeon will be able
to carry out tasks by remote control.

    Over the next seven years there will be an increasing trend towards organ
conservation, particularly the bone, breast, bowel and skin and huge advances in
radiation therapy.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1995


                              285 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           September 5, 1995, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Page  18

LENGTH: 478 words

HEADLINE: CITY DIARY

BYLINE: Lucy Roberts

BODY:

    When Glaxo Wellcome reports its end of year results it will do so without
the help of its director of business development in Europe, Dr Martin
Preuveneers.

    Dr Preuveneers has been bitten by the targeted non-viral delivery systems
bug - state of the art stuff in this industry - and has joined the gene therapy
company, Therexsys. He is at pains to point out that his move is "entirely
positive." The decision to leave the newly-merged Glaxo Wellcome was very
difficult, but he could not resist the challenge.

    As chief executive his task will be to attract finance with a view to
floating the company in around three years time. The company is obviously hoping
for a little of the Preuveneers magic: at Glaxo he was responsible for marketing
Zantac, its best-seller.

    Billionaire Bill Gates had a sly go at IBM during his speech to computer
executives in Paris yesterday. Reminiscing about the heyday of Big Blue in the
70s and early 80s, he said "I don't think IBM would have included Microsoft as
one of the companies to worry about in those days." Neither is Bill loosing
sleep about IBM's OS2, a competitor to his Windows 95: "Everyone in this room
knows about IBM's record on software," he quipped.  But Gates admits that
companies in the high-tech sector seldom keep their lead for long. So exactly
which companies and technologies give him cause for competitive concern?
Considered threats include the likes of voice recognition and the new high-tech
consoles from the likes of Sega and Nintendo.

    The Capital Club, brainchild of Dieter Klostermann, and founder of the CCA
'club' group, will be celebrating the first birthday of his first London venue
later this month.

    Backed by the likes of Lords Palumbo and Gowrie, David Band of BZW and
Michael Dobson of Morgan Grenfell, the Club has benefited from the Oxford and
Cambridge Club's continuing veto on women membership.

    Each time the Oxford and Cambridge raises the issue, the number of women
members at the Capital increases, as Klostermann is fond of pointing out.  Women
can take advantage of all the club's facilities - even the gent's loo - which is
listed as of historical interest.

    Jonathan Fry, chief Executive of Burmah Castrol, needs to work on his joke
repertoire. In preparation for a presentation to the group's brokers, Cazenove,
his daughter, Lucy Abigail, who works at the stockbrokers and would be present
in the audience, implored her father to kick off his presentation with a few
good jokes. Mr Fry took the advice and worked up a series of witty and
good-humoured opening lines. However, when he ran them past the great and good
at Cazenove they were all vetoed. Stunned, Mr Fry asked why his jokes would not
rate at the presentation. "Far too intellectual," came the reply. "You should
stick to the much shorter, and preferably dirtier, variety."


LOAD-DATE: September 05, 1995


                              286 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           August 23, 1995, Wednesday

SECTION: COMMENT; Page  15

LENGTH: 1113 words

HEADLINE: Bigger profits, fewer cures; Two more drugs firms merged this week -
will patients be the losers?

BYLINE: FRANCINE STOCK

BODY:

    Across Europe and America, pharmaceutical companies are being swallowed like
pain-killers. The past week has seen the merger of US firm Upjohn with Pharmacia
of Sweden and a hostile bid by the French group Rhone-Poulenc Rorer for Fisons.
Earlier this year, Glaxo paid pounds 9.1bn for Wellcome. Who feels better for
all this - the companies, their customers or the patients?

    It makes financial sense, say the City columns. It's necessary for survival,
maintain the companies. Dragging a drug to market over the hurdles of research,
development and testing by the authorities takes on average 10 years, costs on
average $ 200m. Slap on a patent that lasts 20 years at most and enjoy the
profits until the bubble bursts in a flurry of generic competition. In short,
unless you have an annual budget for research and development of at least a
billion dollars, you can't play in the big league.

    This new cold logic in the pharmaceuticals industry comes after the fat
times of the Eighties. Drugs were often priced at the highest level the market
could bear, with margins reportedly as high as 90 per cent in some cases. Then
came reform in the management of health care. Often, this was driven by
government, as in this country. In the United States, pressure from health
managers and the health insurers anticipated President Clinton's wrestlings with
the system. Either way, the pharmaceutical industry found itself on the
defensive as the customer began to baulk at the cost. Between the big suppliers
and the big purchasers of drugs, systems of discounts sprang up.

    Nothing wrong, of course, with keeping costs down. A popular hero of recent
weeks was the pharmacist from Gwent who offered prescription patients a chance
to buy drugs over the counter, saving them up to three pounds a time. His local
Family Health Services Authority reckoned that they alone had the right to
haggle and, in any case, his tactics undermined the fundamental principle of the
NHS. Not surprisingly, the pharmacist was backed by the National Pharmaceutical
Association, eager to deliver a sly kick at its benefactor and tormentor - the
health manager.

    But in the US, lists of drugs that could be prescribed were themselves
circumscribed by cost considerations. Americans with ulcers who might have found
that Zantac sat easier on their stomachs than Tagamet were out of luck as
Zantac's manufacturer, Glaxo, was not prepared to give the health purchasers the
discounts they demanded. Price, not therapeutic effect, frequently became the
arbiter. Even in this country, what a manager would purchase for a health
authority and what they might want a sick relative to receive are often
different.

    The US currently makes up 40 per cent of the world drugs market. In Europe,
per capita spending on health is lower, but the proportion of that budget spent
on drugs is higher - around 16 per cent compared with six per cent in the United
States. In Britain, this is seen as the way of the future.  Thus, in ER, the
American television drama, the patient is no sooner through the doors of the
emergency room than the medics are calling down a battery of diagnostic tests,
burrowing the patient further into the hospital system.  But in Britain's
Casualty, the emphasis is on getting the wounded up and walking and out of
there, clutching a prescription. Drugs can keep people out of hospital, which is
where most of us would prefer to be.

    So the market will be strong - if the products are right. But what this
parade of bids and mergers demonstrates is that it has not been enough to have a
single "blockbuster" product (rough definition: a drug that brings in sales of
more than $ 500m a year). A successful company needs a string of hits and for
that, they must aim at the more lucrative areas - the medical obsessions of the
late 20th century developed world.

    The reasoning behind the merging of pharmaceutical companies is that they
can reduce costs by cutting areas of overlap. Inevitably, this surgery goes
beyond the sales force and the accounts department and slices into research. The
time has long gone when big companies allowed wild-haired men in white coats to
play around in the laboratory. The concept of serendipity in scientific research
is a luxury they can no longer afford. From now on, research has to be directed
at areas known to yield rewards. Employees of drugs companies are seeking out
rare plants in remote jungles or wrestling with gene therapy to find a range of
drugs to treat the long-term good bets in the market.

    So the bulk of research will be directed at chronic disease like asthma or
at cancers, Aids, motor neurone disease or Alzheimers. And while combining
companies may well have the benefit of increasing the research budget, that
research will inevitably be concentrated on a limited number of targets.  There
will be gaps in the range of therapeutic drugs available.

    Those who watch the industry reckon that by the end of the century, there
could be as few as five major drug conglomerates who could carve up the lusher
acreage of medicine between them. Beneath them would be a middle tier of smaller
companies with products to serve more esoteric areas.  Spreading the net wider -
and providing the most original work - would be the little research "boutiques".
In theory, these groups of independent scientists would provide the crucible for
innovation.

    The fact is, however, that the large conglomerates would always influence
what went on further down the chain. Smaller companies need investment to fund
their research; more often than not, this search for funds becomes a permanent
relationship of patronage with a much larger partner. Those five conglomerates
could effectively control most of the world market.

    And what, finally of the consumer, since in this case the customer and the
ultimate consumer are not one and the same? Britain has vocal and effective
patients' pressure groups. In the past, they've seen off proposals for
blacklists of NHS drugs. But in the end, patients can only demand drugs that are
developed and on the market. Patient choice must inevitably be squeezed between
the budget constraints of the health authority or the health insurer and the
margins of the drug companies. The bigger and more powerful these two opposing
forces become, the tighter the squeeze.

    Advice to patients is this - if you are going to get ill in the future and
you want a plentiful supply of the best drug available, go for a chronic but not
too expensive disease. Opt for something the bright sparks in market research
foresaw and do try to avoid anything too exotic and unfashionable.


LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1995


                              287 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 22, 1995, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Page  16

LENGTH: 864 words

HEADLINE: Door still open for agreed takeover of Fisons; Drugs: Hopes fade for
white knight in pounds 1.7bn bid as analysts pred ict return of merger mania

BYLINE: MATHEW HORSMAN

BODY:

    MATHEW HORSMAN

    Hopes that a white knight might emerge to save Fisons from a hostile pounds
1.7bn bid launched by Rhone-Poulenc Rorer faded yesterday, as at least one
competitor, Astra, ruled itself out and Fisons' shares fell 51/2p to end the day
at 259p. But RPR senior management left the door open for an agreed offer,
lauding the target company's chief executive and suggesting talks could resume.

    Commenting on RPR's offer document, published yesterday, Robert Cawthorn,
RPR's chairman, reiterated that the 240p a share offer fully valued Fisons,
based on publicly available information. He said that Stuart Wallis, Fisons'
chief executive, had done an excellent job restructuring his company and he
remained "surprised and disappointed" that talks on an agreed deal had failed.

    "In these situations, hostile bids can often become agreed bids," Mr
Cawthorn said, hinting he would be prepared to meet Mr Wallis again. Fisons,
which now has two weeks to publish its defence, had no comment.

    Meanwhile, shares in the pharmaceuticals sector on both sides of the
Atlantic rose yesterday, as analysts predicted the $ 200bn-a-year
pharmaceuticals industry will again be gripped by merger mania.

    Companies big, medium-sized and small are all struggling with the need to
contain costs and expand market share. Analysts expect that the top 10
companies, which now control 37 per cent of the market, might take as much as a
50 per cent by the end of the decade.

    Nigel Barnes, analyst with Merrill Lynch, says the action will be driven by
the need for new products. "In the next five years, there will be a difference
between those companies with a range of products and those without. The market
is likely to prefer companies with a strong new product flow."

    The pharmaceuticals team at NatWest Securities, meanwhile, say cost-cutting
will be an equally important influence on company strategy. They expect sales
forces to be further pruned, either by companies acting on their own or through
mergers like that between Upjohn and Pharmacia, worth $ 13bn, which is expected
to lead to savings of $ 500m.

    "There is still fat in the industry, and consolidation will help you cut
some of that," said RPR's Mr Cawthorn. But he stressed that "innovation is the
driving force. Eventually the cost squeeze won't be able to cut costs further."

    Innovation was the stated reason for Glaxo's pounds 9bn purchase of Wellcome
earlier this year. Armed with a portfolio of products soon to be beyond their
patent protection, and dependent on just four drugs for 80 per cent of profits,
Glaxo was desperate for new products.

    But most companies are far more diversified, with a range of drugs in
various therapeutic fields. RPR, for example, derived 80 per cent of its profits
from 80 different products last year. The company has set out to focus in four
or five niche areas, leading with asthma medicine.  Fisons' expertise in this
field is its main attraction.

    Given the varying reasons why companies either merge or seek strategic
partners, picking likely winners in the pharmaceutical business is tricky.
Likely success stories in the 1990s include Britain's Zeneca, widely tipped as a
potential acquisition, and Merck, the US giant.

    Analyst agree research and development is key, and companies that spend
significantly on developing new products - particularly those associated with
gene therapy - will be best placed. They also like firms with good geographic
spread, particularly a strong presence in the US market, responsible for 40 per
cent of all drug sales.

    Pharmacia's merger with Upjohn, unveiled at the weekend, meets the
diversification test: the Swedish concern gets a US presence, while Upjohn gains
access to Pharmacia's impressive new product list. But is the merger mania a
sign the industry is about to return to the heady days of the 1980s? Analysts
are split: NatWest calls for a return to annual sales growth rates of 10 per
cent by 2000, but others are more cautious.

    The industry's fortunes are intimately tied to the political climate.
Spiralling health care costs, along with a restructuring of the health care
sector in North America and in Europe, saw the growth in spending on drugs
tempered sharply in the early 1990s.

    But cost consciousness may end up helping the pharmaceuticals business,
analysts predict. An ageing population, coupled with pressures to introduce more
preventive care in place of expensive hospitalisation, may give the drugs sector
pride of place in health care.

    Comment, page 17

    Pharmaceuticals industry: the global deals

    July 93 Merck buys Medco pounds 3.8bn

    May 94 Roche buys Syntex pounds 3.4bn

    May 94 Sandoz buys Gerber pounds 2.4bn

    May 94 SKB buys Diversified Pharmaceuticals pounds 1.4bn

    May 94 Hoechst buys Marion Merrell Dow pounds 4.6bn

    July 94 Eli Lilly buys PCS pounds 2.6bn

    Aug 94 American Home Products buys Cyanamid pounds 6.3bn

    Aug 94 SKB buys Sterling Winthrop pounds 1.9bn

    Mar 95 Glaxo buys Wellcome pounds 9.0bn

    Aug 95 Rhone-Poulenc Rorer hostile offer Fisons pounds 1.7bn

    Aug 95 Pharmacia agreed merger Upjohn pounds 8.4bn


LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1995


                              288 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                                 July 27, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1654 words

HEADLINE: Falling for those old furry tales

BYLINE: Allison Pearson

BODY:


    VICKI Moore, the animal rights campaigner, who was gored by a bull she was
trying to rescue during a Spanish fiesta, regained consciousness only to burst
into tears when she heard that the beast had been shot. 'Poor bull,' she
murmured. Poor cow, more like.

    The delusions of the bunny-huggers are increasingly reported with a respect
that suggests they have access to vital truths hidden to the rest of us. During
a recent TV debate on medical experiments, a protester was asked what she would
do if her daughter was discovered to have a liver condition and the only
treatment available had been tested on animals. 'Naturally,' replied the woman
with a fanatic gleam in her eye, 'I would refuse the treatment.' Naturally?
There's something natural about a mother sticking to some barmy principle while
her child is in pain. Suffer little children, but whatever happens don't hurt
our furry friends, right?

    Nobody on the programme told the woman that she was wicked and foolish.  Not
even the man who was there to represent researchers. You see, it's become
dangerous to speak up for medical experiments on animals. The scientists who
carry them out don't want to alienate potential donors to their charity or risk
a firebomb through the kitchen window. And those of us who support them feel
squeamish about saying so because the animal fanatics have stolen the moral -
and emotional - high ground.

    Well, it's time to claim it back. There are compelling reasons for animal
experimentation and strict rules for its practice. Jane, a woman I know, works
at the cutting edge of cancer research. Recently, she wanted to begin some
genetic tests on mice. Before she could start, she had to make an application to
the Home Office. It consisted of several pages justifying every single
experiment and specifying their severity and the length of possible suffering.
The Home Office was unhappy about the length of one test and Jane rightly had to
amend it. To avoid contamination the mice, meanwhile, are kept at peak physical
condition - warm, clean and pampered.  People on income support should be so
lucky.

    Jane is working on gene therapies, which our children and grandchildren will
benefit from in 10 or 20 years' time. One treatment could relieve cystic
fibrosis by infecting the lungs with a virus that carried the correct copy of
the gene that sufferers are missing. But first it must be tried on the mice.
Approximately 1,200,000 rodents are used in experiments in Britain every year -
and how many do you imagine are tortured in the back garden every day by playful
pussycats?

    The animal rights brigade says these experiments could be performed equally
well on tissue culture - a claim as dubious as their 25-year-old propaganda
pictures of anguished laboratory monkeys. I once met a cystic fibrosis sufferer.
A young woman, she had a six-year-old son prematurely sensible from looking
after his mum. She lay on the sofa all day wheezing horribly. Her one slim hope
was a transplant - possibly from a pig. Someone asked the woman what she would
say to the animal rights campaigners. 'Let them,' she said, pausing a minute to
gather strength to finish the sentence, 'try living one day with my lungs, my
heart.'

    Honest George and the dwarfs

    MR GEORGE Walden is standing down as a Conservative MP. He no longer wishes
to be a part of a political process that is mainly about 'the management of
illusions'. Nor does he think the electorate should be treated like toddlers who
have to be thrown a few Smarties occasionally. His view of Parliament reminds me
of JB Priestley's view of politicians: 'A number of anxious dwarfs trying to
grill a whale.'

    I have been an admirer of Mr Walden's since I sat next to him at a Proms
concert. Emboldened by several stiff drinks, I asked him to account for the
heart-breakingly low calibre of your average politician. 'Just look at
Newsnight,' he said amiably. 'There's old Paxman getting two-hundred grand

    to ridicule the Secretary of State for Social Security, who's getting 60
grand for doing a job nobody in the world can do. If you were a bright graduate,
who would you rather be?' This outburst of honest good sense convinced me that
Mr Walden was an excellent fellow and that he had no future in politics.  OWING
to a procreative event so miraculous it could even make the former Bishop of
Durham reconsider his stand on the Virgin Birth, I found myself last week in
John Lewis looking for a maternity bra.

    I had put it off for as long as possible. But the evidence was growing.
Every new morning I awoke to find myself peering over the top of a missile silo.
The regular undies were starting to show the strain. 'Thunderbra!' exclaimed
Himself, who can always be relied upon for tact and reassurance.

    So it was off to Oxford Street in dark glasses and a black mood. Flailing
through the racks of frou-frou black lace numbers, I entered a long corridor
lined with cubicles. The Crimplene hush was broken only by the odd incredulous
cry: 'How big?'

    I was greeted by a delightful Irish assistant. 'Don't worry,' she beamed
'I've picked you out a really pretty one.' It was then that she held up the
garment. With its starched acres of boiled white and clanking chains, it had
clearly last been used to restrain a Victorian madman.

    'That can't possibly fit me,' I said airily. The assistant was ready,
though. Moving faster than I could protest, she smartly lassoed me around the
silo and snapped the buckles shut. 'There,' she said approvingly, '38E with
plenty of room for expansion.'

    'How big?' I moaned.

    It is surely one of the crueller ironies of pregnancy that just as nature
finally sees fit to endow you with the top half of Pamela Anderson, down below
you acquire the withers of Eric Bristow. Leaving the lingerie department heaving
a crate containing my new support garment, I was suddenly reminded of the
poignant words of the great - indeed vast - Jo Brand: 'Triumph has the bra for
the way you are! Does it hell. Isambard Kingdom Brunel has the bra for the way I
am.'

    FOR those readers not lucky enough to live in the borough of Islington, this
column offers an occasional catch-up service so you can see what fun and games
you are missing. Take the recent case of Mrs X - not her real name - who
suffered a debilitating stroke. While recovering in hospital, Mrs X requested
that the council move her from her high-rise flat into a ground floor apartment
so that she could gain access to her home. Sadly, the council said that it could
not oblige. It did, however, have a solution to Mrs X's problem. Every time she
wanted to go in or out of her flat she should get on the phone and call the fire
brigade.

    Fiendishly simple, eh? Nice burly lads show up every couple of hours and
hoist Mrs X up and down the stairs. Now, a few readers may be thinking: what a
ludicrous waste of good money and better firemen. As an Islington resident, I
naturally take a more positive view. I can hardly wait for an old age in which I
get to ride piggyback on uniformed hunks while London burns.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1995


                              291 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             July 17, 1995, Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Page  6

LENGTH: 297 words

HEADLINE: Discoveries raise hopes of gene therapy for baldness

BODY:

    A cure for baldness may be a big step nearer after important breakthroughs
by scientists in Britain and the United States.

    Researchers at Bradford University have isolated the cells that regulate
hair growth from a balding scalp. They are now engaged in searching for
molecules from the cells involved in controlling hair growth.

    At the same time, scientists in the US have discovered a way of delivering
genetic material into hair follicles by packing it into microscopic droplets of
fat.

    Together, the two pieces of research mark a significant step forward in the
search for a cure for baldness.

    Dr Nigel Hibberts, of the Department of Medical Sciences at Bradford
University, said: "Things are getting quite exciting. If we can isolate the
molecule that causes baldness, we might be able to isolate the gene involved in
controlling hair growth. Then some sort of gene therapy might be possible."

    The key to the research involves comparing test-tube cultures of cells from
balding and non-balding scalps and looking for their "growth factor" molecules.

    Until now this comparison was not possible because no one had managed to
isolate balding cells in a test tube.

    Researchers do not know if the cells are producing something which inhibits
hair growth, or not producing something necessary for hair to grow.

    They hope that comparing the cultures will help them find the answer.

    Ultimately the solution to male-pattern baldness might lie in introducing
the right sort of gene into the hair follicles - which is where the American
research comes in.

    Dr Hibberts said: "The difficult part is finding the gene. I would be very
surprised if there's just one special molecule. You're probably talking about a
combination of several."


LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1995


                              298 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             June 20, 1995, Tuesday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Page  14

LENGTH: 1320 words

HEADLINE: Who owns science?; If scientists want the public to be interested in
their work, they must learn to take criticism and give up control, says John
Durant

BODY:

    Along the Mall in Washington DC, that broad, green triumphal avenue
stretching up to Capitol Hill, lies the Smithsonian Institution, roughly the
equivalent of our British Museum, National Gallery, Natural History Museum and
Science Museum all rolled into one. Conventionally, museums are tranquil, even
musty, places, dedicated to the uncontroversial collection of antiquarian
artefacts. But the atmosphere along the Mall has become decidedly tense. For the
Smithsonian has become a bitter battleground in America's culture wars. The
issue is "who owns history?" and, surprisingly, science is in the firing line.

    The first casualty of these conflicts was Martin Harwit, director of the
Smithsonian's National Air and Space Museum, who was forced to resign last
month. The immediate cause of his resignation was a controversy over a proposed
exhibition on the Enola Gay, the aircraft that dropped the atom bomb on
Hiroshima 50 years ago. Initially, war veterans' groups complained about the
allegedly pro-Japanese script for the exhibition, and, in response to a swelling
chorus of protest, the museum first modified the script and then cancelled the
exhibition altogether. Even this, however, was not enough to satisfy the
critics. Following a critical editorial in the Washington Post, 81 members of
Congress called for Harwit's resignation; and on 3 May he duly complied.

    As if this were not bad enough, across the Mall from the National Air and
Space Museum a disconcertingly similar controversy has been going on for almost
a year. Last spring, the National Museum of American History opened a huge
exhibition entitled "Science in American Life". The exhibition, sponsored by the
American Chemical Society (ACS), features a combination of interactive science
(including an extremely imaginative cafe-style hands-on science centre) and
historical exhibits charting the role of science in American society since 1876.
Once again, it is the historical content of the exhibition that has proved
controversial.

    While the exhibition was still being developed, representatives of the ACS
expressed reservations about the emphasis being given to the technological and
wider social impacts of science. A few weeks after it opened, the head of public
relations at the American Physical Society, Robert L Park, extended the debate
into the ether by publishing an openly hostile review in a weekly electronic
newsletter called What's New.

    "The focus is not on discovery," he wrote, "but on the public's changing
view of science - a view that is certain to worsen as a result of the exhibit .
. . It's all there: mushroom clouds, a family bomb shelter from the Sixties, DDT
and CFCs. As you leave the exhibit, there is a sign warning visitors to 'Stop
and think! Is gene therapy safe?' "

    Park's hostile critique sparked an open debate that continues to run, not
just on the electronic bulletin boards (where new comments are still being made
daily) but also in the scientific journals, in the press, and at a series of
meetings with sponsors, scientists and others about the exhibition, whose
contents the National Museum of American History has been obliged to
renegotiate.

    It is not yet clear how much the museum may be willing to concede by way of
changes, or whether the debate will become as bitter and as polarised as that
surrounding the Enola Gay, but at this point I would be surprised if the museum
staff directly involved in the exhibition are confident of the final outcome.

    At one level, these parallel controversies are about America's wish to
define itself and its place in the world in the post-Cold War era. As one of the
curators of "Science in American Life" somewhat ruefully commented when I
visited the exhibition recently: "This debate has taught me that Americans
expect the Smithsonian to hold up to them an acceptable picture of themselves."
With the recent change of political complexion in the US Congress, liberal and
conservative forms of political correctness have come into open conflict with
one another, to the point where today it would appear to require bravery or even
sheer bravado to contemplate mounting an exhibition in the US on any significant
historical or cultural topics.

    But there are other, deeper issues at stake here. For the debates about
Enola Gay and "Science in American Life" are also about who owns history; that
is, about just who is entitled to interpret the development of modern science to
the public. In both cases, the efforts of professional historians and exhibitors
have met with hostility from scientists and scientific publicists, who object
not only to what they see as negative and damaging images of science but also to
what they appear to regard as illicit trespassing on scientific territory by
non-scientific (and therefore incompetent) commentators. It is almost as if some
scientists were seeking to restrict public comment upon their subject to
themselves and their professional colleagues alone.

    Scientists have complained loudly in recent years that they and their
subjects are too often ignored by mainstream culture, and have made a bid for
greater visibility under the banner of public understanding of science. There
are signs that they have had a certain amount of success.  For example, there
has been a boom in popular science on radio and TV, in books and magazines and
in quality newspapers. It is almost as if broadcasters, publishers and editors
had suddenly discovered that science sells.

    I sometimes wonder, though, whether scientists who sign up for the public
understanding of science are always aware of the implications of what they are
doing. While science stays inside the laboratory, it is directed and managed by
scientists and their (generally sympathetic) paymasters; but once it moves out
into popular culture, it is no longer under their (or, for that matter, anyone
else's) complete control. Scientists who want their work to be part of
mainstream culture must accommodate themselves and their discipline to a set of
rules very different from those that operate within their learned societies and
journals. This, as the recent events at the Smithsonian reveal, can be
difficult.

    There is a deep irony about some scientists' simultaneous desire for a
greater presence within mainstream culture and their dissatisfaction with some
of the more striking ways in which science has come to be represented in that
culture. Part of the price that science must pay for a more central place within
culture is a willingness to tolerate comment and criticism from far outside the
scientific community. In fact, this is not as high a price as it seems; for
comment and criticism will occur anyway. The real choice to be made by the
scientific community is whether it will stand aloof from the debate (which means
leaving the field to others), or whether it will join in so as to ensure that
scientific voices are heard alongside others.

    In the UK, we are at a crucial stage in the development of a more publicly
and culturally visible science. Great strides have been made, but some of the
same tensions that are evident across the Atlantic are also present here.
Science is too important be left out of our culture; but, by the same token,
culture is too important to be left in the hands of scientists alone. Culture is
the domain of judgement, of commentary and of criticism.  It would be disastrous
if the existence of different judgements, commentaries and criticisms about
matters scientific were to lead scientists to withdraw from that wider discourse
among men and women of good faith, without which we shall never succeed in
unifying CP Snow's "two cultures".

    Dr John Durant is professor of public understanding of science at Imperial
College, London and assistant director of the Science Museum. and science are in
dispute Photographs: Hulton Deutsch/ Range/Bettmann


LOAD-DATE: June 20, 1995


                              299 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            May 31, 1995, Wednesday

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL; Page  13

LENGTH: 317 words

HEADLINE: Genetic clue to artist's deformity

BYLINE: Joanne Kenenof Reuters

BODY:

    Washington - Doctors believe they have found evidence of a gene thought to
cause a rare form of dwarfism that may have afflicted the French artist Henri de
Toulouse-Lautrec.

    The discovery may lead at last to a definitive posthumous diagnosis of the
painter, known for dark portraits of cafes and cabarets in which the tiny,
tormented artist often made his subjects look more deformed than he was himself.

    Scientists at New York's Mount Sinai Hospital, tracking the disorder in an
Israeli Arab family, and a separate team at the US National Institutes of
Health, studying a Mexican family, have found genetic indications - called
"markers" - for a form of dwarfism known as pycnodysostosis. They have not yet
isolated the gene itself.

    The scientists hope the research, presented in the June edition of Nature
Genetics, leads to a pre-natal screening test or even some day to corrective
gene therapy. They also hope it sheds light on disorders involving bone
formation.

    As far back as 1962, two French doctors, Pierre Maro-teaux and M Lamy
theorised that Toulouse-Lautrec, who died of alcoholism aged 36, suffered from
pycnodysostosis.

    Dr Bruce Gelb, working with Dr Robert Desnick at Mount Sinai, said the
painter's relatives have thus far not seemed eager to exhume him for research.
But since there was a fair amount of inbreeding in his family of French
aristocrats, genetic tests on his cousins' surviving children could determine if
the mutation runs in the family.

    Toulouse-Lautrec's biographer, Julia Frey of the University of Colorado,
questions in an accompanying essay in the journal whether his short stature was
caused by this genetic defect or had some other origin.

    He had some of the characteristics of pycnodysostosis, including shortness
and a tendency to fracture bones, but did not have others like a bulging,
misshapen skull and receding chin.


LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1995


                              302 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             May 18, 1995, Thursday

SECTION: HOME; Page  4

LENGTH: 317 words

HEADLINE: Genetic tests 'may worsen inequality'

BYLINE: DAVID NICHOLSON-LORD Consumer Affairs Correspondent

BODY:

    BY DAVID NICHOLSON-LORD

    Consumer Affairs Correspondent

    Genetic testing for inherited disease could widen social divisions and
create a pool of "uninsurable" people, the National Consumer Council says.

    The council says that if results from genetic tests become available to the
insurance industry, many people could be denied access to health care and the
housing market because they would be considered too high a risk. Their families
- both living and "as yet unborn" - would also be penalised, since they carry
the same gene. Identification of genetic traits could mean people being denied
life insurance and thus a mortgage, or insurance for nursing care, or being
offered policies they cannot afford.

    In evidence to the Commons Select Committee on Science and Technology, the
council says the effect could be to "reinforce social inequality and restrict
opportunities in lifestyle - through no fault of the individual and beyond their
power to control".

    The committee, which began its inquiry into human genetic research last
November and is likely to report in July, is examining issues such as the
confidentiality of test findings and the role of any national "human genome"
authority to supervise research and ethical standards.

    Gene therapy - based on the attempt to isolate genes which may predict
illnesses such as Alzheimer's disease or cancer - is one of the fastest- growing
areas of medical research. By 2010, it has been estimated, nearly 30 per cent of
health costs in the West will stem from it. The council said that if access to
gene therapy depends on wealth, inequalities will be exacerbated, with treatment
becoming "the preserve of the privileged few".

    The council says the dilemmas illustrate the limitations of normal
commercial insurance. To prevent discrimination, "maximum protection" should be
given to the results of genetic tests.


LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1995


                              303 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 18, 1995, Saturday

SECTION: COMMENT; Page  13

LENGTH: 1029 words

HEADLINE: How far must we go for a cure?; Britain excels in medical innovation.
So why do patients end up going abroad? Nicholas Timmins explains

BYLINE: NICHOLAS TIMMINS

BODY:

    Four-year-old Chelsea Burke from Herne in Kent was yesterday recovering from
treatment for a brain tumour in New York. She had been sent there this week
after British doctors said they were unable to do anything more to help her. Two
years ago Laura Davies was flown to the US for two multi- organ transplants that
failed, leaving her dead and her parents sundered.  Last October Alicia
McCluckie, a three-year-old from Cheshire, successfully underwent the same
treatment as Chelsea, at the same clinic, for which the NHS paid pounds 32,000.

    Including Alicia, the Department of Health has allowed the funding of four
patients in the US in the past year because the equivalent treatment was not
available in the UK. Is Britain falling behind on the cutting edge of medicine?

    Bryan Jennett, emeritus professor of neurosurgery at Glasgow University,
doubts it. In the two brain tumour cases, it appears that all the elements of
the treatment the little girls required are available in Britain - but not
combined in one centre. New treatments have to start somewhere, Professor
Jennett says, and New York is ahead.

    But in other cases, such as Laura Davies, "the Americans tend to have more
nerve, be more heroic and take more risks, to put people through operations
where British doctors would judge that things are best left alone. It is partly
cultural, partly their system: a more entrepreneurial society with private
facilities, less regulation and more aggressive doctors and patients.

    "Americans tend to believe that death is optional. And with their private
system, if you shop around enough and are prepared to pay, and to go through
whatever it takes, you can usually find someone willing to have a go."

    Britain has a long track record of innovation in medicine, pioneering hip
replacements, heart and liver transplants and inventing CT scanning and magnetic
resonance imaging, the modern equivalents of X-rays - although the old jibe of
"invented in Britain, developed in America, made in Japan or Germany" applies to
the last two. Today Britain remains ahead in gene therapy for cystic fibrosis
and leads the world in developing transgenic pigs as possible sources of organs
for transplant, for example, although the sheer scale of research elsewhere
dwarfs Britain's contribution.

    Innovation is driven by individuals, ambition, research facilities, money
and culture. South Africa would have been at the top of no one's list for the
frontiers of medicine in 1968; yet Christian Barnard was determined to undertake
the world's first heart transplant. In hi-tech Japan, says Robert Maxwell,
secretary of the King's Fund health think-tank, treatments requiring lasers are
ahead of the world. But their transplant programme lags behind because of
cultural objections to the use of organs.

    The Soviet Union developed eye surgery to remove the need for spectacles,
the one medical area where it led the world - to scepticism in the West and
worries about the long-term results.

    Caution, and a growing concern about cost-effectiveness, informBritain's
approach: there have been too many examples of medical technologies, from foetal
monitoring to new surgical and investigative techniques, adopted wholesale
before their real value - and side-effects - were fully known.  One of the key
gains from the NHS reforms has been a new emphasis on "evidence- based
medicine", working to establish which treatments work and are cost- effective,
and attempting to discard those that are not.

    Sir Terence English, the heart surgeon, says: "It is becoming more
controlled now than in 1979, when I restarted the heart transplant programme. It
would be more difficult to do that now because we demand that things be properly
evaluated. I don't know whether this stifles innovation, but if it does, it is
at the margin. We simply have to find out how best to use limited health budgets
- and that applies everywhere, not just in Britain."

    The scale of health spending and research in the US, and to a lesser extent
Japan, Germany and France, means that many new techniques and treatments are
bound to be developed elsewhere rather than in Britain. "For some conditions, it
may be that a global market will develop, with patients having to travel for
treatment," Mr Maxwell says. "If we were having this conversation somewhere
other than in London, in a significantly poorer country, that would obviously be
true now. As the health spending gap widens, that may happen between more
countries. If you need a particularly expensive piece of kit to provide the
treatment, that is a considerable barrier to a treatment spreading quickly."

    Professor Sir Colin Dollery, dean of the Royal Postgraduate Medical School,
is less certain. "For particular activities, at particular times, it may be
true, but it is likely to be transient. Twenty years ago, Seattle was one of the
major centres for transplantation, and I remember sending patients there for
treatment. But new technologies and new techniques do spread out very quickly
these days."

    In the early Eighties, for example, patients from Scandinavia were coming to
Britain for heart transplants as the British programme developed, and bigger
volumes tend rapidly to cut the cost of new technologies, even of large items of
equipment such as scanners.

    What worries Sir Colin and Sir Terence is not so much Britain's competence
but its capacity. The NHS has been slow to buy enough CT scanning machines, and
needs more magnetic resonance imaging. For certain skin conditions, Britain has
only two lasers available, both in London. Operations once seen as hi-tech but
now routine - such as coronary artery bypass - remain lower in Britain than many
other countries. "The Americans almost certainly do too many of these
operations," Sir Terence says, "but we are doing too few."

    But while there will always be somewhere in the world that for a time leads
the way in new treatments, Sir Colin says that in general, "if I fell ill
tomorrow, I can't think of any disease where it would be necessary to get on the
first plane across the Atlantic to get the best possible treatment".


LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1995


                              304 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 18, 1995, Saturday

SECTION: COMMENT; Page  13

LENGTH: 1029 words

HEADLINE: How far must we go for a cure?; Britain excels in medical innovation.
So why do patients end up going abroad? Nicholas Timmins explains

BYLINE: NICHOLAS TIMMINS

BODY:

    Four-year-old Chelsea Burke from Herne in Kent was yesterday recovering from
treatment for a brain tumour in New York. She had been sent there this week
after British doctors said they were unable to do anything more to help her. Two
years ago Laura Davies was flown to the US for two multi- organ transplants that
failed, leaving her dead and her parents sundered.  Last October Alicia
McCluckie, a three-year-old from Cheshire, successfully underwent the same
treatment as Chelsea, at the same clinic, for which the NHS paid pounds 32,000.

    Including Alicia, the Department of Health has allowed the funding of four
patients in the US in the past year because the equivalent treatment was not
available in the UK. Is Britain falling behind on the cutting edge of medicine?

    Bryan Jennett, emeritus professor of neurosurgery at Glasgow University,
doubts it. In the two brain tumour cases, it appears that all the elements of
the treatment the little girls required are available in Britain - but not
combined in one centre. New treatments have to start somewhere, Professor
Jennett says, and New York is ahead.

    But in other cases, such as Laura Davies, "the Americans tend to have more
nerve, be more heroic and take more risks, to put people through operations
where British doctors would judge that things are best left alone. It is partly
cultural, partly their system: a more entrepreneurial society with private
facilities, less regulation and more aggressive doctors and patients.

    "Americans tend to believe that death is optional. And with their private
system, if you shop around enough and are prepared to pay, and to go through
whatever it takes, you can usually find someone willing to have a go."

    Britain has a long track record of innovation in medicine, pioneering hip
replacements, heart and liver transplants and inventing CT scanning and magnetic
resonance imaging, the modern equivalents of X-rays - although the old jibe of
"invented in Britain, developed in America, made in Japan or Germany" applies to
the last two. Today Britain remains ahead in gene therapy for cystic fibrosis
and leads the world in developing transgenic pigs as possible sources of organs
for transplant, for example, although the sheer scale of research elsewhere
dwarfs Britain's contribution.

    Innovation is driven by individuals, ambition, research facilities, money
and culture. South Africa would have been at the top of no one's list for the
frontiers of medicine in 1968; yet Christian Barnard was determined to undertake
the world's first heart transplant. In hi-tech Japan, says Robert Maxwell,
secretary of the King's Fund health think-tank, treatments requiring lasers are
ahead of the world. But their transplant programme lags behind because of
cultural objections to the use of organs.

    The Soviet Union developed eye surgery to remove the need for spectacles,
the one medical area where it led the world - to scepticism in the West and
worries about the long-term results.

    Caution, and a growing concern about cost-effectiveness, informBritain's
approach: there have been too many examples of medical technologies, from foetal
monitoring to new surgical and investigative techniques, adopted wholesale
before their real value - and side-effects - were fully known.  One of the key
gains from the NHS reforms has been a new emphasis on "evidence- based
medicine", working to establish which treatments work and are cost- effective,
and attempting to discard those that are not.

    Sir Terence English, the heart surgeon, says: "It is becoming more
controlled now than in 1979, when I restarted the heart transplant programme. It
would be more difficult to do that now because we demand that things be properly
evaluated. I don't know whether this stifles innovation, but if it does, it is
at the margin. We simply have to find out how best to use limited health budgets
- and that applies everywhere, not just in Britain."

    The scale of health spending and research in the US, and to a lesser extent
Japan, Germany and France, means that many new techniques and treatments are
bound to be developed elsewhere rather than in Britain. "For some conditions, it
may be that a global market will develop, with patients having to travel for
treatment," Mr Maxwell says. "If we were having this conversation somewhere
other than in London, in a significantly poorer country, that would obviously be
true now. As the health spending gap widens, that may happen between more
countries. If you need a particularly expensive piece of kit to provide the
treatment, that is a considerable barrier to a treatment spreading quickly."

    Professor Sir Colin Dollery, dean of the Royal Postgraduate Medical School,
is less certain. "For particular activities, at particular times, it may be
true, but it is likely to be transient. Twenty years ago, Seattle was one of the
major centres for transplantation, and I remember sending patients there for
treatment. But new technologies and new techniques do spread out very quickly
these days."

    In the early Eighties, for example, patients from Scandinavia were coming to
Britain for heart transplants as the British programme developed, and bigger
volumes tend rapidly to cut the cost of new technologies, even of large items of
equipment such as scanners.

    What worries Sir Colin and Sir Terence is not so much Britain's competence
but its capacity. The NHS has been slow to buy enough CT scanning machines, and
needs more magnetic resonance imaging. For certain skin conditions, Britain has
only two lasers available, both in London. Operations once seen as hi-tech but
now routine - such as coronary artery bypass - remain lower in Britain than many
other countries. "The Americans almost certainly do too many of these
operations," Sir Terence says, "but we are doing too few."

    But while there will always be somewhere in the world that for a time leads
the way in new treatments, Sir Colin says that in general, "if I fell ill
tomorrow, I can't think of any disease where it would be necessary to get on the
first plane across the Atlantic to get the best possible treatment".


LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1995


                              305 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             March 17, 1995, Friday

SECTION: FEATURES; Page  25

LENGTH: 1659 words

HEADLINE: YOU WERE A PERFECT BABY; It is 2095 and time Sharon's Mum told her the
facts of life. On the first day of National Science Week, Tom Wilkie steps into
a future of genetically fabricated families

BYLINE: Tom Wilkie

BODY:

    For Trevor and Tracy, it was the moment every parent finds difficult.
Sharon, their eldest, had started asking The Question: where did I come from,
Mummy? As she patted her daughter's blond hair (catalogue number: HC 205) and
looked into her perfect cornflower blue eyes (EC 317), Tracy decided that, in
2095, there was nothing to be squeamish about.

    Sharon had heard disturbing rumours about how in the old days, when a man
and a woman wanted to have a baby, they went to bed with each other and left the
outcome to passion and chance. Well, this was not the way her father and mother
had set about bringing their daughter into the world, Tracy assured her.

    It was virtually inconceivable that any responsible parent could permit a
child to be born whose genes had been left to the chance shuffling of natural
processes, although there were rumours of underground groups that still
practised "chance childbirth" as it was called. No, that was quite obscene. No
parent would allow a foetus to go through nine months of development without
knowing the colour of its eyes, or whether it had straight hair or wavy. Good
grief, no one would ever conceive a child without specifying the genes for its
intelligence quotient, which would help determine its chances in education and
subsequent employment.

    No, Sharon had to understand that Trevor and Tracy had been thorough.  They
had gone to the Ideal Baby exhibition at Olympia and they had combed through
months of back issues of Genes and Babies magazine. They had window- shopped
hopefully at the Harrods' Baby Counter (but the prices were prohibitive) and had
leafed carefully through the glossy pages of a Swedish genetic superstore's DNA
Catalogue for novel ideas. They would have liked to go to one of the specialist
gene designers, who trawled the world's gene banks, for the most exotic mixtures
and the latest models. In the end, though, Trevor was only a relatively humble
virtual manager and they could afford only to go along to their local
mass-retailer, the Genes 'R' Us supermarket to choose Sharon's genes.

    All children these days were put together according to their parents'
specifications. And, of course, Trevor and Tracy would have sent back any baby
which did not conform to their wishes. The right of return with full refund had
been written into the recent Consumer Protection (Human DNA) Act. The Act was
passed after a long debate following a couple of controversial High Court cases
in which the judges (such old men, and so completely out of touch with the
modern world) had ruled that any human baby merited the law's protection whether
it met the parents' specification or not. Their rulings had met with a howl of
protest from parents insisting that the gene-retailers and baby farmers should
be forced to keep to their contracts.

    As Colchester's Anglican vicar, Tracy felt she had a moral duty to explain
to her daughter the facts of life. (Married women had been at a premium in the
Church since the schism following the great "gay synod" of 2004.)

    Tracy explained that the "blueprint" for all living things, plants and
animals alike, is contained in a substance called DNA. The set of instructions
which tells a fertilised egg that it is to develop into a human being and not a
chimpanzee is written out in chemical letters along the DNA.  Family
resemblances arise, Tracy explained, because children inherit their DNA from
their parents, transmitted in the egg and sperm. Or at least that was how
matters had been before technology and civilisation had allowed parents to
choose their child's genetic inheritance at will. That was why Sharon had fair
hair, blue eyes and creamy-pink skin whereas her mother and father both had
brown eyes, dark skin and hair.

    But the Church paid its priests poorly and there had been a recession at the
genetically engineered food factory where Trevor worked, so, Tracy reflected, it
might be better not to mention the fact that they had not been able to afford
the most expensive high intelligence genetic profile for Sharon. Over the
previous two decades, high intelligence genes had been hoarded by a giant
Chinese corporation, which traded under the name GeneSoft. Prices had been
driven beyond the reach of ordinary consumers like Trevor and Tracy.

    They had settled for a cheaper model (catalogue number: IQ 200). Sharon
would therefore always be less intelligent than her school-friend Charlotte,
whose grandparents had taken out a second mortgage to help purchase for her the
genes guaranteeing ultra-high intelligence (catalogue number IQ 300). And
because Charlotte's grandfather had been a geneticist, they had been able to get
a trade discount.

    Sharon could learn the realities of the market economy later, Tracy decided;
for the moment she would have to stick to the facts of biology to tell Sharon
about the history of human reproduction and genetics. She settled Sharon down in
front of their Netscreen module and told it to call up the history service,
which then through holographic clips, graphics and 3D-images began to explain
how society had put scientific knowledge to use to arrive at the genetic
superstores of 2095.

    The first step on the road away from superstition and towards the decency of
the 21st century came in the 1960s, when The Pill first became available.  For
the first time in history, women were freed from the burden of biology and could
choose when to have a baby.

    Technology moved on very quickly, the Netscreen virtual environment
explained, using dated television news clips from 1978 to tell the story of
Louise Brown, the world's first test-tube baby. The technique, "in vitro
fertilisation" offered another way for people to take control of their biology.
IVF meant a woman could carry in her womb a child to which she bore no genetic
relationship.

    In 1985, Britain's first commercial surrogate mother, Kim Cotton, was paid
pounds 6,500 to have an American couple's baby. By 1993 Italian doctors had
implanted a fertilised egg, donated by a white woman, into the womb of a black
woman, thus altering one of the most firmly established of all inherited traits:
that a child should resemble its parents. Now prospective parents could choose
the skin colour and racial grouping of their offspring.

    Yet something far more profound was going on elsewhere. At a cost of more
than $ 3bn, scientists in the major developed countries were sifting through the
human genome: the compendium of all the genes in humanity's inherited blueprint.
When this international Human Genome Project was complete, scientists had read
the set of instructions written in DNA : they began to rewrite it as well.

    On 14 September 1990, doctors at the US National Institutes of Health near
Washington DC conducted the first successful attempt to treat disease by
transplanting human genes a four-year-old girl who suffered from an inborn
defect of her immune system that had left her defenceless against infection.
Within weeks of her gene therapy, the girl was going dancing and taking skating
lessons, without fear of infection.

    At that point Trevor returned from work. As she saw him Tracy felt, as
always, joy that he was still alive. In an unpleasant incident at work involving
the plutonium and the cobalt-60 source of gamma-rays, Trevor's spleen, liver and
kidneys had been destroyed. But the two of them were fortunate that they had
taken out extra health insurance to cover genetic engineering of a pig, which
was bred to provide organs suitable for transplant and which were virtually
guaranteed not to be rejected by Trevor's immune system.

    Trevor and Tracy had made sure that, when Sharon was born, they had invested
in breeding a line of customised pigs containing copies of Sharon's genes in
case she needed organ transplants later.

    Yet science was not the only force at work. Commerce became increasingly
powerful. Commerce was at the forefront of the Human Genome Project. Many
genetics researchers in the USA and several in Britain were directors of private
biotechnology companies, while receiving research grants from public funds or
from charities. It was the greatest privatisation programme of the 21st century:
the privatisation of DNA.

    The scientific power of the new genetics, to fabricate what was previously
seen as natural, was harnessed not by the public sector but by the market and
giant corporations. Genetic engineering research had led to prototypes, which
had led to production for general consumption. Soon the genetics industry was
following the same path of software, information technology and semi-conductors
in the 20th century. The huge R&D costs had to be covered by worldwide sales.
Those were the commercial and scientific roots of the genetics superstores of
2095.

    "All very interesting", said Sharon, wriggling on the sofa, "but Neighbours
will be on in a minute, can't you just tell me where I came from?" Tracy
wondered why they hadn't spent a bit more money to get one of the higher-
powered patience genes that had just come on the market. So she told her
daughter the story.

    By the middle of the 21st century advances in science had produced female
gorillas with a virtually human reproductive system. So a human egg fertilised
in vitro could be implanted in the uterus of such a gorilla. That was how Sharon
had been born. After Tracy and Trevor had chosen her genes, they had come back
to Genes 'R' Us nine months later to pick up their new child which had been
nurtured in the surrogate womb of a genetically engineered female gorilla.
Tracy, happily, was spared the bother and inconvenience of having to be pregnant
or the difficulties and pain of birth.

    On 23 March, the 'Independent' is holding a public debate at the Institute
of Education in London on 'Monster Myths: are writers demonising the new
genetics?' Tickets ( pounds 10) available by phoning 0171-611 8442.


LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1995


                              306 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             March 7, 1995, Tuesday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Page  27

LENGTH: 1241 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE : Mad boffins and other science fictions; Ruth McKernan, a
geneticist, looks at the image problem of scientists in response to Maureen
Duffy's article last week initiating our debate on 'monster myths'

BYLINE: Ruth McKernan

BODY:

    "Ninety per cent of scientists are nutters." Then as an afterthought Leonard
Low, 60, added: "But they're clever nutters." His definition was fairly typical
of the people I interviewed in the market in Harlow, Essex, one Saturday
afternoon in an attempt to gauge the public perception of scientists. People see
us, at best, as an eccentric bunch of white- coated boffins and, at worst,
verging on evil.

    "When I think of scientists I think of vivisectors. Scientists are nutters.
They want to muck about with nature. There's not much you can look back on and
say that science was good for," said Mr Kline, 52.

    We are viewed as uncharismatic oddballs - not the sort of person you would
want to invite to a party. When I took courage and admitted to being one of
these social misfits, interviewees were surprised. I did not appear to fit the
mould.

    But who do people think of when asked to name a scientist? Well, er, um . .
. Strangely, although most people I spoke to had a clear mental picture of a
scientist, few could name one. A remarkable exception was Robert Lorrimer, 33,
who runs a fabric stall on the market. He came up with George Porter, Albert
Einstein and Stephen Hawking quicker than most contestants on University
Challenge could answer a starter for 10. He followed this up by describing plans
to interface his personal organiser with the Internet.  He was not typical.

    Where then does the perception of scientists as weird or crazy come from?
According to three-year-old Francesca Guest, "Scientists are people who look for
bones buried in the earth". She has learnt this from her book on dinosaurs.
Presumably, others form their images of scientists from what they read, hear and
see. If scientists are perceived as strange, it is because they are portrayed as
such.

    Films like Frankenstein, The Fly and Jurassic Park and television programmes
such as First Born and Chimera may be entertaining, but they present a vision of
scientists which, though memorable, is unrealistic. There is also a handful of
media scientists, such as Magnus Pyke and Patrick Moore, whose extrovert
mannerisms make science entertaining but also propagate the boffin image. In the
real world, scientists are no more all nutters than all cabinet ministers are
untrustworthy adulterers and all footballers are violent prima donnas. One
expects that those in the public eye are the exceptions rather than the rule.

    Perhaps it wouldn't matter that some people have a distorted view of
scientists if they appreciated how science underpins our lives. Perhaps it would
be OK if eccentricity were necessary for creativity and scientists were
nevertheless admired for their contributions. Sadly, this seems not to be the
case. Too many people distrust scientists.

    A survey carried out in 1985 by New Scientist found science ranked below
medicine and the armed forces as an institution whose leaders the public
trusted. However, the credibility of doctors depends on decades of research by
scientists developing a huge range of medicines, anaesthetics and vaccines and
the success of generals relies on scientific research in aeronautics, radar and
ammunitions technology, for example. It is through the efforts of scientists
that doctors and generals are in their privileged positions. The poor perception
of scientists seems all the more unfair since the public generally does not know
who today's scientific leaders are.

    Worse still, there were those in Harlow market who fail to see that science
is good for us. Of course, most people would consider that science plays a key
role in medical or defence research, but there is more to it than that. As the
Royal Society's Report on the Public Understanding of Science stated 10 years
ago: "Science and technology play a major part in most aspects of our daily
lives . . . Our industry and thus our national prosperity depends on them."

    We are thoroughly cosseted by science. It forms the basis of our economy.
Scientists are people carrying out valuable and beneficial research, not a bunch
of loony eccentrics tinkering away for our own enjoyment. We may be lucky enough
to do jobs that we enjoy, but let us not lose sight of the fact that science is
a serious and expensive pursuit necessary for the development of a nation.
Progress is not cheap and research needs substantial funding to be successful.

    It matters that the public learns to trust scientists. And it should be
remembered that the public does not just number the shoppers of Harlow market
but includes policymakers, advisers and those who shape our future.

    We have progressed to the point where current advances have the potential to
be frightening. In biological research, the production of genetically modified
food and organisms, the use of gene therapy and the implications of mapping the
human genome all need careful discussion and legislation to shape the future of
our society in a considered and rational manner.  How can society exploit the
advances available to it if judgement about the science is undermined by a lack
of trust in those carrying out the research?

    One way to increase the trust in scientists might be to improve the level of
scientific literacy in the population. The Royal Society's report 10 years ago
concluded that a proper science education at school must provide the ultimate
basis for an adequate understanding of science. Last year a report from the
Department for Education offered hope. Even though science specialists are
declining, combined science GCSEs are becoming more popular, and the number of
students who include a science A-level with their arts subjects is increasing.
Important steps have been taken to try to encourage scientific literacy in the
young, but what about those who finished formal education when gene was a man's
name rather than a unit of heredity?

    More sensible science in the media would be a good start. The line between
science fantasy as entertainment and science fact needs to be drawn more
clearly. It is not possible to clone a dinosaur and mad scientists are not
engaged in such pursuits. Yet it is these false beliefs that shape the public's
view.

    There are some excellent television and radio programmes, including Horizon
and Equinox. But what about more scientific features in newspapers and magazines
and more science on non-scientific programmes? There are 640,000 professional
scientists and engineers in the UK, but we rarely see them in popular
programmes. Why don't scientists live in Coronation Street, Albert Square or
Brookside?

    Scientists could help, too. We are among the best in the world, using most
measurable criteria, well-respected internationally in our fields yet not by
many people at home. As a nation, we have more than our fair share of Nobel
prize-winners so it is time to come out of our cloisters and promote ourselves.

    The message that we need to get over is that science is good for you and
well looked after in the hands of responsible and trustworthy individuals.  To
improve our science base, to encourage people to spend their taxes on scientific
research and to shape the direction of our society, we need to promote public
understanding. And first we need to stamp out the perception of scientists as
mad, bad and dangerous to know. Harlow market, where scientists were seen by the
public as at best eccentric and at worst evil Photograph: Edward Sykes


LOAD-DATE: March 08, 1995


                              307 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           February 14, 1995, Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH; Page  25

LENGTH: 966 words

HEADLINE: Health: No fish fingers, no problem; Jane Armstrong explains how a
strict diet keeps her two-year-old son safe from the serious dangers of his rare
liver condition

BYLINE: JANE ARMSTRONG

BODY:

    It is lunchtime. I am measuring out 110 grams of boiled potato (no skin), 30
grams of broccoli, and 48 grams of yoghurt for my second son, Nick. He will also
be having as much low-protein topped apple crumble as he likes, and a few
teaspoons of a very strong and unpleasant diet supplement. Unlike his elder
brother, who is free to eat as many or as few of his fish fingers as he fancies,
Nick has to eat up all of his measured food - no more and no less. Incredibly -
to anyone familiar with two-year- olds - it's all, apart from the paste, going
down without fuss.

    Every child born in the UK is tested soon after birth for the condition
which requires this diet, and yet it is so rare that relatively few people are
aware of its existence. Although 1 in 60 people carries the gene defect
involved, only 1 in 12,000 is born with the condition itself. The community
midwife who administered Nick's heel-prick blood test cheerfully reassured us
that no one ever came up positive.

    Our healthy and extremely cheerful two-year-old has phenylketonuria (PKU to
those who have to say it every day): his liver lacks sufficient quantities of an
enzyme that breaks down phenylalanine, one of the major constituents of protein.
When PKU is not treated with a reduced-protein diet, excess phenylalanine builds
up in the brain and causes mental retardation, varying from mild to severe. If
the condition is untreated in the first years of life, the brain damage can be
irreversible.

    The diet treatment for PKU was discovered only about 30 years ago; testing
for the condition was introduced at about the same time. Before that, many
sufferers ended up in mental institutions. The health visitor who discussed
Nick's test result with us, when he was three weeks old, put this vividly
(though in fact she was oversimplifying): when I asked her if Nick's father or I
might have PKU without having realised it because we would never have been
tested, she said: "If you did, you wouldn't be sitting here talking to me now."

    Our baby, we were told, was one of the 50 or 60 children born with PKU every
year; a strange contradiction awaited us. After the diagnosis, we were referred
to the Children's Hospital at Great Ormond Street, London.  We had to digest the
shocking news that our child had a disease we'd never heard of, one that causes
potentially severe mental retardation; but we were also told that on a strict
diet he would be a perfectly normal child, and reach his full intellectual
capacity.

    Other people find this contradiction hard to grasp, too. Friends often ask
whether Nick is "well". The answer is that he is not "ill" at all; but he is
still different. What makes it even more difficult to pin down is that without a
weekly blood test to check for levels of phenylananine in his blood, which we
now carry out ourselves, there would be no indication that he had any problem
for weeks or even months. There would be no "illness", just a gradual loss of
concentration and abilities. In university students with the disease who leave
off the diet for a few weeks, grades have been found to slip drastically; babies
who are left untreated develop late, and a few may never learn to walk.

    Food is such a central part of life that although PKU is invisible in terms
of the child's health, it can never be invisible from day to day.  The minute
Nick sits down to a meal it is clear that he is not an ordinary child but a sort
of super-vegan who doesn't even eat soya and lentils.  We never go anywhere
without our electronic scales. If Nick eats at someone else's house it means
either preparing everything in advance and taking it with us or a detailed
conversation with a bewildered parent about what he can eat. Having tea with a
friend on impulse is very difficult.  When we go on holiday it means taking an
enormous box full of low-protein substitute biscuits and pasta, special vitamins
and diet supplements.  The supplements contain synthetic protein without
phenylalaline, and added minerals.

    We also have to make sure that we take our blood-testing kit so that we can
do the test, post it off to be analysed for phenylalanine levels, and talk to
the Great Ormond Street dietician when she rings to discuss Nick's diet for the
week ahead. We also panic more about childhood illnesses: any fever or stomach
upset sends the phenylalanine level shooting up, as the body starts to consume
its own protein.

    As a child with PKU grows older and the brain becomes more developed, the
diet becomes less crucial, but it is still a diet for life, and the amount of
protein allowed does not increase greatly with age. On a relatively mild diet,
Nick is allowed the protein equivalent of eight Weetabix a day; many others of
his age and much older are affected more severely.

    Geneticists like PKU because it provides a textbook example of the way
genetic mistakes work. Like other conditions - such as the more common, and more
devastating, cystic fibrosis - it is carried on recessive genes, one from each
parent.

    They are beginning to trace different strains of PKU in different
populations, put rough dates to their origin, and tie them into the history of
population movements. If, for example, both sides of your family are Jewish and
you have severe PKU, it is highly likely that you have a variant that started in
one particular Yemeni family in the 14th century.

    PKU is also likely to be a candidate for gene therapy, at least in the more
severe cases. However, because the normal gene has to be introduced directly
into the liver, the process is not straightforward.

    The National Society for Phenylketonuria: 7 Southfield Close, Willen, Milton
Keynes, MK15 9LL. super-vegan who doesn't even eat soya or lentils' Photograph:
Kalpesh Lathigra


LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1995


                              308 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                               February 13, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 7

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: Great health debate draws more than 1,000

BYLINE: Jo Revill

BODY:


    THE Health Care Crisis in London conference, sponsored by the Evening
Standard, has triggered an overwhelming demand for tickets.

    It was hoped nearly 800 people would attend the debate, where Londoners can
have a say on the future of their Health Service.

    More than 1,000 applied for a free ticket and we have had to hire a bigger
hall, capable of seating 1,170.

    The event, to be held on Saturday afternoon at the Queen Elizabeth II
Conference Centre in Westminster, will be the largest ever gathering of public
and health professionals to look at the future of the NHS. It comes at a
turbulent time for London's hospitals. The formal consultation on the run-down
of Guy's closes this Friday, while the three-month procedure proposing the
closure of Bart's ends next week.

    Professor Brian Jarman, head of general practice at St Mary's Hospital in
Paddington, will speak on bed shortages. Since the Government first accused him
of 'scare-mongering', two independent reports have vindicated his views.  North
London GP Iona Heath will talk about family doctors' experience of the
difficulties in having patients admitted to hospital.

    The problems of efficient research work in a market-driven health service
will be the focus for leading gene therapist, Prof Bob Williamson.

    After a tea break there will a discussion of the policy for London, with
questions from the floor and audience contribution to the debate. Ray Rowden,
Institute of Health Service Management chief; mental health campaigner Jayne
Zito; GP Chaand Nagpaul and ward sister Lesley Fisher will take questions.
Actor John Bird will read out a declaration of rights for Londoners, calling for
action to halt bed and casualty department closures.

    Those attending must bring their tickets.

    along with them.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1995


                              309 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           February 10, 1995, Friday

SECTION: HOME; Page  11

LENGTH: 248 words

HEADLINE: Lung cancer gene therapy given trial run

BYLINE: LIZ HUNT

BODY:

    An American lung cancer patient is the first person to receive gene therapy
for the disease, scientists said yesterday.

    The patient, with advanced lung cancer, was injected with a normal copy of a
gene known as p53, which controls cell division. About half of the 6.5 million
cancers diagnosed world-wide each year are linked with mutations of this gene.

    Dr Jack Roth, of the University of Texas MD Cancer Center, said that animal
tests had shown that growth of cancer cells is suppressed when normal p53 genes
are introduced into the tumour. He used a "viral vector", a harmless retrovirus
that carries the gene into human cells.

    "In this Phase 1 study, the p53 gene has been packaged in particles with
retroviral components essential for getting the p53 gene into cancer cells where
it can potentially exert its biological function," Dr Roth said.

    Surgeons had removed as much of the lung tumour as they could before Dr Roth
injected the p53/retrovirus combination into the "tumour bed" - the cancerous
tissue that could not be surgically removed.

    The p53 gene is an important tumour suppressor gene. Scientists believe it
promotes repair of DNA, safeguarding against genetic mutations which occur when
cells reproduce and which can lead to abnormal cell growth. In cells which only
have mutated p53 genes, the errors remain uncorrected and are often linked with
tumour development. The Phase 1 trial aims to test the safety of the gene
therapy in humans.


LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1995


                              310 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          February 8, 1995, Wednesday

SECTION: HOME; Page  10

LENGTH: 392 words

HEADLINE: Bowel cancer study aims to save 2,000 lives a year

BYLINE: By Celia Hall

BODY:

    Two thousand lives a year could be saved if patients with bowel cancer were
given the best available treatment, scientists said yesterday.

    In addition a genetic screen for bowel cancer which is the commonest killer
after lung cancer could be available in three to five years.

    Launching a package of new measures to combat a disease which kills nearly
20,000 British men and women a year Mr John Northover head of the Imperial
Cancer Research Fund's Bowel Cancer Unit in London said that people were
"literally dieing of embarrassment" because they do not go to their doctors soon
enough.

    "Bowel cancer of its very nature is an embarrassing subject and people tend
to shy away from it,".he said. Mr Northover added that studies have shown
awareness of bowel cancer in the population is very low although it kills 19,600
men and women a year and 15,200 men and 15,600 women a year are diagnosed.

    "Lack of concern may be why the Government does not take a massive interest
in it. It may be why in the Health of the Nation which gave targets for common
cancers that bowel cancer did not figure once in the document."

    However ther ICRF announced the start of the largest ever treatment trial
which will involve 8,000 patients. They estimate that deaths could be reduced by
10 per cent.

    Too little research has been conducted into the best treatment regimes said
Richard Gray of the Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, the trial"s co-ordinator "Bowel
cancer treatment was currently haphazard. In 50 per cent of cases doctors base
treatment on opinion and not on scientific evidence," he said The new trial
involving virtually every bowel cancer specialist in the country will provide
the first soundly evidence on how best to treat the disease.

    Meanwhile, the new gene therapy work involves the gene called ras which is
known to signal early cell changes. Cells that line the bowel are shed in stools
and these can be analysed for early genetic mutations. Ras changes are
implicated in 50 per cent of bowel cancers.

    The task is to simplify the process, to automate it, to cornfirm its
reliability and to launch large scale trials.

    The research fund yesterday published two booklets Completing the Jigsaw _
Getting to the bottom of bowel cancer, available from ICRF, Po Box 123,
Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX.


LOAD-DATE: February 09, 1995


                              312 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                                January 30, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 17

LENGTH: 214 words

HEADLINE: Record £151,000 boosts the search for a cure

BODY:


    PIONEERING research into cystic fibrosis at two London hospitals has been
given a £151,736 boost - thanks to the biggest fund-raising effort by any
charity in the capital.

    The Cystic Fibrosis Trust raised the money at a London ball. Patron Princess
Alexandra and the trust's chair, Vivien Fripp, presented the cheque to Professor
Bob Williamson, of St Mary's Hospital.

    The money will be used to continue research into gene therapy by St Mary's
and the Royal Brompton Hospital.

    The hospitals have published initial results of the world's first trials of
gene therapy, which it is hoped could bring a cure within six years.

GRAPHIC: Princess Alexandra, centre, Vivien Fripp and Prof Williamson

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 1995


                              315 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                                January 16, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 15

LENGTH: 934 words

HEADLINE: NHS HAVE YOUR SAY;
ATTEND THE VITAL FORUM AS REFORMS CUT A SWATHE THROUGH LONDON"S HEALTH PROVISION

BYLINE: Jo Revill

BODY:


    NEVER has a public debate on what is happening to the National Health
Service in London been more crucially needed. Waiting lists across London and
the South-east have risen by 26 per cent in three years. Twelve casualty units
in inner and outer London are now under threat of closure and hospitals are
having to cancel record numbers of operations as they run out of money.  That is
why the Evening Standard is sponsoring a major conference next month to debate
how the reforms have affected our hospitals and GP services - and how the
picture might be improved.

    Two reports last week showed that the capital has lost just under 2,000 beds
in two years. If the Government's plans go ahead, 800 more will be lost with the
merger of Bart's and the London, and Guy's with St Thomas's.

    Psychiatric units report a bed occupancy rate of 130 per cent, with only the
most severely mentally ill patients being admitted as hundreds are left to fend
for themselves in the community.

    Millions of pounds are being poured into private health care because
patients with potentially serious or painful conditions are desperate to avoid
the long waits for examinations that are now commonplace across the city. Health
experts have shown that almost half the private work carried out is a substitute
for NHS care.

    The Health Care Crisis in London conference has invited speakers from a
range of disciplines to talk about the problems - and also offer some solutions.

    We are offering free tickets for the event to Evening Standard readers.  It
will take place on Saturday, 18 February at the Queen Elizabeth II Conference
Centre in Westminster, from 2pm to 6pm.

    Professor Brian Jarman, head of General Practice at St Mary's Hospital, will
be talking about the drastic reduction in bed numbers and the need for more beds
for the elderly. In some boroughs in London there is not a single nursing home
place - so the elderly are staying on hospital wards when they could be better
looked after elsewhere.

    The threat to our centres of excellence through the market-driven health
reforms and the merger of the London hospitals will be the subject of Professor
Bob Williamson's talk. Prof Williamson, a gene therapy expert who has pioneered
work on cystic fibrosis, announced last year he was leaving Britain to work
abroad because of his disillusionment with the reforms.

    North London GP Dr Iona Heath will talk about the importance of primary care
and Toby Harris, the chairman of the Association of London Authorities, which is
organising the conference, will discuss the public's role in decision-making.

    After tea there will be a discussion between the audience and a panel of
health experts. They include the mental health campaigner Jayne Zito; Ray
Rowden, the director of the Institute of Health Services Management; ward sister
Lesley Fisher and GP Chaand Nagpaul. The NHS Trust Federation is jointly
organising the conference and its head, Professor Harry Keen, will chair the
discussion and give the audience ample opportunity to contribute.

    At the end a declaration will be made, setting out Londoners' rights to a
better health service. Already there has been a huge response from some of the
health professionals we have invited. Anyone wishing to attend should fill out
the form below, sending it back to the address of the Association of London
Authorities.

    A PUBLIC meeting on the future of Bart's is taking place this evening at the
Central Conference Centre, 90 Central Street, London EC1. Organised by the
Islington Community Health Council, the meeting will have speakers including
health managers in charge of the consultation over the closure, and MP Chris
Smith.

GRAPHIC: (1)PROF BRIAN JARMAN TALK ON PLIGHT OF THE ELDERLY (2) PROF BOB
WILLIAMSO PIONEER THERAPIST

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1995


                              317 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1995 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           January 12, 1995, Thursday

SECTION: POLITICS; Page  9

LENGTH: 112 words

HEADLINE: Q&A Written Replies

BODY:

    COUNCILLORS' ALLOWANCES: The Government last night announced the scrapping
of the ceiling on the level of allowances paid to top councillors in England and
Wales. The Local Government minister, David Curry, also disclosedthat on 1 April
he is to end curbs on the total amount authorities can spend on payments to
members. But he stressed there will be no extra Whitehall cash.

    TODAY IN PARLIAMENT - Commons: Home Office questions; questions to the Prime
Minister; Town and Country Planning (Cost of Inquiries) Bill, Second Reading;
debate on childcare facilities for the House. Lords: Criminal Justice (Scotland)
Bill, committee. Debate on gene therapy.


LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1995


                              321 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                                December 9, 1994

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 267 words

HEADLINE: Plea for cancer risk clinics

BYLINE: Jo Revill

BODY:


    FAMILY clinics should be set up by the Government to screen individuals with
an inherited risk of developing cancer, say health experts, writes Jo Revill.

    Leading cancer scientists and experts on medical ethics were meeting in
London today to discuss the complex issue of identifying those with a genetic
predisposition to the disease.

    One of the genes increasing the risk of breast cancer was recently
discovered in the US and doctors hope to do the same for prostate and skin
cancer within two years. But there is no Government policy on identifying those
at risk, or on handling the information to prevent it affecting job and
insurance prospects.

    The meeting, organised by the Cancer Research Campaign and the Cancer Relief
Macmillan Fund, heard half of scientists' applications to perform gene therapy
involved cancer patients.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1994


                              322 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           December 8, 1994, Thursday

SECTION: FILM PAGE; Page 25

LENGTH: 1089 words

HEADLINE: FILM / The battle of the bulge; Masculinity has always been Arnie's
main draw, but in Junior he's discovered a more feminine side. Adam Mars-Jones
investigates

BYLINE: ADAM MARS-JONES

BODY:

    It's been many years since the image of a pregnant man was used as part of a
health education campaign. If anything, it's surprising that Hollywood has taken
so long to turn that image into the basis for a comedy, but now there is Junior
(PG). In another way, though, the film hasn't waited long enough, since its
gimmick - a drug called Expectane, which suppresses the mechanism of miscarriage
- is horribly reminiscent of thalidomide. This tragic echo may not altogether
suppress the mechanism of laughter, but it hardly promotes it.

    Even 10 years ago, in a film on this theme, there would be at least one
character opposed to medical intervention in childbirth; 10 years hence, when
the implications of gene therapy have sunk in, we might expect a voice given to
a more cautious, even a Luddite, attitude. But in Junior everyone accepts the
principle of intervention. All three central characters are, by profession,
meddlers in reproduction. Dr Alex Hesse (Arnold Schwarzenegger) is a researcher
who has developed Expectane in collaboration with Dr Larry Arbogast (Danny
DeVito). When their experimental protocols are rejected by the Food and Drug
Administration, their lab is assigned to Dr Diana Reddin (Emma Thompson),
herself hardly a spokesperson for the natural since she routinely freezes the
elements of life - including one of her own ova just in case she misses out -
what with being so busy and also rather shy - on being fertilised in situ.

    The main area of conflict in the plot is how the discovery should be
exploited. The head of the heroes' department seeks to control their renegade
research, on the basis that it was funded by the university, although he forbade
them to continue with it. Dr Arbogast, meanwhile, does deals with pharmacology
corporations that operate outside the United States. The writers of the
screenplay, Kevin Wade and Chris Conrad, have unaccountably failed to provide a
comeuppance for his money grabbing.

    Danny DeVito has always played weasels, though this seems to be one of the
weasels we're supposed to like, if only on the grounds of his association with
the only piece of technology which actively increases the layman's sense of
wonder. The other doctors, meanwhile, are too busy dealing with their emotions
and their situation to be thinking about profit - Alex transfigured by a
pregnancy that was meant to be an experiment but that he can't bear to
terminate, Diana troubled by her attraction to this newly sensitised colleague,
not knowing the reason for his change.

    It is greatly to Schwarzenegger's credit that he is willing to try comedy,
less so that he makes his attempts (Twins, Kindergarten Cop and now Junior) with
Ivan Reitman, not the most inventive of directors. In the new film he gets to do
relatively unmacho things, such as posing as a steroid-distorted female athlete,
in vast pink sweatclothes and a wig, but there is plenty of stereotyped
reassurance for his persona. His donation of semen is greeted with coos of
professional praise from Arbogast (''Terrific motility, excellent count. Strong
swimmers, big load. Way to go!''), and even his urine samples seek to impress us
with their oceanic volume. Continuing the theme of liquid plenty, the filmmakers
must have used tankerloads of glycerine to give the big man the tears that the
screenplay demands so regularly.

    When an actor like Clint Eastwood makes an experiment like The Beguiled or
even Tightrope, you sense his film- maker's curiosity; with Schwarzenegger, you
feel he's not so much exploring his range as extending his franchise.
Spontaneity is not something you can acquire by numbers, and those facial
expressions of his that are meant to be tender read more as tenderised, like
meat that has been beaten before cooking.

    Far more subversive of Schwarzenegger's persona than anything in the plot is
a shot that seems to show silvery chest hair - with the implication that Arnie
tints the hair on his head. His pregnancy bulge looks reassuringly prosthetic;
when the baby kicks inside it, audiences are likely to be reminded, not of the
marvels of motherhood, but of John Hurt's bout of stomach cramp in Alien.

    Even when Arnie is cross- dressed and bewigged, he still looks unmistakably
like Arnie - which is of course the point. Junior may be about a definitively
female experience, but it is still masculinity that is sacred to the filmmakers.
He may be awash with oestrogens, but Alex's desire never strays from its
destined class of object, though it does become warmer in tone. Male
heterosexuality operates at a deeper level than the hormonal.

    Femininity, on the other hand, is hormones. The additives in Alex's blood
give him not only mood swings and sore nipples, but, at one peculiarly creepy
moment, feminine intuition. Female hormones are responsible for such diverse
things as the urge to cook and an interest in clothes - even perhaps the ability
to coordinate them on a psychic level, since at one meeting between the
cross-dressed Alex and Diana they both happen to wear white and beige.

    Emma Thompson makes a good job of the female lead, valiantly submitting to
the script's demands for faintly demeaning slapstick. Diana may be a brilliantly
successful scientist, but she's not at home with her body - physically clumsy
and disorganised, forever losing, dropping or treading in something. She is
allowed to denounce the presumption of the men's kidnapping of gestation, but it
is made clear to us that she has a lot to learn about being a woman. Dr Arbogast
is given what the filmmakers seem to think is (forgive me) the bull point, when
he remarks that women are always saying they wish men could go through
pregnancy, but don't seem to like it much when their wish becomes reality.

    What is striking about the men in Junior is that they are capable of
retaining the lessons of femininity, in a way that escapes the mere women. When
the hormones and the plot-crises recede, the men don't forget the breakthroughs
they have made in their personal growth, while the women remain at the mercy of
the flux of their bodies.

    If there's one film that Junior aspires to be like, it has to be Tootsie.
But it lacks the earlier film's careful construction and outstanding
performances, not to mention the high-grade jokes. The only element Junior
successfully emulates is the underlying and rather smug idea that when men take
on a female role they have something to teach women, as well as a certain amount
to learn.

    (Photograph omitted)


LOAD-DATE: December 08, 1994


                              323 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           December 6, 1994, Tuesday

SECTION: SCIENCE PAGE; Page 24

LENGTH: 1208 words

HEADLINE: Creating a new breed of social outcasts; We must control the screening
of genes or risk a society in which people are shunned because of their DNA, and
where patents take priority over patients, warn Susan Watts and Tom Wilkie

BYLINE: SUSAN WATTS and TOM WILKIE

BODY:

    Simple tests that reveal the genetic inheritance a child receives from its
parents could create ''the lepers of the 21st century'' - people shunned by
society because of their DNA.

    Unless the Government introduces proper regulations to control testing for
genetic disease, the new technologies of DNA analysis could do more harm than
good. Researchers and, significantly, the support groups for people and families
affected by genetic disease are increasingly concerned about the impact of
uncontrolled genetic screening.

    In December 1993, the Nuffield Council on Bioethics issued a report urging
the Government to bring in safeguards on genetic screening ''to protect
individuals and their families against the misuse of confidential information,
the risk of social stigma and the possiblities of eugenic abuse''. Nothing has
been done.

    Now a House of Commons Select Committee is embarking on the first proper
parliamentary investigation of the new science of human genetics. The deadline
for submission of evidence to the committee is the end of this week.

    Researchers are discovering a new human gene almost weekly. The genes
responsible for many of the most important inherited diseases have been
analysed. In 1986, two American scientists, Tony Monaco and Louis Kunkel,
identified the gene responsible for Duchenne muscular dystrophy - the first
triumph of the modern techniques of DNA analysis. It was followed three years
later by the gene for cystic fibrosis - the commonest single gene defect among
northern Europeans. In the past year, the genes for Huntington's disease and a
form of inherited breast cancer have been isolated.

    Once the gene is found, it is relatively easy to test people to see if they
have the gene and run the risk of having children who will suffer from the
disease. Often researchers or their employers have patented their discovery,
with the aim of making money out of marketing tests to the general population.

    Such tests could create ''a genetic underclass - the lepers of the 21st
century'', says Sue Watkin of the Huntington's Disease Association. Mrs Watkin
was addressing a meeting in London last week organised by the Genetic Interest
Group (GIG), a charity that brings together all the support groups for people
and families affected by genetic disease.

    GIG and the support groups welcome the advances being made in understanding
inherited disease. To individuals and families affected by genetic conditions,
these advances hold hope for treatment where none existed before, but they want
to ensure the new knowledge is applied to benefit affected people and families.

    Mrs Watkin worries that employers and insurance companies might require
people to undergo genetic testing. She cited the case of a family whose father
had died of cancer at the age of 50, before exhibiting the symptoms of
progressive degeneration of the brain resulting from the Huntington's disease
gene he carried. His children carried on, unaware they had a 50 per cent risk of
developing the disease, went on to higher education and fulfilling careers.
Would they have done so, she asked, had they known their risk status through a
predictive test, say one imposed by their father's employer?

    People with inherited disorders are already being discriminated against,
says Michael Turner of the Family Heart Association. ''We have an example of
someone who wanted to join the Army. It rejected him on medical grounds, as did
the Fire Service.'' Others have to pay high motor insurance premiums, which Dr
Turner feels is particularly unfair because people who are diagnosed and treated
with drugs are less of a risk than those who are unaware of their condition. And
92 per cent of those with inherited high levels of blood cholesterol have not
been diagnosed, he says.

    Screening for genetic diseases can do more harm than good, says Bernadette
Modell of University College Hospital, London. ''It can damage people's healthy
self-image or their image of a healthy baby.'' All newborn babies have a spot of
blood taken from their heels and blotted on to a card soon after birth, Dr
Modell told the conference. This ''Guthrie spot'' is analysed for the inherited
disease PKU as part of a comprehensive and effective genetic screening
programme.

    But in Sweden, Dr Modell says, researchers used the Guthrie spots as part of
a screening programme for alpha-1 anti-trypsin deficiency, which carries with it
a susceptibility to lung disease. This is not strictly a genetic disease, but
children who have inherited the genes are very vulnerable to environmental
pollutants. In the Swedish programme, the parents of such children were told to
stop smoking.

    Then a follow-up study showed the parents were smoking more. They were angry
because they had not been consulted, nor their permission sought, for the tests.
They had not been properly informed or counselled about the significance of the
condition. The parents were left, Dr Modell says, ''with unresolved anxieties.
They had been told that their children had an invisible risk of something later
in life for which were was no definitive treatment.'' The failure of the
programme ''is a warning to us,'' she says.

    Sources have told the Independent that Britain came close to repeating the
Swedish mistakes. Pathologists in one NHS hospital were so entranced by the
power of new techniques for amplifying and analysing tiny samples of DNA that
they proposed to search through Guthrie spots in their hospital records to
identify children who carried the gene for cystic fibrosis. A child who inherits
two copies of the damaged gene - one each from their mother and their father -
will suffer from the disease. But diagnosing cystic fibrosis does not need DNA
analysis. People who inherit one copy of the gene, rather than two, are
perfectly healthy and do not have any ill effects. Problems arise only if they
should meet and marry another symptomless carrier, in which case they have a one
in four chance of conceiving a child who inherits both damaged copies.

    At the last moment, the pathologists were dissuaded from carrying out the
tests. One geneticist remarked: ''It had not occurred to them what they were
going to tell the infants.'' Nor had they thought through why the children
should be tested or what their parents would do with the information.

    Alastair Kent, the director of the Genetic Interest Group, welcomes the
Select Committee's investigation. ''There is a need for an appropriate and
effective regulatory regime.'' But, he stresses it must be open and transparent.
He contrasts the secrecy of the British Gene Therapy Advisory Committee with the
openness of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, which holds public hearings,
and publishes its agenda and decisions.

    Mr Kent feels organisations offering genetic testing, or companies
stipulating that someone should undergo a genetic test, must pay for proper
counselling, support and follow-up. He would like the Disability Bill, which the
Government intends to introduce into Parliament next year, extended to prohibit
discrimination against those affected by genetic disease.

    The Genetic Interest Group helpline is 071-430 0090.

    (Photograph omitted)


LOAD-DATE: December 06, 1994


                              325 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           November 22, 1994, Tuesday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 5

LENGTH: 440 words

HEADLINE: Sperm-cell hope for infertile men

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR Science Correspondent

BODY:

    Men might soon be fathering other men's children following a dramatic
advance in infertility research.

    Scientists have successfully transplanted sperm-producing cells from fertile
laboratory mice into the testes of infertile mice. The ''infertile'' males then
successfully sired the progeny of the fertile males.

    Although the revolutionary technique is unlikely to be attempted on humans
for some years, medical researchers are already bracing themselves for what one
scientist described as an ''ethical nightmare''.

    The technique also permits scientists to create laboratory animals that can
produce the sperm of other species. Researchers for instance are working on a
mouse that can produce the sperm of a bull.

    Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia, have
demonstrated it is possible for infertile male mice to produce offspring after
receiving transplants of ''stem'' cells, which produce sperm, from other male
mice. The research is published today in the Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences.

    Transferring stem cells of sperm differs radically from transferring eggs
because the stem cells will produce sperm continually throughout a male's
lifetime, whereas donating eggs is a one-off business.

    Ralph Brinster, Professor of Physiology at the University of Pennsylvania,
who led the research, said: ''Sperm stem cells are the only self-renewing cells
in the body that can contribute to the next generation. In a sense they are
immortal.''

    Professor Brinster predicted that his technique could be applied to
infertile men before the end of the decade. He emphasised, however, that there
are still many technical barriers and acknowledged that there are ethical issues
that need to be addressed. ''People will decide whether to apply the technique
when they feel the time is appropriate.''

    Being able to transfer sperm-producing cells will also enable scientists to
perform genetic engineering on the donated tissue - to fix defective genes for
instance. However, such ''germ-line'' gene therapy has been officially
discouraged in Britain by the Government's Clothier committee.

    Martin Dym, a biologist at Georgetown University Medical Centre, in
Washington, said that germ-line gene therapy affected not only the patient but
subsequent generations and will ultimately ''be of immense benefit to mankind''.

    Richard Sharpe, a male infertility expert at the Medical Research Council's
Reproductive Biology Unit, in Edinburgh, described Professor Brinster's research
as ''remarkable'' but ''an ethical nightmare . . . that needs to be looked at
very carefully''.


LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1994


                              328 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           November 8, 1994, Tuesday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 3

LENGTH: 585 words

HEADLINE: Research on monkeys could fight Alzheimer's

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR Science Correspondent

BODY:

    Scientists have successfully prevented the degeneration of brain cells in
very old monkeys. They believe the same technique could be used to treat people
with Alzheimer's disease, the progressive degeneration of the brain in old age.

    The researchers found that a form of gene therapy, in which healthy genes
are implanted into the brain, stimulated the growth of some of the key cells
involved in memory.

    They hope the revolutionary technology could be adapted for people in the
early stages of Alzheimer's disease to prevent their memories becoming
increasingly impaired, one of the most distressing features of this form of
senile dementia.

    The rhesus monkeys were between 25 and 29 years old, which is equivalent to
the age range of 75 to 87 in humans. They received transplants into the brain of
small, hollow plastic fibres filled with living hamster cells that had been
genetically engineered to produce a human growth factor for nerves. According to
research published today, the transplants stimulated the growth of vital memory
cells in the front part of the brain - which degenerates in Alzheimer's disease.
It is the first time researchers have prevented degeneration of such nerve cells
in aged animals.

    Although scientists have known for some years about the benefits of nerve
growth factor in preventing brain cell degeneration, the difficulty has been
finding a way of getting this complex molecule across the physical barrier
separating brain tissue from the blood.

    The importance of the monkey research is that it demonstrates the
feasibility of using plastic fibres loaded with living cells as a method of
crossing the blood-brain barrier and implanting the nerve growth factor deep
into the brain.

    Hamster cells engineered with the gene for human nerve growth factor and
packed into the plastic fibres secreted the growth factor for several weeks
after being implanted into the brains of three rhesus monkeys. The plastic
capsules prevented the monkeys' immune defences attacking the hamster cells
while allowing the growth factor to seep into surrounding brain tissue.

    Details of the research are published in the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science by a research team led by Professor Jeffrey Kordower, of the
Rush Presbyterian-St Luke's Medical Centre in Chicago.

    Professor Elliott Mufson, a member of the Chicago group, said yesterday:
''This is the first demonstration using this type of technology of a way of
preventing cell death in an aged animal. It not only prevents the death of brain
cells, it actually induces the growth of nerve fibres.''

    He stressed that the work had to be replicated before first phase clinical
trials on humans could begin ''several years down the road'', adding: ''It is a
new technology that has the potential for increasing our ability to beat
neurological diseases.''

    Gordon Wilcock, professor of the care of the elderly at Bristol University,
who has worked on nerve growth factor for several years, said it would be
important to get the growth factor into the brain tissue of Alzheimer's patients
before they became too impaired with the disease.

    ''This research is another piece in the jigsaw puzzle that implies nerve
growth factor may play a role in Alzheimer's disease.''

    In Britain there are half a million people with Alzheimer's, which affects
one in five over the age of 80. The former American president, Ronald Reagan,
has admitted that he has been diagnosed as having the disease.


LOAD-DATE: November 08, 1994


                              329 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          November 2, 1994, Wednesday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 4

LENGTH: 289 words

HEADLINE: Examples of processes and products obtained from microbes

BODY:

    Microorganism Type Product or Process Commodity or use Bacteria

    Xanthomonas campestris Xanthan gum

    1. Gelling of foods- eg ice cream, cheese spreads

    2. Lubrication - eg

    toothpaste

    3. Enhanced oil recovery

    Lactobacillus bulgaricus & Milk fermentation Yoghurt Streptococcus
thermophilus Bacillus thuringiensis Protein toxin(s) Insecticide - eg
caterpillar stage of moths and butterflies, mosquito larvae, Colorado beetle

    Pseudomonas syringae 'A' protein Artificial snow

    Alcaligenes eutrophus Polyhydroxybutyrate Biodegradable plastic

    Streptomyces species eg Streptomycin Antibacterial agent

    Thiobacillus ferrooxidans Sulphuric acid 'Microbiological mining' - eg gold,
copper

    Escherichia coli

    1. Indigo Textile dye (genetically manipulated)

    2. Insulin Treatment of diabetes

    Acetobacter species Acetic acid Vinegar (malt, wine, etc)

    Clostridium botuiinum Botulin A Nerve toxin - but in minute doses controls
muscular spasms of face and hands

    Yeasts

    Saccharomyces cerevisiae

    1. Alcohol Beers and wine

    2. Carbon dioxide Bread

    Candida lipolytica Lipase Flavour development in cheese

    Filamentous fungi

    Aspergillus nidulans Chymosin 'Vegetarian' cheese

    (genetically manipulated) (rennin)

    Penicillium camemberti Ripening enzymes Camembert cheese

    Fusarium graminearum Whole cell product 'Quorn' - meat substitute

    Aspergillus niger Citric acid Soft drinks, sweets, food stuffs

    Viruses

    Vaccinia Vector of In raw meat fed to antirabies foxes, skunks and vaccine
raccoons in the wild

    Adenovirus Vector of human gene Gene therapy of cystic fibrosis

    Baculoviruses Insecticide and vector Moths and (genetically engineered) of
insecticide toxins butterflies


LOAD-DATE: November 02, 1994


                              334 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           September 12, 1994, Monday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 6

LENGTH: 235 words

HEADLINE: Pioneering gene therapy trial fails to help girl, 2

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR

BODY:

    A REVOLUTIONARY operation that transplants genes to correct inherited
defects and cancers has suffered a setback. The first gene therapy trial in
Britain has failed to help a child with a rare genetic disorder of the immune
system, writes Steve Connor.

    Although Carly Todd, two, of Lennoxtown in Strathclyde, remains healthy,
doctors at the Great Ormond Street Hospital in London cannot detect the gene
they transplanted into her bone- marrow cells in March 1993.

    Carly suffers a very rare deficiency of an enzyme - adenosine deaminase -
that is vital for the immune system to function. Without treatment it leads to a
build up of toxic substances in the blood.

    Scientists took bone-marrow cells from Carly and infected them with a
genetically engineered virus designed to transport a correct copy of the ADA
gene into her cells. The bone marrow was then transplanted back into her body.

    Dr Gareth Morgan, the consultant supervising the operation, said the initial
results were promising. ''Analysis at two months showed the gene in the blood
cells of the patient and at six months in the bone marrow but our latest
analysis . . . does not show any evidence of the ADA gene,'' he said.

    Dr Morgan said Carly was healthy and living at home and there were no plans
to repeat the gene therapy unless her condition deteriorated. Other gene therapy
trials are planned by British doctors.


LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1994


                              336 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          September 7, 1994, Wednesday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 13

LENGTH: 312 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy to treat cystic fibrosis

BODY:

    WITHIN five years human gene therapy will become a routine treatment for
cystic fibrosis - the most common inherited disease in Britain - says one of the
UK's pioneers of human gene therapy.

    However, Professor Bob Williamson, professor of Molecular Genetics at St
Mary's Hospital Medical School, in London, said that neither of the techniques
currently in clinical trials was likely to be adopted directly. He was notably
cautious about the success of trials for introducing intact genes into the lungs
of cystic fibrosis patients.

    Cystic fibrosis is a chronic debilitating disease in which the lungs clog
with mucus. Although repeated infections can be controlled by antibiotics, few
CF sufferers survive much beyond 30.

    Researchers have two methods of introducing the intact genes to patients'
lungs. The approach adopted in the US is to use a genetically engineered
adenovirus, similar to the virus that causes the common cold, to infect the
cells lining the lungs with the new gene. In Britain researchers have sprayed
liposomes - fatty particles resembling cell membranes - into the noses of
patients to try to inflitrate the genes into cells lining the airway.

    Professor Williamson said the adenovirus technique was very efficient but
provokes inflammation and an immune response. The liposome data indicates safety
but is less efficient. ''My view is that at the end of the day we will all see
something that is neither liposome nor adenovirus,'' he said.

    Seven of Britain's leading geneticists yesterday condemned the way decisions
on the safety of genetic engineering have been shrouded in secrecy. The
government committees which decide whether or not to approve human gene therapy
and whether it is safe to release genetically engineered plants, viruses and
bacteria into the environment ought to be open to public scrutiny, they said.


LOAD-DATE: September 07, 1994


                              337 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           September 5, 1994, Monday

SECTION: SCIENCE PAGE; Page 21

LENGTH: 884 words

HEADLINE: That's interesting, science is exciting; Anne McLaren, president of
the British Association, invites young and old to come to Loughborough and join
in the fun

BYLINE: ANNE MCLAREN

BODY:

    As a child, I had a small part in the film of H G Wells's The Shape of
Things to Come. In my scene, my great-grandfather was giving me a video history
lesson in the year 2054 on space travel (''Mice that have gone round the
moon!'') and extinct diseases (''Atishoo! Did people really do that?'').

    Wells was wrong by a century about the moon. He failed to predict the huge
technical advances in rocketry that accompanied the Second World War and the
political factors leading to the ''Space Race'', which put men, not mice, on the
moon little more than 30 years after his film appeared. Let us hope he was right
about the common cold, that it will soon join dinosaurs and smallpox in
extinction.

    Perhaps it was that early history lesson which sparked my interest in
science, and in the popularisation of science. Wells and J B S Haldane were the
two most inspired popular science writers this country has known, and both were
keen supporters of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BA).

    The BA's Annual Festival of Science is being held in Loughborough University
of Technology this week. Its theme is ''Science in the World Around Us''. I like
this title because to me it means two quite different things.

    Science and scientific explanations really are all around us in the world -
and I am not thinking just of global warming or gene therapy, but more of
questions like why the sky is blue during the day but black at night, why you
burn your fingers on a metal saucepan handle but not a wooden one, why ice
floats.

    These are the sort of questions children ask. I believe children are born
scientists, intensely interested in and curious about the world around them,
highly observant, and with a very early understanding of experimental method.
School and exams seems to extinguish many children's interest in science.
Several sessions at the BA meeting will be asking why this should be and what
can be done about it.

    The second meaning of ''Science in the World Around Us'' relates to the
international nature of science. In addition to being this year's president of
the BA, I wear another hat as foreign secretary of the Royal Society. As such, I
am particularly interested in the international aspect, and delighted that the
International Federation of Associations for the Advancement of Science and
Technology will be meeting at the science festival, as guests of the BA.Science
today is in some ways the equivalent of the medieval trade guilds. Just as an
English silversmith in the Middle Ages would have felt very much at home with
his Italian counterpart, even though they had little shared language, so
scientists may feel that they have more in common with their colleagues in Japan
or Cuba or India than they do with many non-scientists in their own country.

    A major aim of the BA is to show nonscientists that science can be
interesting and exciting, not just boring and difficult. The success of the
national week of science, engineering and technology, held in March, showed how
much interest and enthusiasm for science exists all over Britain. At the
Loughborough festival, this interest and enthusiasm will be focused on a single
campus. There will be nearly 500 talks, as well as exhibitions, experiments,
road shows, films and a special three-day programme of hands-on science for
children aged 8-18. The Archbishop of York; Liz Forgan, managing director of BBC
Network Radio; Sir Leon Brittan; and P D James will be joining in the fun.

    We are particularly pleased that David Hunt, Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster and thus the cabinet minister with responsibility for science, will
spend a day at the festival. His post has a great many responsibilities, but
clearly he ranks science and technology high among them.

    The BA covers social sciences as well as natural sciences. Of those nearly
500 talks, some are just ''natural'' and some just ''social''. There are
fascinating sessions, for example, on the origin of life, on the way cells
communicate with one another, on chaos theory and neural networks and virtual
reality.

    Among social science sessions are some on the NHS (does the ''market'' in
health care destroy the traditional values of our healthcare system?); on crime,
its causes and consequences; and on education, with Sir Claus Moser reviewing
the recent report of the National Commission on Education and looking at
prospects for the future.

    But most sessions will involve both ''natural'' and ''social'' science.
There is a growing realisation that much of social science relies heavily on the
backing of natural science, and much of natural science only makes sense in the
context of social science. World population growth, the importance of family
planning and new contraceptive approaches, the role of women and the education
of women; our global environment, climate change, ozone depletion and its
effects in medicine and agriculture; all this and much more awaits you in
Loughborough. Come along for a day, or for the whole week.

    The author is president of the British Association for the Advancement of
Science and a senior researcher at the Institute of Cancer and Developmental
Biology, Cambridge.

    For information on the BA meeting, phone 0509 222382.

    (Photographs omitted)


LOAD-DATE: September 05, 1994


                              339 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           August 11, 1994, Thursday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 6

LENGTH: 672 words

HEADLINE: International Aids Conference: Gene therapy to be tested on babies at
risk of HIV; Researchers seek go-ahead for pioneering treatment as new outbreak
threatens Asia

BYLINE: LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent

BODY:

    BABIES born to women infected with the Aids virus are to undergo pioneering
gene therapy aimed at destroying HIV before it begins attacking their immune
system, scientists announced yesterday.

    Dr Flossie Wong-Staal of the University of California in San Diego, and a
leading Aids researcher, said trials should start within a year.

    ''This might seem like an unreachable goal right now, but we should bear in
mind that gene therapy is a rapidly developing field,'' she told the 10th
International Conference on Aids in Yokohama, Japan. ''It is hoped that the
urgency of the Aids epidemic will provide impetus for this technology.''

    Dr Wong-Staal and her team plan to remove blood from the baby's umbilical
cord. The blood contains stem cells which are normally found in the bone marrow,
and are involved in the production of new blood cells. A new gene will then be
inserted into the genetic material of the stem cells in the laboratory. The gene
enables the cell to make an enzyme, known as a hairpin ribozyme, which slices up
and destroys the HIV genetic material that it needs if it is to replicate
itself.

    The treated stem cells will then be injected back into the baby where they
will produce white blood cells containing the enzyme. If one of these cells is
infected by HIV, the enzyme will attack it before it becomes established in the
cell. If it fails, the enzyme will attack the virus again when it starts to
replicate.

    Initially, each baby will be given altered blood cells taken from its own
umbilical cord, but eventually, doctors hope to mass-produce stem cells which
will be available as a routine injection. The ultimate goal is to develop a
simple Aids treatment that can be given in a single injection to protect infants
at risk.

    The proposed therapy has yet to be approved by the American Food and Drug
Administration and the National Institutes of Health, but Dr Wong-Staal said:
''We don't expect a long delay and treatment should begin in 1995.''

    Dr Wong-Staal's approach is one of several gene-therapy treatments now in
development for HIV infection.

    Drug therapy, the first line of attack, has proved disappointing. The virus
can mutate rapidly to evade the impact of drugs now used, and resistance is a
growing problem. Vaccine development is progressing slowly with no real prospect
of a successful preventive injection before 2000 at least.

    Dr William Paul, director of the US Office of Aids Research, said there was
''great enthusiasm about the potential of gene therapy to limit the capacity of
cells to support the growth of the virus''. Although no one knows for sure if
gene therapy will work any better than drugs, treating infection at the earliest
stages - in infected infants or those at risk - is believed to hold the best
prospects for prolonging life.

    Researchers working for the Ares-Serono drug company told the conference
that a genetically- engineered form of growth hormone appeared to halt the
dramatic weight loss and wasting associated with Aids.

    A preliminary 12-week trial in 178 people showed that the weight gain was
due to an increase in ''lean body mass'' and not fat, suggesting that the
hormone was reversing or slowing down the breakdown of protein in the body.

    Aids researchers and activists yesterday called for better awareness of the
disease to prevent the marginalisation of sufferers. Junsuda Suwunjundee, a Thai
woman with Aids, told the conference: ''Death no longer frightens us. What
frightens us is how we can continue to live in society.''

    Ms Suwunjundee, a member of a Thai Aids support group, said that when she
revealed she had the disease her family was reluctant to carry on living with
her. ''They were afraid to have me live in the same house so I decided to leave
home for the clinic. As we are not welcome in some hospitals, we must go to the
few hospitals that will accept us.''

    She said society had a responsibility to secure the fundamental human rights
of people with HIV.

    (Photograph omitted)


LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1994


                              340 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            July 23, 1994, Saturday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 4

LENGTH: 663 words

HEADLINE: Leavers cite 'chaos' of changes

BYLINE: LIZ HUNT

BODY:

    - PROFESSOR Tim Eden, professor of paediatric oncology (child cancer) at St
Bartholomew's Hospital, London, is leaving to take up the Cancer Research
Campaign chair at the Royal Manchester Children's Hospital in October. He says
the ''piecemeal'' reorganisation of London's health care and the impact of the
NHS changes were major factors in his decision to move on. ''The tragedy is that
political dogma has tried to translate the NHS into a commercial enterprise.
What we needed to do was find out how much things cost and to improve
efficiency, not to equate treating patients with selling baked beans.''

    - Professor Bob Williamson, head of genetics at St Mary's Hospital, made a
major contribution to the discovery of the cystic fibrosis gene and is a pioneer
of gene therapy. He is to become professor of genetics at Melbourne University.
He said: ''The health services in London have turned into a disaster scene. I
haven't taken the decision to leave Britain lightly but there comes a point when
you have to say things have gone too far.''

    - Professor Lucio Luzzatto, head of Haematology at Hammersmith Hospital, and
a world-renowned expert on sickle cell disease and thalassemia, is leaving after
13 years to set up a genetics department at the Sloane Kettering Memorial
Hospital, New York. Hammersmith was earmarked for closure but won a reprieve and
is now merging with Charing Cross Hospital. Professor Luzzatto said that he
decided to leave when it became clear that the ''best marrying of research and
clinical medicine in the world'' was under threat.

    - Professor Kay Davies has returned to her former post as head of molecular
genetics at the Medical Research Council's Institute of Molecular Medicine in
Oxford, where she leads research into Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Professor
Davies was to have been director of the MRC's pounds 21m clinical sciences
centre at the Hammersmith Hospital. She was unavailable yesterday but is
reported to have resigned, citing continuing doubts about the Hammersmith's
future.

    - Professor Keith Johnson, professor of molecular neurogenetics at Charing
Cross Hospital, is at the forefront of research into muscular dystrophy. He is
considering a move out of London to set up a new unit.

    - Professor Martin Bobrow, professor of paediatric research at Guy's and St
Thomas's Hospital Trust, says he is ''likely'' to move to Cambridge University
after 12 years at Guy's. Professor Bobrow said yesterday that the vital
contribution of the London centres of academic medicine had been ''submerged''
in decisions about local provision. ''It is not just about the NHS reforms . . .
it is the extent of disruption to teaching and research.''

    - Professor Michael Chapman, former professor of obstetrics and gynaecology
at Guy's and pioneer of foetal heart surgery left in March after 10 years at
Guy's to take up a post at St Georges's Hospital, Sydney, a new teaching
hospital. Colleagues says he was disillusioned with the situation at Guy's and
doubts about its future.

    - Professor Richard Wood, professor of surgery at St Bartholomew's Hospital
and a leading kidney surgeon, is moving after 10 years at Bart's to the Northern
General Hospital in Sheffield. Colleagues say the ''chaos'' of London health
care and disruption caused by the merger with the Royal London Hospital Trust
led to his decision.

    - Dr David Bihari, director of the intensive care unit at Guy's and St
Thomas's Hospital Trust, and an outspoken critic of the Government's decision to
run down Guy's, once the flagship trust hospital, as part of a merger with St
Thomas's. Dr Bihari has said he will move to Australia to take up a post at St
George's Hospital, Sydney if the hospital is rundown as planned. ''I built up a
world famous department here. If it is going to close it shows the Government
has no regard for quality or academic excellence. They are only interested in
supermarket health care.''

    (Photograph omitted)


LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1994


                              343 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             July 22, 1994, Friday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 6

LENGTH: 527 words

HEADLINE: Scientists quit over NHS cash changes; Cancer expert bemoans 'big
blow' to crucial medical research

BYLINE: TOM WILKIE and STEPHEN WARD

BODY:

    TWO of Britain's most brilliant geneticists are resigning from posts at
London teaching hospitals, and yesterday blamed the Government's changes to
funding of the National Health Service for undermining scientific research.

    Both scientists led teams whose work has been of direct practical benefit to
medicine, rather than abstract pure science with no obvious end result. Their
departure is likely to be followed by others, and have a demoralising effect on
the National Health Service.

    When the introduction of a market within the National Health Service was
announced in the late 1980s, several scientists expressed fears that research
would be in jeopardy, because in the short term it adds to the cost of a
hospital.

    The two are Professor Bob Williamson, who is leaving as head of genetics at
St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, west London, to become professor of genetics at
Melbourne University; and Professor Lucio Luzzatto, head of haematology at
Hammersmith Hospital, who is to take up a job at New York's Sloan Kettering
Memorial Hospital. They both emphasised that they were going to excellent jobs,
but the changes in funding had played a major role in their decision.

    Their loss was described as a ''big blow'' by Karol Sikora, a cancer expert
and editor of the journal Gene Therapy, who said: ''These people are the leaders
of British science. Why should they waste their time on committees carrying out
hours of paperwork when they should be allowed to get on with the research that
is so desperately needed?''

    Over the past 20 years, Professor Williamson has pioneered gene therapy for
cystic fibrosis sufferers. He headed the laboratory which was unusually
productive in making significant discoveries about human genetics.

    More recently scientists working under him were the first to show there was
genetic damage associated with inherited forms of premature Alzheimer's disease,
leading to a better understanding of the disease.

    In a body blow to British research, that entire research team moved en masse
to the US because they could not get proper funding for their work.

    He is respected not only as a great scientist in his own right, but as one
who has both led and inspired others.

    He told the London Evening Standard yesterday that changes in funding of the
health service which make hospitals compete for funds with one another have
''poisoned the environment between research groups who should be collaborating
with one another and instead are being forced into competition.''

    Professor Luzzatto said: ''What the Government is doing to the NHS is
suicidal. They are repudiating its research base.''

    Reacting to the two resignations, the junior health minister Baroness
Cumberlege said at question time in the Lords that people often changed jobs
''for a variety of reasons including family reasons''.

    She added: ''Scientists with international reputations are few in number.
They work all over the world and it is not surprising that two should choose to
go abroad. Many in fact choose to come to the UK from abroad and the net result
if that we attract marginally more than we export.''


LOAD-DATE: July 22, 1994


                              344 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                                 July 21, 1994

SECTION: Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1534 words

HEADLINE: HUGE BLOW AS PIONEERING SCIENTISTS QUIT LONDON

BYLINE: Jo Revill

BODY:


    IT IS one of the unique qualities of the NHS that research and clinical
treatment, laboratories and wards, have always existed side by side.

    It seemed obvious that teaching hospitals would foster the right climate for
medical advance because scientists had ready access to patients upon whom to try
out new drugs and therapies.

    But today's revelation that five of the country's leading molecular
geneticists have resigned from their London posts suggests this is no longer the
case.

    The great fear they all expressed is that doctors and scientists are being
isolated from one another, as the health reforms and their financial constraints
begin to bite. Professor Lucio Luzzatto, a world-renowned specialist on sickle
cell disease and thalassaemia, has described the separation as suicidal.

    He said: "The NHS was one of the main reasons why I came to Britain 13 years
ago.

    "I regarded it as the best medical service in the world and when I came here
I wasn't disappointed."

    Last year, however, things began to change for Professor Luzzatto, head of
haematology at the Hammersmith Hospital.

    He became aware that an immense amount of paper work was being required of
him. He became worried that the more specialist interests of clinicians were
suffering because health authorities now have to sanction payment for patients
before they are admitted to hospital.

    "The idea was that patient choice would be increased, but I believe it has
decreased", said Professor Luzzatto, who is going to a prestigious job in New
York's Sloan Kettering Memorial Hospital.

    But the resignations are symptomatic of a deeper malaise within the NHS.

    Bob Williamson, who is heading for Australia in a few months' time, said: "I
don't want to spend the last 10 years of my working career in a hospital
environment which is competitive and on the decline because of Government
policy.

    "We are being forced by that policy to engage in a destructive, competitive
conflict."

    None of the scientists feel easy about leaving behind the colleagues they
have worked with, and the teams they have built up over the years.

    All stress the excellence of the departments they were leaving behind, and
the superb opportunities they were taking up at their new jobs in order to
continue their research.

    But it is the shake-up of London's hospitals, begun two years ago by Sir
Bernard Tomlinson who suggested closing up to nine hospitals, which has
destroyed their faith in the future.

    Professor Williamson, who has become famous for his work on gene therapy
with cystic fibrosis sufferers, said: "I love St Mary's - I think we've done
some wonderful research here. But there comes a point where policies over which
you have no control can force you to take steps which are certainly not
desirable.

    "I feel very sorry to leave London at the very moment when the London groups
- including our own - are getting excellent results on some of the preliminary
trials for gene therapy, cystic fibrosis and other diseases."

    The irony is that St Mary's in Paddington was never on the Government
hit-list and Tomlinson himself singled it out for praise. But, as Williamson
says, no one is immune from the trends towards cost-cutting and competitiveness.
Nowhere is this more destructive to the collaborative spirit of science than in
genetics, where huge databases on gene types of thousands of patients are needed
in order to hunt down the defective genes.

    It is this spirit of collaboration that led Professor Williamson to work
with the Royal Brompton and now sees the first volunteers there undergoing
monthly treatment which may offer them much longer lives.

    Another big loss to the country is Kay Davies, the professor who was to have
headed a pioneering centre at the Hammersmith Hospital to develop gene therapy
for a number of fatal inherited diseases.

    But it was the uncertainty over the hospital's future - first threatened
with closure and now heading for a merger with Charing Cross - that led her

    to leave and go back to Oxford.

    For Professor Martin Bobrow, who has headed Guy's Hospital's genetic work
and created a world-leading team on muscle-wasting diseases, the crunch came on
the day that Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley made her speech to Parliament
announcing that St Thomas's would become the capital's major hospital and Guy's
would lose most of its clinical services.

    Professor Bobrow, who will set up a new department in Cambridge in genetics,
said: "The way London medicine is being reconfigured is separating the practice
of medicine from its scientific base.

    "I don't believe that is the way medicine should be practised. I believe the
long term effects of that could be very destructive"

    The departure of Professor Bobrow and the others will create a gap that the
deans of the medical schools will find almost impossible to fill.

    The fear is that others, seeing the writing on the wall, will also go.

    "People are very wary about accepting a job when they see themselves
spending the next seven years arguing over costs and becoming involved in
politics" said Professor Bobrow.

    "We all understand the need for change, but that process is muddy, it is
intensely political, it is not open and it has not been based on free and fair
discussion".

GRAPHIC: Professor Williamson today: Fleeing 'destructive' policies

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1994


                              345 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                                 July 21, 1994

SECTION: Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1534 words

HEADLINE: HUGE BLOW AS PIONEERING SCIENTISTS QUIT LONDON

BYLINE: Jo Revill

BODY:


    IT IS one of the unique qualities of the NHS that research and clinical
treatment, laboratories and wards, have always existed side by side.

    It seemed obvious that teaching hospitals would foster the right climate for
medical advance because scientists had ready access to patients upon whom to try
out new drugs and therapies.

    But today's revelation that five of the country's leading molecular
geneticists have resigned from their London posts suggests this is no longer the
case.

    The great fear they all expressed is that doctors and scientists are being
isolated from one another, as the health reforms and their financial constraints
begin to bite. Professor Lucio Luzzatto, a world-renowned specialist on sickle
cell disease and thalassaemia, has described the separation as suicidal.

    He said: "The NHS was one of the main reasons why I came to Britain 13 years
ago.

    "I regarded it as the best medical service in the world and when I came here
I wasn't disappointed."

    Last year, however, things began to change for Professor Luzzatto, head of
haematology at the Hammersmith Hospital.

    He became aware that an immense amount of paper work was being required of
him. He became worried that the more specialist interests of clinicians were
suffering because health authorities now have to sanction payment for patients
before they are admitted to hospital.

    "The idea was that patient choice would be increased, but I believe it has
decreased", said Professor Luzzatto, who is going to a prestigious job in New
York's Sloan Kettering Memorial Hospital.

    But the resignations are symptomatic of a deeper malaise within the NHS.

    Bob Williamson, who is heading for Australia in a few months' time, said: "I
don't want to spend the last 10 years of my working career in a hospital
environment which is competitive and on the decline because of Government
policy.

    "We are being forced by that policy to engage in a destructive, competitive
conflict."

    None of the scientists feel easy about leaving behind the colleagues they
have worked with, and the teams they have built up over the years.

    All stress the excellence of the departments they were leaving behind, and
the superb opportunities they were taking up at their new jobs in order to
continue their research.

    But it is the shake-up of London's hospitals, begun two years ago by Sir
Bernard Tomlinson who suggested closing up to nine hospitals, which has
destroyed their faith in the future.

    Professor Williamson, who has become famous for his work on gene therapy
with cystic fibrosis sufferers, said: "I love St Mary's - I think we've done
some wonderful research here. But there comes a point where policies over which
you have no control can force you to take steps which are certainly not
desirable.

    "I feel very sorry to leave London at the very moment when the London groups
- including our own - are getting excellent results on some of the preliminary
trials for gene therapy, cystic fibrosis and other diseases."

    The irony is that St Mary's in Paddington was never on the Government
hit-list and Tomlinson himself singled it out for praise. But, as Williamson
says, no one is immune from the trends towards cost-cutting and competitiveness.
Nowhere is this more destructive to the collaborative spirit of science than in
genetics, where huge databases on gene types of thousands of patients are needed
in order to hunt down the defective genes.

    It is this spirit of collaboration that led Professor Williamson to work
with the Royal Brompton and now sees the first volunteers there undergoing
monthly treatment which may offer them much longer lives.

    Another big loss to the country is Kay Davies, the professor who was to have
headed a pioneering centre at the Hammersmith Hospital to develop gene therapy
for a number of fatal inherited diseases.

    But it was the uncertainty over the hospital's future - first threatened
with closure and now heading for a merger with Charing Cross - that led her

    to leave and go back to Oxford.

    For Professor Martin Bobrow, who has headed Guy's Hospital's genetic work
and created a world-leading team on muscle-wasting diseases, the crunch came on
the day that Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley made her speech to Parliament
announcing that St Thomas's would become the capital's major hospital and Guy's
would lose most of its clinical services.

    Professor Bobrow, who will set up a new department in Cambridge in genetics,
said: "The way London medicine is being reconfigured is separating the practice
of medicine from its scientific base.

    "I don't believe that is the way medicine should be practised. I believe the
long term effects of that could be very destructive"

    The departure of Professor Bobrow and the others will create a gap that the
deans of the medical schools will find almost impossible to fill.

    The fear is that others, seeing the writing on the wall, will also go.

    "People are very wary about accepting a job when they see themselves
spending the next seven years arguing over costs and becoming involved in
politics" said Professor Bobrow.

    "We all understand the need for change, but that process is muddy, it is
intensely political, it is not open and it has not been based on free and fair
discussion".

GRAPHIC: Professor Williamson today: Fleeing 'destructive' policies

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1994


                              347 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                              May 30, 1994, Monday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 4

LENGTH: 225 words

HEADLINE: 'Suicide cell' plan to beat breast cancer

BODY:

    SCIENTISTS are to try to order cancer cells to ''commit suicide'' in the
battle to beat breast cancer.

    The method centres on a new approach to cancer gene therapy being devised by
a team at the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, which has worked out a way of
tricking a breast tumour cell into activating a drug that will kill it.

    The scientists from the charity's cancer unit at London's Hammersmith
Hospital have asked for approval to start trials with 10 volunteer patients with
advanced breast cancer. Dr Nick Lemoine, the team leader, said: ''This is the
first time anyone has attempted to use a cancer gene to destroy a cancer cell.''

    The method, published in the journal Gene Therapy, is called genetic prodrug
activation therapy.

    Breast cancer has been chosen for the trial because the team identified the
molecular ''switch'' controlling a gene called erbB-2 which is turned on in
breast cancer cells but not in normal cells.

    High levels of the protein produced by the gene are found in tumour cells in
about a fifth of patients, whose outlook is very poor.

    Dr Lemoine said: ''The first trial will not be an attempt to cure. It's
fact-finding - checking whether we can make the cells activate the drug in the
nodules.

    ''It works in the laboratory, but that is a long way from making it
effective in patients.''


LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1994


                              348 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                                  May 9, 1994

SECTION: Pg. 19

LENGTH: 254 words

HEADLINE: Breakthrough on blood disease

BODY:


    A BREAKTHROUGH in the search for a cure for haemophilia has been unveiled by
researchers from a London hospital.

    Gene therapy experts from the Royal Free, Hampstead, have developed a
treatment that would replace the daily injections endured by thousands of
haemophiliacs with an annual, or six-monthly, injection.

    The research team have produced a vital protein that is missing from the
blood of haemophiliacs, whose blood does not clot properly, the International
Congress of the World Federation of Haemophilia in Mexico City was told.
Clinical trials could begin within five years.

    'It is an important breakthrough and I feel very excited,' said consultant
haematologist Dr John Pasi. 'This is the first step towards a cure for
haemophilia.'

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1994


                              351 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 29, 1994, Friday

SECTION: COMMENT PAGE; Page 17

LENGTH: 313 words

HEADLINE: Letter: Royalties from genetic testing

BYLINE: From Dr DAVID R. GREAVES

BODY:

    Sir: In her article ''The genetic goldrush'' (27 April), Susan Watts raises
important issues pertaining to the patenting of DNA sequences from the human
genome. The cloning and characterisation of the cystic fibrosis (CF) gene from
both normal subjects and CF patients in 1989 was a scientific tour de force. The
knowledge of the CF gene DNA sequence immediately allowed the development of
good diagnostic tests for the presence of defective CF genes.

    That a royalty has to be paid for a genetic test is not without precedent,
witness the royalties paid every time an HIV test is performed. The availability
of unambiguous genetic tests for defective CF genes offers nothing to those
currently afflicted by this debilitating disease and to those in future
generations who will be born with two defective CF genes. It is for these people
that the CF gene DNA sequence can be used not just as a marker but hopefully as
a therapeutic agent in and of itself.

    While the idea of someone else's ownership of our own DNA sequences seems
outrageous, the idea of a pharmaceutical company having patent protection to
develop certain chemical compounds (eg antibiotics) is widely accepted. Since
DNA itself is only a very large chemical compound, there is no reason why new
therapies using specific gene sequences should not enjoy similar patent
protection. Indeed, such exclusive rights are essential if the huge sums of
money required to bring gene therapy protocols into clinical trials are to be
raised in financial

    markets.

    Susan Watts concludes her article on a somewhat downbeat note by saying
little science is being done; on the contrary, much exciting science is being
done but it is the lawyers who are making all the money.

    Yours sincerely,

    DAVID R. GREAVES

    Sir William Dunn School

    of Pathology

    University of Oxford

    Oxford

    27 April


LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1994


                              353 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 12, 1994, Tuesday

SECTION: GAZETTE PAGE; Page 14

LENGTH: 1203 words

HEADLINE: Obituary: Professor Jerome Lejeune

BYLINE: MAJ HULTEN

BODY:

    Jerome Jean Louis Marie Lejeune, geneticist: born Montrouge, France 13 June
1926; Director of Research, CNRS 1963-94; Professor of Fundamental Genetics,
Faculty of Medicine, Paris 1964-94; member, Pontifical Academy of Sciences
1974-94; author of Discovery of the extra chromosome in Trisomy 21 (mongolism)
1959; married 1959 Birthe Bringsted (two sons, three daughters); died Paris 3
April 1994.

    JEROME LEJEUNE, a pivotal figure in medical genetics, is best remembered for
his discovery 35 years ago of the chromosome abnormality which causes Down's
syndrome.

    His seminal paper, published in 1959, together with his French colleagues
Marthe Gauthier and Raymond Turpin, was the first clear documentation of a
chromosome abnormality in humans. This publication marked the introduction of
clinical cytogenetics as an independent discipline, providing for the first time
a definitive differential diagnosis, and rapidly becoming a most important
clinical diagnostic tool in medical genetics.

    In 1952, after completion of his medical education, Lejeune had become
associated with Raymond Turpin, the Professor of Paediatrics at the National
Centre for Scientific Research in Paris. He initially analysed the
dermatoglyphics - i.e. the palm and finger prints (not to be confused with the
modern type of DNA finger-printing) in children with Down's syndrome - and also
researched the genetic effects of irradiation in humans (still a controversial
subject).

    It was, however, the study of the inheritance patterns of Down's syndrome in
twins that led Lejeune to become involved in chromosome research. He was puzzled
by the high concordance in identical twins in comparison to the extremely low
concordance in non-identical twins. This did not fit in with expectations that
the condition was caused by a single gene defect. He therefore postulated that
the underlying cause may have been an abnormality affecting a number of genes on
a chromosome, perhaps an abnormality in the number of chromosomes.

    As a young medical doctor Lejeune's main research interest focused on mental
deficiency, and early on he recognised the potential of chromosome
investigations for the diagnosis of conditions associated with developmental
delay. At the time he was working on his own, with relatively little support
from his colleagues, and without much technological help.

    By 1955 he was convinced that there must be an abnormality in chromosome
number in sufferers from Down's syndrome, but at that stage he was not clear
whether there was an extra, or a missing chromosome. One of the problems was the
absence of a reliable standard for comparison, since there was then some
uncertainty as to the normal chromosome number of man, although it had become
generally accepted that there would be 24 pairs, a total of 48 chromosomes.

    It is only when there are cellular divisions that the DNA is compact enough
to be seen by ordinary microscopy. Lejeune developed his own technology for cell
growth. He used cells from small skin biopsies from the patients, which he put
together with extracts from chicken embryos. In the absence of an incubator, he
strapped the test tube containing the cells plus the chicken extract to his own
body. A few weeks later, there was enough cell growth for him to produce
chromosome preparations.

    Using slightly different technology, two research workers in Sweden, Joe Hin
Tijo and Albert Levan, had in 1956 identified the correct chromosome number for
humans as being 46, but it still took some time before Lejeune was able to
clearly demonstrate that the children with Down's syndrome had an extra
chromosome. Lejeune not only discovered the first numerical chromosome
abnormality in man, but also the first chromosome deletion, which is the one
seen in children who are developmentally delayed and have a peculiar cry,
commonly described as ''cri du chat'' (''cat cry''). Lejeune found that this was
due to the deletion of a very small part of one of the longest chromosomes, and
the syndrome is now called the Cri du Chat

    syndrome.

    Lejeune became the Professor of Fundamental Genetics in the Faculty of
Medicine in Paris in 1964. He maintained his interest in chromosome research,
but insisted on publishing his scientific papers in French. It was only
relatively late in life that he learnt English, by aid of a linguaphone course.
Much of his later life was dominated by his strong religious beliefs and
devotion to Catholicism.

    Lejeune was convinced that it would be possible to find an effective
treatment for chromosome abnormalities, and wrote intricate papers to
substantiate this view, in particular with respect to Down's syndrome. At the
same time he crusaded against the prenatal Down's screening programmes, which
had become commonplace since the early 1970s. The screening allows
identification of foetal Down's syndrome with a view to offering termination of
an affected foetus; for Lejeune this was a most unwelcome and contradictory
outcome of his early and pioneering research.

    WhenLejeune received the Allan Memorial Award in October 1969, he addressed
the American Society of Human Genetics at San Francisco with a presentation
entitled ''On the Nature of Men'' with the motto ''To kill or not to kill, is
the question (unknown)''. It was published in the American Journal of Human
Genetics (1970), providing a rare opportunity for a non-French- speaking
audience to become acquainted with Lejeune's work. He suggests that the genetic
make-up of humans and the human chromosome picture must have ''appeared first in
an extremely small group, even as small as one couple'', implying that ''the old
idea that human beings are brothers is not an ethical hypothesis or a purely
moral goal but simply a correct expression of plain reality''. He further notes
that ''the recognition of such brotherhood is very comforting but increases our
concern as human geneticists for the destination of those unfortunate children
who do not share equitably our chromosomal inheritance''.

    In an interim section he proposes the establishment of a jurisdiction, a
body of counsellors, a new Facility for Research and Applied Eugenics. He then
outlines in three articles the statutes for such a new body, which must have
startled the audience of mainstream geneticists, enthused and excited by the new
provision for prenatal diagnosis now available.

    There can be not doubt that Lejeune was a man of outstanding integrity, a
highly disciplined and methodological scholar, as such much respected by his
colleagues and the general public alike. He presented his views in a
characteristically soft-spoken way, constantly expressing his deep and genuine
concern for the disabled with Down's syndrome as one of the most common and
outstanding examples.

    There is a very long way to go before the vision and conviction of his work
may be realised concerning the potential of medical treatment for these
conditions, typically involving defects of hundreds if not thousands of genes.
Nevertheless, the spirit of this man should continue to provide a stimulus for
research into cytogenetics in general and gene therapy in particular.

    (Photograph omitted)


LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1994


                              354 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            April 7, 1994, Thursday

SECTION: TITLE PAGE; Page 1

LENGTH: 318 words

HEADLINE: After the cancer mouse row, the designer sperm

BYLINE: TOM WILKIE, Science Editor

BODY:

    TWO AMERICAN scientists have invented a way of correcting defective genes in
sperm so children inherit only the ''healthy'' ones.

    The University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia is trying to patent the
technique with the European Patent Office, but most European countries have
ruled that ''germ-line'' gene therapy - where new genes are passed to subsequent
generations - is unacceptable. In some countries it is illegal.

    The genetic engineering of sperm is the latest controversial biotechnology
patent to be considered by the Office. After protests across Europe, the Office
is reviewing a decision to allow a patent (also sought by an American
university) on a mouse designed in the laboratory to contract cancer.

    Under the European Patent convention, patents can be refused on the grounds
that they might be contrary to morality or to public order.

    Today's issue of New Scientist magazine says Ralph Brinster, professor of
physiology at the University's Veterinary School, and Jim Zimmermann developed
the sperm process for animal breeding. However, the patent specification is
broad enough to include applications ''where the said animal is human'', the
magazine states.

    The technique involves removing sperm-producing cells, known as
spermatogonia, from the testes and then irradiating the testes to destroy any
remaining sperm or spermatogonia. New genes can then be inserted into the
spermatogonia removed earlier and altered cells put back into the empty testes.

    The genetically engineered spermatogonia would mature and produce healthy
sperm which would carry the designer genes into any child the man fathered.

    Inserting ''designer genes'' into animals and plants for propagation is
routine in research laboratories and commercial companies. The first successful
gene therapy on a human was in September 1990 when a girl was treated for an
immune system defect.


LOAD-DATE: April 07, 1994


                              360 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 21, 1994, Friday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 5

LENGTH: 565 words

HEADLINE: Revolution heralded in treating the 'incurable'; Gene therapy signals
way forward

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR, Science Correspondent

BODY:

    INCURABLE cancers, heart disease and arthritis have become the focus for a
revolutionary treatment that involves ''stitching'' genetic material into
patients.

    Next month, Britain's ethics committee on gene therapy will consider the
first proposal in the United Kingdom to treat cancer with a genetic vaccine -
the first of many to tackle fatal and not necessarily inherited diseases using
the new genetic technology.

    ''We are about to witness a revolution in our ability to tackle certain
life-threatening illnesses,'' Professor Karol Sikora, a cancer expert with the
Royal Postgraduate Medical School at Hammersmith Hospital, London, said. ''By
the end of the decade, some form of gene therapy will be routinely available in
hospitals throughout the world.''

    Medical researchers at the Institute of Cancer Research at the Royal Marsden
Hospital in London are preparing for the first clinical trial of gene therapy on
UK cancer patients, which is scheduled for this summer, if approved by the
government's Gene Therapy Advisory Committee.

    They will take tumour cells from about a dozen volunteers suffering from
malignant melanoma - the most lethal kind of skin cancer - and infect them with
a genetically engineered virus to create a vaccine that should stimulate the
patient's own immune system to attack the tumour.

    The vaccine will consist of inactivated tumour cells containing a gene for
interleukin-2, a natural substance in the body that triggers killer cells in the
blood to attack invading microbes. On this occasion, the scientists hope the
killer cells will destroy the tumour.

    Professor Sikora said that there were so many proposals in gene therapy
poised for clinical trials it had been necessary to launch a new scientific
journal, Gene Therapy, specifically designed to keep researchers in touch with
new developments.

    It was only four years since doctors inserted the first functional gene into
a patient suffering from a rare inherited disorder, he said. Now, more than 50
proposals were being considered by ethics committees or undergoing trials.

    Among the incurable diseases being considered for gene therapy are:

    Arthritis. Work has begun to insert genes into the tissues forming the
membrane around arthritic joints. The genes will cause the release of natural
substances that block the action of cytokines - chemical messengers that are
secreted in inappropriately large amounts in patients with arthritis.

    Aids. Researchers hope to introduce ''decoy'' genes into the body's white
blood cells, which are the targets of infection by HIV. The decoys will signal
the virus to replicate but will prevent it from completing the task, so
hopefully rendering it harmless.

    Heart disease. Genes that help to unclog furred-up arteries in heart
patients could be inserted into blood vessels as they are being cleaned out
following a heart attack. Scientists hope this will help prevent further attacks
as the arteries slowly release natural ''clot-busting'' drugs.

    Professor Sikora said one of the greatest problems with gene therapy is
being able to stitch enough genes into the right place for the treatment to
work. The Human Genome Project, which aims to map the precise position and
chemical structure of the estimated 100,000 genes in the human genetic
blueprint, will help to achieve this, he said.

    (Graphic omitted)


LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1994


                              361 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 7, 1994, Friday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 6

LENGTH: 758 words

HEADLINE: The Gene Dilemma: 'Rogue' genes the first step in long march

BYLINE: CELIA HALL, Medical Editor

BODY:

    A SOPHISTICATED system of genetic screening of ''expectant'' couples would
detect two-thirds of all the cystic fibrosis pregnancies in a year, a leading
medical expert is predicting.

    Most of these couples would then decide not to go ahead with the pregnancy.
Those who did would be able to prepare for a child with cystic fibrosis.

    Currently there are 300 cystic fibrosis babies born each year.

    Nicholas Wald, professor of environmental medicine at St Bartholomew's
Hospital in central London, is involved in the early stages of setting up a
''couples'' screening trial through family doctors in Oxford, allowing testing
to take place early in pregnancy. His ideas are at the front line of the
application of the new genetic knowledge.

    But the full benefits of knowing the identity of genes that cause diseases,
or which may predispose people to developing them, are still many years away.

    Three per cent of the population carry the cystic fibrosis mutations. These
people are normal and will never develop the condition. They do not know they
are carriers. But if carriers marry then there is a 25 per cent chance of a
child having cystic fibrosis, a 25 per cent chance of a child having no
defective gene for cystic fibrosis and a 50 per cent chance of a child being a
carrier - like his or her parents.

    Professor Wald says that when both the mother- and father-to-be are screened
it is only necessary to follow up the couples who are both carriers as only
their children are at risk of cystic fibrosis.

    Sampling of foetal cells by standard methods will then show if the foetus is
affected. It is still not a perfect method, even if all expectant couples are
screened. About a third will be missed because of the variability of the cystic
fibrosis gene defect. There are about 300 differences, he said.

    Population screening of well men and women, who have no disease themselves,
is controversial. But testing individuals who have reason to believe - because
of the birth of an affected baby or from family history - that they may carry
defective genes for a range of ills, is much less so. These are people who
already suspect the worst.

    There are more than 5,000 inherited disorders caused by single gene defects.
Many more genes will predispose their carriers to diseases including cancer and
heart disease given some environmental trigger. These are being hunted.

    All health regions have genetic testing and counselling centres although
they vary great in their range. Most now test for about 20 of the commonest
inherited diseases which make up 95 per cent of all the cases. There is
effectively no treatment on offer. Trials of gene therapy for cystic fibrosis
and an immune disease of childhood are being undertaken. For pregnant women, the
option is abortion.

    Top of the list of the common gene-defect diseases which are now tested for
are cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy, haemophilia, thalassaemia, sickle cell
disease and Huntington's disease.

    ''Some hundred or so other rare disorders can also be tested for and over
the next 10 or 15 years that will be thousands,'' Professor Martin Bobrow,
director of the Paediatric Research Unit at Guy's and St Thomas' Hospitals in
London, said. ''Genetic traits we know about, that predispose people, that make
them more likely to develop a disease, include Alzheimer's, schizophrenia and
diabetes,'' he said. But testing these groups is not yet a practical proposition
as the factors that trigger the onset of illness are not established.

    ''Medical treatments that would help do not yet exist,'' he said.

    So despite all the excitement over the identification of new genes, there is
still ''a huge gap between finding the gene and then being able to do something
it'', Alastair Kent, director of the Genetic Interest Group, said. This is an
umbrella organisation representing 120 support groups and charities concerned
with genetic disorders. ''It is all happening very rapidly. Knowledge is
increasing almost as we speak.''

    He went on: ''Knowing you carry one of these genes at least gives people the
option of deciding what they might do about it. They have the chance to make
informed choices. They will know what their chances are for passing on a
condition to their children. They may decide not to have children or to have
more children.''

    Mr Kent added: ''It is knowledge that allows people to make the decisions
they feel are most right for them.''

    - Genetic Interest Group helpline: 9am-5.50pm weekdays; 0865 744002.


LOAD-DATE: January 07, 1994


                              363 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           January 6, 1994, Thursday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 8

LENGTH: 326 words

HEADLINE: The Gene Dilemma: Guide to the jargon of genetics

BYLINE: TOM WILKIE

BODY:

    GENETICS uses a highly technical language. Here is a short guide for the
perplexed.

    Amino acid: the building blocks from which all proteins are made - 20
different sorts occur naturally.

    Bacterium: a simple micro-organism consisting of one cell in which there is
no nucleus and where the DNA floats freely in a loop.

    Base: one of the chemical sub- units of DNA which carries the genetic code.
Cells ''read'' the genetic message three bases at a time: each triplet
corresponds to an amino acid.

    Cell: the small sub-units from which living organisms are composed. In
humans, higher plants and animals, most cells have a complex structure
consisting of a nucleus surrounded by cytoplasm.

    Chromosome: Humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes carrying their entire
genetic specification.

    DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid): in most living things, DNA is the molecule
carrying primary genetic information. It consists of long chains of nucleotides
each of which is a base linked to a sugar (deoxyribose) and phosphate molecule.

    Double helix: the three dimensional structure of DNA in which two strands
twist together in a spiral.

    Gene: the unit of inheritance, consisting of a sequence of bases of DNA
occupying a specific position within the genome.

    Gene therapy: the deliberate repair or replacement of damaged genes.

    Genome: the full set of chromosomes - basically all the genes in an
organism's DNA.

    Nucleus: one of the inner compartments of a cell, separated from the
cytoplasm by a membrane and containing the chromosomes.

    Polygenic: controlled by or associated with more than one gene

    Probe: a short single strand of DNA, usually labelled with a radioactive
isotope, which can be used to detect a complementary segment.

    Transgenic: an organism containing genetic material artificially inserted
from from another species

    Virus: a sub-microscopic organism which has to invade another cell to
replicate itself.


LOAD-DATE: January 06, 1994


                              364 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           January 6, 1994, Thursday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 8

LENGTH: 908 words

HEADLINE: The Gene Dilemma: Who are you - the perilous knowledge ; In the first
of a three part series Independent writers report on the cutting edge of
research into human genes

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR, Science Correspondent

BODY:

    A MILLION people in Britain are members of families affected by genetic
disorders and 15,000 babies are born each year with significant inherited
disabilities.

    One in three Britons will suffer cancer - a disease influenced by defective
genes, although it is seldom inherited. Many will die of Alzheimer's and heart
disease, both also thought to have a genetic component.

    Dramatic advances in genetics over recent years now offer the prospect of
diagnosing and treating today's most incurable diseases.

    As the new year dawned, French scientists announced that they had discovered
genes linked to human ageing. It was the latest instalment in a stream of
genetic knowledge which is pouring out of the world's research laboratories. And
the pace will quicken.

    The French researchers themselves fear for the consequences of their own
discovery - that it may tempt insurance companies to test their prospective
clients to ascertain not only what they are likely to die of, but when they are
likely to die.

    Others fear that the scientists may be trampling on the very stuff of
humanity and that the door may have been opened to a Brave New World - where
parents might selectively abort their unborn children until they obtain one with
the genetic profile indicating high intelligence; where other children might
grow up with their lives blighted by the foreknowledge that they are genetically
predisposed to an early death; and where adults might try to alter the natural
order of things to postpone or cheat their inevitable demise.

    Parents wanting healthy children will benefit, but who is to define ''bad''
and ''good'' genes? Most people would agree that a crippling genetic disorder is
bad, but what about genes influencing sexual preference? Last year researchers
identified an inherited component to homosexuality that could result in the
discovery of a ''gay gene''.

    What pressure will scientists come under to identify ''good'' genes in the
hope that society could improve longevity, height or even intelligence? True
designer babies would then be a possibility.

    In the developed countries, genetic and congenital disorders have emerged as
the single biggest killer of children now that the battle against the infectious
scourges of the past has been won. A third of paediatric admissions to UK
hospitals are now the result of inherited disorders.

    Gene technology that came of age in the 1980s will change fundamentally the
way doctors treat patients. It holds out the prospect of diagnosing disease
before it strikes and of eliminating it by gene therapy - replacement of
defective genes with healthy substitutes.

    In a few years it might be possible to produce genetic read-outs on patients
that list the inherited traits they could suffer from later, such as heart
disease and cancer.

    Scientists are well on the way to finding the location of each of the
estimated 100,000 genes on the 46 human chromosomes - the genome. Finding a gene
quickly leads to the development of a genetic test and a better understanding of
an inherited disorder. Hunting down and mapping the position of every human gene
is a huge undertaking. The $ 3bn ( pounds 2.02bn) international Human Genome
Project has been likened in scale to President John F Kennedy's declared mission
in 1961 to send a man to the Moon.

    The genes are made of DNA - the genetic blueprint - which is the largest
molecule known. If all the DNA in the 46 chromosomes of one human cell were
stretched end to end it would measure 2 metres. All the DNA in the human body,
stretched end to end, would reach to the Moon and back 8,000 times.

    Scientists have discovered that the estimated 100,000 human genes reside in
just a small fraction, perhaps 10 per cent or less, of the DNA molecule.
Pinpointing the position of each gene could be compared with searching for a
burnt-out light bulb in a house without knowing the address.

    And yet barely a week goes past without an announcement of another gene
discovery. In 1973, scientists had located just 25 genes. By 1989 this had grown
to 1,656. By the end of 1991, the figure had reached well over 2,100. Within the
first decade of the next century, scientists on the Human Genome Project predict
they will have mapped all 100,000 or so human genes.

    James Watson, the co-discoverer in 1953 of the DNA double helix structure, a
find that helped to spawn the new genetics, said the implications of mapping the
entire human genome will be greater than landing a man on the Moon: ''A more
important set of instruction books will never be found by human beings. When
finally interpreted, the genetic messages encoded within our DNA molecules will
provide the ultimate answers to the chemical underpinnings of human existence.''

    Scientists have described more than 5,000 inherited disorders caused by
single gene defects.

    Unravelling the message of the human genome holds out the prospect of
treating what have been stubbornly incurable illnesses.

    But it does much more. It allows humanity to delve into a hidden genetic
resource that has taken millions of years to evolve. It poses questions that
have yet to be widely debated in the public arena, such as: Who has the right to
know what is written in someone's genes? Who has the right to own genetic
information? Who has the right to act on genetic information?

    The debate must begin sooner, rather than later.

    (Graphic omitted)


LOAD-DATE: January 06, 1994


                              365 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           January 6, 1994, Thursday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 9

LENGTH: 556 words

HEADLINE: The Gene Dilemma: How a cold got in the way

BYLINE: TOM WILKIE, Science Editor

BODY:

    THE RESULTS of Britain's first gene therapy trial for cystic fibrosis,
Britain's most common inherited disease, have been delayed - by the common cold.

    Dr Duncan Geddes, director of respiratory medicine at the National Heart and
Lung Hospital in London, started treating 12 patients in September. Yesterday he
said: ''All it needs is for someone to get a cold and that puts the measurements
off for a month - and there are lots of colds going around.''

    Outwardly, the cystic fibrosis gene transplant appears a simple procedure,
which involves each volunteer sniffing briefly from a nasal spray. The
sophistication lies in the genetic engineering that has produced the material
sprayed, consisting of fatty globules containing billions of copies of the
intact cystic fibrosis gene. The hope is that the globules - known as liposomes
- will merge with the fatty outer membrane of the cells lining the inner surface
of the nose, carrying their precious genetic cargo into the cells.

    Dr Geddes said: ''They get the inhalation once, and then we test repeatedly
over the following month. We are testing the electric charge on the surface of
the lining of the nose; and using a sort of 'pipe cleaner' to brush away nose
cells to look at the gene, and whether it has been translated into protein.''

    In what is known as a double blind trial, some patients are receiving sprays
which do not contain genes as a ''control'' to check that if there is
improvement the effect is truly because of the gene transplant. To prevent
unconscious bias, Dr Geddes does not know which patients have received the genes
and which the placebo and he will be told only after measurements are complete.

    If the procedure works, Dr Geddes is cautious about describing it as a
''cure'' for doses will have to be given repeatedly. Cystic fibrosis affects
more than 7,000 children and young adults, whose lungs clog with thick mucus
which provides a perfect breeding ground for bacteria and leaves them open to
recurrent infections. These scar the lungs, leaving patients breathless, and
eventually lead to lung failure. CF also blocks the secretion of digestive
enzymes.

    There is currently no cure and sufferers used to die in early childhood.
With modern antibiotics and intensive nursing, they now have much longer life
expectancy. But their lives are dominated by a constant regime of having to take
up to 70 tablets a day, to stop chest infections, improve breathing, and to
assist in digestion. It is still comparatively rare for them to survive into
their thirties.

    One of the tragedies of CF is that it often appears to afflict a family with
no previous experience of the disease. But, in 1989, after an international
quest that had continued for more than a decade, researchers in the United
States and Canada identified the gene responsible for the disease.

    Like all genes, it represented a recipe for cells to make a specific protein
and once the researchers knew the recipe they could hunt for the protein in
affected cells and try to establish its function. They discovered that the
protein controls the movement of chloride (salt) ions across cell membranes,
which helps to explain why people who suffer from cystic fibrosis are unable to
keep the airways of their lungs wet and therefore clear.

    (Graphic omitted)


LOAD-DATE: January 06, 1994


                              367 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           December 31, 1993, Friday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 2

LENGTH: 576 words

HEADLINE: Faulty gene offers clues to cancer; Discovery by scientists working on
inherited disease opens way to predictive tests and offers hope of possible
treatment. Tom Wilkie reports

BYLINE: TOM WILKIE

BODY:

    NEW INSIGHTS into the development of cancer may follow from the discovery,
announced today, of the gene responsible for tuberous sclerosis, an inherited
disease affecting more than a million people around the world.

    The identification of the gene - one of two thought to be responsible for
the condition - opens the way to predictive tests for families at risk of having
children suffering from the disease, which had previously seemed to strike
without warning.

    Tuberous sclerosis is a relatively common inherited disease - about 1 in
6,000 people is affected - which can cause mental handicap, epilepsy,
disfiguring skin rashes and kidney disorders. The faulty gene causes abnormal
development of tuber-like growths in the brain which become hard or sclerotic,
hence the condition's name (it has no relationship to multiple sclerosis, nor to
tuberculosis).

    But the scientists who found the gene were intrigued to discover that it
produces a protein, known as tuberin, which resembles a molecule, GAP3, known to
be involved in regulating the growth and proliferation of cells - and thus
playing a role in cancer. Patients with tuberous sclerosis frequently develop
tumours, but these are almost always benign.

    Dr Julian Sampson, from the Institute of Medical Genetics at Cardiff and one
of the leaders of the research group that discovered the gene, said: ''It's
likely that in some tumours abnormalities of this protein may exist.''

    Dr Sampson believes that two practical applications will follow from the
discovery. ''The condition is renowned for the variability of its severity and
because the condition is so very variable, members of families are unsure as to
whether they are carrying the gene or not. The hope is that a more direct, gene-
based test could be developed.''

    A single copy of the defective gene is sufficient to cause the disease, and
anyone carrying the faulty gene has a one in two chance of passing it on to his
or her children.

    Because of the variation in its severity, someone with minimal or no
manifestations of tuberous sclerosis could have the gene which could then
severely affect their offspring.

    The development of a test is complicated because researchers know that the
gene, whose identification is published in the scientific journal Cell today and
which lies on the 16th of the 24 human chromosomes, is responsible for only half
of the cases of tuberous sclerosis. The other cases stem from a mutation in a
gene lying on chromosome number 9 which has not yet been identified.

    Paradoxically, the existence of a genetic defect on chromosome 9 linked to
tuberous sclerosis was proved in 1987, whereas the existence of a defect on
chromosome 16 came to light only last year. This gene was speedily isolated and
identified because four groups of researchers ''were working together rather
than competing'', and because the techniques for identifying genes are getting
faster, Dr Sampson said.

    The second practical application is the development of some form of
treatment, but Dr Sampson cautioned that the nature of the disease makes it
unlikely that it could be a good candidate for gene therapy. ''Because it
affects so many organs, especially the brain, it's difficult to see how you can
deliver intact genes to all the organs,'' he said. But by understanding the
mechanisms of the disorder, Dr Sampson believes, it may be possible to devise
other therapies for the condition.


LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1993


                              368 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                           December 7, 1993, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 19

LENGTH: 867 words

HEADLINE: Call to protect identities of gene victims

BYLINE: Jo Revill

BODY:


    FAMILIES who are screened for genetic diseases need to be protected from the
potentially devastating consequences it can have on their jobs, insurance and
mortgage prospects.

    A report today says no one should be compulsorily tested for an inherited
disorder, and the Government should set up safeguards to protect confidential
medical information which could otherwise wreck the lives of sufferers.

    Genetic disease accounts for about half of all childhood deaths in Britain,
with about 15,000 babies born annually having a significant inherited disorder.

    In the next decade, the search to identify those who have abnormal genes is
expected to become widespread as technology improves.

    Screening throughout a population will allow doctors to warn people their
children may have a disease if they are carriers.

    There is already screening in some areas of Britain for sickle cell disease,
cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy, and pregnant mothers are now tested for
spina bifida.

    But there is concern that those identified as carriers or sufferers could
find it impossible to get a job or mortgage because of discrimination.

    British insurance companies should not require any genetic tests as a
prerequisite for insurance, the report by the Nuffield Council of Bioethics said
today.

    Mina Nilesh and her six-year-old son Amit are deeply aware of the
consequences of screening. He has a blood disorder, thalassaemia, which was not
picked up by testing when she was pregnant.

    Mrs Nilesh, who runs an optician's in North Harrow, said: 'I do worry about
the long-term prospects. Until he gets a bone marrow transplant, he needs a
blood transfusion every three weeks and iron injections every day.

    'We have to identify his condition on official forms, but would that put off
a potential employer?

    'His life could be precarious, medical insurers will not cover treatment for
his condition.'

    Scientists may soon be able to forecast who is at risk of cancer, heart
disease and a whole range of illnesses simply by identifying an individual's
body genes. There are about 4,000 inherited diseases caused by a single faulty
gene.

    It is expected tests will become routine, especially for people with family
histories of life-threatening conditions.

    Today's report by the Nuffield Council is the first in-depth inquiry into
the moral issues raised by science.

    It says scientists may soon be able to forecast accurately an individual's
lifespan through genes, but the real excitement will be for sufferers of
previously incurable inherited conditions.

    Gene therapy involves correcting defects in the body by adding new genes.
This work is still at the trial stage, but initial findings are encouraging.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1993


                              371 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          November 17, 1993, Wednesday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 10

LENGTH: 575 words

HEADLINE: Charities join forces against patenting of human genes; Drug firms'
actions 'could delay treatment for people suffering from genetic disorders'

BYLINE: TOM WILKIE Science Editor

BODY:

    THE RUSH by international drugs companies to patent human genes will delay
treatment and prolong the suffering of people affected by genetic disease,
representatives of patients and their families claim.

    The Genetic Interest Group (Gig), the national group which brings together
more than 100 charities concerned with genetic disorders, is the first
significant body publicly to oppose the patenting of human genes. For several
years, American companies have been patenting even partially analysed human
genes, forcing European research institutes to follow and prompting unease among
researchers in universities and in some drugs companies.

    Genetic disease accounts for half of all childhood deaths in Britain,
according to Ann Hunt, chair of the Gig. At least 4,000 conditions result in
disabling or fatal illnesses, such as Huntington's, Tay Sachs, or cystic
fibrosis, and about 15,000 babies are born each year with significant genetic
disorders.

    Clinical trials of gene therapy for cystic fibrosis began in Britain this
summer, but although such developments offer hope to families afflicted by
genetic disease, Ms Hunt warned ''this progress is being put at risk by
decisions of the Patent Office to permit commercial companies and research
institutes to take out patents on the actual structure of the genes
themselves''.

    The Gig also criticised the attitude of the Department of Trade and
Industry, which is opposing proposals by the European Commission to ban the
patenting of human genes. Its director, Alastair Kent, said: ''Our view is that
there is something fundamentally unacceptable about any institution,
corporation, or individual having ownership over part of a human being.'' Genes
and DNA are natural parts of the human body not patentable ''inventions'', he
continued.

    The Government wants genes isolated outside the human body to be patentable,
but this was a false distinction, Mr Kent said. ''It makes no difference to a
gene whether it is inside or outside the body.''

    He added: ''Before the tendency to patent reared its ugly head, there was
significant international collaboration between scientists. But researchers have
told us of difficulties that the requirement to patent has put in the way of
that collaboration.'' Patents will increase the costs of research and the
payment of royalities will increase the burden on charities who have to raise
the funds to develop treatments for rare genetic disorders where commercial
companies do not see market opportunities.

    Dr Sue Chamberlain, a genetics researcher at St Mary's Hospital Medical
School in London, said that when she tries to collaborate or exchange
information with other researchers she finds ''it's a closed shop now in the US
. . . most researchers have their own companies on the side''.

    Vaccination against measles may be linked to a rise in cases of chronic
inflammatory bowel disease in children and young adults, writes Liz Hunt.

    The measles virus has been isolated from the diseased gut of people with
Crohn's disease, and scientists are close to establishing whether a
''wild-type'' virus that occurs naturally, or a vaccine-related virus is
implicated. The vaccine contains live, treated virus which triggers the immune
system to produce protective antibodies, but is not infectious and should not
cause symptoms. More than 40,000 Britons have Crohn's disease, including an
increasing number of children.


LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1993


                              372 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           November 16, 1993, Tuesday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 9

LENGTH: 323 words

HEADLINE: Genetics labs 'face closure'; Patients put at risk by NHS funding
changes, therapy pioneer warns

BYLINE: TOM WILKIE, Science Editor

BODY:

    THE National Health Service will fail people at risk of genetic diseases
because of changes in funding, one of the country's leading geneticists warned
yesterday.

    Regional genetics laboratories, which carry out DNA analysis for affected
patients, are facing imminent closure because no one is willing to pay for them,
according to Professor Robert Williamson, a pioneer of gene therapy to cure
cystic fibrosis.

    Speaking at a meeting in London organised by the BioIndustry Association,
Professor Williamson warned that just as genetic services were moving out of the
research laboratory into the clinics, patients might never see the benefit
because of the new structure of the NHS.

    Professor Williamson's remarks were prompted by an earlier speech to the
meeting by Tom Sackville, junior health minister. Mr Sackville, who announced
the composition of a new committee on the ethics of gene therapy, also praised
the potential benefits that could follow from the ''complex and exciting area''
where ''progress has been faster than anyone had thought''.

    In outspoken terms, Professor Williamson said: ''It is cynical of ministers
to discuss genetic services without noticing that the way the NHS is being
funded will prevent genetic services being delivered.'' The Medical Research
Council and the NHS have been studying the best way of screening couples who are
at risk of having children who would suffer from cystic fibrosis, the most
common genetic disease in Britain.

    Screening requires analysis of samples of DNA, the molecular messenger which
carries the genes, and in Britain, that has previously been carried out in
regional genetics laboratories. These now face closure, not only because
regional health authorities are eventually to be disbanded but also because of
the way in which the internal market works within the NHS.

    The Department of Health refused to comment on the specific criticisms.


LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1993


                              373 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                          November 10, 1993, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1974 words

HEADLINE: STORM OVER NEW GUIDE TO LONDON'S BEST DOCTORS

BYLINE: Jo Revill

BODY:


    A CONTROVERSIAL new guide naming the top 500 medical specialists in London
is being challenged by the doctors' ruling body, which views it is an underhand
way of consultants unlawfully advertising their skills.

    Disciplinary action is being threatened against anyone who has helped in the
compilation of The Good Doctor Guide, a directory listing the best consultants,
their particular expertise and their qualifications.

    More than 70 senior consultants have helped compile the second edition of
the directory. It contains far more names and specialisms than the first, which
was hugely popular, selling 10,000 copies.

    The consultants were asked two questions - which colleagues they would
recommend in their own or a closely-related field if a close relative needed
treatment, and who would they go to for a second opinion?

    The names they recommended - out of 2,500 specialists in London - were put
into a computer to come up with the most popular. Author Martin Page ended up
with 500 specialists, in 69 categories.

    Although most have private practices, listed alongside the NHS address, only
six of them do no work for the NHS, and 68 are professors.

    But any consultant who has even helped to check his own entry for accuracy
could now be in trouble, as the 'General Medical Council has warned that the
doctors should not agree to such an 'advertisement' of their services.

    GMC rules state: 'Doctors should not cause, sanction or acquiesce in the
publication of their names or practice details in any professional directory or
book which purports to make recommendation as to the quality of doctors or their
services.'

    But one doctor willing to challenge the GMC's stance is cancer expert
Professor Karol Sikora of the Hammersmith Hospital, who is included in the
guide.

    He said: 'It's ridiculous that people should not be allowed to know the
views of the medical profession.

    'If I wanted to know the best school for my child, I could walk into a
bookshop and buy this sort of guide.'

    Mr Page, who now lives in Portugal and has undergone several operations in
Britain on his eyes, said his motives in compiling the guide were not financial.

    'I'm trying to break down the wall of secrecy that has been built up around
doctors' skills and their qualifications.

    'The medical profession has tried to sabotage this book on the grounds that
the public might not use this information correctly.

    'But why should the public not be allowed to make up their own mind?'

    THE book details consultants from 69 fields of medicine - here we list those
working in two - cardiology and cancer treatment.

    Cardiologists

    Dr Raphael Balcon, London Chest:

    Dr Seamus Banim, Bart's:

    Professor Alan Camm (electrophysiology) St George's:

    Dr John Coltart, St Thomas's:

    Dr Paul Curry, Guy's:

    Dr Kim Fox (electrocardiography) Royal Brompton:

    Dr David Jewitt, King's College:

    Dr Alastair McDonald, Royal London:

    Dr Anthony Nathan (abnormal heart rhythms) Bart's:

    Dr Celia Oakley (congenital heart diseases) Hammersmith:

    Dr Paul Oldershaw (echocardiography) Brompton:

    Professor Philip Poole-Wilson (invasive cardiology) Brompton:

    Dr Anthony Rickards (investigative testing, catheters and angiography)
Brompton:

    Professor Peter Sever (hypertension), St Mary's:

    Dr Elliot Shinebourne (heart disorders in children) Brompton:

    Dr Jane Somerville (heart disorders in children) Brompton:

    Dr Edgar Sowton (angioplasty) Guy's:

    Dr Roworth Spurrell (cardiac catheterisation and angioplasty) Bart's:

    Dr Richard Sutton (pacing) Chelsea and Westminster:

    Dr Howard Swanton (angioplasty) Middlesex.

    Cancer physicians

    Professor Michael Baum (breast cancer) Royal Marsden:

    Dr Charles Coombes (breast cancer) Charing Cross:

    Professor David Cunningham (gastric cancer and lymphoma) Royal Marsden:

    Mr Jeremy Gilmore (breast cancer) Bart's:

    Professor John Goldman (leukaemia), Guy's:

    Dr Peter Harper, Guy's:

    Professor Victor Hoffband (leukaemia and lymphoma) Royal Free:

    Professor James Malpas (children's cancer) Bart's:

    Professor Edward Newlands (brain tumours and testicular cancer) Charing
Cross:

    Professor Timothy Oliver (bladder, kidney and testicular cancer) Royal
London:

    Dr Ray Powles (leukaemia and lymphoma) Royal Marsden:

    Dr Trevor Powles (breast cancer) Royal Marsden:

    Dr Grant Prentice (bone marrow transplants) Royal Free:

    Dr Gordon Rustin (tumours) Charing Cross:

    Professor Karol Sikora (investigational therapies, gene therapy)
Hammersmith:

    Dr Maurice Slevin (breast, colon and lung cancers) Bart's:

    Dr Ian Smith (breast cancer) Royal Marsden:

    Professor Robert Souhami (bone and muscle tumours) University College:

    Dr Jonathan Waxman (cancer of the bladder, kidney and prostate) Hammersmith:

    Dr Peter Wrigley (cancer of the intestine, stomach and lymphomas) Bart's.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1993


                              376 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           October 16, 1993, Saturday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 5

LENGTH: 664 words

HEADLINE: Hopes rise of therapy for cystic fibrosis; Researchers in US
demonstrate that gene treatment can correct disorder

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR, Science Correspondent

BODY:

    THE FIRST evidence that the revolutionary technique of gene therapy works on
humans with cystic fibrosis - the most common inherited disorder of northern
Europeans - has emerged from research in the United States.

    Scientists reported at a conference this week in Dallas, Texas, that they
have successfully treated cystic fibrosis patients using gene therapy, where
healthy versions of a defective gene are inserted into human tissue.

    They emphasised that the research, which will be published in full next
week, is still only preliminary and so far they have only demonstrated that it
works on the noses of three patients.

    In order for cystic fibrosis patients to benefit, gene therapy must work in
their lungs, which become clogged with sticky mucus because of a defective gene
that prevents the normal transport of chloride in and out of the cells lining
the respiratory system.

    Michael Welsh and colleagues from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at the
University of Iowa presented the results at the North American Cystic Fibrosis
Conference. Further details will be published in the scientific journal Cell.

    ''I'm cautiously hopeful,'' Dr Welsh said. ''But I think many more questions
need to be answered. The really, really important issue is safety.''

    The researchers sprayed the noses of their patients with the common cold
virus, which they had genetically engineered to carry the normal version of the
cystic fibrosis gene into defective cells. Dr Welsh found the inserted gene
worked and the chloride defect was corrected.

    However, large doses of the genetically altered virus will be needed in
order to infect the cells lining the lungs, which may result in side-effects not
seen in the three patients who received lower doses.

    Nevertheless, Robert Beall of the US Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, said: ''I
think it's a major milestone. We have to be very encouraged about this.''

    Duncan Geddes, director of respiratory medicine at the National Heart and
Lung Hospital in London, which began gene therapy trials on cystic fibrosis
patients last August, said: ''This is an important first step on the long road
towards gene therapy.''

    His team is attempting to inject genes using fatty droplets, called
liposomes, rather than viruses. A group of nine patients - all men - are taking
part in the British trial. Three will receive a placebo, and six will receive
liposomes carrying the gene.

    A spokeswoman for the Cystic Fibrosis Research Trust in Britain said results
of the trial were expected before the end of the year.

    If gene therapy proves to work in the lungs of patients, it will have to be
repeated on a regular basis because the respiratory system is constantly
renewing the cells lining the lungs. Dr Geddes said the unanswered questions
were how big the gene therapy doses will need to be, and how often they will
have to be applied.

    There are about 7,000 people, mostly children, suffering from cystic
fibrosis in Britain. They are prone to recurrent lung infections that can lead
to respiratory failure. Although antibiotics can prolong life expectancy, there
is no cure for the disorder and many patients die in childhood.

    The virus used in Dr Welsh's experiments was constructed by scientists at
Genzyme, a biotechnology company based in Framingham, Massachusetts.

    Two other US research teams - headed by Ronald Crystal, of Cornell
University, and James Wilson, of the University of Pennsylvania - are conducting
similar experiments. They are administering gene-carrying viruses directly to
the lungs.

    ''They should be congratulated. It's great,'' Dr Wilson said of the Iowa
group's findings. He has so far treated two patients but not released any
results.

    However, he and Dr Crystal warned that much more work needs to be done.

    Dr Crystal, who has treated three patients, said: ''It's a demonstration
that you can correct the abnormality in the nose, but the disease is not in the
nose.''


LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1993


                              377 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                           October 14, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 10, 1

LENGTH: 4854 words

HEADLINE: SUCCESS,FAILURE AND THE CLASS OF '83

BYLINE: Madeleine Harper,Anne Dixey

BODY:


    #VICTORIA HULL* lives Hammersmith, father a merchant banker. Studied English
and theology at St Andrews, taught at Hill House prep school for four years,
left to become producer/researcher of TV documentaries. Now works for film
director Don Boyd

    #LUCY MARDER* lives Jersey, parents both lawyers, married to photographer
Martin Wyness, daughter Sophie born September. First in art history at
Manchester, worked at Museum of Jewish Diaspora, Tel Aviv, for three years.  Now
art curator with Jersey Museum Services. Salary: £17,000

    #CELIA GREIG* lives Chiswick, late father a journalist. 2:2 in Latin
American studies at Bristol, travelled widely before joining the Student Travel
Co, now with a travel firm specialising in Latin America holidays.  Salary:
'very little'

    #CHARLOTTE HARFORD* lives Moscow, father a stockbroker, mother solicitor.
2:1 in modern languages at Oxford, joined Foreign Office, now running 'know-how'
fund at British Embassy, Moscow, which helps set up Russian companies. Salary:
'enough'

    #SUSAN FURNELL* lives Earls Court, father retired education consultant,
mother teacher. 2:2 in electronic engineering, Warwick, sponsored by GEC
Avionics, management consultant with Peat Marwick for three years. Now marketing
executive with Mercury telecommunications

    #GEORGIA METCALFE* lives Notting Hill Gate, father 'entrepreneur', mother
does charity work, married to Nicholas Coleridge, managing director of Conde
Nast, with sons Alexander, two, and Freddie 9 months. 2:2 in PPE at Oxford,
'made tea' at The Spectator, then joined You magazine. Now works part-time in
Daily Mail books department

    #KATE LOWE* lives Knightsbridge, father literary/theatrical agent, late
mother actress Hilary Tindall. 2:1 in Modern Languages, Cambridge, joined J
Walter Thompson and worked in New York as advertising account executive. Now
with PR firm Erika Fry in London. Salary: £25,000

    #SARAH LLOYD-DAVIES* lives Fulham, father with RTZ minerals, mother
physiotherapist. 2:1 in art history, London, worked for Artemis, the Duke Street
art dealer for four years. Now with Old Master dealer Michael Tollemache.
Salary: £16,000

    #SUSIE KOCEN* lives Melbourne, father a doctor, mother physiotherapist. 2:1
in textile design, Manchester, travelled to Australia where she joined a textile
firm. Left to found her own 50-acre smallholding.

    #KATE BINGHAM* lives Bloomsbury, father Lord Justice Bingham, Master of the
Rolls, mother National Gallery trustee. First in biochemistry, Oxford, strategy
consultant for US-based firm Monitor, Kennedy scholarship to Harvard Business
School for two years, graduated in top five per cent and joined Vertex
Pharmaceuticals. Now with Schroders Ventures starting up companies and director
of gene therapy firm Therexsys. Salary: £80,000

    #JOELY RICHARDSON* lives Chiswick, late father film director Tony
Richardson, mother actress Vanessa Redgrave, grandfather Sir Michael Redgrave,
sister actress Natasha Richardson, married to film producer Tim Bevan, daughter
Daisy, 18 months. Trained at RADA and in her first film Wetherby she played her
mother's younger self, starred in Peter Greenaway's Drowning by Numbers and
BBC's Lady Chatterley's Lover. Currently rehearsing film My Sister in This House
with Julie Walters.

    #JACQUELINE DAVIDSON* lives Hampstead, late father accountant, mother
ex-solicitor, married to Associated Newspapers' systems manager Andrew Rashbass,
sons Elie Joseph, two, Jacob, six months. 2:1 in Classics and law, Cambridge,
joined KPMG Peat Marwick and now a tax manager there

    #DIDO SANDLER* lives Hampstead, father emeritus Professor, London
University, mother interpreter. 2:1 in Hispanic studies, Liverpool, joined
industrial packaging firm CMB as graduate trainee. Now international marketing
manager for Mary Glasgow publicising

    #ZOE DE-ROPPE WEINMAN* lives New York, father writes detective novels,
mother interior designer. Studied modern European history at Columbia

    University, executive trainee with Macy's, MBA at Harvard Business School
for three years. Now consultant with Deloitte and Touche.

    #STELLA COLLIER* lives Edinburgh, father ex-civil servant, mother
ex-teacher. Studied history at Edinburgh University, attended college in
Philadelphia. Did odd jobs then travelled. Now manager of a Waterstone's
bookshop. Salary: £10,500

    #MARY-EMMA DEWAR* lives Perth. Cambridge degree, married the Hon Adam
Drummond, two children. Now full-time mother

    #GISELLE FINLAY* lives Hampstead, father runs family bakeware business,
married to barrister Michael Green, daughter Francesca, four months. 2:1 in
politics, Exeter, post-graduate radio journalism at City University, worked for
Radio Cambridge and GLR. Now Radio 4 producer of World at One and PM.  Salary:
£30,000

    #EMMA DANIELS* lives Kings Norton, Birmingham, father Home Office
accountant, married to computer company manager. 2:2 in international studies,
Birmingham, trained in banking and now a Lloyd's branch manager.  Salary:
£20,000

    #HELENA NICOLAIDES* lives Barnes, father ex-property developer, married
Dutch businessman Roy Prinse, son Nicholas, four, second child due now. Went
into property development, now runs company organising fashion shows and retail
business. Salary: 'don't know'

    #HELEN O'MALLEY* lives Oxford, father judge, married to Taiwanese chef, son
Benjamin, two. 2:2 in history, Oxford, joined London publishers, taught English
in Thailand, now runs Thai restaurant with husband. Salary: £20,000 #JOANNA
NEWMAN* lives Seoul, Korea, father music publisher, mother Royal College of
Music professor. 2:1 in French and German, Oxford, joined Associated Press, then
became financial journalist in Paris. Now research analyst with stockbroker WI
Carr. Salary: £70,000

    #AMANDA REYNOLDS* lives Fulham, father businessman, married to banker Jeremy
Thirsk, daughter Natasha, 6 months. 2:2 in law, Cambridge, now a merchant banker

    #LINDA MORRIS* lives Willesden, father Lord Morris of Kenwood, married to a
computer consultant. Attended American Musical and Dramatic Academy, New York,
now a singer touring Japan

    #KULSUM RAHIMTOOLA* lives Washington, married to a banker. First in natural
sciences, Cambridge, worked in pharmaceuticals in Pakistan, now consultant
scientist for World Bank in America

    #LORAINE RYAN* lives Ashford, father surveyor, mother BUPA supervisor. Third
in biology and oceanography, Southampton, now a British Gas research analyst.
Salary: £20,500

    #POLLY WHITELEGGE* lives Chiswick, parents legal profession/musician,
married to stockbroker Alastair Irvine. Joined a City firm as financial
administrator, now a general administrator with a management consultancy

    #RACHAEL NEAMAN* lives Islington, father concert violinist, mother doctor.
2:1 in French and Italian, Cambridge, travelled, taught French at Cambridge
University, then became editor for Cambridge University Press. Now deputy
publications manager at International Institute of Strategic Studies

    #ALEXA REA* lives Chelsea, father ex-Foreign Office, mother ex-artist,
living with barrister Paul Storey and stepchildren aged four and nine.  Studied
law at Wolverhampton Polytechnic, travelled, then worked for a publisher. Now
barrister specialising in family and civil law.

    #BELINDA STANNAGE* lives Fulham, father ex-tourist board PR, married civil
engineer two weeks ago. 2:2 in geography, Bristol, trained in PR and now works
for Royal Yachting Association

    #HELEN STEPHENS* lives Bristol, parents teachers, studied medicine at
Middlesex University, engaged to doctor Peter Brook. Now a GP.

    #NICOLA THOROLD* lives London, father insurance broker, mother art
historian, married to an architect. 2:1 in history, Oxford, joined City firm as
financial analyst, then the Arts Council. Now director of the Independent
Theatre Council

    #MERIEL RAINE* lives Oxford, father surgeon, mother teacher, married to
Oxford lecturer. 2:1 in medicine, Oxford, worked at Kingston, St Thomas's and
Guy's hospitals and now surgeon in Reading. Salary: £26,000

    #EMMA CLARKE* lives Kensington, father directs TV advertisements, mother an
ITN production worker. Studied English at Bristol University, then worked in
advertising production. Joined a Hollywood film company and recently made
15-minute independent drama

    #KATIE CHANDLER* lives Chiswick, father bank manager, mother
ex-headmistress, married to a cardiologist. 2:1 in medicine, Cambridge, trained
at the Royal London Hospital, now paediatrician at Queen Elizabeth Children's
Hospital. Salary: £25,000

    #KAREN WINKELMANN* lives Indiana, took Diploma at the Royal Academy of
Music, then music MA at Indiana University. Now violinist with American symphony
orchestra and string quartet

    #BETTINA WURDEMANN* lives Southampton, father finance director. 2:2 in
business, economics and accounting, Southampton. Now a Price Waterhouse
accountant. Salary: £29,000

    #HON MARY ANN SLIM* lives Chelsea, father Viscount Slim, company director.
Third in comparative religion and philosophy, London, worked for interior
designer, then for a British film company. Started her own property
refurbishment firm which she recently sold and is now looking for new career

    #DANIELA SIEFF* lives Oxford, father Lord Sieff, Marks & Spencer director,
mother runs art business. 2:1 in human sciences, Oxford, MSc at Michigan
University. Recently spent three years in Tanzania researching the lives of
nomadic cattle herders, now writing her findings for a PhD at Oxford

    #ALETHEA SIOW* lives Wembley, father doctor. Studied law, London. Now a
solicitor in the banking department of a city firm. Salary: £30,000

    #JANE WILLIS* lives Stockwell, father worked for insurance firm, mother
science journal editor. 2:1 in history, Manchester, did business and secretarial
course at City of London Polytechnic, joined Michael O'Mara, publishers of
Andrew Morton's book Diana: Her True Story, as a secretary.  Now their rights
manager. Salary: £16,000

    #REBECCA SIMOR* lives Notting Hill Gate, father furniture designer, mother
director America European Community Association. 2:1 in history, Manchester,
worked for European satellite TV station, then became Channel 4 current affairs
researcher. Now assistant editor at People's Century BBC Books.

    #SONIA MAGNAGO* lives Nottingham, parents hoteliers. 2:1 in bio-chemistry at
Bristol, and returned there to study medicine. Trained at Frenchay Hospital,
Bristol, now at Derby Royal Infirmary

    #GIGI LETTS* lives Paris, father managing director of Letts diaries, mother
runs Academia Italiana museum, married to a French businessman. St Paul's
headgirl, 2:2 in Philosophy, Cambridge, joined mergers and aquisitions at
Prudential Bache investment bank, then Baring Bros. Did MBA, became finance
director for mother's musum before launching company in Paris which prepares
French students for American university entrance exams.

    #PAULINA SINE NOMINE* Says of school: 'Not all thrive. We were under
pressure - pressure to look beautiful, get A's in everything, to excel on the
sports track and reach grade 8 in music. It was jolly good if you were glamorous
and clever. I'm still bitter about the place.'#ANITA McNAUGHT* lives Auckland,
mother died, never knew father. Odd jobs then went to New Zealand with then
boyfriend, feature writer for business magazines, joined TV New Zealand as
trainee, presented own show Tonight with Anita McNaught.  Now anchorman for
leading current affairs programme

    #SUSIE JOHNSON-SMITH* lives Wandsworth, father Geoffrey Johnson-Smith, Tory
MP for Wealden, mother psychiatrist, married to a solicitor. Studied history,
politics and philosophy at Kingston Polytechnic. Travelled, then worked as a
shop manager, joined Conservative Central Office and now helps organise party
conferences. Salary: 'It's in our contracts that we can't disclose how much we
earn'

    #SARAH KEE* lives Guatemala, father broadcaster Robert Kee, mother writer.
Studied anthropology at Sussex, travelled widely in Latin America and stayed on
in Guatemala as human rights worker. Now living with guerilla freedom fighters
helping to re-settle refugees

    #ZEENAT GAREWAL* lives Notting Hill, mother personal assistant, father Delhi
businessman. 2:2 in sociology and politics, Bristol. Worked in an advice centre
in India, then a London-based resource centre for Cubans. Now works in night
shelters and a Notting Hill housing advice centre. Salary: £12,000 #PIPPA
LEARNER* lives Manchester, father physics lecturer, mother books editor, married
to an acoustic consultant. 2:1 in engineering, Manchester, joined ICI and now a
part-time office manager with Prescott Consulting Engineers. Earns: £7,000

    #IMOGEN BRUNNER* lives Notting Hill, father former Texaco managing director,
mother music school director, engaged to BBC producer Tim Breadin. 2:1 in
geography, Oxford, did odd jobs, then went to Charing Cross and Westminster
medical school. Now a surgeon at Queen Mary's Hospital, Roehampton. Salary:
£20,000

    #MIRANDA KAZANTZIS* lives Notting Hill, father lawyer, mother writer. 2:1 in
PPE, Oxford, MA in International Relations at Columbia University. Now a trainee
barrister

    #SU MARSHALL* lives Olympia, father retired merchant banker, left Nottingham
University when pregnant, now a single mother, daughter Natasha, six.  Planning
to train as a physiotherapist. Says of school: 'I didn't like it and I'd say a
lot of the class of '83 didn't. It was too much of a brain factory and just
concerned with getting people to Oxbridge'

    #TAMSIN JAY* lives Islington, father is Peter Jay, former Ambassador to US
now BBC economics editor, mother is Baroness Margaret Jay, married to a TV
producer. 2:1 in politics and Russian studies, Bristol, worked for independent
TV company as researcher, then joined BBC political staff. Now a BBC assistant
producer, having worked on Newsnight and Today in Parliament

    #RACHEL JOHNSON* lives Notting Hill, father environmentalist, mother artist
Charlotte Johnson, married to Sunday Telegraph foreign editor Ivo Dawney, son
Ludo, 8 months. 2:1 in Classics and edited Isis at Oxford. Now a journalist at
the Financial Times

    #GABRIELA KOCZIAN* lives Tel Aviv, father in imports and exports, mother
marketing director. Studied business at Brighton Polytechnic, then tour operator
in Greece and with Royal Caribbean cruiseline, now teaching English in Israel.
Salary: £20 an hour

    #KAREN JONES* lives Poole, father violinist, mother pianist. Studied at the
Guildhall School of Music and Drama, then Vienna, then won scholarship to New
York Mannes College. Now principal flautist with the Bournemouth Symphony
Orchestra. Salary: £30,000

    #JULIE BLIGHT* lives New York, father data consultant, mother ski
instructor, married to geneticist. 2:1 in English, Cambridge, became advertising
copy writer, various firms. Salary: £30,000

    #RACHEL KELLY* lives Notting Hill, married to investment banker. 2:1 in
history, runner-up in Vogue talent contest and joined their staff, aged 22.
Went to Campaign magazine, then joined The Times. Now its property and local
government correspondent. Recently named by Tatler as an under-30 achiever

    #ANNA HOWARD* lives Stoke Newington, married to picture-framer Orazio
Gaultieri. 2:1 in Italian and art history, Edinburgh, then joined Metro Art
picture framers. Now works for husband's firm, Byron and Byron

    #ELIZA CHANCELLOR* lives Brook Green, father journalist Alexander
Chancellor, married to opera critic Alexander Waugh, son of Auberon, daughter
Mary, three months. 2:1 in Italian, London. Joined Independent Magazine, then
did odd jobs. Now helps husband compile pocket CD music guides. Salary: £50 a
month

    #SARAH AITKEN* lives Fulham, father businessman. 2:1 in History, Cambridge,
joined Cazenove as an analyst, now at JTP Morgan marketing global custody

    #PENNY BAKER* lives Scotland, parents doctors, married to a solicitor, son
Callum, one. Worked as a chalet girl and met her husband at Meribel, did sports
BA at Jordanhill University, Glasgow. Now a full-time mother

    #SUSY STRAGE* lives W Kensington, father ex-management consultant, married
to a venture capitalist. Studied history and linguistics at Tufts University,
Boston, joined London head-hunting firm, went to America and worked for Harvard
University before returning to London. Now freelance head-hunter

    #MARIA PAKENHAM* lives Shepherd's Bush, parents writers, grandfather Lord
Longford. Third in English, London. Joined Century Hutchinson's publicity
department, then Daunt's travel bookshop. Now at Heywood Hill bookshop

    #ANNETTE RICHARDS* lives Stanford, Connecticutt, father Dean of St Mary's
Medical School, Paddington. 2:1 in English, Oxford after winning organ
scholarship, won fellowship to Stanford University, then Sweelinck
Conservatorium in Amsterdam. Now postgraduate at Stanford and concert organist.
Salary: £25,000

    #PRISCILLA NORGEN* lives Devon, father lawyer, mother photograph librarian,
married to an ex-Navy officer. Studied comparative literature, Smith College,
Massachusetts, then trained at Charing Cross hospital. Now a doctor. Salary:
£20,000

    #SOPHIE CHAMBERS* lives London, father former ship owner. Did secretarial
work, joined Lloyds firm and now runs own racehorse insurance company.  Salary:
£30,000

    The girls most likely to...

    Each girl we contacted was asked to name the classmate they thought was most
likely to have been a success. The girls who received the most votes were:

    KATE BINGHAM lives Bloomsbury, father Lord Justice Bingham, Master of the
Rolls, mother National Gallery trustee. First in biochemistry, Oxford, strategy
consultant for US-based firm Monitor, Kennedy scholarship to Harvard Business
School for two years, graduated in top five per cent and joined Vertex
Pharmaceuticals. Now with Schroders Ventures starting up companies and director
of gene therapy firm Therexsys. Salary: £80,000

    IMOGEN BRUNNER lives Notting Hill, father former Texaco managing director,
mother music school director, engaged to BBC producer Tim Breadin.  2:1 in
geography, Oxford, did odd jobs, then went to Charing Cross and Westminster
medical school. Now a surgeon at Queen Mary's Hospital, Roehampton. Salary:
£20,000

    ANITA McNAUGHT lives Auckland, mother died, never knew father. Odd jobs then
went to New Zealand with then boyfriend, feature writer for business magazines,
joined TV New Zealand as trainee, presented own show Tonight with Anita
McNaught. Now anchorman for leading current affairs programme

    SARAH KEE lives Guatemala, father broadcaster Robert Kee, mother writer.
Studied anthropology at Sussex, travelled widely in Latin America and stayed on
in Guatemala as human rights worker. Now living with guerilla freedom fighters
helping to re-settle refugees

    GIGI LETTS lives Paris, father managing director of Letts diaries, mother
runs Academia Italiana museum, married to a French businessman. St Paul's
headgirl, 2:2 in Philosophy, Cambridge, joined mergers and aquisitions at
Prudential Bache investment bank, then Baring Bros. Did MBA, became finance
director for mother's musum before launching company in Paris which prepares
French students for American university entrance exams.

GRAPHIC: (please note captions with story)

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1993


                              378 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                           October 14, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 10, 11

LENGTH: 4574 words

HEADLINE: Success, failure and the class of '83

BYLINE: Madeleine Harper,Anne Dixey

BODY:


    Ten years ago they were the creme de la creme. Quite simply the most
brilliant school girls of their generation - beautiful, intelligent,
fashionable, musically gifted and accomplished in sport.

    But has the St Paul's Girls class of '83 lived up to that early promise?  As
the girls plan a unique 10-year reunion the Evening Standard has tracked them
down to discover how they've fared.  #VICTORIA HULL:* lives Hammersmith, father
a merchant banker. Studied English and theology at St Andrews, taught at Hill
House prep school for four years, left to become producer/researcher of TV
documentaries. Now works for film director Don Boyd.

    #LUCY MARDER:* lives Jersey, parents both lawyers, married to photographer
Martin Wyness, daughter Sophie born September. First in art history at
Manchester, worked at Museum of Jewish Diaspora, Tel Aviv, for three years. Now
art curator with Jersey Museum Services. Salary: £17,000.

    #CELIA GREIG:* lives Chiswick, late father a journalist. 2:2 in Latin
American studies at Bristol, travelled widely before joining the Student Travel
Co, now with a travel firm specialising in Latin America holidays.  Salary:
'very little'.

    #CHARLOTTE HARFORD:* lives Moscow, father a stockbroker, mother solicitor.
2:1 in modern languages at Oxford, joined Foreign Office, now running 'know-how'
fund at British Embassy, Moscow, which helps set up Russian companies. Salary:
'enough'.

    #SUSAN FURNELL:* lives Earl's Court, father retired education consultant,
mother teacher. 2:2 in electronic engineering, Warwick, sponsored by GEC
Avionics, management consultant with Peat Marwick for three years. Now marketing
executive with Mercury telecommunications.

    #GEORGIA METCALFE:* lives Notting Hill Gate, father 'entrepreneur', mother
does charity work, married to Nicholas Coleridge, managing director of Conde
Nast, with sons Alexander, two, and Freddie, nine months. 2:2 in PPE at Oxford,
'made tea' at The Spectator, then joined You magazine. Now works part-time in
Daily Mail books department.

    #KATE LOWE:* lives Knightsbridge, father literary/theatrical agent, late
mother actress Hilary Tindall. 2:1 in modern languages, Cambridge, joined J
Walter Thompson and worked in New York as advertising account executive. Now
with PR firm Erika Fry in London. Salary: £25,000.

    #SARAH LLOYD-DAVIES:* lives Fulham, father with RTZ minerals, mother
physiotherapist. 2:1 in art history, London, worked for Artemis, the Duke Street
art dealer for four years. Now with Old Master dealer Michael Tollemache.
Salary: £16,000.

    #SUSIE KOCEN:* lives Melbourne, father a doctor, mother physiotherapist. 2:1
in textile design, Manchester, travelled to Australia where she joined a textile
firm. Left to found her own 50-acre smallholding.

    #JOELY RICHARDSON:* lives Chiswick, late father film director Tony
Richardson, mother actress Vanessa Redgrave, grandfather Sir Michael Redgrave,
sister actress Natasha Richardson, married to film producer Tim Bevan, daughter
Daisy, 18 months. Trained at Rada and in her first film, Wetherby, she played
her mother's younger self; starred in Peter Greenaway's Drowning by Numbers and
BBC's Lady Chatterley's Lover. Currently rehearsing film My Sister In This House
with Julie Walters.

    #JACQUELINE DAVIDSON:* lives Hampstead, late father accountant, mother
ex-solicitor, married to Associated Newspapers systems manager Andrew Rashbass,
sons Elie Joseph, two, Jacob, six months. 2:1 in classics and law, Cambridge,
joined KPMG Peat Marwick and now a tax manager there.

    #DIDO SANDLER:* lives Hampstead, father emeritus Professor, London
University, mother interpreter. 2:1 in Hispanic studies, Liverpool, joined
industrial packaging firm CMB as graduate trainee. Now international marketing
manager for Mary Glasgow publishing.

    #ZOE DE-ROPPE WEINMAN:* lives New York, father writes detective novels,
mother interior designer. Studied modern European history at Columbia
University, executive trainee with Macy's, MBA at Harvard Business School

    for three years. Now consultant with Deloitte and Touche.

    #STELLA COLLIER:* lives Edinburgh, father ex-civil servant, mother
ex-teacher. Studied history at Edinburgh University, attended college in
Philadelphia. Did odd jobs then travelled. Now manager of a Waterstone's
bookshop. Salary: £10,500.

    #MARY-EMMA DEWAR:* lives Perth. Cambridge degree, married the Hon Adam
Drummond, two children. Now full-time mother.

    #GISELLE FINLAY:* lives Hampstead, father runs family bakeware business,
married to barrister Michael Green, daughter Francesca, four months. 2:1 in
politics, Exeter, post-graduate radio journalism at City University, worked for
Radio Cambridge and GLR. Now Radio 4 producer of World at One and PM.  Salary:
£30,000.

    #EMMA DANIELS:* lives Birmingham, father Home Office accountant, married to
computer company manager. 2:2 in international studies, Birmingham, trained in
banking and now a Lloyds branch manager. Salary: £20,000.

    #HELENA NICOLAIDES:* lives Barnes, father ex-property developer, married
Dutch businessman Roy Prinse, son Nicholas, four, second child due now. Went
into property development, now runs company organising fashion shows and retail
business. Salary: 'don't know'.

    #HELEN O'MALLEY:* lives Oxford, father judge, married to Taiwanese chef, son
Benjamin, two. 2:2 in history, Oxford, joined London publishers, taught English
in Thailand, now runs Thai restaurant with husband. Salary: £20,000.

    #JOANNA NEWMAN:* lives Seoul, Korea, father music publisher, mother Royal
College of Music professor. 2:1 in French and German, Oxford, joined Associated
Press, then became financial journalist in Paris. Now research analyst with
stockbroker WI Carr. Salary: £70,000.

    #AMANDA REYNOLDS:* lives Fulham, father businessman, married to banker
Jeremy Thirsk, daughter Natasha, six months. 2:2 in law, Cambridge, now a
merchant banker.

    #LINDA MORRIS:* lives Willesden, father Lord Morris of Kenwood, married to a
computer consultant. Attended American Musical and Dramatic Academy, New York,
now a singer touring Japan.

    #LORAINE RYAN:* lives Ashford, father surveyor, mother Bupa supervisor.
Third in biology and oceanography, Southampton, now a British Gas research
analyst. Salary: £20,500.

    #POLLY WHITELEGGE:* lives Chiswick, parents legal profession/musician,
married to stockbroker. Joined a City firm as financial administrator, now a
general administrator with a management consultancy.

    #RACHAEL NEAMAN:* lives Islington, father concert violinist, mother doctor.
2:1 in French and Italian, Cambridge, travelled, taught French at Cambridge
University, then became editor for Cambridge University Press. Now deputy
publications manager at International Institute of Strategic Studies.

    #ALEXA REA:* lives Chelsea, father ex-Foreign Office, mother ex-artist,
living with barrister and stepchildren aged four and nine. Studied law at
Wolverhampton Polytechnic, travelled, then worked for a publisher. Now barrister
specialising in family and civil law.

    #BELINDA STANNAGE:* lives Fulham, father ex-tourist board PR, married civil
engineer two weeks ago. 2:2 in geography, Bristol, trained in PR and now works
for Royal Yachting Association.

    #HELEN STEPHENS:* lives Bristol, parents teachers, studied medicine at
Middlesex University, engaged to doctor Peter Brook. Now a GP.

    #NICOLA THOROLD:* lives London, father insurance broker, mother art
historian, married to an architect. 2:1 in history, Oxford, joined City firm as
financial analyst, then the Arts Council. Now director of the Independent
Theatre Council.

    #MERIEL RAINE:* lives Oxford, father surgeon, mother teacher, married to
Oxford lecturer. 2:1 in medicine, Oxford, worked at Kingston, St Thomas's and
Guy's hospitals and now surgeon in Reading. Salary: £26,000.

    #EMMA CLARKE:* lives Kensington, father directs TV advertisements, mother an
ITN production worker. Studied English at Bristol, then worked in advertising
production. Joined a Hollywood film company and recently made 15-minute
independent drama.

    #KATIE CHANDLER:* lives Chiswick, father bank manager, mother
ex-headmistress, married to a cardiologist. 2:1 in medicine, Cambridge, trained
at the Royal London Hospital, now paediatrician at Queen Elizabeth Children's
Hospital. Salary: £25,000.

    #KAREN WINKELMANN:* lives Indiana, took Diploma at the Royal Academy of
Music, then music MA at Indiana University. Now violinist with American symphony
orchestra and string quartet.

    #BETTINA WURDEMANN:* lives Southampton, father finance director. 2:2 in
business, economics and accounting, Southampton. Now a Price Waterhouse
accountant. Salary: £29,000.

    #HON MARY ANN SLIM:* lives Chelsea, father Viscount Slim, company director.
Third in comparative religion and philosophy, London, worked for interior
designer, then for a British film company. Started her own property
refurbishment firm which she recently sold and is now looking for new career.

    #DANIELA SIEFF:* lives Oxford, father Lord Sieff, Marks and Spencer
director, mother runs art business. 2:1 in human sciences, Oxford, MSc at
Michigan University. Recently spent three years in Tanzania researching the
lives of nomadic cattle herders, now writing her findings for a PhD at Oxford.

    #ALETHEA SIOW:* lives Wembley, father doctor. Studied law, London. Now a
solicitor in the banking department of a city firm. Salary: £30,000.

    #JANE WILLIS:* lives Stockwell, father worked for insurance firm, mother
science journal editor. 2:1 in history, Manchester, did business and secretarial
course at City of London Polytechnic, joined Michael O'Mara, publishers of
Andrew Morton's book, Diana: Her True Story, as a secretary.  Now their rights
manager. Salary: £16,000.

    #REBECCA SIMOR:* lives Notting Hill Gate, father furniture designer, mother
director America European Community Association. 2:1 in history, Manchester,
worked for European satellite TV station, then became Channel 4 current affairs
researcher. Now assistant editor at People's Century BBC Books.

    #SONIA MAGNAGO:* lives Nottingham, parents hoteliers. 2:1 in bio-chemistry
at Bristol, and returned there to study medicine. Trained at Frenchay Hospital,
Bristol, now at Derby Royal Infirmary.

    #PAULINA SINE NOMINE:* Says of school: 'Not all thrive. We were under
pressure - pressure to look beautiful, get A's in everything, to excel on the
sports track and reach grade 8 in music. It was jolly good if you were glamorous
and clever. I'm still bitter about the place.'

    #SUSIE JOHNSON SMITH:* lives Wandsworth, father Sir Geoffrey Johnson Smith,
Tory MP for Wealden, mother psychiatrist, married to a solicitor. Studied
history, politics and philosophy at Kingston Polytechnic. Travelled, then worked
as a shop manager, joined Conservative Central Office and now helps organise
party conferences. Salary: 'It's in our contracts that we can't disclose how
much we earn'.

    #ZEENAT GAREWAL:* lives Notting Hill, mother personal assistant, father
Delhi businessman. 2:2 in sociology and politics, Bristol. Worked in an advice
centre in India, then a London-based resource centre for Cubans. Now works in
night shelters and a Notting Hill housing advice centre. Salary: £12,000.

    #PIPPA LEARNER:* lives Manchester, father physics lecturer, mother books
editor, married to an acoustic consultant. 2:1 in engineering, Manchester,
joined ICI and now a part-time office manager with Prescott Consulting
Engineers. Salary: £7,000.

    #MIRANDA KAZANTZIS:* lives Notting Hill, father lawyer, mother writer. 2:1
in PPE, Oxford, MA in international relations at Columbia University. Now a
trainee barrister.

    #SU MARSHALL:* lives Olympia, father retired merchant banker, left
Nottingham University when pregnant, now a single mother, daughter Natasha, six.
Planning to train as a physiotherapist. Says of school: 'I didn't like it and
I'd say a lot of the class of '83 didn't. It was too much of a brain factory and
just concerned with getting people to Oxbridge.'

    #TAMSIN JAY:* lives Islington, father is Peter Jay, former Ambassador to US
now BBC economics editor, mother is Baroness Margaret Jay, married to a TV
producer. 2:1 in politics and Russian studies, Bristol, worked for independent
TV company as researcher, then joined BBC political staff. Now a BBC assistant
producer, having worked on Newsnight and Today in Parliament.  #RACHEL JOHNSON:*
lives Notting Hill, father environmentalist, mother artist Charlotte Johnson,
married to Sunday Telegraph foreign editor Ivo Dawney, son Ludo, eight months.
2:1 in Classics and edited Isis at Oxford. Now a journalist at the Financial
Times.

    #GABRIELA KOCZIAN:* lives Tel Aviv, father in imports and exports, mother
marketing director. Studied business at Brighton Polytechnic, then tour operator
in Greece and with Royal Caribbean cruise line, now teaching English in Israel.
Salary: £20 an hour.

    #KAREN JONES:* lives Poole, father violinist, mother pianist. Studied at the
Guildhall School of Music and Drama, then Vienna, then won scholarship to

    New York Mannes College. Now principal flautist with the Bournemouth
Symphony Orchestra. Salary: £30,000.

    #JULIE BLIGHT:* lives New York, father data consultant, mother ski
instructor, married to geneticist. 2:1 in English, Cambridge, became advertising
copy writer, various firms. Salary: £30,000.

    #RACHEL KELLY:* lives Notting Hill, married to investment banker. 2:1 in
history, runner-up in Vogue talent contest and joined their staff, aged 22.
Went to Campaign magazine, then joined The Times. Now its property and local
government correspondent. Recently named by Tatler as an under-30 achiever.
#ANNA HOWARD:* lives Stoke Newington, married to picture-framer Orazio
Gaultieri. 2:1 in Italian and art history, Edinburgh, then joined Metro Art
picture framers. Now works for husband's firm, Byron and Byron.

    #ELIZA CHANCELLOR:* lives Brook Green, father journalist Alexander
Chancellor, married to opera critic Alexander Waugh, son of Auberon, daughter
Mary, three months. 2:1 in Italian, London. Joined Independent magazine, then
did odd jobs. Now helps husband compile pocket CD music guides. Salary: £50 a
month.

    #SARAH AITKEN:* lives Fulham, father businessman. 2:1 in history, Cambridge,
joined Cazenove as an analyst, now at JTP Morgan marketing global custody.

    #PENNY BAKER:* lives Scotland, parents doctors, married to a solicitor, son
Callum, one. Worked as a chalet girl and met her husband at Meribel, did sports
BA at Jordanhill University, Glasgow. Now a full-time mother.

    #SUSY STRAGE:* lives West Kensington, father ex-management consultant,
married to a venture capitalist. Studied history and linguistics at Tufts
University, Boston, joined London head-hunting firm, went to America and worked
for Harvard University before returning to London. Now freelance head-hunter.

    #MARIA PAKENHAM:* lives Shepherd's Bush, parents writers, grandfather Lord
Longford. Third in English, London. Joined Century Hutchinson's publicity
department, then Daunt's travel bookshop. Now at Heywood Hill bookshop.

    #ANNETTE RICHARDS:* lives Stanford, Connecticutt, father Dean of St Mary's
Medical School, Paddington. 2:1 in English, Oxford after winning organ
scholarship, won fellowship to Stanford University, then Sweelinck
Conservatorium in Amsterdam. Now postgraduate at Stanford and concert organist.
Salary: £25,000.

    #PRISCILLA NORGEN:* lives Devon, father lawyer, mother photograph librarian,
married to an ex-Navy officer. Studied comparative literature, Smith College,
Massachusetts, then trained at Charing Cross hospital. Now a doctor. Salary:
£20,000.

    #SOPHIE CHAMBERS:* lives London, father former ship owner. Did secretarial
work, joined Lloyd's firm and now runs own racehorse insurance company.  Salary:
£30,000.

    THE GIRLS MOST LIKELY TO . . .  EACH girl we contacted was asked to name the
classmate they thought was most likely to have been a success. The girls who
received the most votes were:

    KATE BINGHAM* lives Bloomsbury, father Lord Justice Bingham, Master of the
Rolls, mother National Gallery trustee. First in biochemistry, Oxford, strategy
consultant for US-based firm Monitor, Kennedy scholarship to Harvard Business
School for two years, graduated in top five per cent and joined Vertex
Pharmaceuticals. Now with Schroders Ventures starting up companies and director
of gene therapy firm Therexsys. Salary: £80,000

    IMOGEN BRUNNER* lives Notting Hill, father former Texaco managing director,
mother music school director, engaged to BBC producer Tim Breadin. 2:1 in
geography, Oxford, did odd jobs, then went to Charing Cross and Westminster
medical school. Now a surgeon at Queen Mary's Hospital, Roehampton. Salary:
£20,000

    ANITA McNAUGHT* lives Auckland, mother died, never knew father. Odd jobs
then went to New Zealand with then boyfriend, feature writer for business
magazines, joined TV New Zealand as trainee, presented own show Tonight with
Anita McNaught. Now anchorman for leading current affairs programme

    SARAH KEE* lives Guatemala, father broadcaster Robert Kee, mother writer.
Studied anthropology at Sussex, travelled widely in Latin America and stayed on
in Guatemala as human rights worker. Now living with guerilla freedom fighters
helping to re-settle refugees

    KULSUM RAHIMTOOLA* lives Washington, married to a banker. First in natural
sciences, Cambridge, worked in pharmaceuticals in Pakistan, now consultant
scientist for World Bank in America

    GIGI LETTS* lives Paris, father managing director of Letts diaries, mother
runs Academia Italiana museum, married to a French businessman. St Paul's
headgirl, 2:2 in Philosophy, Cambridge, joined mergers and acquisitions at
Prudential Bache investment bank, then Baring Bros. Did MBA, became finance
director for mother's museum before launching company in Paris which prepares
French students for American university entrance exams.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1993


                              387 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           August 26, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: COMMENT PAGE; Page 29

LENGTH: 833 words

HEADLINE: Diary

BODY:

    Restored to prominence

    FOR DECADES, motorists have marvelled at the Cerne Giant, the 180-foot-long
chalk etching of a man engraved in the Dorset hills near Cerne Abbas, not least
because of its colossal anatomy, particularly impressive in the area of the
loins. Now, I can reveal, there is something else to look at. A nose.

    ''People have become so used to seeing the face without a nose that they
have been beguiled into thinking he was created noseless,'' says Ivan Smith, a
spokesman for the National Trust, which looks after the landmark. ''In fact, the
organ - traditionally one of the more obvious parts of the giant, since it
sticks up - got eroded away.''

    Led by Martin Papworth, the trust's archaeological surveyor for Wessex, a
team has rebuilt the nose, raising it nine inches by lifting the turf in the
area around it and remodelling it with chalk.

    Most historians agree that the ithyphallic giant - thought to be over 2,000
years old - is a fertility symbol. The figure, which carries a club in its right
hand while stretching out its left, is probably Hercules, who presumably had a
big nose.

    ACCORDING to the Department of the Environment, the treatment of patients
with cystic fibrosis by gene therapy contravened a European Community directive
on the release of genetically engineered organisms into the environment.

    With yesterday's announcement of British trials (see page 6), and knowing
that the genetically engineered organism is actually Darren Keen, a boy with
cystic fibrosis who will be the first to receive the gene therapy, I am pleased
to say that the civil servants have decided to waive the ruling.

    Which is just as well. The directive requires genetically engineered
organisms to be confined within an area of one acre. Darren lives in Hemel
Hempstead, but is being treated in West London, at least 24 miles away.

    Words worth little

    WINDSOR and 19th-century literature seem slightly at odds with each other at
the moment. Yesterday, I noted that British Rail had printed 60,000 leaflets
advertising its services to Windsor without realising that its plug line for the
castle was written by Wordsworth, not Tennyson as advertised.

    Now it is the turn of the novelists. The Bronte sisters, according to a
placard displayed by ''Pasttimes'', a parlour game shop about to open in the
town's Peascod Street, were 18th-century writers, as, apparently, was Jane
Austen. Austen was born in 1775, its true, but Pride and Prejudice was published
in 1813 and Emma in 1815, and she has therefore always been acknowledged as a
19th-century novelist.

    But there is no such ambiguity over the Brontes. Charlotte, the eldest
sister, was born in 1816. A reader who pointed out the mistakes was told by a
shop assistant ''with a very vinegary look'' that the desciptions would stand.
''We have to do what we are told,'' she said.

    THE caring side of the music industry was illustrated by a telephone inquiry
to one of Britain's biggest CD stores yesterday. Was Frank Zappa's Yellow Shark
on release? ''No, it's now being held back until after he dies.''

    Dubious counsel

    ANOTHER advertising story, but this time my sympathies lie with the
Financial Times and a difficulty it has encountered with Oxford City Council
over one of its slogans, ''Business is Never Black and White''.

    Ruling on whether to grant a licence to an FT-sponsored taxi driver who
wanted to drive his pink cab in Oxford, a trio of councillors had to decide
whether the slogan was potentially racist. ''We have firm guidelines as to
advertising,'' said a spokesman. ''Our licensing manager was advised that the
slogan could be offensive to a section of the community, black or white.''

    I'm glad to say that the licence was granted by two votes to one. But if
business is never black and white, nor is politics. Compare headlines in
yesterday's Financial Times and The Times:

    FT ''Portillo hopes for future tax cut''

    Times ''Portillo defies Right with tax rise warning''.

    A DAY LIKE THIS

    26 August 1721 Sir John Vanbrugh, architect, writes to a friend: ''I am
going for three or four days again to Castle Howard, where I must Spend a Week
or ten days, to do what is necessary there. My Lord Carlisle going on with his
Works as usual; by which the Seat is wonderfully improv'd this last Year. Two
Years more, tho' they won't compleat all the Building, will so Beautify the
Outworks, of Gardens, Park &c, That I think no Place I ever Saw, will dispute
with it, for a Delightfull Dwelling in generall, let the Criticks fish out what
particular faults they please in the Architecture. Here are Several Gentlemen in
these Parts of the World, that are possess'd with the Spirit of Building, And
Seem dispos'd to do it, in so good a Manner, that were they to establish here a
sort of Board of Works to conduct their Affairs, I do verily believe, they wou'd
sooner make Hawksmoor a Commissioner of it, than that excellent Architect,
Ripley.''



                              388 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           August 26, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 4

LENGTH: 315 words

HEADLINE: The guinea pig who hopes for reprieve from constant infection;
Children would benefit most from genetic engineering technique that could be
used to treat Britain's most common inherited disease

BYLINE: TOM WILKIE and ANN BARRETT

BODY:

    PALE and slight, Darren Keen sat quietly beside the doctors and scientists,
more troubled by the sight of the British media pack than by the prospect that
he may be the first Briton to undergo gene therapy for cystic fibrosis, writes
Ann Barrett.

    In a quiet, husky voice (he has yet another painful lung infection), he made
light of the physiotherapy he has to undergo to clear his lungs of mucus. ''My
girlfriend beats me up twice a day and makes sure I take my tablets,'' he said.

    He has known Dawn Wooton for 14 months and she hopes to be a nurse if her
exam results this week are good enough. She visits him daily to help, and has
applied for an invalidity attendance allowance so that she can continue.

    Now 23, Mr Keen lives in a flat on his own in Hemel Hempstead and has been
unable to work for two years because of his illness. Since he was two, his life
has been dominated by cystic fibrosis. He has to take 70 tablets a day to stop
him getting chest infections, to improve his breathing, and to help him digest
food. This is supplemented by nebulisers and surfactant, a lubricant for the
surface of the lungs.

    After many years of fighting lung infections, his breathing was laboured as
he talked. Mr Keen has a tube into a vein in his arm for the high doses of
antibiotics he needs.

    When doctors at the National Heart and Lung Hospital in Kensington told him
about five months ago about the possibility of the treatment, his reaction was:
''I'll be cured.'' However, he said that now that he understood the therapy
better, he did not expect a cure. ''But it might stop me getting an infection.
I'm pleased to be able to help.''

    The hospital has the largest clinic for treating cystic fibrosis in Europe.
But neither doctors nor the nine volunteers will know until November, at the
earliest, whether the technique has worked.

    (Photograph omitted)



                              389 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           August 26, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 4

LENGTH: 570 words

HEADLINE: Volunteers test a gene therapy for cystic fibrosis; Children would
benefit most from genetic engineering technique that could be used to treat
Britain's most common inherited disease

BYLINE: TOM WILKIE and ANN BARRETT

BODY:

    THE FIRST British attempts to use genetic engineering to treat the
life-threatening disease cystic fibrosis (CF) were announced by doctors and
scientists at the National Heart and Lung Hospital in London yesterday.

    Over the next few weeks, nine volunteers at the hospital will have normal
genes sprayed into the cells lining their noses and lungs, to counter the
effects of the faulty genes that they have inherited.

    If successful, the new therapy could be offered routinely to CF patients
within five years, according to Dr Duncan Geddes, director of respiratory
medicine at the hospital.

    Children would benefit most, he said, if they got the treatment early
enough, before lung damage occurs. ''If we can give paediatricians evidence that
gene therapy is safe and that it works, then they see no reason not to give it
to children.''

    But Dr Geddes cautioned that it would be wrong to talk in terms of a
''cure'', because the gene transplants will have to be given repeatedly.

    Cystic fibrosis is the most common inherited disease in Britain, affecting
more than 7,000 children and young adults. Their lungs clog with thick sticky
mucus which provides a perfect breeding ground for bacteria and leaves them open
to recurrent infections. These scar the lungs and eventually lead to lung
failure.

    There is no cure, and people with CF used to die in early childhood. With
modern antibiotics and intensive nursing, people with CF now have a much longer
life expectancy.

    In 1989, after more than a decade of effort by scientists around the world,
researchers at the universities of Michigan, in the United States, and Toronto,
in Canada, isolated the gene responsible for the disease. The defective CF gene
fails to control the passage of salt and water in and out of the body's cells.
In the lungs, this failure results in the sticky mucus. By replacing faulty CF
genes with normal ones the defect can be corrected.

    However, the US trials, which began in April, have hit a problem and have
been stopped. The doctors used a genetically engineered version of the common
cold virus to infect the lungs of CF sufferers: the virus enters the cells
lining the lung and thus transfers the normal CF gene into them. But the
procedure caused inflammation in the lungs of some patients, who were already
sensitive to infections.

    In contrast, Professor Bob Williamson of St Mary's Hospital Medical School
believes that the technique he has devised for the British trials may be milder
and less liable to side effects. Instead of employing a virus, he has found a
way of using fat globules, called liposomes, to carry the genes. Cells have a
fatty outer membrane, Professor Williamson explained yesterday, and the two will
join just as ''two oil drops floating on water will fuse and form a single
drop''.

    The clinical trials announced yesterday are the first for CF to be held
outside the US. The safety and efficacy of the procedure have been extensively
tested, partly on mice with a defect analogous to CF, and the ethics have been
examined by a government committee on gene therapy, under the chairmanship of
Sir Cecil Clothier.

    One concern was that, because no one can know the full consequences, new
genes should not be passed down to future generations, and it was decided that
initially only men should take part, since virtually all men with CF are
infertile.

    (Graphic omitted)



                              390 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                           August 25, 1993, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 2

LENGTH: 240 words

HEADLINE: HOPE FOR CYSTIC FIBROSIS VICTIMS

BYLINE: Jo Revill

BODY:


    FRESH hope was offered to cystic fibrosis sufferers today - ushering in a
new era of medical advances for inherited diseases, writes Jo Revill.

    Doctors at the Royal Brompton Hospital will begin trials in two weeks time
aimed at putting healthy genes into the cells lining the lungs of patients.

    It offers the best hope to date for Britain's 7,000 sufferers.

    The trial - the first to use fatty globules called liposones as gene therapy
- will be watched closely by the 'scientific community.

    The Cystic Fibrosis Trust, the Evening Standard's charity of the year, has
already spent £2 million on research leading to the launch of the trial.  Cystic
fibrosis is the most commonly inherited disease in Britain.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              391 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           August 19, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: COMMENT PAGE; Page 32

LENGTH: 1061 words

HEADLINE: Gods who are selling our genes; Tom Wilkie on the dangers of an
obsessive and commercial scramble for knowledge

BYLINE: TOM WILKIE

BODY:

    IT IS all there in Birmingham this week: scientific talent, youth and money.
And the subject of discussion is one that has been in the shadows for almost
half a century: genetics.

    The 17th International Congress of Genetics has attracted more than 4,000
geneticists. They have taken over the city's International Convention Centre and
booked out the surrounding hotels. The audiences for some of the lectures have
filled the new Symphony Hall, while in the hi-tech atrium and on the elevated
walkways, earnest rice geneticists from the Indian subcontinent discuss the
arcana of genetic polymorphism with heavy-set plaid-coated men from the American
Midwest.

    Journalists and other strangers shouldering their way through the crowds
might forget that for every one attending the conference, there must be 10
geneticists left behind minding the laboratory. Geneticists are in the business
of breeding - and they are.

    The scientific conference business is not cheap. Those attending had to pay
pounds 315 each for the privilege, while the hotels ranged from pounds 105 a
night (without breakfast) to just pounds 23.50 a night for those who could not
aspire higher than the university halls of residence.

    But there is money in genetics. More than any other branch of modern
science, the practitioners have gone out into the marketplace and sold their
skills to the financial investment houses. Those who made the ground-breaking
discoveries in the early Seventies set the tone and the pattern: not only did
they walk off with Nobel Prizes, they turned themselves into start-up biotech
companies and became dollar millionaires overnight as the stock market rushed to
invest.

    Several of those speaking in Birmingham this week hold academic appointments
in universities or hospitals while actively pursuing commercial applications as
directors or consultants to biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies. They do
not seem to be worried about conflict of interest; or concerned that, in effect,
the human genetic inheritance is being parcelled up and sold off as private
property.

    One speaker appeared not to notice the incongruity between declaiming to the
conference that the human gene pool was the common property of all mankind - a
common refrain - and the fact that he had set up his own company to exploit
genetic discoveries.

    And yet, as the American gene therapist French Anderson reminded those
attending the conference, for all the money, effort and scientific genius which
has gone into modern molecular genetics, there has been very little pay-off so
far in terms of alleviating human suffering.

    The first successful gene therapy treatments concerned two little girls in
the US suffering from a very rare inherited defect of the immune system. The
disease is so rare that there were probably no other sufferers in the US who
could have benefited from the treatment. A couple of other children suffering
from the same rare ailment - one of them British - have been treated elsewhere.

    As a result of other genetic discoveries, some women who risk bearing
children with cystic fibrosis have been offered advanced diagnosis and the
option of aborting an affected foetus. And that is it.

    Perhaps it is too early to expect promises to be realised. Yet those
promises have been extravagant. In 1988 Robert Sinsheimer, of the University of
California at Santa Cruz, said simply that genes are what ''defines a human
being''. In 1989 James Watson, the discoverer of the double helix of DNA, was
quoted in Time as saying: ''We used to think our fate was in our stars. Now we
know, in large measure, our fate is in our genes.''

    Such claims, of course, help to ensure that money, whether from the public
purse or private funds, continues to flow to finance the research. Others, most
notably this week the British plant geneticist Sir Ralph Riley, who is president
of the Birmingham conference, have been more guarded, warning of the dangers of
political misuse of the geneticists' findings. With the fearful history of this
century's abuse of genetics - not just in Nazi Germany but also in the
sterilisation of thousands of the ''feeble minded'' in the democratically
governed US - the organisers have gone out of their way to encourage ''public
awareness''.

    In addition to technical sessions comprehensible only to a few fellow
specialists there are more accessible lectures every evening. The whole of
Saturday is given over to examining the darkness of the past and the lessons
that can be learnt to avoid its repetition.

    Yet geneticists are caught in an inescapable trap. All scientists pursue
their subjects out of a sense of intrinsic interest. But most, and especially
the geneticists, also believe that their work has an extrinsic value: medical
genetics will alleviate human suffering; plant genetics will usher in a second
green revolution to feed the starving. They do not believe those philosophers of
science who say that scientific knowledge is inherently value-neutral; on the
contrary, the geneticists know that their work is beneficial - it were not, they
would not be doing it.

    And that is the catch. The Birmingham conference is encouraging public
discussion of geneticists' work. But underlying their calls for greater public
understanding of genetics is a massive unspoken assumption: that once people see
and understand what the scientists are doing, they will approve.

    Just as valid a reaction might be to reinterpret the old story of Genesis.
To the geneticists' claim that with this new knowledge ''ye shall be as gods'',
the public might well respond that we do not wish to eat of this particular
tree. Are humans really wise enough to be as gods? Can we really cope with the
power that this knowledge brings?

    What if the people in whose name this research is being done were to say:
thank you, we have understood, and we do not want this particular line of
research (into the so-called ''gay gene'', perhaps) to continue? That would be
the ultimate test of whether the modern geneticists have escaped the fearful
legacy of their eugenicist predecessors and are willing to conduct their science
under democratic control.

    Tom Wilkie's book on the social implications of modern genetics, ''Perilous
Knowledge'', is published by Faber and Faber at pounds 14.99.

    (Photograph omitted)



                              392 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           August 19, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 4

LENGTH: 499 words

HEADLINE: Genetic cure for muscular dystrophy 'a step closer'; Treatment for
muscle-wasting disease is possible, scientists say

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR, Science Correspondent

BODY:

    A TREATMENT for muscular dystrophy, one of the most common genetic
disorders, has come a step closer with experiments showing that mice afflicted
by the muscle-wasting disease can be successfully cured.

    Scientists believe the animal experiments show that gene therapy - injecting
healthy genes into patients - for muscular dystrophy is now more than a
theoretical possibility, although researchers emphasise in today's issue of the
journal Nature that more work needs to be done.

    Duchenne muscular dystrophy affects about one in every 3,500 boys and is one
of the most common genetic diseases with no cure. Females rarely develop the
symptoms but can be carriers. The signs of muscle wasting first appear at about
three years old. Children are often confined to wheelchairs by the age of 11 and
develop severe respiratory and heart problems that frequently prove lethal by
their mid-twenties.

    Ever since the gene for muscular dystrophy was discovered in 1986,
scientists have thought that gene therapy could provide a cure, but the problems
of inserting such a large gene - it is 100 times the size of a typical gene -
into all affected muscle cells seemed insurmountable.

    Jeffrey Chamberlain, assistant professor of human genetics at the University
of Michigan Medical School, United States, who led the research team, said the
work demonstrated for the first time that a cure was possible: ''We have clearly
shown that if you can get the gene into the muscle you can cure the disease.''

    He warned that the method used to cure the mice could not be used on humans
because genetic manipulation of the very early embryo was too dangerous. ''If
you can find an effective way to get the gene into humans, and you can control
it properly, then you may have a cure. In this study we found a way to control
the gene once it's in the muscle; now we need to find a way to deliver it to
muscles .''

    Dr Chamberlain's group is attempting to insert the healthy gene into the
influenza virus which can then be used to ''infect'' muscle cells of the lungs
with the correct gene form.

    Kay Davies, a medical geneticist who will soon become head of the Medical
Research Council's new Clinical Research Centre at Hammersmith, London, and who
helped to discover the muscular dystrophy gene, said at the International
Congress of Genetics at Birmingham yesterday that Dr Chamberlain's work showed
that such gene therapy does not produce toxic side-effects.

    ''It's a very important experiment because we need to know what range of
toxicity there might be,'' she said. ''This is a valuable contribution but we
still have a long way to go before we get a method that is efficient at getting
at all the respiratory cells.''

    Although muscular dystrophy is inherited, about a third of cases result from
spontaneous mutations in early life, so pre-natal diagnosis cannot eliminate it
completely, which is why gene therapy is important.

    Gods who sell our genes, page 32



                              393 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 17, 1993, Tuesday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 4

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: The International Congress of Genetics in Birmingham: 'Suicide gene'
gives hope of cure for brain cancers

BYLINE: ANN BARRETT and TOM WILKIE

BODY:

    BRAIN cancers may be successfully treated by killing the cancer cells with a
''suicide gene'', according to one of the world's pioneers of human gene
therapy. The procedure involves deliberately infecting a patient's brain with a
modified herpes virus which makes it possible to kill malignant tumours, the
International Congress of Genetics in Birmingham was told.

    Professor French Anderson, director of the gene therapy laboratories at the
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, said the procedure had already
been tested on laboratory animals with ''spectacular results''.

    In December 1992, the first of eight human patients was treated in the
United States. The American medical authorities and the patients' doctors ''are
encouraged'' by their progress.

    But Professor Anderson warned: ''It is imperative that we go into the era of
gene therapy as responsibly as possible and the responsible way is to use gene
therapy for the treatment only of serious diseases.''

    Human gene therapy began in September 1990, when the professor and
colleagues treated a four-year-old girl for an extremely rare form of inherited
immune deficiency. So far only 60 patients have been treated.

    In the United States there are at least 20,000 patients each year suffering
from glioblastoma multiforme, the type of brain cancer for which the eight
patients are now being treated. It is the most malignant type of brain tumour
and most patients die within a year of diagnosis. All eight patients undergoing
the experimental therapy had been treated with chemotherapy or radiation without
success.

    Researchers inject genetically engineered cells taken from mice into the
human patients' brains near the tumour. The mice cells are programmed to produce
a modified herpes virus, which in turn infects the tumour cells. The treatment
is selective because the virus will infect only cells that are dividing to
produce more cells and, within the brain, the only dividing cells are those of
the growing tumour and its blood supply.

    Once inside the tumour cells, a component of the herpes virus insinuates
itself into the human DNA. A week after the genetic treatment, the doctors give
their patients gancyclovir, an anti-herpes drug, which the herpes gene then
turns into a poison to kill its host tumour cell.

    Dr Greg Winter, from the laboratory of molecular biology at Cambridge, told
the congress that he could produce highly specific antibodies (one of the key
components in the immune system) by genetically engineering a bacteriophage - a
type of virus which preys upon bacteria.

    By fusing fragments of antibodies on to the virus's outer coating, it is
possible to devise a means of picking specific human proteins out of human
blood. The approach could provide a ''magic bullet'' to pick out proteins
produced by cancer cells and deliver a tumour-killing chemical direct.

    A gay geneticist, Dr Douglas Futuyma, called on the scientific community to
set up a ''union of concerned geneticists'' to prevent abuses of modern
genetics, after last month's alleged discovery of a ''gay gene''.



                              397 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                             July 13, 1993, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 17

LENGTH: 240 words

HEADLINE: 'Bubble' baby home after operation

BODY:


    BABY Andrew Gobea, the first baby to have pioneering gene therapy to rebuild
his immune system, has been allowed home from a Los Angeles hospital.

    Childhood illnesses could kill two-month-old Andrew, who was born without an
enzyme called ADA. The rare deficiency destroys disease-fighting white blood
cells and is also known as 'bubble baby disease', after a boy sufferer spent 12
years in a sterile chamber before he died.

    Doctors drew cells from the umbilical cord, genetically altered them by
incubating them with a virus to stimulate ADA production, and returned them to
Andrew intravenously when he was just four days old.

    He can now fight off colds, and doctors are pleased with his progress.  But
it will be six months to a year before they know if Andrew will be able to live
a normal life.

GRAPHIC: Recovering: Andrew with mother, Crystal

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              405 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                            June 16, 1993, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 15

LENGTH: 227 words

HEADLINE: One call could save this baby

BODY:


    HEART surgeon Professor Sir Magdi Yacoub has appealed for bereaved parents
to -help to save six-month-old Hal Brodhurst, who has only weeks to live.

    Hal suffers from Pompe's Disease, a rare inherited disorder which has caused
his heart to swell enormously.

    In a million-to-one chance, his parents Robin and Desiree, from Putney,
carry the genetic flaw which causes the disease - and usually kills children by
the age of two. The only chance of Hal living beyond a few weeks is if another
baby dies and the parents donate its heart.

    Professor Yacoub wants to carry out combined heart transplant and bone
marrow surgery that would be a world first, based on new studies into gene
therapy.

GRAPHIC: Weeks left: Hal Brodhurst with father Robin

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              407 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            May 12, 1993, Wednesday

SECTION: COMMENT PAGE; Page 21

LENGTH: 1473 words

HEADLINE: Our plunge into the gene pool

BYLINE: BRYAN APPLEYARD

BODY:

    ALMOST 40 years ago, the double helix structure of the DNA molecule was
deciphered in Cambridge. In July, the Steven Spielberg movie Jurassic Park opens
in Britain. The film is about the re-creation of dinosaurs using DNA from blood
found inside a mosquito preserved in amber. It is based on the single most
startling and, maybe, poetic insight that DNA appears to provide - that all of
life with rare exceptions is connected by a single, fabulously competent,
chemical messenger. Spielberg is evidently moved by this holistic vision. In his
film ET, the cry goes up from one scientist trying to revive the dying alien:
''He's got DNA!'' We are one with the universe, the messenger tells us, nobody
is a stranger here.

    Popular culture says many things; most are trivial, but this time it is on
to the big one. Forty years down the line from Watson and Crick it is clear that
biology possesses the most powerful knowledge of the age. Physics made this
century, transforming the electromechanical culture of the 19th into the
electromagnetic one of the 20th. And, for the moment, physics remains the
scientific market leader. The most popularly evocative science stories are still
about physics. Big Science still means gigantic particle colliders or space
telescopes. These are the paraphernalia of our creation myths.

    But now Big Science also means the multinational, multi-billion pound
project to ''sequence'' the human genome; the effort to plot the entire genetic
structure of human DNA. This project has poetry for the movies, but it also has
something that the weird speculations of high physics do not have - immediate
practical impact. Some version of human destiny in the form of susceptibility to
disease, longevity, intelligence and, maybe, character, seem to be at least
partially encoded in the chemistry of the genome. The physicists may be able to
claim that somewhere in those ripples lies the clue to our ''ultimate'' origin.
But biologists can potentially claim so much more: a clear, direct, useable
narrative about our existence.

    As a result, physics, it is now commonly stated, is dead. Long live biology.
The bizarre and frequently inept excursions by the popularisers of physics into
the realms of the theological and the philosophical are symptoms of its
decadence and its impending decline. They are about to be usurped. The 21st
century will be dominated by the impact of this new knowledge and its
accompanying technology. Science will take on a new human intimacy as it finally
crosses the barrier at which it has always faltered - the barrier of the self.

    The ''future shock'' associated with this development has not yet been felt.
Perhaps we are still too enmeshed in the disorientations of the physics culture
- nuclear weapons may have been adequately sublimated, but the information
revolution arising, ultimately, from quantum theory is still being slowly and
uneasily absorbed. And the huge changes promised by biology are still in the
future. Sequencing the genome may, for example, point us to the specific gene
that causes cystic fibrosis or muscular dystrophy, but further knowledge and
technologies are required before we can act upon this information.

    Yet the first developments are definitely with us in the form of some
limited applications of gene therapy and in the artificial production of
substances such as human growth hormone - a development that has already moved
from the therapeutic to the cosmetic. It has been offered as a treatment, not
just for dwarfism but also for people who feel they are unattractively short.
And it is absolutely clear that momentous developments are on the way; that we
are to be confronted with a whole new realm of choice.

    ''The availability of so many options,'' writes my colleague Tom Wilkie in
his massively informative book on the subject, ''is something very new in human
experience.''

    We know where we are heading and consequently, as the philosopher Bernard
Williams has pointed out, it is wrong for us to relax our moral guard just
because some things are not possible now. ''It is a requirement on moral
argument,'' Williams has said, ''that it shouldn't simply stop at mere technical
fact and say that the question does not yet arise.''

    But where to start? The scope of the moral argument may be said to be as
vast as the genome itself; there are as many subtleties as there are ''base
pairs'' in human DNA - three billion. We may feel relaxed about curing cystic
fibrosis with gene therapy, but what about designing our babies, or perhaps even
curing cystic fibrosis or Aids by ''germ-line'' therapy that involves
intervening permanently and perhaps unpredictably in the human gene pool?

    There are many issues, but, really, there is only one: eugenics, whose bland
dictionary presence states that it is ''the study of methods of improving the
quality of the human race''. For most people the very word is tainted. There was
much toying with the idea - by, among others, Churchill - in the technologically
confident early decades of this century. The fear among the educated was that
the poor were breeding too quickly and, as a result, the quality of the general
stock of humanity would deteriorate. The crude prescriptions included government
control of fertility and marriage; a strategy whose one redeeming feature was
that it inspired a brilliant, book-length condemnation from G K Chesterton.

    ''They can offer us nothing,'' he wrote of the eugenicists in Eugenics and
Other Evils, ''but the same stuffy science, the same bullying bureaucracy and
the same terrorism by tenth-rate professors that have led the German Empire to
its recent conspicuous triumph.''

    That was in 1922. In the event, the Germans were to make Chesterton's case
for him even more conclusively. Nazism embraced eugenics, and controlling human
fertility in the name of social engineering ceased to be a

    respectable option.

    But, in anticipation of the coming sovereignty of biology, eugenics is
quietly becoming respectable again. Moral philosophers such as John Harris at
Manchester University are attempting to see beyond the gut loathing the word
provokes. After all, he points out, it only means planning for better offspring
in a better world and who could object to that? Parents use money and other
wiles to improve the condition of their children, why should they not also
employ biology? Furthermore, although germ-line technology for eradicating Aids
may hold risks for future generations, will there not come a point when those
risks are outweighed by the risks of doing nothing?

    Harris is right to ask these questions. Recoiling in historically aware
horror from all this is not an option. Eugenics will arrive through the
marketplace, if not through legislation. The offering of growth hormone as a
cosmetic treatment is but one portent. Designing all kinds of characteristics
into babies will unquestionably soon be possible and, if the eugenically
inclined rich cannot find such services in this country, they will obtain them
elsewhere. They may be disappointed - no serious biologist would claim that
genetics is the full story of our destiny and they would know that the impact of
environment and upbringing is at least as important - but the option to gamble
would be on offer. But, as Chesterton saw, rigging the game for the living is
one thing, rigging it for the unborn is quite another. He wrote of selecting a
wife on the basis of her breeding capacities: ''The baby that does not exist can
be considered even before the wife who does.'' This is the point: biology will
offer us the power to be conceptually and morally implicated in the nature of
future generations. This may be perfectly rational, but we are not likely to be
good at it. Horrible mistakes are certain to be made as they invariably are when
technological ambition outstrips sensible caution.

    The real point, however, is nothing to do with such rationality. It is again
captured by Chesterton when he muses that ''Keats died young; but he had more
pleasure in a minute than a Eugenist gets in a month''. The uncertainty and
ultimately indefinable nature of our experience is fundamental to our conception
of what it is to be human. A consumptive genius is a phenomenon we like to feel
is beyond any rational balancing of probabilities and, crazy as it may seem, it
is natural occasionally to muse that the aborted foetus or the child unconceived
because of wise genetic counselling could have been Keats. Biologists will say
they are not threatening any of that, they are simply pursuing knowledge. This
is true, but inadequate, for knowledge changes things and, now, it is about to
change everything.

    - 'Perilous Knowledge: The Human Genome Project and its Implications' by Tom
Wilkie (Faber & Faber, pounds 14.99).



                              408 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             May 1, 1993, Saturday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 7

LENGTH: 499 words

HEADLINE: Aids vaccine is brought a step closer

BYLINE: STEVE CONNOR, Science Correspondent

BODY:

    A RADICAL new approach in medical science has brought the prospect of a
vaccine against Aids a step closer.

    Conventional vaccines rely on injecting the infective agent itself. The new
''genetic inoculation'' technique relies on injecting genes of the Aids virus
into the cells of the patient.

    The idea, which is similar to gene therapy, is that the body will
manufacture important bits of the virus that will stimulate the immune system to
produce an effective defence against any future attack from HIV.

    Researchers are also investigating methods of producing genetic vaccines
against malaria, which is caused by a blood parasite, and cancerous tumours,
which could be attacked by a type of genetic therapy.

    Scientists in the United States believe the approach is more than a
pipedream with the publication today in the science journal Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the first results of tests of a genetic vaccine
on laboratory mice.

    David Weiner, an immunologist at the University of Pennsylvania, said the
results showed the approach was safe and capable of producing the ''right sort''
of immunity. He emphasised, however, that there was a long way to go before
declaring an effective Aids vaccine. ''We have only done the initial work. This
is not an Aids vaccine.''

    Traditional methods of making vaccines use either live viruses, which have
been rendered harmless or ''attenuated'', or viruses that have been killed yet
retain important physical features which the immune system can recognise and
produce effective antibodies against. The disadvantage of live, attentuated
viruses is that there is always a possibility that they could revert to being
harmful. With the Aids virus, which mutates rapidly and causes disease many
years after infection, a live, attenuated virus is considered too dangerous to
be used.

    Most effort has therefore concentrated on using inactivated HIV, or bits of
the virus's protein, as a vaccine. One of the many fears of this approach,
however, is that such a vaccine would not generate the right sort of immunity
because it does not behave like an infective agent.

    Dr Weiner said the genetic vaccine he has tested has shown itself to be both
safe and capable of generating an effective immune response - one where the
all-important ''killer cells'' of the immune system are mobilised into an
attack.

    The prototype vaccine itself is made from the genes of HIV that the virus
uses to orchestrate the manufacture of its envelope proteins, which form its
outer ''coat''. Dr Weiner and his colleagues injected the genetic material into
laboratory mice. The animals then began to make viral proteins under the command
of the genes. The results indicated the approach ''is a very important avenue of
research'', he said.

    Dr Weiner said there were plans to take the research further with tests on
monkeys. Clinical trials on humans could then be considered, but he could not
say when this was likely.



                              410 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 23, 1993, Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH PAGE; Page 17

LENGTH: 1214 words

HEADLINE: Health: Child sickness that bodes ill for the mother

BYLINE: CAROL COOPER

BODY:

    WOMEN fear breast cancer, and no wonder. In the UK 26,000 are newly
diagnosed with it every year and nearly 16,000 die. Put another way, the average
woman has about one chance in 12 of developing the disease at some point in her
life.

    Curiously enough, an obscure, incurable disease of young children is
shedding light on the way in which some women become susceptible to breast
cancer. Thomas Cottingham, now nearly five years old, suffers from ataxia
telangiectasia, or A-T for short.

    A-T is rare, with only about 150 known cases in the UK, though there may be
many milder forms not yet diagnosed. It is a recessive genetic disease, which
means that to develop it you need a pair of defective genes, one from each
parent. A recent surprising finding is that carriers are common.

    These people, like Thomas's parents, with one defective gene each have a
high incidence of malignancy, although the cancer rates in A-T children are
higher still. Women with the gene defect may have a breast cancer risk of one in
two.

    Because there is no direct test for carriers, estimates vary, but experts
often quote a figure of 2 per cent of the population. For comparison, this is
half the carrier rate of cystic fibrosis, the commonest similarly transmitted
autosomal recessive condition.

    A-T usually becomes noticeable in toddlers, with clumsiness or unsteadiness.
Speech and eye movements often lack co-ordination, though so far Thomas has
escaped this.

    Unsteadiness gradually worsens, and by the age of six a spidery network of
enlarged blood vessels appears in the whites of the eyes. A-T progresses
relentlessly and a wheelchair is often needed by 10 or 11. Sufferers also have
about a hundredfold greater chance of developing various cancers. At the age of
two, Thomas was found to have a rare and advanced lymphoma of his thymus, the
gland situated behind the breastbone.

    ''This is what really confirmed the of A-T,'' says his mother, Beverley
Hodson. ''We were devastated. Neither of us had heard of A-T and now our son was
fighting for his life in intensive care, with less than a 50-50 chance of
survival.''

    Against the odds, Thomas survived. Last April he finished two years of
chemotherapy. But A-T is a multi- system disease and the future is uncertain.
Immune defects often cause recurrent chest infections.

    Later on other changes resemble premature ageing, such as thinning skin,
greying hair, memory defects and the early onset of heart disease. Premature
death is usual.

    Michael Swift, from New York Medical College, has studied more than 1,500
relatives of A-T patients and estimates that carriers have three to four times
the risk of cancer of the general population. Female carriers are worse off,
with a five to sevenfold greater risk of breast cancer.

    They may also have a higher incidence of diabetes and both sexes seem to
have more coronary artery disease. At this stage, however, there is no definite
way of knowing who is a carrier - unless they happen to have an A-T child, in
which case both parents must be carriers.

    Children with A-T are very sensitive to radiation and so, it turns out, are
carriers. Professor Swift found that among blood relatives of A-T patients women
with breast cancer were more likely to have had extensive diagnostic X-rays than
women relatives without cancer.

    That finding raises intriguing questions about the genesis of cancer. How
important is radiation as a causative factor? Is the increasing use of X-rays
the reason why, as a research group in Boston, Massachussetts, suggests, breast
cancer appears to have became more common? Or is it to do with chromosome
breakages, which are also a feature of A-T? With its relevance to cancer
genesis, and possibly to ageing, too, A-T is of enormous scientific interest.

    In this country much of the work is funded by the A-T Research Trust, a
charity launched in 1990 by Thomas's parents. At the Medical Research Council
cell mutation unit at the University of Sussex, Colin Arlett and his team are
engaged in, among other things, clarifying the link between the A-T gene and
cancer.

    Malcolm Taylor, a geneticist at the Cancer Research Campaign laboratory in
Birmingham, is working on identifying the gene itself. It is a gene that is
totally independent of other cancer-predisposing genes, and, as Dr Taylor puts
it: ''The feeling is that A- T has to do with something very fundamental in
biology.''

    There are many practical aspects, too. A-T carriers tend to develop their
breast cancers at a younger age.

    When A-T heterozygotes do develop cancer they tolerate radiotherapy badly,
and complications tend to occur at lower doses. It has, in fact, long been
noticed that younger breast cancer patients have cosmetically poorer results
from radiotherapy.

    Given their sensitivity to radiation, known carriers should only have X-rays
if they are absolutely essential. The astute may well point out that no one
should have superfluous X-rays, but it is difficult to avoid pre-employment
chest X-rays and the like.

    So where does that leave mammography? In general, mammograms deliver low
doses of radiation, provided the equipment is up to date and few films are
taken. There is little evidence of radiation being harmful beyond middle age, so
the over-50s, including A-T relatives, should not be deterred from routine
screening.

    For younger women, though, the situation is less clear. Mammograms alone can
miss cancer in women under 50, according to specialists such as Mike Burke, of
Northwick Park Hospital, London. There is therefore a need for clinical breast
examination, too. This is especially true of A-T carriers, who, says Professor
Swift in New York, should be checking for breast cancer from the age of 30.

    To identify carriers, the A-T gene needs desperately to be found. Humans
each carry 23 pairs of chromosomes and ''the A-T gene'' actually appears to be a
cluster of four separate genes on one chromosome.

    ''All four seem to be together in a very small area of chromosome 11,'' says
Dr Taylor. Localisation will be complete soon, but it is impossible to say
exactly when. Sometimes interim findings lead to rapid progress - and sometimes
they don't.

    Gene therapy - replacing a defective gene with a new one - may be much in
the news, but with A-T that is going to be a very long way off - if it is ever
possible. Identifying carriers, however, will soon help the 2 per cent of the
population at high risk of cancer. Even if avoiding malignancy is impossible,
they will at least have the chance of having abnormalities diagnosed earlier.

    There could also be benefits for non-carriers, such as radiotherapy patients
generally. Radiotherapy is usually limited to a so-called ''tolerance dose'',
based on what can be given to the population at large without causing
complications.

    The general population, however, includes a number of A-T carriers who are
excessively sensitive. If these could be excluded, the rest of the patients
might be able to receive higher doses of radiation and achieve better cure rates
without side-effects.

    - A-T Medical Research Trust, Angel Cottage, Colston Bassett,
Nottinghamshire, NG12 3FD (0949 91222).

    - Carol Cooper is a London GP.

    (Photograph omitted)



                              417 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                            March 18, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 3

LENGTH: 547 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy hope for baby Carly

BODY:


    BABY Carly Todd will today become the first patient in Britain to undergo
gene therapy, a revolutionary form of medicine leading to treatment for a range
of diseases.

    Eight-month-old Carly, from Lennoxtown, near Glasgow, is due to have an
operation to remove bone marrow at London's Hospital for Sick Children in Great
Ormond Street.

    The operation is the first stage in the treatment for a severe form of
immunodeficiency or total allergy syndrome, a congenital condition which leaves
victims vulnerable to infections. Sufferers usually die in childhood.

    Carly's mother Jane lost her 14-month-old son Greig to the disease four days
before Carly was born.

    Without the presence of the Adenoisine Deaminase gene, toxic substances
build up in the bloodstream, damaging the immune system.

    Doctors hope to treat the condition by removing some of Carly's bone marrow
and introducing the ADA gene into the cells.

    The cells will then be injected into the baby's bloodstream in four days
time so they can find their way back to her bone marrow.

    Doctors hope the technique, developed jointly by British and Dutch doctors
and scientists, will have long-lasting positive results on Carly's gene
structure.

    American experiments with gene therapy have so far only altered blood cells
rather than bone marrow cells and have had to be repeated monthly.

    Gene therapy could eventually offer effective treatment for as many as 4,000
hereditary illnesses, including cystic fibrosis.

    But there are complex ethical issues involved in its use. Approval for
Carly's operation had to be given by the Clothier Committee on the ethics of
gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              418 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 18, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 7

LENGTH: 438 words

HEADLINE: Baby to get first gene transplant

BYLINE: CELIA HALL, Medical Editor

BODY:

    A BABY girl will today make British medical history when doctors begin the
first gene transplant designed to cure a deficiency which, untreated, could lead
to her death.

    Carly Todd, aged eight months, from Lennoxtown, near Glasgow, has the same
immune system deficiency which killed her 14-month-old brother four days before
she was born.

    Children with this rare condition do not make an enzyme called Adenosine
Deaminase, or ADA, which is necessary for the immune system to develop properly.
Without ADA, Carly is vulnerable to any infection which a baby with normal cells
would be able to fight.

    Doctors at Great Ormond Street hospital, London, working with scientists at
the University of Leiden in the Netherlands, plan to reprogramme Carly's cells
so that she can protect herself from infection.

    A copy of the ADA gene will be inserted into the cells of Carly's bone
marrow which are responsible for making the cells of the immune system.

    Dr Gareth Morgan, senior lecturer in immunology, described Carly as a
delightful and responsive baby. He said he was ''cautiously optimistic'' of
success.

    One Italian and two American children with ADA have been treated with a
different type of gene therapy, aimed mostly at mature cells, but its effect is
short lived as the cells have a limited life and the treatment has to be
repeated.

    The British and Dutch technique aims for a lifetime cure. This is because
the bone marrow cells are stem or progenitor cells.

    Today, Dr Morgan will take about a cupful of Carly's bone marrow from her
pelvis. It will be sent to the laboratory of Dr Dinko Valerio, in Leiden, where
the stem cells will be harnessed with the ADA gene copies. The ''incubation'' of
the newly programmed cells takes about a day and a half. The gene brew will then
be returned to Great Ormond Street.

    Dr Morgan said that on about day four Carly will be given back the treated
cells, probably via a drip. After two weeks a series of blood tests will begin
to look for tell-tale chemical changes in the cells from her bone marrow.

    He said that after two or three months they would be reasonably confident
that the gene transplant had worked. ''This is the first time and we must be
realistic. It could be that the cells die off for some reason inside her body.
But we are hopeful this will not happen. This sort of gene therapy does not have
side effects and should be very advantageous for Carly.''

    Special permission for this attempt to manipulate the genes of a human was
given by the Clothier committee, the Government's advisory body on the ethics of
gene therapy.



                              419 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            March 18, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 7

LENGTH: 105 words

HEADLINE: Hope for gene therapy on cystic fibrosis

BODY:

    Scientists have cured laboratory mice suffering from cystic fibrosis - the
commonest genetic disorder of north Europeans - and believe it shows gene
therapy on human cystic fibrosis patients will work.

    Today's issue of the science journal Nature reports that researchers from
Oxford and Cambridge universities inserted healthy copies of the gene into the
lungs of the diseased mice using a substance that could be developed into an
inhalation spray for human patients.

    Cystic fibrosis affects about 1 in 2,500 children in the UK. Patients
develop severe lung problems which often kill them by the age of 25 to 30.



                              421 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             March 12, 1993, Friday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 2

LENGTH: 49 words

HEADLINE: Gene patient

BODY:

    Carly Todd, aged eight months, will next Thursday become the first patient
in Britain to undergo gene therapy. The operation will be carried out at the
Great Ormond Street hospital, London after final approval was granted by a
watchdog body, the Committee on the Ethics of Gene Therapy.



                              423 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             March 1, 1993, Monday

SECTION: TITLE PAGE; Page 1

LENGTH: 398 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy breakthrough to tackle skin cancer

BYLINE: By CELIA HALL, Medical Editor

BODY:

    GENE THERAPY which can switch on the body's immune system to kill cancerous
cells could be tried this year.

    British scientists announced yesterday that they had found a way to target
skin cancer cells by introducing into them, by a simple injection, a gene for
the immune system which attracts anti- cancer cells to the tumour.

    Patents have been applied for and application will be made to the Clothier
Committee on the Ethics of Gene Therapy within the next two weeks for permission
to use the technique on patients. It would be the first time in Britain that
gene therapy has been used on cancer patients.

    The system is designed for melanoma, which is doubling in incidence every 10
years. The scientists hope that the therapy will be used on patients for whom
other treatments have failed. About 4,000 people a year in the UK get melanoma.
While it is treated successfully by surgery in two thirds of cases, more than
1,000 die patients every year.

    Dr Michael Crumpton, director of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund's
laboratory research, said: ''We believe we have an exciting and important
discovery which has important clinical implications for the treatment of tumours
in general - I guess we are talking about a period of 5 to 10 years.''

    The work has been developed over the past year by Ian Hart, head of the ICRF
biology of metastasis laboratory, and his colleague, Dr Richard Vile.

    Dr Hart said they had exploited a function of certain skin cells,
melanocytes, which produce the skin pigment melanin, which is spread through
surrounding skin cells. The melanocytes also play a role in the development of
the melanoma. ''The jump we made is that if this characteristic is a specific of
melanocytes and is shared by many melanomas, then perhaps we could use the
pathway that produces this melanin to target melanoma, and that is what we have
done.''

    The key is an enzyme, tyrosinase, essential for making melanin. The
scientists found that close to the gene for tyrosinase is a piece of genetic
material which acts as a chemical switch.

    They confirmed that they could try to use a chemical switch that is active
in most skin cancer cells but not in other cells in the body.

    The final stage was to hook on to the chemical switch a gene for Interleukin
2 (IL2) which stimulates the ''killer'' T cells of the immune system at the
cancer sites.



                              429 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          February 3, 1993, Wednesday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 2

LENGTH: 425 words

HEADLINE: Organ 'opt-out scheme needed'

BYLINE: By STEVE CONNOR, Science Correspondent

BODY:

    THE serious shortage of organs for surgical transplants can only be
addressed by introducing a radical ''opt-out'' system, government advisers said
yesterday.

    Surgeons should assume that they have permission to remove organs from a
dead patient unless they are aware of a specific refusal, the Advisory Council
on Science and Technology (Acost) recommends in a review of medical research.

    A move to an opt-out system similar to those of Belgium, France and Austria,
instead of the present procedure where written permission from donors is
required, should significantly improve the supply of organs, the advisory
council says in a report to the Cabinet Office.

    ''Since past measures to increase organ supply have failed, radical actions
need to be considered,'' the report says.

    Dr Peter Doyle, the chairman of the council's medical research and health
committee, said that changing the present arrangements for organ donation would
alleviate ''the chronic shortfall'' of donors in Britain.

    Fewer than a fifth of possible recipients received kidney transplants in
1992, he said. ''Not one kidney transplant in 1990 was done from a person
carrying a donor card so we have to think of something better.''

    The chronic shortfall of organ donors means that patients are not receiving
the full benefits of new medical techniques in tissue transplants and gene
therapy, the advisory council says.

    Acost wants the Government to introduce several additional policies that
would increase the

    uptake of developments in medical science. Its recommendations include:

    A nationally co-ordinated programme of screening the public for diseases to
ensure equal availability of testing services throughout the NHS.

    Government initiatives to foster the development into commercial products or
services of medical breakthroughs in the NHS.

    The introduction of a year's grace between publication of research and
filing a patent on a potential product, which would protect many British
inventions from exploitation by foreign companies.

    Assessment of new surgical procedures in a more rigorous and controlled
fashion to gauge the benefits to patients and the cost to the NHS.

    Dr Doyle said it was necessary for the Government to introduce a ''more
evaluative culture'' into the NHS to assess the benefits of new and expensive
medical technology.

    The advisory council intends to follow up its recommendations in 12 months
''to chart progress''.

    - A Report on Medical Research and Health; Acost; HMSO; pounds 13.



                              430 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          January 27, 1993, Wednesday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 2

LENGTH: 527 words

HEADLINE: Child likely to be first gene therapy patient

BYLINE: By STEVE CONNOR, Science Correspondent

BODY:

    The first gene therapy trial in Britain won approval from the Government's
regulatory authority yesterday.

    A child suffering from a rare inherited disorder of the immune system is
likely to become the first patient in the UK to receive injections of genetic
material designed in the laboratory as a substitute for a defective gene.

    After a day-long meeting, the Committee on the Ethics of Gene Therapy,
chaired by Sir Cecil Clothier, the former National Health Service ombudsman,
said that it had no ethical objections.

    A spokesman for the Department of Health said that although the medical
researchers involved must provide further technical details of how they intended
to conduct the gene therapy trial, there were now no substantial hurdles in
their way. ''The principle has been approved,'' he said.

    The patient concerned suffers from an immune disorder resulting from the
inheritance of a defective gene for an enzyme called adenosine deaminase, ADA,
which is vital for the proper functioning of the immune defences. Without ADA,
children are at risk from life- threatening infections such as pneumonia and
cannot lead a normal, active life.

    Doctors led by Roland Levinsky, director of the Institute of Child Health at
the Hospotal for Sick Children Great Ormond Street in London hope to take the
patient's own bone marrow cells, genetically engineer them with healthy copies
of the gene, and then inject the cells back into the child's bone marrow, where
cells of the immune system are made. If successful, the child should then
produce enough ADA.

    Gareth Morgan, senior lecturer in clinical immunology at the hospital, said
the approval from the committee ''opens the way for use of this form of therapy
as an alternative to current treatments which, although of value, are not
totally successful''.

    The hospital emphasised that the risk to the child was probably less than
the risk of other forms of treatment. The patient will be kept in isolation
until the outcome of the trial is known.

    Kay Davies, the director of the new Clinical Sciences Centre at Hammersmith
Hospital in west London, which will conduct research into gene therapy, welcomed
the ethical approval. ''It's a big step forward. It's essentially the green
light for more proposals,'' she said.

    The Clothier committee, which is reviewing the ethics of gene therapy trials
until the Government establishes a permanent regulatory authority, also looked
at a second proposal but did not reach a decision. This trial will attempt to
substitute the defective genes of children suffering from cystic fibrosis, the
most common genetic disorder among north Europeans.

    Doctors at the Royal Brompton and St Mary's Hospitals in London hope to
insert healthy copies of the cystic fibrosis gene into cells lining the lungs in
an attempt to stop the production of a sticky mucus that blocks respiratory
passages.

    Professor Bob Williamson, at St Mary's Hospital, said the proposal was
experimental and so the safety issues had to be looked at carefully.

    Gene therapy has begun in the United States on two children suffering from
ADA deficiency.



                              431 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 22, 1993, Friday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 6

LENGTH: 304 words

HEADLINE: Gene find is key to rare blood disease

BYLINE: By STEVE CONNOR, Science Correspondent

BODY:

    MEDICAL RESEARCHERS have identified the gene responsible for a rare blood
disorder and say the find could lead to an effective treatment for the incurable
disease within the near future, writes Steve Connor.

    Scientists can now test for the presence of mutations in the gene that
result in the disease, which affects about 1 in every 50,000 babies. The
discovery could soon lead to the possibility of replacing defective genes with
healthy substitutes, a technique known as gene therapy.

    Researchers from Guy's Hospital in London, with colleagues from the
Karolinska Institute in Sweden, found the gene for agammaglobulinaemia - caused
by a deficiency of white blood cells - by studying 33 families afflicted by the
inherited disorder.

    The disease usually affects males, with females being healthy carriers of
the defective gene. Discovering the gene, and the mutations associated with the
disease, has also shed light on how the deficiency of white blood cells comes
about, according to the research, which is published in the latest issue of
Nature.

    The gene is responsible for the production of a substance involved in the
communication of signals within cells in the body. A defect in it causes a block
in the proliferation of white cells.

    Sufferers are susceptible to infectious diseases. Affected children have to
be given antibiotics and injections of antibodies, without which they would
quickly die.

    David Bentley, lecturer in molecular genetics at Guy's, said that it took
about nine months to be sure the research team had found the right gene. The
''crucial evidence'' came when mutations in the gene were found only in people
suffering the disorder. ''We could design a test tomorrow for pre-natal
screening,'' he said, but it would not be introduced without genetic
counselling.



                              434 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                          December 2, 1992, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 374 words

HEADLINE: British vaccine bid to beat skin cancer

BODY:


    A VACCINE to treat skin cancer is being developed by British scientists, it
was announced today.

    The research is part of work on genes at specialist centres around the
world.

    A team at London's Institute of Cancer is targeting melanoma, the most
serious form of skin cancer, which kills about 2,000 Britons every year.

    There are also plans to launch the first gene therapy study on human cancer
in Britain if scientists get the go-ahead from the Department of Health.

    The gene therapy technique was originally thought to be mainly of benefit to
people with single gene defects, like cystic fibrosis or immuno-deficiency. But
researchers now believe it can be effective in fighting cancer.

    Working with doctors at London's Royal Marsden Hospital, scientists have
shown it is possible to change tumour cells so that they secrete natural
proteins which help identify cancer and stimulate rejection by the body.

    Dr Martin Gore, who heads the hospital's clinical team, said: 'There is
still some way to go before this laboratory work can be translated into a
treatment for human cancer, but it offers very exciting prospects for the
future.'

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              435 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          November 11, 1992, Wednesday

SECTION: MEDIA PAGE; Page 15

LENGTH: 882 words

HEADLINE: Media: Gee whiz! It even has a pull-out dinosaur

BYLINE: By JASON NISSE

BODY:

    IT looks awful, with all the design disunity of a bad issue of Q. It reads
like a grown-up version of Look and Learn, that smartypants children's magazine
your parents made you read when you wanted Victor or the Valiant. Yet the World
in Focus could be the biggest thing to hit the men's publishing sector since . .
. well, since anybody thought of it as a market.

    The publishers of Focus, which arrives on the newsstands today, estimate
that as many as a quarter of a million men of 35 or under will buy it monthly,
at pounds 1.75 a copy. Normally such claims would be laughed off; but today no
one is laughing, because the publisher is Gruner & Jahr, the consumer magazines
arm of the German media group Bertelsmann and the backer of two of the most
successful magazine launches of the Eighties, Prima and Best.

    Prima was launched in 1985, attacking an already crowded women's monthly
market. Now it is the UK's second-largest monthly title, after Reader's Digest,
and sells 740,000 copies. Prima was followed a year later by Best, which went
after the women's weekly market. Industry pundits predicted disaster, arguing
that the sector was not only in decline but also dominated by a single
publisher, Reed International's IPC. Best now sells 630,000 copies a week.

    ''We're taking a certain risk launching in this market at this time,''
admits Holger Wiemann, 33, the UK managing director of G & J, which has
earmarked pounds lm for a extensive television and poster-based advertising
campaign to accompany the launch of Focus. ''But British publishers have left
this area of the market alone for a long time and we are trying to open it
out.''

    Mr Wiemann describes Focus as a total innovation for the UK, but in truth it
is merely an extension of a formula G & J found successful on the Continent. The
concept started in 1978 in Germany with PM, or Peter Moosleitners' Interesting
Magazine to give a translation of its full title. PM is an amateur boffins'
title, brimming with gee-whiz articles about science and computers. It sells
more than 450,000 copies a month, mostly through subscription.

    The success of PM was followed up by launches in France and Spain in the
early Eighties. Ca m'interesse and Muy interesante (both translate roughly as
''that's interesting'') have a lower science content and more ecology, history
and world affairs. Both have sales around the 300,000 mark and estimated
readerships of more than 2 million. Muy interesante is Spain's largest-selling
monthly, and boasts more males in the high demographic profile areas than any
other publication.

    G & J has been keen to bring the title to Britain but decided to wait until
the group had an established base here. Focus, under the editorship of Mick
Hurrell, an ecology writer, is closer to the French and Spanish titles in tone,
although it retains a heavy science bias.

    The first issue has ''Why does British racing technology reign supreme?'' as
its main feature, but the cover also trails items on gene therapy, left-handed
sports stars and, in true Look and Learn style, a 10-page dossier on dinosaurs
with a pull-out colour poster (what the under-35 male is supposed to do with
this poster one can hardly imagine). Inside there are items about monster
asteroids heading for Earth, caving, the lemurs of Madagascar and the truth
about Jesus Christ. The writing style is fairly breathless and illustrations
abound, four or five to the page, mostly in colour.

    The articles are generally well written and informative. If you were stuck
in the dentist's waiting room and picked it up, it would keep you amused for
half an hour or so. But, unlike most of Europe, in Britain most broadsheet and
Sunday newspapers have science, ecology or architecture sections dealing with
many of the same issues. So will anyone buy Focus?

    Mr Wiemann says yes, and G & J is guaranteeing advertisers sales of 80,000
for each of the first three issues. He feels there is a gap in the market
between the serious political/economic titles such as the Economist or New
Statesman & Society, the style publications GQ, Arena and Esquire (which
together sell more than 200,000 a month) and science titles such as New
Scientist, which are pitched more at professional scientists than casual
readers.

    He has a supporter in Michael VerMeulen, editor of GQ. ''I kind of like it,
it's got a nice newsy feel. We've found our science column is very positively
accepted by the readers and I think this will find a market niche.''

    Mr VerMeulen feels that Focus could attract a youthful readership, possibly
between 16 and 23. G & J hopes for a more mature purchaser - somebody who enjoys
the science pages of the Independent, watches Equinox or QED on television.

    ''What we are offering is editorial quality, a good subject mix and strong
layout. The magazine has the depth the newspapers cannot offer,'' says Mr
Wiemann.

    Research prior to publication indicates good demand for a publication with
Focus's subject mix. G & J sees the magazine as the first of a series of new
launches in Britain, with the group possibly bringing out British versions of
such Continental favourites as Stern and Femme Actuel. Mr Wiemann hopes G & J's
magic touch has not vanished.

    (Photograph omitted)



                              442 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          September 17, 1992, Thursday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 6

LENGTH: 353 words

HEADLINE: Mice help fight on cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: By STEVE CONNOR, Science Correspondent

BODY:

    SCIENTISTS have made a significant breakthrough in their search to cure
cystic fibrosis, the most common inherited disorder which strikes 1 in 2,000
new-born babies.

    They have created strains of laboratory mice that suffer symptoms similar to
those caused by the human disease, which opens the way to developing new drugs
and testing revolutionary treatments such as gene therapy.

    By inducing a mutation in the mouse gene responsible for transporting
chloride ions across cell membranes, the researchers have created mice that are
effectively healthy carriers of cystic fibrosis.

    When these mice are crossbred with each other, they produce offspring that
develop the full panoply of symptoms, including the build-up of thick, sticky
mucus secretions in the lungs, common in children with the disease.

    Until now, cystic fibrosis was known only in humans, and the lack of a
suitable animal model on which to test new drugs and treatments had effectively
frustrated the quest for a cure.

    A team of researchers, led by David Porteous from the Medical Research
Council's Human Genetics Unit at the Western General Hospital in Edinburgh, took
nearly three years to complete the research, which is published in today's issue
of the journal Nature.

    Professor John Evans, director of the unit, said: ''What we've got is a real
animal model of the human disease. We can now start varying therapy to see how
the disease progresses in these animals. We can't do that on humans.''

    Martin Scott, of the Cystic Fibrosis Research Trust, which funded the work
at a cost of pounds 200,000, said the mice should have a ''tremendous impact''
on the search for a cure. Gene therapy, where healthy genes are used to replace
defective ones, could now be tested on animals to ensure it was safe for humans.
''One can now expect a great mushrooming of knowledge and therapy.''

    American researchers last month revealed that they had also created cystic
fibrosis mice but those animals did not have the full range of symptoms and all
died soon after birth, making them effectively useless in medical research.



                              444 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 6, 1992, Thursday

SECTION: EDITORIAL PAGE; Page 21

LENGTH: 697 words

HEADLINE: BOOK REVIEW / Consumers' genes tailored for a perfect fit

BYLINE: By MAREK KOHN

BODY:

    ''WHIZZ for atomms!'', cried Nigel Molesworth back in the Fifties. Will
schoolboys cry ''Whizz for genes!'' in the Nineties? Their scientific elders
already are, none more enthusiastically than Robert Shapiro. The Human Blueprint
is popular science the way it used to be: wide-eyed, optimistic, and blessed
with unlimited faith in humanity's capacity for progress. Atoms turned sour,
space ran out of steam; then along came genes. Instead of mastering the
elemental forces of nature, or conquering the universe, the goal has become
getting hold of the human instruction manual. At last, humanity will be able to
debug its own system, and maybe customise it too.

    Shapiro is a player rather than a cheerleader. As Professor of Chemistry at
New York University, with experience in DNA research going back to the Fifties,
his credentials are impeccable. His secondary strength is accessibility - all
jargon more obscure than ''gene'' or ''nucleus'' is translated into everyday
terms.

    The trouble is that the social issues are just as heavily simplified. Rather
than acknowledging that these potent technologies will bring ethical
considerations of equivalent magnitude, Shapiro seems to feel that all that is
needed is a little reassurance from the experts. If the public is to develop an
understanding of science, scientists must develop a complementary understanding
of science as part of a larger public sphere.

    As far as the Human Genome Project goes, the requirement is pressing.
Although by 1990 only about five million human DNA characters had been logged,
all the six billion characters needed to specify a human being will have been
identified by 2005. Anthropologists will then be able to reconstruct the
narrative of human evolution and ethnic diversity. Policemen will obtain
physical descriptions of criminals from DNA traces at the scene of the crime.
Genetically coded disorders will be identified; in some cases, as now happens
with cystic fibrosis, affected individuals may receive ''gene therapy''. Genetic
testing in the womb may lead to abortions, or to genetic treatment of the
embryo. Prospective marriage partners, or their parents, may demand genetic
vetting before a contract is signed. So may employers and insurance companies.

    Genetic manipulation is unusual among technologies in having been
discredited before it existed, through the eugenic policies now associated with
Nazism. This, however, may act to the benefit of its advocates. Robert Shapiro
and his fellow enthusiasts are patently not Nazis or racists, and the dangers of
keeping genetic databases on large numbers of people seem hypothetical to the
citizens of liberal democracies. But the prevailing values of these societies
pose more insidious dangers. Shapiro imagines test- tube fertilisation being
used to create a range of embryos, from which the favourite could be selected
for implantation: ''Which would you prefer, Mrs Brown, the dark-haired girl or
the fair- haired boy?'' Consumer culture would become terminally pathological.

    Genetic technologies may also come to oppress those who hail them most
gratefully. The Western quest for physical perfection, one of our culture's most
powerful expressions of the belief in individualism, is likely to result in
discrimination. And racist lobbies, whether supported by scientists or not, will
certainly interpret the bewildering torrent of data in the light of their own
prejudices.

    The question will be, what constitutes a defect? What if a gene for
homosexuality is identified, for example? Will a future society impose
''therapy''? Shapiro's prescription is goodwill, and his vision that

    of radical diversity. Different populations may take different views of
their genetic destiny, he suggests, eventually leading

    to the emergence of several subspecies. And then, on to the stars; another

    subspecies, another planet. On current form, even that far apart will not be
far enough.

    As for our individual selves, Shapiro suggests that we leave DNA samples for
reanimation by posterity. There need never be a final curtain, but a series of
revivals. For the despot, that would be the ultimate dynasty.



                              451 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            June 13, 1992, Saturday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 3

LENGTH: 544 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy hope for cancer patients

BYLINE: By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent

BODY:

    AMERICAN patients with brain cancer are to receive pioneering gene therapy
which could make inoperable tumours treatable with drugs. One scientist has
likened it to ''putting bull's-eyes in the tumour cells and shooting them'' and
says it could be used eventually to treat some other cancers, including liver
cancer.

    The treatment, which is a new application of gene therapy, involves
introducing a gene taken from a common virus into the brain tumour cells. Once
the viral gene is in the cell, it makes it vulnerable to attack with anti-viral
drugs. Brain tumours in 11 out of 14 laboratory rats regressed completely after
the treatment, according to a report in Science magazine. Further unpublished
studies of treatment in monkeys have confirmed the potential of the therapy.

    Last week a US government advisory committee approved the treatment for use
in humans based on these trial results. The American Food and Drug
Administration must now consider the trial protocol but is expected to approve
it. The first patients will start treatment in August.

    Scientists from the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland,
where the therapy was developed, said they were ''excited'' at the prospect of
human trials but stressed it was at a very early stage. They have been
overwhelmed by telephone calls from desperate patients volunteering to take
part.

    Dr Kenneth Culver, who initially proposed the technique, said yesterday:
''Certainly we are very, very hopeful but it is only a study in animals and it
may not work in humans. It is a desperate disease, and you cannot read that
paper in Science and not have hope. It is a difficult position for us. We feel
as if we are playing God.''

    Dr Culver's caution was echoed by British cancer specialists. Karol Sikora,
professor of clinical oncology at the Hammersmith Hospital, west London, said:
''Gene therapy is the way forward and this is interesting research. But it is
very early days and it is likely to be at least five years before patients start
benefiting. It is unlikely that any cancer patient alive today will have any
real benefit.''

    Most existing experimental gene therapies for cancer have relied on removing
cells from the patient and introducing genes which boost the body's own defences
against the tumour. Cells cannot be removed from inoperable brain tumours so the
NIH scientists used mouse cells instead.

    A gene was removed from the herpes simplex virus and introduced into the
mouse cells using a retrovirus which acts as the gene ''carrier''. The herpes
gene turns any cell which carries it in to a target for a drug called
ganicyclovir.

    The mouse cells were then injected into the brain tumour where they start
''pumping out'' copies of the retrovirus. The retrovirus infects other tumour
cells which are then open to attack by the drug. It only infects actively
dividing tumour cells and leaves healthy brain tissue alone.

    The National Cancer Institute is at the forefront of experimental gene
therapies to treat cancer patients in whom all other treatments have failed.
Scientists believe that it will one day replace the unsatisfactory ''cut, burn
and poison'' approach of surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy that doctors now
rely on.



                              452 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             June 9, 1992, Tuesday

SECTION: EDITORIAL PAGE; Page 17

LENGTH: 1378 words

HEADLINE: Spare us the moral scientist

BYLINE: By LEWIS WOLPERT

BODY:

    Knowledge can be as dangerous as ignorance, but the illusion of
understanding may be more dangerous than either. In this scientists play a
special role for scientific knowledge can be inaccessible to the non-scientist.

    So what moral obligations do scientists have? Should they be more socially
responsible in their work, and are they responsible for the knowledge they
generate? What is their role in relation to the environmental crisis, genetic
engineering or Aids, for example?

    I wish to argue that it is not for scientists to take moral or ethical
decisions in relation to their work; their obligation is to make public the
implications of their work and its reliability. There is indeed a grave danger
in making scientists or engineers socially responsible for it gives them power
to make decisions about how we should live, a decision in which we should all
take part. Those with political power to apply science have similar obligations.

    Knowledge is not the same as its application. There is a difference between
science and technology. Building the atomic bomb was essentially technology -
applied science, a gigantic engineering feat, but based on sound scientific
principles.

    Even more important, the decision to build the bomb was political, not
scientific, as Robert Oppenheimer, who was in charge of the project, made clear.
''The scientist is not responsible for the laws of nature, but it is the
scientist's job to find out how these laws operate. However, it is not the
scientist's responsibility to determine whether a hydrogen bomb should be used.
That responsibility rests with the American people and their chosen
representatives.'' he said.

    In general terms, the scientists during the Second World War behaved with
great moral responsibility with respect to their special and privileged
knowledge. They explained to their governments just what the implications were
and their information was reliable.

    The case of eugenics, however, illustrates the dangers of unreliable
knowledge. In the early part of the century, many scientists, including Francis
Galton (who coined the term), believed that it was important to improve the
human stock by selective breeding. The basic idea underlying the eugenics
programme was that almost all human attributes were genetically determined.
Certain races were perceived as being biologically inferior, and in the US this
led to a selective immigration policy and sterilisation of the feebleminded.
Later these ideas were used by Hitler to justify his notorious eugenic
sterilisation laws.

    The science on which the early eugenics movement was based was false. The
evidence that genetic factors are the sole determinants of complex human
behaviour was based on prejudice rather than evidence. Whether or not the
scientists involved were honourable or not, they were bad scientists. Not only
was their science wrong, they also failed to evaluate critically the reliability
of their work in a highly sensitive area which has major social implications.
Those politicians who implemented the policies were even more guilty.

    Issues about the reliability of so-called science when applied to social
issues are raised this week in an important new BBC 2 television series,
Pandora's Box, which explores the relationship between science and political
power. Science's achievements have been breathtaking, but its very success gives
it an almost irresistible allure, particularly if its methods could be used to
create economic growth, plan a just society, or provide a reliable guide to
conducting the Cold War. Moreover, the application of science in this way
provides a route to power for the politicians, engineers and the scientists
involved.

    The television series questions whether the rationality of the scientific
method can be applied to solving major social issues, and illustrates how
dangerous the illusion of scientific understanding can be.

    It is both painful and touching, but finally infuriating, to watch in the
first programme in the series (''The Engineers' Plot'') footage of the early
years of the Russian revolution when there was a deep conviction that
communities could be treated like machines and engineered to produce just
societies. Power was given to engineers, who receive much of the blame for the
narrowness of vision in planning. However, it was not just the incompetence of
the planners with their absurd ''centralisation'' that caused the failure of the
great plan. Failure was largely due to the political constraints within which
they worked. Since Communism precluded personal gain there could be no
incentives, and innovation within such a system was almost impossible. So it was
not just bad science, clumsily applied, but also bad political philosophy that
brought about the system's failure. The latter may well have been the more
damaging.

    Politicians seem to like policies that claim to be based on a rational
scientific approach both because they can believe in them and because it conveys
respectability. But there can be no greater damage to the scientific enterprise
than to promote confidence in unreliable predictions, or to promise success on
the basis of weak or even false premises. There is much in the Star Wars
programme, for example, that came from unjustified claims by some scientists
about what lasers could do to enemy missiles.

    The strong desire to know the future and the power of science must be
tempered with appreciation of the limits of science. We have to come to terms
with being tempted by science into thinking that all problems will yield to its
methods. They may in the future. But at present our understanding of complex
systems, such as human behaviour, the ecosystem and society as a whole, are so
limited that they are barely at the stage of a primitive science.

    Even predicting, for example, global climate change is very difficult and at
present far from reliable. The system is enormously complex and current models
are no more than crude appropriations. Much more basic research is required.
Confident, detailed predictions should be treated with caution.

    However, this is not to say that we should not act on scientific advice even
when there is no certainty that it is correct. The evidence in favour of Aids
being caused by a virus is very strong, and measures to control its spread
should be based on this. There may well be other predisposing factors, but for
the present counteracting the spread of the virus should be the main aim. The
uncertainties in this field cannot be compared to those in economics or the
prediction of climatic changes, for example.

    In relation to gene therapy, for example, the scientist's role is to spell
out the benefits and dangers as best they can.

    Nevertheless it is sobering to realise that knowing the laws of even quite
simple systems does not mean that their behaviour can be predicted. For example,
one can write down the equations of motion of three bodies which attract each
other with a gravitational force, but to solve the equations and so describe
their motion is exceptionally difficult and has not been achieved. There is a
recent appreciation of chaos in complex systems such as a growing animal
population, or the weather. In each case the smallest perturbations may make
predictability almost impossible. And certain problems are intrinsically
insoluble. In economics, for example, there need be no solution as to how to
distribute goods among groups with different preferences.

    Our only hope for the future is to use science to try to solve problems that
require understanding of the way the world works; problems such as environmental
pollution, overpopulation and illness. This, of course, excludes problems
related to moral and ethical issues, since science has nothing to offer in that
area. A scientific approach is the only way forward. But ultimately in a
democracy, it is for all citizens to decide what risks to take and what benefits
to hope for.

    The writer is Professor of Biology as Applied to Medicine at University
College, London. His book, 'The Unnatural Nature of Science', will be published
by Faber in November.

    'Pandora's Box' can be seen on BBC 2 at 9.30pm on Thursday.

    (Photograph omitted)



                              461 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           April 15, 1992, Wednesday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 2

LENGTH: 308 words

HEADLINE: DNA pioneer steps down

BYLINE: By TOM WILKIE, Science Editor

BODY:

    SCIENTIFIC research in the US has been dealt a major blow with the
resignation of Dr James D Watson, co-discoverer of the double helix of DNA, as
director of the multi-billion dollar programme to analyse and dissect all human
genes.

    Dr Watson has stepped down as director of the US Human Genome Project after
political infighting within the National Institutes of Health, which funds
medical research in the US.

    As reported in The Independent on 10 April, the director of the NIH, Dr
Bernadine Healy, had ordered an investigation into possible conflicts of
interest due to Dr Watson's shareholdings in biotechnology companies.

    This was the first time that any question had been raised about Dr Watson's
shareholdings in such companies.

    His resignation was announced in a terse letter to Dr Healy, who accepted it
immediately without any expression of regret at his departure. Dr Michael
Gottesman, from the US National Cancer Institute, has been appointed acting head
of the genome research project pending appointment of a permanent director.

    In his resignation statement Dr Watson cited as his reason the burden of
acting as director of the project at the same time as being head of the
Coldspring Harbor Laboratory - one of the world's foremost genetic research
instititutes.

    The differences between Dr Watson and Dr Healy were hinted at with the
statement that his resignation allowed Dr Healy ''to appoint her own director
for the project''.

    In 1953, at the age of 25, Dr Watson and the English physicist Francis Crick
discovered that DNA, the molecule of inheritance, had the structure of a double
helix.

    The discovery opened the way to the development of the whole subject of
post-war genetics and molecular biology, laying the foundations for genetic
engineering, biotechnology and human gene therapy.



                              462 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 10, 1992, Friday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 8

LENGTH: 1009 words

HEADLINE: Concern at genetic research on food

BODY:

    GENETIC engineering of food and farm animals arouses the greatest opposition
of all the uses of biotechnology, according to a survey carried out for the
European Commission.

    Nearly 13,000 people from all the countries of the EC were questioned by the
Eurobarometer Survey about their attitudes to the uses of genetic engineering in
plants, micro-organisms, farm animals, food, human gene therapy, and the
production of medicines and vaccines. Although the questions put biotechnology
in the most favourable light, a majority of those responding believed that
research on farm animals was not worthwhile and should not be pursued.

    European public opinion approved of the use of genetic engineering to
produce pharmaceuticals and to keep the environment clean. But while nearly
three- quarters favoured gene therapy for humans, Europeans were lukewarm in
their endorsement of biotechnology in the food industry and those opposed to
genetic engineering of farm animals outnumbered those who favoured it.

    The survey also found that the British react more negatively to the phrase
''genetic engineering'' than they do to ''biotechnology'' whereas the Germans
see no distinction between the two and are the most suspicious of all the
European nations about the new biological technologies.

    The Dutch Institute for Consumer Research in the Hague found similarly, in a
study in the Netherlands, that most people were unwilling to accept food
produced by biotechnology or genetic engineering. They were more likely to
accept modified foods if they could see obvious benefits either to the consumer
(the food might be more nutritious) or to the environment (it may help reduce
the need for pesticides).

    On a scale of one (unacceptable) to 38 (acceptable) the consumers gave
genetically engineered food a rating of 6.3. They accepted the idea of altered
plants and microbes more readily than the prospect of altered animals. The
notion that biotechnologists might one day use human genetic material to improve
food production scored very highly on the unacceptability scale.

    Such views are endorsed by Dr John Webb, director of genetics at the
Cotswold Pig Development Company in Lincoln. He emphasised that his company was
getting pigs to produce leaner meat by traditional breeding practices. ''Quite
rightly there is a lot of public disquiet about using genetic engineering to
make animals leaner or to grow faster and I share that concern.''

    If genetic engineering were to be applied to farm livestock, Dr Webb
believes that it ought to be in the area of boosting the animals' immune system.
Animal welfare would be better and fewer drugs would be needed, he said.

    The techniques of gene transfer would not become affordable to the animal
industry for at least 10 to 15 years, he believes, and by that time, efficient
natural breeding methods would achieve the desired degree of leanness.

    Consumer acceptance and economics will ultimately determine how much
genetically engineered produce appears on the supermarket shelves. Hal MacFie,
head of the Agricultural and Food Research Council's Consumer Sciences division
(the recently re- named ''Department of Food Acceptability''), said that in the
case of the genetically engineered yeast approved in Britain in 1990, bakers are
working on a simple equation of benefits versus perceived risk. Mr MacFie
believes they still think the commercial risks they face from using engineered
produce outweigh the benefits.

    ''It is rather like food irradiation. The baking industry is worried about
consumer opinion, if it should suddenly swing they could be cast in a negative
light,'' he said.

    Britain has one of the most sophisticated regulatory processes in the world
for checking the safety of organisms engineered for use in food. But despite the
rigour of this system, there seems to be little if any tracking of such products
once they reach the commercial world. A spokeswoman for the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food said it was ''not aware'' of any British
manufacturer using any of the engineered produce that its advisory committees
have approved. But the ministry also admits that it would not necessarily know.
There is no obligation for industry to tell anybody that it is using such
products.

    One food that uses products that result from genetic engineering is already
on sale in Britain. Several of the cheeses in the local supermarket contain an
enzyme, chymosin, made by a genetically engineered fungus. Express Foods, the
company that makes the cheese, is supplying it to several supermarket chains,
but will not name them.

    David Phillips, director of quality assurance at Express Foods, said his
company was conducting trials of the chymosin from the engineered fungus. The
trial aims to test how well the enzyme performs in all of the various types of
cheese Express Foods produces.

    A survey carried out by Maff last year found that 23 per cent of people
questioned would like a label informing them if food contains genetically
engineered products.

    But the ministry's Food Advisory Committee has said in draft guidelines that
labelling is not always necessary.

    Only food that contained genes from a source outside an organism's own
species should be labelled, the committee said. It has yet to decide whether the
label might be a simple message saying something along the lines of ''a product
of gene technology'', or whether such food should carry an easily recognisable
logo instead.

    The Consumers' Association wants labels on all products made by the new
technology, at least in the short term. Karen McColl, of the association, said:
''To date there has been relatively little research into people's attitudes. A
decision on labelling should be based on proper market research. We need a label
that is not whitewashing, but that is also not scaremongering. But until we know
more about what people's concerns are and how many people have them it is surely
better to give people the chance to make an informed choice.''



                              464 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             March 20, 1992, Friday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 4

LENGTH: 523 words

HEADLINE: Gene research offers hope on muscle-wasting disease

BYLINE: By CELIA HALL, Medical Editor

BODY:

    MEDICAL researchers believe they have developed two methods which could lead
to treatment of the previously incurable genetic disease Duchenne Muscular
Dystrophy.

    Dr Kay Davies and colleagues at the Institute of Molecular Medicine in
Oxford have successfully corrected an analogous genetic defect in laboratory
mice by transplanting an intact gene into mice embryos.

    Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) is a wasting disease of the muscles which
confines sufferers to a wheelchair at an early age. Only boys are affected and
most die before the age of 20.

    The boys inherit a damaged gene from their mothers - who are unaffected -
and, as a result, their muscles are unable to make a key protein called
dystrophin.

    The gene implicated in the disease was first isolated by American
researchers in 1986. It turned out to be unexpectedly large, which made it
difficult to handle in genetic engineering techniques. Dr Davies and her group
put together a smaller gene which the experiments on mice demonstrated can still
make functional dystrophin.

    If a way can be found to get Dr Davies's ''mini-gene'' into the muscles of
affected boys then the cells would automatically start making the previously
deficient dystrophin.

    However, Dr Davies believes there may be an alternative route to treating
DMD which does not involve the technical difficulties of gene therapy. Two years
ago her research group identified a similar gene to that of dystrophin, whose
corresponding protein is present even in the muscles of those who suffer from
DMD.

    It may be possible to find a drug that would induce this naturally present
''dystrophin-related protein'' to be produced in greater quantities and so
compensate for the deficient dystrophin. However, experiments to verify this
route are not as far advanced as with the mini-gene.

    Nevertheless, this may turn out to be a more productive route to developing
treatment for DMD. According to Dr Davies there are still many practical
difficulties in carrying out gene therapy to correct DMD in humans, even though
her group have proved that the mini-gene works in mice.

    The group got the gene into mice embryos by packaging it inside a
genetically engineered virus. But the gene transplant ''took'' in only one
embryo and even then dystrophin was produced at just one-sixth of the normal
level. ''We are absolutely sure we can increase expression of dystrophin and do
still better,'' Dr Davies said.

    The problem remains of getting the gene into the muscle cells of those
suffering from the disease. Other research groups are looking at the
possibilities of using herpes virus or even hepatitis virus as ''vectors'' to
carry the gene. But the difficulty is to ensure that the genetically engineered
virus does not infect cells other than muscle where the production of dystrophin
would be detrimental.

    One route may be injection of the DNA directly into muscle cells. Those
cells take up DNA more easily than most other body cells, according to Dr
Davies. However, the injections would have to be repeated as the gene would not
be fully integrated into the cells.



                              468 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             March 9, 1992, Monday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 4

LENGTH: 499 words

HEADLINE: Scientists warn that asthma cure is 15 years away

BYLINE: By STEVE CONNOR, Science Correspondent

BODY:

   A CURE for asthma is more than 15 years away, according to scientists
searching for the gene implicated in the breathing disorder.

   Although researchers believe that the gene is located in a region of one of
the human chromosomes, they have yet to pinpoint it precisely. Even when they
do, years of drug development will be necessary to produce a cure, they say.

   Their caution follows weekend reports that drugs that can counter asthma will
be available within five years because the scientists have isolated the gene.

   ''We have located it, but have not formally identified it,'' Julian Hopkin,
of the John Radcliffe and Churchill hospitals in Oxford, said. ''There is a
significant piece of research yet to be done. We are looking at developing drugs
probably in 15 years or longer.''

   Asthma affects 3 million Britons and kills 2,000 each year. Some types of
childhood asthma tend to run in families and are associated with allergies such
as hay fever and skin rashes.

   Dr Hopkin, and his colleague William Cookson, analysed blood samples of 1,000
people from 100 families with histories of asthma and allergy problems. Two
years ago they found that a gene on chromosome 11 was associated with a
particular type of allergic disorder which can cause asthma in some children.

   Since then they have narrowed their search to a piece of genetic material, or
DNA, on the chromosome but believe that the gene itself is a far smaller
fragment just a thousandth of the size.

   Sir David Weatherall, director of the Institute of Molecular Medicine in
Oxford, said the research was a long way from an asthma cure. ''They haven't
found the gene for certain. They may get the gene next week, or they may be a
few years away,'' he said. Even then, the search for a cure has only begun.
''Other genes may be involved and you've got to find out what it is about a gene
that makes people susceptible.

   There are about 4,000 inherited diseases, such as cystic fibrosis, caused by
single genes, and many more, like asthma and diabetes, where a number of genes
appear to play an important role.

   Another complication is the interaction between genes and environment. For
instance, some children susceptible to asthma may be at more risk of developing
the disorder if they are in contact with household dust mites from an early age.

   By looking at family pedigrees, taking blood samples and identifying genetic
''markers'' that are associated with an inherited disorder, geneticists can
pinpoint the location of genes on chromosomes and so discover the genetic basis
of a disease.

   ''The main interest in this research is to identify differences between
susceptible and non-susceptible people, which may give us some clue as to the
cause and so give us a better chance of breaking the circle and providing some
effective treatment,'' Sir David said.

   Revolutionary new treatments and even cures could result from the ''new
genetics'', and American doctors are alredy performing gene-therapy trials.


                              469 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                           Evening Standard (London)

                             March 6, 1992, Friday

SECTION: Pg. 20

LENGTH: 1200 words

HEADLINE: DO WE REALLY WANT SCIENCE TO CREATE THE PERFECT BABY?;
A new breakthrough allows doctors to predict, with great accuracy, how an unborn
child will develop. But it could be used for a more sinister purpose,

BYLINE: Paul Clayton

BODY:


    HAVING a baby is always a gamble. No matter how carefully you plan the
pregnancy, there is always a small risk that the baby might be born with a
congenital illness. The risk is not great - only one child in every 100 is born
with a serious genetic defect - but it's every mother-to-be's worst fear.

    That may be about to change. A new medical breakthrough has been announced
that will soon make it possible to detect the presence of genetic errors in the
foetus as early as two weeks after a missed period. So what's new? Pre-natal
screening has been available for some time. Malformations and abnormal rates of
growth and movement can be picked up with ultrasound. If doctors think it
necessary they can take a sample of foetal cells for chromosome or DNA analysis,
and detect the presence of genetic illness such as Down's Syndrome or cystic
fibrosis.

    But this type of sampling is invasive - a needle is passed through the
abdominal wall into the womb - can't be done until 10 to 16 weeks after
conception and carries a one to two per cent risk of spontaneous abortion.  It
also takes time and money.

    All that is about to change. After four-and-a-half years of study, Professor
Warren Jones and his team at Flinders University in South Australia have come up
with a new way of detecting genetic errors in the unborn which is not only quick
and simple, it's cheap, accurate and risk-free. Within the next 12 months it
will be launched on an unsuspecting global market; and all it requires is a
small blood sample taken from a vein in the mother's arm.

    It works like this. As early as six weeks after conception, or two weeks
after a missed period, a few cells from the foetal part of the placenta find
their way into the mother's circulation. A small blood sample taken from her arm
will contain about 50 million of her blood cells, and, swimming around in that
small red sea, about 10 foetal cells. The trick is to find them.

    The Australian group came up with an ingenious new fishing technique. The
hooks they use are 'immunobeads', tiny synthetic beads with an iron core.  For
bait, they coat the immunobeads with antibodies, large molecules made by the
immune system that specifically recognise and stick to foetal cells.  They drop
a few immunobeads into the blood sample - and then fish them out with a magnet,
together with the foetal cells stuck to their antibody coating. A few steps
later the lab has enough DNA to tell whether the foetus carries the genes for
haemophilia, Duchenne's muscular dystrophy, sickle-cell disease, or other
genetic illnesses.

    It sounds complex, but the procedure is simple enough to be automated. By
the end of 1992 the US biotechnology company, MediGene, will be offering mass
pre-natal scanning at a network of American centres and then worldwide.  It will
mean a sharp decline in the number of babies born with genetic defects, prevent
much suffering, and make a great deal of money.

    There are, of course, considerable ethical problems. Dr Theresa Marteau is a
research psychologist at the Royal Free specialising in genetic counselling.
'Counselling is vitally important, not only to explain the results of screening,
but also to help parents decide in advance whether they really do want to be
screened. I'm concerned that there will be a conflict of interests.'

    And, given the current international race to map and strip-mine the human
genetic code, how long can it be before the MediGene centres, or others like
them, begin to test for minor genetic defects such as an increased risk of
developing heart disease or diabetes? Or, for those who can afford them, tests
for socially desirable characteristics?

    There are many possible futures. In one of them women will give monthly

    blood samples as routinely as we now hand over rolls of undeveloped film,
receiving, next day, a genetic snapshot showing how strong, brave and beautiful
their unborn child is likely to be. The hope must be that somewhere further
ahead science will generate the means for treating genetic errors. Already it
has a name: gene therapy.

    The first government-approved trial of gene therapy started in America in
September, 1990, treating children suffering from a rare genetic condition known
as severe combined immuno-deficiency. The defective gene causing this lethal
illness was identified, and a group at the National Institute of Health began
treating the children by giving them copies of the healthy gene. It is not a
cure; the children will need repeated treatments throughout their lives, but it
is a sign of things to come.

    A note of caution is sounded by Professor Inder Verma of California's Salk
Institute: 'The current pace of research suggests that by the turn of the
century clinical trials of gene therapy may be under way for any number of
diseases. But it raises fundamental questions . . . should therapy be applied
simply to improve one's offspring, as opposed to preventing an illness? Who
would decide? Is society willing to risk introducing changes into the gene pool
that could ultimately damage our chances of survival?  Ultimately, do we have
the right to tamper with human evolution?

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              473 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            February 7, 1992, Friday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 5

LENGTH: 269 words

HEADLINE: Charity to pay for gene research

BYLINE: By STEVE CONNOR, Science Correspondent

BODY:

   A CHARITY will pay for Britain's first research programme aimed at curing an
inherited disease by gene therapy, replacing defective genes with healthy ones.

   The donation brings the prospect of gene therapy for children with cystic
fibrosis, the commonest inherited disorder, much closer, Professor Bob
Williamson of St Mary's Hospital, west London, said. ''My guess is that we are
going to see attempts at therapy within the next two years.'' Gene therapy to
treat cystic fibrosis could be taking place on an experimental basis in five to
ten years, he said.

   The Cystic Fibrosis Research Trust was able to fund the 10-year research
programme after a pounds 1m gift from the trustees of the estate of Leopold
Muller, a wealthy London hotelier who died in 1988.

   Professor Williamson criticised British pharmaceutical firms for their
''unadventurous'' attitude towards long-term research. Charities had become an
important source of research funds, he said.

   Professor Williamson has already lost some of his leading scientists to the
US. ''If we are going to survive as a research group, we have to see first-rate
science funded generously,'' he said.

   The defective gene in cystic fibrosis causes a build-up of mucus in the
lungs, making the children prone to infection and forcing them to undergo
uncomfortable physiotherapy and drug treatment. The disease affects about 6,000
young people and shortens life expectancy.

   Researchers will attempt gene therapy by harnessing a virus that normally
infects bacteria and using it to insert the healthy cystic fibrosis gene into
the lung cells of sufferers.


                              474 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 20, 1992, Monday

SECTION: SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PAGE; Page 14

LENGTH: 1224 words

HEADLINE: Striking the enemy from within; Cancer specialists are using gene
modification techniques to strengthen the body's own immune systems, says Liz
Hunt

BYLINE: By LIZ HUNT

BODY:

   LAST YEAR, on Tuesday 8 October, Dr Steven Rosenberg, chief of surgery at the
US National Institutes of Health, injected 200 million live cancer cells into
one of his patients.

   It took about three minutes to complete the injection, into the thigh of a
46-year-old man terminally ill with malignant melanoma. It was the first time
that doctors have, knowingly, injected cancer cells into humans. But these
cells, derived from the patient's own tumour or melanoma, had been genetically
''modified'': reprogrammed to stimulate the patient's immune system to attack
the melanoma.

   Four patients have now received the treatment, and Dr Rosenberg says: ''All
is going well and side-effects are minimal.''

   Dr Rosenberg is a leading proponent of ''biological therapies'' for cancer -
boosting the natural defence mechanisms of the host. He believes that gene
therapy may be the best way of delivering biological treatments.

   One day, this combination of genetic engineering and biological therapy may
replace the unsatisfactory ''cut, burn and poison'' approach of surgery,
radiotherapy and chemotherapy that doctors now rely on.

   Until recently, most attempts at biological therapies have involved
non-specific stimulation of the immune system, using agents such as the
anti-tuberculosis vaccine BCG.

   However, the body naturally produces proteins, known as cytokines, in
response to viral infections or early tumour growth. Cytokines include
interferon, which is produced by the body to combat viral infections. Interferon
inhibits cell division and activates some cells of the immune system.
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) is another immune-stimulating compound in cells, while
tumour necrosis factor (TNF) is a potent anti-cancer protein.

   The problem is that these substances have toxic side-effects, so Dr Rosenberg
and his team looked for new ways of delivering cytokines directly to the site of
the tumour. They focused on cells known as tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes
(TIL), which can recognise the tumour they are derived from.

   In an early TIL treatment, a cross-section of the tumour was removed, the TIL
cells extracted, incubated with IL-2, and then returned to the body. In one
trial, 19 out of 50 melanoma patients responded to this treatment with partial
or complete regression of their disease. Dr Rosenberg speculated that increasing
the anti-tumour activity of these cells by inserting a new gene or genes could
build on the effectiveness. ''Gene modification could be used to design TIL with
new properties to increase their effectiveness,'' he said.

   In May 1991, gene therapy was tried out on cancer patients for the first
time. A 29-year-old woman and a 42-year-old man with melanoma received an
infusion of their own white blood cells, TIL cells, which had been grown in the
lab and genetically modified to produce the potent anti-cancer protein, TNF,
which is produced naturally by the body in tiny amounts.

    TNF cannot be injected directly because of its severe side-effects. In
theory, the cells would deliver concentrated doses of TNF directly to the
tumour. Three more patients have now received the treatment, and Dr Rosenberg
says that ''things are looking good''. However more detailed clinical
information is not yet forthcoming.

   Since May last year the NIH researchers have turned their attention to what
Dr Rosenberg describes as the ''flip side'' of this approach. They looked into
the possibility of modifying the tumour cells (rather than the white blood
cells) to increase their ''immunogenicity'' or their ability to trigger a much
stronger attack by the patient's immune system.

   ''If you insert IL-4, IL-2 or TNF into the tumour, you will substantially
increase the immunogenicity of the tumour,'' Dr Rosenberg said.

   When this was tried in mice, an aggressive form of sarcoma, a soft- tissue
cancer, was reduced to less than half its original size. In the trial, which
started last October, the melanoma patient underwent removal of the tumour as
part of the normal treatment.

   ''We took some of the tumour cells and grew them in culture in the laboratory
to establish cell lines,'' said Dr Rosenberg. ''Then we introduced cytokine
genes into the tumour cells and used this gene-modified tumour to 'immunise' the
patient.''

   After about three weeks the patient's lymph nodes were removed to harvest
some of these ''more aggressive'' TIL cells, to be grown in the laboratory for
use in later treatments for the patient.

   These therapies are all experimental and the patients who receive them are
under no illusions. They are all terminally ill people for whom all other
treatments have failed.

   Dr Rosenberg has no shortage of volunteers. Each time his work receives
publicity, his office is inundated with calls from cancer patients volunteering
to join the experiments. There is a small risk attached to gene therapy, that
insertion of a new gene could itself result in the growth of cancerous cells.
But the greater concern is for side-effects in patients who have already
suffered a great deal.

   Each experimental gene therapy treatment must be first approved by the
National Institutes of Health Clinical Research Centre, then by the Recombinant
DNA Advisory Committee (RAC), and finally by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) (equivalent to the Committee on Safety of Medicines in Britain).

   The RAC has set up a gene therapy sub-committee to monitor its application in
humans. (This followed an incident in which a doctor at the University of Los
Angeles in California tried to use gene therapy to treat two sufferers from
thalassaemia - a hereditary blood disease - in Israel and Italy. The treatment
had no effect and the patients were unharmed, but the doctor concerned lost his
government research grants because he attempted the experiment without peer
approval.)

   Yet another refinement of gene therapy is some way off, but the first
tentative steps have been made. If successful, it could lead to cancer vaccines
that immunise people against the disease. As Dr Rosenberg explained: ''There are
common cancer antigens that are shared between individuals. Because this sharing
exists, it may be possible to clone these antigens, insert them into the
vaccinia virus and use them to immunise against these cancers.''

   The pace of progress in gene therapy is remarkable. The first successful
attempt to use the technique took place only in September 1990 at the NIH. A
four-year-old girl from Cleveland, Ohio, with severe combined immune deficiency
syndrome which left her vulnerable to a wide range of infections, received an
infusion of her own T-cells which had been genetically modified to produce a
vital enzyme (ADA) that her body was lacking.

   In addition to the treatments for immune deficiency and some cancers,
researchers at the University of Michigan have recently received approval to use
gene therapy to treat heart disease. But Dr Rosenberg is not satisfied.

   ''I wish this were all happening faster. There are so many possibilities that
we need to translate into treatments. They are treatments that do not work in
most patients. They have toxic side-effects and are extremely complex and
cumbersome. But what they have shown is that by using strictly biological
processes, it is possible to bring about the regression of some cancers. That is
what we need to build on.''


                              478 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            January 17, 1992, Friday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 3

LENGTH: 331 words

HEADLINE: Bottomley to seek public views over gene therapy

BYLINE: By CELIA HALL, Medical Editor

BODY:

   THE GOVERNMENT is asking for comments before acting on the recommendations
that would allow gene therapy to be conducted on humans in this country,
Virginia Bottomley, Minister for Health, said yesterday.

   The report of the Committee on the Ethics of Gene Therapy published yesterday
says gene therapy does not raise any new ethical issues but recommends
safeguards.

   Mrs Bottomley said: ''In such an important and sensitive area, ministers
believe that those with an interest, both professional and lay people, should be
given an opportunity to respond to the committee's recommendations.

   ''We have therefore decided to consult widely. The Government will decide
what steps to take once these views are available.''

   The consultation period will last four months. The committee, chaired by Sir
Cecil Clothier, says the modification of human genes offers for the first time
prospects of treatment and cures for genetic diseases, including cystic
fibrosis, haemophilia and muscular dystrophy. But before any treatments are
offered they must be proved to be safe and should be regarded as research, the
committee says.

   It recommends that no gene modification should be conducted on reproductive
cells and that an expert committee should be established to advise the local
ethical committee on prospective treatment projects.

   The report says that while gene manipulation might have specific benefits
there may be unwanted side effects which could cause unwanted genetic alteration
or ''lead to social abuse''.

   In the new edition of The Lancet, researchers from the US and France say they
have detected a gene defect which could help in the treatment of breast cancer.

   Genetic analysis of 121 breast tumours found specific abnormalities on
chromosome 7 in 49 of them, which suggest that these cancers are the ones most
likely to spread. This type of analysis would help doctors to decide what
further treatment to give to women after surgery for a primary breast cancer.


                              479 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           January 16, 1992, Thursday

SECTION: TITLE PAGE; Page 1

LENGTH: 502 words

HEADLINE: Experts urge go-ahead for gene therapy

BYLINE: By CELIA HALL and TOM WILKIE

BODY:

   AN EXPERT government committee will recommend today that the manipulation of
genes to cure and treat diseases should be allowed to go ahead in Britain.

   The independent committee, chaired by Sir Cecil Clothier, will say that there
is no ethical objection to gene therapy in which defective genes that cause
illnesses such as cystic fibrosis are replaced by normal genes. The Government
is expected to accept the recommendations.

   But the committee is emphasising that ''genetic modification'' should be
confined to non- reproductive cells and should not be carried out on human
reproductive cells or embryos, because too little is known of the effects of
passing on genetic modifications. The report will recommend that the therapy
should only be used to treat disease, and not to enhance normal characteristics
such as height or eye colour.

   One of the first applications of the new technology is expected to be in the
treatment of cystic fibrosis. At St Mary's Hospital medical school, in west
London, a group led by Professor Bob Williamson has been researching the
genetics of cystic fibrosis for more than ten years. However, the treatment of
patients by gene therapy is still several years away.

   The Clothier committee says that a non-statutory expert group should be
established to assist hospital and regional ethical committees in making
decisions about gene therapy projects.

   Since the therapy is so new they say that all projects should be regarded as
''research'' and thus be covered by existing ethical rules. These include
informed consent of the patient and approval by an ethical committee.

   Gene therapy describes a wide range of potential treatments in which
defective genes are replaced by normal copies. In the past four years, many
genes have been located, including ones that, when defective, result in cystic
fibrosis, muscular dystrophy, and Marfan's syndrome.

   Professor Sir David Weatherall, director of the Institute of Molecular
Medicine at Oxford University and a member of the Clothier committee, said
yesterday there were still many hurdles to clear.

   ''We have to be cautious, there is still a long way to go. The real
importance of the Clothier report is to give us a set of ethical guidelines in
advance of actual treatments becoming available.''

   Doctors in the United States have succeeded in treating a child with Severe
Combined Immune Deficiency by manipulating the genes in her defective white
blood cells.

   Professor Weatherall said: ''This kind of treatment is really a sexy form of
transfusion which needs to be repeated. It is palliative rather than curative, a
temporary treatment, rather like treating haemophilia.

   ''The real success will be to insert normal genes into cells which are
self-renewing, such as the cells that make blood cells in the bone marrow, so
that a lifetime's treatment, or only two or three in a lifetime, would be given.
No one has done this yet. There are bits of biology which we still don't
understand.''

   Background, page 2


                              480 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1992 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           January 16, 1992, Thursday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 2

LENGTH: 706 words

HEADLINE: Gene transplants offer hope for sufferers of inherited disorders ; Tom
Wilkie, Science Editor, looks at the prospects for a new way of treating cystic
fibrosis and other single-gene diseases

BYLINE: By TOM WILKIE, Science Editor

BODY:

   IN SEPTEMBER 1990, a four-year-old girl from Cleveland, Ohio, with a
dangerous flaw in her immune system, sat up in her hospital bed and chatted to
doctors as they gave her a simple transfusion. It was the world's first
successful gene transplant to treat disease.

   Last week, American and French researchers reported experiments in laboratory
animals that bring closer the prospects of gene transplants to treat cystic
fibrosis, the most common single- gene disease of Caucasians.

   The Cleveland girl suffered from a rare inherited defect, known as severe
combined immune deficiency (SCID), which crippled her immune system. Most
patients with the condition die in infancy from overwhelming infection.

   In one case, a boy in Texas spent his brief life inside a plastic bubble to
shield him from bacteria and viruses. But within months of the Cleveland girl's
''operation'', carried out at the US National Institutes of Health near
Washington, the girl was going skating and taking dancing lessons.

   Her body is unable to make a chemical, known as adenosine deaminase or ADA,
which is vital for the functioning of her immune system. A team of researchers
at the NIH, led by Dr Michael Blaese, French Anderson and Steven Rosenberg,
removed some of her white blood cells, known as T lymphocytes, and corrected the
defect by genetically engineering into the cells extra, normal copies of the ADA
gene to compensate for the one that was defective.

   Cystic fibrosis was an intractable condition until 1989, when the faulty gene
was identified. The gene contains the specification for a protein which controls
the flow of salt ions in and out of cells. In sufferers the protein is defective
with the result that their lungs clog with mucus, which provides a perfect
breeding ground for bacteria.

   In the days before antibiotics, sufferers often died from pulmonary
infections. Even today the average life expectancy is about 30 years.

   Last week, researchers led by Ronald Crystal at the NIH showed that they had
successfuly introduced a corrective cystic fibrosis gene into the lungs of
experimental rats. They took a virus related to the one which causes the common
cold, and genetically engineered it to insert the correct gene and to remove its
virulence. After the rats were given the virus by nasal spray, the cells of
their lungs took up the gene and started making the protein properly.

   Trials of this procedure in human volunteers are still some way off, but
neither it nor the ADA transplant represent final cures. White blood cells
eventually break down and are scavenged from the circulation.

   The Cleveland girl has to receive regular transfusions to keep her immune
system functioning properly - seven in the year after the first transplant. The
procedure resembles a high technology drug delivery system for getting ADA to
the right place in approximately the right quantities, more than a final
''cure'' for the condition. In a similar way, the cells lining the lungs of
cystic fibrosis sufferers have a limited life, so the therapy would have to be
repeated.

    An attempt at gene therapy carried out a decade earlier ended in failure and
controversy. Professor Martin Cline, of the University of California, Los
Angeles, tried to treat patients in Israel and Italy who were suffering from
thalassaemia - an inherited disorder of the blood which is the most prevalent
single-gene defect in the world.

   But Professor Cline departed from the agreed protocol for the gene therapy
and the federal government stopped funding his work. His patients were unharmed,
but they received no benefit from the procedure either. Proponents of gene
therapy in the US have moved cautiously since that incident.

   One question mark does hang over the long-term safety of such procedures.
Transplanted genes are inserted essentially at random within human DNA and the
procedure could inadvertently disrupt normally functioning genes, possibly
''switching on'' previously dormant cancer-causing genes.

   Since, for most of those who would be considered for gene therapy, the choice
is between almost certain death or the possible risk of cancer at some point in
the distant future, this is unlikely to be an important consideration.


                              481 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1991 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          December 19, 1991, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURE PAGE; Page 12

LENGTH: 3550 words

HEADLINE: The 1991 Reith Lectures: Our genetic future: the evolution of Utopia;
In his final lecture, Dr Steve Jones looks at the choices ahead as science steps
in to alter nature's course

BYLINE: By Dr STEVE JONES

BODY:

   In Paraguay there is an isolated village with an unusual name: Nueva Germania
- New Germany. Its inhabitants look quite different from their neighbours. Many
have blond hair and blue eyes. Their names are not Spanish, but are more likely
to be Schutte or Neumann. These people are the descendants of an experiment in
improving humanity.

   Their ancestors were chosen from Saxony in 1886 by Elizabeth Nietzsche -
sister of the philosopher - as particularly splendid specimens, selected for the
''German purity of their blood''. They were expected to found a community so
favoured in its genetic endowment that it would be the seed of a new race of
supermen. Elizabeth Nietzsche died in 1935. Hitler wept at her funeral. Today
the people of Nueva Germania are poor, inbred and diseased; their Utopia has
failed.

   Before the Second World War the idea that one can improve humanity by
meddling with genes was popular. It originated with the founder of my laboratory
at University College London, Francis Galton, Charles Darwin's cousin. Galton's
book Hereditary Genius marks the beginning of human genetics. He was interested
in distinguished people and found a tendency for ''genius'', as he called it,
cropped up again and again in the same family. This, he suggested, showed that
ability was inborn. Galton claimed that such families had fewer children than
most and became concerned about the quality of future generations. He founded
the science - if that is the right word - of eugenics, whose main aim was ''to
check the birth rate of the Unfit and improve the race by furthering the
productivity of the fit by early marriages of the best stock''.

   The eugenics movement had a spectacular career. Its proponents shared some
highly heritable attributes: wealth, education and social position. Much of its
agenda was the survival of the richest. Other eugenicists were on the left: they
felt that if we could plan economies, we could do the same with genes. There
were eugenics clubs with prizes for the fittest families; the name ''Eugene'' -
well-born - entered the English language; and, more seriously, medicine became
concerned about whether its duty to future generations outweighed the interests
of some of those alive at the time.

   Eugenics was taken seriously: 25,000 Americans were sterilised because they
might pass feeble-mindedness or criminality to future generations. One judge,
saying that ''three generations of imbeciles are enough'', compared
sterilisation with vaccination. The common good, he said, overrode individual
rights. Eugenics was destroyed by the Nazi experiment. In Hamburg, one person in
30 was sterilised; and those in charge estimated that one in five should have
been. Eugenics combined a touching concern about the unborn with a brutal
rejection of the rights of the living - a combination not unknown today.

   In this, my last lecture, I look at the genetics of the future; the
relationship between people and genes now that we have the tools to carry out
some kind of eugenics programme if we wish. I will also ask whether we can now
choose our own evolutionary path, or whether we may already have done so without
realising it.

   We now have answers to many of the genetics questions that obsessed the
eugenics movement. However, there has been an odd shift in attitude: modern
geneticists scarcely involve themselves with what their work implies for the
future of humanity. They feel responsible to people rather than to populations;
to individuals rather than to posterity. No serious scientist now has the
slightest interest in producing a genetically planned society. But the explosion
in genetics means that we are soon - like it or not - bound to be faced with
moral problems about whether we should make conscious decisions about human
evolution.

   These choices are not new. I will illustrate them with a very old piece of
genetic discrimination: prejudice against the genes carried on the chromosomes
that determine sex. Women have two X chromosomes, men an X and a much smaller Y.
This means that all eggs have an X chromosome, but that sperm are of two kinds,
X or Y. At fertilisation, both XY males and XX females are produced. Our
physical sex is as much a product of genes as is our blood group.

   The way we judge the value of these genes helps to explain how most people
make genetic decisions. Sometimes, Y chromosomes seem to be worth less than Xs.
When it comes to wars, murders and executions males are much more acceptable
victims than females. But the balance can shift. Many families express a
preference for sons, especially as a first-born; and some actually try to
achieve them.

   Genetics gives several ways to make the choice. One is to separate X and Y
sperm and to fertilise a woman only with the appropriate sperm. We can take a
single cell from the developing embryo - usually when there are only eight cells
altogether - and determine its sex. Only those of the right sex are implanted
into the mother.

   The Indian government recently shut down clinics that chose the sex of a baby
by looking at the chromosomes of the foetus. In India and elsewhere many
foetuses with two Xs were aborted. More than 2,000 pregnancies a year were ended
for this reason in Bombay alone. In Eskimo society 50 years ago there were twice
as many boys as girls, because girls were killed at birth or allowed to starve
when food was short. In parts of modern China, too, the one-child policy has
produced an excess of boys.

   All these methods interfere with our genes. Their acceptability varies; where
one draws the line depends on one's own social, political or religious
background. There are two absolutist positions: that any kind of interference
with reproduction is immoral and unacceptable, and that parents should have an
absolutely free choice as to whether to continue with any pregnancy. Different
societies take different stands on the issue. Britain, as in most Western
countries, is equivocal. Most people would, I imagine, see the possibility of
terminating a pregnancy just because it is the wrong sex as being ethically
unacceptable. Choosing X or Y sperm seems less of a problem.

   But choosing a child's sex can be much more than self-indulgence. Sometimes
it is a matter of life and death. Many serious inherited diseases are carried on
the X chromosome. In girls, an abnormal X is usually masked by a normal copy of
the same chromosome. Boys do not have this option, as they have only a single X.
For this reason, sex-linked abnormalities, as they are known, are much commoner
in boys than girls. They can be very distressing. Sex-linked muscular dystrophy,
for example, is a wasting disease that leads to weakness and death in a child's
teens or twenties. A couple who have had a son with muscular dystrophy can
scarcely be blamed for wanting to make sure that none of their future children
have it. They want to make a decision about biological quality, and few will
criticise them for doing so.

   Each year there are world-wide about 90 million births and 60 million induced
abortions. Many more pregnancies end without the woman knowing, often because
the foetus has a genetic defect. Genetic selection is hence a natural part of
reproduction. By diagnosing defective genes before birth we can now, if we wish,
shift the boundaries of the natural process of selective abortion to reduce the
number of genetically damaged children born and, to some extent, alter our
evolutionary future. Selective abortion raises passions; from those who feel all
foetuses are sacred, to others who consider that knowingly to pass on a badly
damaged gene is equivalent to child abuse.

   The new genetics offers other prospects for changing the genetic future.
Sometimes, treating inborn disease is simple. About 40 children per year in
Britain are born with phenylketonuria, an inability to digest a certain amino
acid. If they were not treated they would die young. But all that is needed for
a reasonably normal life is a diet that lacks the amino acid. Other treatments
are more complex, but work just as well - for example, injection of a
blood-clotting factor cures the symptoms of haemophilia. Sometimes, drastic
action is needed. The inherited disorder cystic fibrosis can be lethal because
of lung problems. A heart-lung transplant can help. This involves a risk, but
offers the chance of a reasonably normal life.

   These treatments deal only with the effects of genetic damage. Gene therapy
involves replacing a faulty gene. Copies made in the laboratory are inserted
into a living cell with the help of a virus. Cells in culture that lack the
enzyme missing in children with immune disease - those kept in a plastic bubble
to reduce the chance of infection - have been cured. In the past few months, one
child has been successfully treated with genetically engineered cells. In mice,
genes can be inserted into egg cells so that they are passed on to future
generations. Manipulation of sperm and egg in humans has never been tried, but
there is no great practical reason why it should not. Those with a disease and
their descendants would both be helped.

   To some, this work is the first step towards Frankenstein; but these fears
are exaggerated. Most treatments of genetic disease are not very different from
those in the rest of medicine. Surely no one worries about treating
phenylketonuria with a special diet or haemophilia with Factor VIII. And a
society that accepts a heart-lung transplant for a child with cystic fibrosis
cannot deny that child the right to have the symptoms treated at source with a
working gene.

   All that is different is the level of intervention - the gene itself rather
than what it produces. Everyone has rights to their own body, and can decide
whether or not to accept treatment. This applies to genes, too. Replacing a
damaged gene is not much different from replacing a damaged kidney, and the same
choices must be made.

   There are other problems in giving genetic advice. A search for carriers of
the sickle cell gene in the United States led to great bitterness in the black
community. Although most carriers are quite healthy, some states made screening
compulsory. Carriers were discriminated against in jobs and for insurance. There
were hints of eugenic attempts to improve the population rather than the health
of individuals. There can also be a subtle tyranny in genetic screening: the
tyranny of the normal, the pressure to produce an average child. In the US this
has led to demands for growth hormone to be given to children with a slight
genetic deficiency who grow up a few inches shorter than average and would once
have been accepted as normal.

   The biggest problem of modern genetics is one that we have scarcely come to
terms with: the ubiquity of genetic disease. In some places, the problem is
already obvious. Around the Mediterranean and in Africa there are many inherited
errors in red blood cells. A single copy of the error protects against malaria;
but a child born with two has severe anaemia. The treatment is blood
transfusion, which works but is expensive. In Cyprus, to treat all affected
children would soak up half the total health budget within 10 years. There are
already 250 million people who carry a single copy of one of these genes, and by
the year 2000 7 per cent of the world's population will be carriers. Barring a
medical breakthrough, no society will be able to afford to treat the millions of
anaemic children who will be born.

   Even in Britain there is plenty of inherited disease. About one child in 40
is born with a genetic problem of some kind, albeit a minor one. If we broaden
our definition of genetic diseases - as we should - to include those such as
cancer or heart disease that have an inherited component - two-thirds of us will
suffer from, and possibly die of, a genetic illness. The new technology is
making it possible to identify who carries what genes. Sometimes this will be
useful. People with one particular gene are almost certain to die at an early
age through severe breathing difficulties if they smoke. Another gene may
increase the chance of becoming an alcoholic. Yet another alters susceptibility
to industrial chemicals, so that those who have it could be advised to work
elsewhere. Such information is helpful. But universal genetic imperfection
brings problems of its own.

   In Britain, about one child in 2,000 or 3,000 is born with cystic fibrosis, a
serious disease that needs two copies of the damaged gene - one from each parent
- to show its effects. But two million Britons carry a single copy, so in about
one married couple in 10 one of the partners has the gene.

   There is now a cheap and easy test that identifies about 80 per cent of
carriers. A mass screening of 1,000 people attending a family planning clinic in
Hertfordshire was tried recently. Several carriers were found. There is some
controversy about this approach. It misses some carriers and may cause anxiety
and distress. There are also unpleasant reminders of the past. In a recent
survey, not one German medical geneticist would accept such a screening
programme, even if it was absolutely reliable and the results were kept private.

   Genetic screening should soon be available for many defective genes -
possibly a hundred or so, including some of the most common, in the next five
years. This leads to new controversies. Where should we draw the line on our
assessments of genetic quality? And what about diseases for which no treatment
is yet available, but which might be treatable by the time the child is in
danger of dying? In muscular dystrophy, for example, we are beginning to
understand what has gone wrong in the cell machinery, and it is not impossible
that treatment may be available within the next 20 years or so.

   All this illustrates the problems we will soon have to face. The most
immediate is the dilemma of information: genetics may soon be able to tell many
of us how we are likely to die. Huntington's disease is a disease of the nervous
system with an unusual pattern of inheritance. Those with a single copy of the
gene will show its effects, but often not until middle age, leaving them in
uncertainty for many years. If a parent has been afflicted, there is about a 50
per cent chance of being affected oneself. Many people choose to have their
pregnancies tested even if they themselves have no symptoms. Should the foetus
be carrying the gene, then one of the parents must carry it and may soon become
ill. This knowledge is hard to bear, and many at risk ask that they should not
be told.

    Huntington's disease illustrates the difficulty of knowing about our genes.
There are so many different genetic diseases that each of us is likely to be a
carrier of two or more damaged genes that would kill us if we had two copies of
the same one. Do we really want to know that we may die of a disease about which
we can do nothing? Will this help us choose our partners, or decide on having
children? The most difficult choice that genetics will face us with is that of
being aware of our own - or our children's - fate.

   At least genetics has put paid to the idea of human perfectibility - that
preventing a few people from having children will purify the human race and lead
to a eugenic Utopia. We all have skeletons in our genetic cupboard, and the
chances of our influencing human evolution by getting rid of a few of them seems
remote.

   There is another, more important, reason for dismissing eugenics concerns
about the future. As I have said in previous lectures, we have interfered with
our genetic heritage throughout history, usually quite unknowingly. I will end
these lectures by speculating about just what we may be doing to our evolution
without realising it.

   Some changes are obvious. The chance of surviving infection often depends on
genes. Once a disease has disappeared the gene's fate changes. Sardinians carry
inherited anaemias because the gene once protected against malaria - which has
now gone from the island. Diabetes is an illness of civilisation, of a fatty
diet with lots of sugar. People with certain genes are more likely to suffer
from it, perhaps because the genes were advantageous when starvation was
followed by glut; only with a constant supply of food did they become dangerous.
The genetic future depends on an environmental change; a possibility that
eugenics never considered.

   Some environmental changes - such as nuclear power stations and tobacco -
increase the mutation rate. Others, such as a diet rich in fresh fruit and
vegetables, decrease it. Older parents have more mutations. All this will change
the genes of future generations, but probably in small, obscure and
unpredictable ways.

   Perhaps the biggest, simplest and most predictable genetic change in modern
society has to do with the geography of mating. For most of history, people more
or less had to marry the girl, or boy, next door, because they had no choice.
Society was based on small bands or isolated villages; and marriages were within
the group. In many places, populations were stable and quite inbred. Almost
nobody moved. We can see this in the genes of some American Indians, drowned in
a peat bog in Florida. The DNA in the preserved brains of bodies drowned a
thousand years apart shows that their genes are almost the same: there was
little immigration, and the Indians had no choice but to marry their relatives.

   There are constraints on how close a relative one may marry: brother with
sister is universally forbidden, but even first-cousin marriages may be illegal,
as in most US states in the nineteenth century. Part of this arises from a fear
that their children may be less healthy. There is an increase in mortality and a
slowing in the development of children born to close relatives. Cousins share a
grandparent in common; if that grandparent carried a harmful gene, the children
of cousins are more likely than average to inherit two copies of it. There is a
noticeable increase in childhood illness in the children of these matings.

   Wherever we look, one thing is clear: there has been a drop in inbreeding in
human populations in the recent evolutionary past. An increase in mating outside
the group is one of the most dramatic changes in recent evolutionary history.
Its effects may outweigh anything that medical genetics is likely to be able to
do.

   You can probably see the same process at work in your own family. One way of
estimating how related a couple might be is to ask how far apart they were born.
If they come from the same village, they may well be relatives, but if they were
born hundred of miles apart this is much less likely. For most people, the
distance between the places where they and their partner were born is greater
than that separating their parents' birthplaces. The same is true when we
compare our parents with our grandparents. In nineteenth-century Oxfordshire the
distance between the birthplaces of marriage partners was less than 10 miles; in
the US today it is several hundred, so most US couples are completely unrelated.
Increased movement means that the world's populations are beginning to mix
together.

   It will take a long time before the mixing is complete - as much as 500 years
to even out the genetic differences between England and Scotland, and perhaps
even longer to get rid of their cultural difference. But increased movement will
certainly have a genetic effect. No longer will large numbers of children be
born who have two copies of defective genes because their parents are related.
Consider a mating between an African slave and a white slave-owner in
nineteenth-century America. Each has a chance of carrying one copy of certain
defective genes. The commonest damaged gene in whites is the one for cystic
fibrosis, in blacks that for sickle-cell anaemia. Only if a child inherits two
copies of either of these will it suffer genetic damage. Because cystic fibrosis
is almost unknown in Africans and sickle cell in whites, the child of a
black-white mating is safe from both diseases.

   This change in human mating patterns means that we may have entered a period
of genetic well-being; many harmful genes will be partnered by a normal copy
which masks their effects.

   Subtle changes such as these are usually forgotten by the likes of Elizabeth
Nietzsche who are concerned with the future of humanity. Fictional Utopias
nearly all seem to evolve in roughly the same way. A master race imposes its
will on lesser breeds, only to meet its doom because of its own biological
failings. But most novels of the future ignore one of the few predictable things
about evolution: its unpredictability. Evolution always builds on its
weaknesses, rather than making a fresh start. It is this lack of a grand plan
that has made life so adaptable; and humans - the greatest opportunists of all -
so successful.

   The biology of the future will not be very different from that of the past.
Economic advance and medical progress may even mean that humans are almost at
the end of their evolutionary road, that we are as near to our biological Utopia
as we are ever likely to get. But remember the dinosaurs!

   This is an edited version of yesterday's lecture on Radio 4. It will be
repeated on Saturday on Radio 3 at 8.55pm.


                              485 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1991 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           December 3, 1991, Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH PAGE; Page 15

LENGTH: 1166 words

HEADLINE: Health: The lab that can save your skin; Simon Denison reports on how
'man-made' grafts could solve the problem of transplant rejection and prevent
hundreds of deaths from burns each year

BYLINE: By SIMON DENISON

BODY:

   Human skin grown in the laboratory is being used successfully on patients
requiring skin grafts - without the need for immunosuppressive drugs. The ''man-
made'' skin is grown from a few donor cells - one square centimetre of donor
skin could produce enough to cover a whole human body.

   The surgery appears to overturn a fundamental principle of transplant
medicine: that cells from one body will always be rejected by another, unless
the immune system is suppressed. Full details of the successful grafts have yet
to be published, and doctors will present the results of their first attempts to
a meeting of the British Association of Plastic Surgeons in London this week. If
they are verified, the results could revolutionise medical practice and save the
lives of hundreds of burns patients every year.

   More than 10,000 patients with burns are admitted to British hospitals
annually, and two thirds need skin grafts. But doctors have always been faced
with an intractable problem: where to find enough new skin to cover the wounds
without further damaging the patient.

   At present, doctors usually have to take skin from unburnt parts of the
patient's own body, but the technique is far from ideal. It doubles the size of
the wounds - increasing the risk of infection and the loss of protein and fluids
- and doubles the extent of scarring.

   In some cases, doctors have been able to avoid this by transplanting skin
from corpses. But demand exceeds supply by seven to one. And even when donor
skin is available, the patient has to be kept on immunosuppressive drugs, with
the risk of developing other life- threatening infections and diseases.

   The ''man-made'' skin, which has been developed by scientists at the Imperial
Cancer Research Fund, has already been grafted on to patients who wanted tattoos
removed. Doctors say they are confident they can use it on patients with burns.

   Grafts were transplanted on to the tattoo patients without the use of
immunosuppressive drugs, and appear not to have been rejected. The skin covering
has remained in place, and the edges of the grafts have healed over.

   Jagdeep Nanchahal, a plastic surgeon at the St Lawrence Hospital in Chepstow,
Gwent, who was responsible for grafting the tattoo patients, says the clinical
benefit of not using immunosuppressive drugs for a burns patient is enormous. A
burn wound is easily infected, he says, and by lowering the body's defences
against infection, immunosuppressive drugs greatly increase the chance of death
through septicaemia (blood poisoning).

   The scientists and plastic surgeons developing the skin cannot explain why
immunosuppressive drugs are not needed, but their work is generating much
interest in the medical world.

   Dr Colin Rayner, a plastic surgeon and director-designate of clinical
research at Britain's largest burns unit, at the Birmingham Accident Hospital,
has described it as ''equivalent to the splitting of the atom, or Einstein's
theory of relativity''. Dr Rayner, who is independent of the research team, says
that, if verified, the development would transform ''beyond recognition'' the
care of burns patients and reconstructive surgery. ''And it would have cracked
one of the remaining immunological problems remaining in medical practice.''

   The skin is grown by first taking a sample from a donor which includes both
the upper layer (epidermis) and inner layer (dermis). A tiny sample can be grown
into a sheet 10,000 times its original size. The epidermis and dermis are split
and grown separately. They are broken down into their component cells by enzymes
that eat away the glue (collagen) that binds the cells together. Hair follicles,
sweat glands and blood vessels are separated out and discarded.

   The skin cells are then grown in flasks containing nutrients that allow them
to reproduce naturally. It takes about four weeks to grow the skin to 2,000
times its original size. At this stage, the cells look like wet tissue paper.

   Finally, the dermal and epidermal sheets are bound together with a glutinous
solution derived from animal collagen. The solution sets, to leave jelly-like
pads of skin - kept down to the manageable size of a human hand - which the
plastic surgeon can attach to the patient using tissue glue or staples.

   This is the first time that full-thickness skin that can be used on patients
has been grown. In the early Eighties American scientists grew sheets of
epidermis, but they were unusable on their own. Without the support of a layer
of dermis, the epidermal skin contracted to a third of its size, distorting the
patient's joints.

   Once the skin pads have been grown, Mr Nanchahal says, they can be stored
indefinitely under liquid nitrogen. This opens the prospect of ''skin banks''
providing new skin for burns patients across the country. Many of the 350- 400
burns patients who die in hospitals each year could be saved.

   Dr Rayner says that, compared with hearts and livers, skin is an infinitely
more complex and difficult substance to transplant from one body to another.
''Until now, no one has got anywhere near doing it except in highly
immunosuppressed patients. So to transfer something in the way Mr Nanchahal has,
on to a patient who is otherwise completely well, and to get a complete take,
really is extremely exciting.''

   There are several theories to explain how the grafts succeed without
immunosuppressive drugs. One is that the cells actually are rejected over time,
but simultaneously stimulate the growth of the patient's own skin, so that they
act like a sophisticated bandage.

   But Dr Robin Dover, one of the scientists involved, says there is some
evidence that the donor cells themselves remain. In order to test this, some
female patients had skin grafts made from male skin, which contains the
Y-chromosome, not present in female skin.

   According to the traditional theory of immunology, all the cells containing
Y-chromosomes should have been rejected as alien within a week. But Dr Dover has
detected the Y-chromosome remaining in the women's grafts after a month, and in
one case possibly after a much longer period.

   Dr Dover says one explanation of why the donor cells are staying behind is
that the cells most easily recognised as alien - such as pigment and hair
follicles - are removed at the start.

   There may also be a connection with the fact that the skin, as it is being
grown, is frozen and thawed several times. There is some evidence that this
process reduces the surface antigens - proteins that trigger the immune system
to produce antibodies which attack donor tissue.

   If the scientists really have, as they believe, discovered a way to
transplant skin without having to use immunosuppressive drugs, their discovery
will open up several new paths in medicine, including gene therapy, according to
Dr Dover.

   ''We could put desirable genes into our skin grafts to correct genetic
disorders. We could include growth hormone, for example. The possibilities are
almost endless.''


                              486 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1991 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            October 7, 1991, Monday

SECTION: SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PAGE; Page 15

LENGTH: 942 words

HEADLINE: Making viruses self-destruct within a cell; John Newell looks at
genetic research that could provide protection against Aids

BYLINE: By JOHN NEWELL

BODY:

   DRUGS AND antibiotics have largely brought disease caused by bacteria and
parasites under control, at least in the West. But few drugs are available to
treat viral diseases such as Aids, the common cold or hepatitis. The
effectiveness of what drugs there are is limited, because viruses infiltrate the
body's cells, making it impossible to kill the one without damaging the other.

   However, genetic engineering research by Dr Georges Natsoulis and Dr Jef
Boeke of the Department of Molecular Biology at Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore may make it possible to attack viruses inside human cells without
damaging the cells themselves. But this development, promising as it is,
threatens to reopen the controversy about inserting ''foreign'' genes into human
beings in such a way that the genes are passed on from one generation to the
next.

   Today doctors, scientists and genetic engineers are even more strongly
opposed to such ''germ- line gene therapy'' than is the lay public. In the
United States, experiments have already started in which ''intact'' genes are
inserted into the body cells of people born with an inherited genetic defect.
Other research involves inserting normal genes into cancer cells whose genetic
control mechanism has got out of kilter.

   Because the effect of this ''somatic gene therapy'' is confined to the body
of the patient who has received the new genes, few people see any difference
between transplanting genes in this way and transplanting a lung or kidney. But
it is regarded as extremely unethical to tamper with the genes of generations
unborn.

   The subtle technique developed by Drs Natsoulis and Boeke provides cells with
defences that make it impossible for a virus to replicate. A virus usually
operates by insinuating its own genetic material into that of its host cell and
so hi-jacking the cell's production machinery to make new copies of the virus.
But in cells with the defences provided by the researchers, as soon as the virus
begins to make new virus particles, they destroy themselves, because the cell
introduces destructive chemicals - enzymes - into them.

   The cells are defended by synthetic genes that contain the recipe for a
protein making up part of the virus's outer coating as well as the recipe for an
enzyme that breaks up DNA. When a virus takes over control of the cell and
orders it to make more virus particles, those orders also go to the hybrid gene.
A virus consists of little more than a bundle of viral genes protected by the
outer coating. But if just one of the molecules in that outer coat is produced
by the hybrid gene, then a DNA-dissolving enzyme will also be attached, pointing
down into the inside of the virus. The enzyme will break up the genes so that
the virus becomes unable to spread infection into other cells.

   The technique has been tested on particles found in yeast which, although
technically not viruses, behave in a similar fashion and have a similar
structure. In the first trials, the synthetic genes have proved 99 per cent
effective in stopping the replication of the particles. The scientists have
shown that it is possible to select gene-dissolving enzymes that will work only
inside virus particles, or will only attack viral genes. So this protective
therapy will not damage the genes of the cells it is defending.

   Drs Natsoulis and Boeke believe that HIV, the virus that causes Aids, is an
ideal target for this kind of therapy. The virus infects a particular type of
white blood cell, known as a T-cell. If their research bears fruit, it may be
possible to insert protective genes into the bone marrow of people infected with
HIV so that as new T-cells are formed from bone marrow cells, they would contain
protective genes and would prevent any further spread of HIV. However, there is
a wide gulf between yeast and humans, so such clinical applications of the
technique are a long way off.

   But, says Dr Boeke: ''There are other applications much less far down the
road. It is possible that we could build transgenic animals with protective
genes added to very early embryos so that the animals that grew from those
embryos and all their descendants would have the protective genes in every cell
of their bodies. This could create herds of farm animals made naturally
resistant to any chosen virus.''

   Completely virus-resistant cows or sheep could be created in this way and
they could be made resistant to more than one virus by adding extra genes. As
the efficiency and safety of such techniques are demonstrated on animals over
repeated generations, there may be a growing demand for them to be made
available for humans, too. This would require a big swing towards the idea of
inserting genes into germ-line cells. Drs Natsoulis and Boeke emphatically deny
any such intentions.

   But Baroness Mary Warnock, chairman of the Government's committee of inquiry
into human fertilisation, said at a recent London conference on human gene
mapping that it may not always be right to ban germ-line gene therapy
absolutely. If a manifest benefit such as a cure for Aids was going to flow from
it, then she believes that it could be justifiable to insert genes into
humanity's future generations. But Baroness Warnock is emphatic that such issues
should be settled through legislation passed by the governments of individual
nations. The techniques now being developed in Baltimore imply that such
possibilities may require consideration sooner rather than later.

   - The author is science and medicine editor for the BBC World Service and
author of 'Playing God', a book on genetic engineering published by Broadside
Books on 28 October.


                              488 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1991 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                              July 1, 1991, Monday

SECTION: SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PAGE; Page 17

LENGTH: 634 words

HEADLINE: Science and Technology: Genes to line lungs

BYLINE: By JOHN NEWELL

BODY:

   HUMAN genes have been transferred directly into the lungs of laboratory
animals, using a virus made harmless by genetic engineering. This paves the way
for the treatment of incurable and potentially fatal conditions such as cystic
fibrosis and severe emphysema using gene therapy.

   The above conditions are caused by gene defects. In the past two or three
years, the genes involved have been identified, making it possible to isolate
and multiply them in the laboratory. Now the aim is to find ways of treating the
conditions by implanting the normal versions of defective genes into the part of
the body affected.

   In the case of cystic fibrosis and emphysema, this is the lung. Mutations of
the cystic fibrosis gene cause abnormalities in the way the cells lining the
lung, and also the pancreas and the gastrointestinal tract, are able to move
minerals, particularly chloride, from inside to outside the cell. As a result,
the lungs of children with cystic fibrosis become clogged with thick mucus; this
provides a breeding ground for infection, leading to inflammation and
respiratory insufficiency.

   In emphysema the lung is damaged by failure to produce a protein that
normally protects the lung against damage by corrosive enzymes. This protein is
called alpha-one-antitrypsin.

   A team of researchers at the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute at
Bethesda, Maryland, led by Ronald Crystal, has been trying to find a way to
deliver intact genes to the lungs of those suffering from cystic fibrosis or
emphysema, to compensate for missing or damaged genes. As Dr Crystal puts it:
''The lung is very convoluted, not a place where you could easily take out cells
that line the lung, do something to them in the test-tube and put them back. So
we have to do something directly inside the lung.''

   The strategy adopted was to take advantage of the ''adenovirus'' - a virus
originally found in the adenoids. It is one of the causes of the common cold and
sore throats and infects lung cells. The task Dr Crystal and his co-workers
faced was to engineer the virus so it would go into the cells but cause no harm.
What Dr Crystal did was remove the harmful part of the virus and, in place of
that genetic information, insert genes that would direct the synthesis of the
deficient protein.

   Dr Crystal has shown that the cells of mouse lungs infected with such viruses
produce the proteins that are deficient in emphysema and cystic fibrosis. So how
far are we now from human gene therapy for these conditions? Dr Crystal says
there is no technical problem in using the same technique to treat humans. The
problem lies in showing that the technique is safe. Other forms of gene therapy
now coming into use or under development involve taking human cells outside the
body, inserting genes into them and putting them back again; his goes a step
further, by putting an engineered virus directly into humans. That means doctors
will have to ensure that the altered adenovirus and the extra gene it carries
will not have some unpredictable effect, such as triggering oncogenes
(cancer-causing genes), in the cells it infects. This will take time.

   Even a treatment with possible risks can be better than none at all, the
prospect some with cystic fibrosis or emphysema face. Such patients will be the
first to try the treatment, but there is a good chance larger numbers will use
it before the end of the century.

   Another idea is to use adenoviruses with added genes to carry genes into
liver cells, to treat genetic diseases. Yet another to use the virus to get
added genes into the walls of arteries. Such genes could cause the cells
containing them to produce substances such as those that prevent dangerous blood
clotting.

   The author is editor, science and medicine, BBC World Services.


                              489 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1991 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             June 21, 1991, Friday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 2

LENGTH: 187 words

HEADLINE: Aids researchers 'immunise' blood

BODY:

   BLOOD CELLS that have been ''immunised'' by a type of gene therapy can resist
infection by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), scientists reported this
week at the Seventh International Conference on Aids in Florence, writes Sharon
Kingman.

   This raises the possibility that people infected with HIV could one day have
their white blood cells periodically treated to protect them. The number of
these cells declines in Aids, leaving the body with little or no protection
against infection.

   Researchers at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, Massachusetts,
took HIV, stripped out its genes, and inserted in their place another gene they
had made. This left them with a virus that looked like HIV but could not
reproduce.

   This ghostly version of HIV infected the same blood cells as HIV but inserted
the engineered gene into their DNA.

   This gene makes a chemical that blocks the reproduction of HIV. When the
scientists added live infectious HIV to the culture of genetically engineered
cells, they found that the gene did indeed protect the cells from infection.

   Aids researchers 'immunise' blood


                              491 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1991 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 8, 1991, Monday

SECTION: SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PAGE; Page 15

LENGTH: 1517 words

HEADLINE: After 30 years, space seems as big as ever; History has not lived up
to the promise of Yuri Gagarin's flight, says David Whitehouse

BYLINE: By DAVID WHITEHOUSE

BODY:

   IT WAS April 1961, Kennedy's spring. Cultured, articulate, young, President
John F Kennedy and his wife were the darlings of Washington at the dawn of a
liberal age.

   But in the first days of that bright April, Kennedy knew the honeymoon would
be short. A month previously his intelligence service had told him that the
Soviet Union would be first to launch a man into space - not a sub- orbital hop
like that planned for Alan Shepard in May, but an orbit around the world. On 12
April, Kennedy was told that a Soviet rocket was being prepared on the launch
pad at Baikonur, and that it was manned. That night his press secretary prepared
a statement. Kennedy went to bed, leaving instructions that he should not be
woken - he would hear the news in the morning.

   On the other side of the world, Alexei Ivanov, the chief designer of the
Vostok capsule, did not sleep a wink. He was in and out of the capsule, checking
this, adjusting that. At sunrise an elderly woman made her way to the wooden hut
that was her home. The night before, it had been taken over by doctors. Inside,
two young men - one called Titov, the other Gagarin - were being woken. She
brought with her a bunch of wild yellow tulips for Gagarin; he reminded her of
her son, also a pilot, who had been killed in the war.

   Gagarin had been in training as a cosmonaut for just one year and 29 days,
and had known he would be the first man in space for only two days. As he donned
his suit he joked with the chief designer and force behind the Soviet space
effort, Sergei Korolev. ''Just wait,'' said the latter. ''In five years' time
there will be trade union- subsidised flights into space.'' A wave and an
embrace on the gantry, and then into the Vostok capsule.

   At 1:07 Washington time on 12 April, US radar detected a launch from
Baikonur. Fifteen minutes later White House officials knew. At 5:30 Radio Moscow
announced the news, and Gagarin's name was on everyone's lips. He was promoted
to Major during the flight. He had nothing to do; the Vostok flight was
automatic. For years the Soviet Union lied about the landing, saying Gagarin
touched down in the capsule. In reality, he parachuted clear at an altitude of
10,000 metres.

   President Kennedy held a press conference later that day. What he said
revealed a lot about the attitude of the US government at the time. The nation
would not try to match the Soviet Union's achievements in space, but on Earth,
by choosing ''other areas where we can be first and which will bring more
long-range benefits to mankind''.

   Yet the space race touched a deep fear in US society about the potential
behind the iron curtain. The next day The Washington Post called for wartime
mobilisation to beat the Soviet Union. Some Third World countries were saying
Moscow's success in space pointed to the superiority of the communist system.
Kennedy, the consummate politician, read the mood of the nation.

   Nasa had begun to contemplate a manned mission to the Moon in 1959, about the
same time as similar ideas were being raised in the Soviet Union. At first Nasa
officials played down the lunar landing, fearing it would be regarded as too
ambitious, and would distract from shorter-term goals. Privately, however, it
occupied a lot of Kennedy's time. He did not accept the challenge willingly, but
faced with the Soviet Union's apparent superiority, he had three options: quit,
remain in second place or do something dramatic.

   Kennedy knew more defeats lay ahead. The advantage the Soviet Union had in
building large rockets ensured it would be first to launch a two- or three-man
crew, and possibly build a space station. Kennedy needed something spectacular.
Gagarin was not Kennedy's only crisis that mid-April weekend. The US budget
deficit was expected to exceed $ 3bn, and poised for an assault on Fidel
Castro's Cuba was a US-supported brigade of Cuban soldiers. They planned to land
at a place called the Bay of Pigs.

   Some say the humiliation suffered by the US in that fiasco spurred Kennedy to
try to retrieve the nation's pride through the lunar programme. Alan Shepard
became the first American in space on the morning of 5 May. With only 15 mins
and 22 secs of manned spaceflight experience successfully undertaken, Kennedy
committed America to the Moon: ''. . . before this decade is out. To land a man
on the Moon and return him safely to the Earth''.

   It was a gamble, but many at Nasa said they could do it; some were talking
about a landing in 1967. Although their plans were to change radically, eight
years and eight weeks after Kennedy's speech, they made it. Man landed on the
Moon.

   The Soviet Union also had plans to go to the Moon and, at the time of
Kennedy's speech, had every right to expect it would be first. But rivalry
between design bureaux, political interference and diktat, and the death of
Korolev in 1966 sent the Soviet lunar effort into a chaotic tailspin from which
it took years to recover.

   History will endow the Apollo project with the significance of the Pyramids.
But it was a finite ambition: once man had walked upon the Moon, there seemed
little else to do. The last three planned lunar landings, to many the most
significant, were cancelled. The space programme became politically orphaned
and, with its budget slashed, Nasa was forced to choose between its two big
projects: the space station, Skylab, or the space shuttle. And since there was
no sense in having a station with no way to reach it, the development of a US
space station was put on ice for 20 years, and for a long time no American went
into space.

   It is also 10 years since the first shuttle flight. It is now clear that the
shuttle will never do what the misty-eyed public relations officials (and Nasa's
senior management) said it would. The fleet is still liable to be grounded
because of this or that problem. Gone is the talk of 50 flights a year; there
are 10 at most.

   Meanwhile, Soviet space crews have become experts at living and working on
the space stations, sometimes spending more than a year away from Earth. Space
is a vital aspect of the Soviet economy, but it is unmanned space: an area as
vast as the Soviet Union relies on communications satellites. And the question
being raised ever more loudly is: who needs men in space when there is no food
in the shops? I agree with that sentiment. In a command economy space can
provide military and national prestige. In a market economy it must argue its
case, accept its defeats and take its place in line with other sectors. There
are things more important.

   So where do we stand now, 30 years after the first manned flight, 10 years
after the first shuttle flight? In retrospect, it was a mistake to shut down the
Saturn V/Skylab production lines. The short-lived Skylab space station of the
early Seventies could have blossomed into something far more impressive than the
space station Freedom being designed 20 years later. The shuttle would then have
been built to be compatible with Skylab, instead of the other way round, as is
the case now.

   In the Soviet Union manned space flight is changing. Political support for it
is dwindling and many officials are unhappy about the recent trend of selling
passenger seats. The Soviet space shuttle, technologically far inferior to the
US version, has flown only once, in an unmanned flight in 1989. It was expected
to make another such flight later this year to dock with the Mir space station,
but it now seems it will not. The first manned mission was once scheduled for
next year but now will not take place before 1993, possibly later. Such an
expensive and complicated project cannot survive with this kind of flight rate.
It is ripe for cancellation.

   The Soviet Union's super booster, Energia, also has its problems. With the
ability to place into orbit cargoes of more than 100 tons, it compares most
closely to the long-dead US Saturn V that took the Americans to the Moon. But it
has flown only once, as there are no large cargoes available to justify its
cost. Even the future of the replacement for the Mir space station is in doubt.
The Soviet Union may opt for a large platform in space that will only
occasionally be visited by cosmonauts.

   The United States will go back to the Moon and on to Mars, and may develop
nuclear propulsion to do so. But the projected launch date for the two- to
three-year mission to Mars is 2015. Venturing beyond the Moon takes a more
mature technology, requiring longer development times, and money is scarce.

   Are we at the dawn of the extraterrestrial century? Perhaps. I am excited by
the prospect of the Moonbase or the mission to Mars. But I would regard a cure
for cancer, the discovery of what causes cot death, effective treatments for
Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases and the development of gene therapy as
being of more use to more people. Times change, perspectives alter. The first
footprint on Mars will be justified only if we have done these things, and more.

   - The author, a former space scientist who has worked on manned space
projects, is the BBC's science correspondent.


                              494 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1991 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          February 20, 1991, Wednesday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 11

LENGTH: 436 words

HEADLINE: The American Association for the Advancement of Science: Gene
transplant therapy in girl 'achieving success'

BYLINE: From TOM WILKIE in Washington

BODY:

   THE FIRST attempt to treat a disease by means of a human gene transplant
looks as if it is achieving success, the annual meeting of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science was told yesterday.

   The human gene therapy trial began last September with the infusion of
genetically engineered cells into a four-year-old girl suffering from a genetic
deficiency of her immune system. The transfusions appear to have had the
intended effect of boosting her resistance to disease, according to Dr Michael
Blaese, of the US National Institutes of Health.

   Dr Blaese said that if the procedure proved satisfactory, gene therapy might
be used to treat Aids ''within the next few years''.

   A second gene therapy trial started three weeks ago, this time to try to
combat severe forms of cancer incurable by other methods. It is too early to say
whether this trial is achieving success.

   The girl being treated by Dr Blaese is suffering from ADA deficiency, the
cause of about one quarter of all the cases of severe combined immunodeficiency
- a condition in which the sufferer's defences against disease almost completely
fail to operate. Most patients die in infancy - usually around the age of two -
from overwhelming infection.

   ADA deficiency can be tackled by bone-marrow transplants, but only if the
patient has a compatible sibling to act as donor. It is also possible to give
patients doses of the enzyme ADA that they lack, but, according to Dr Blaese,
the beneficial effect often wears off after a year or so.

   Dr Blaese took white blood cells, known as T lymphocytes, from the patient -
these cells form part of the immune system's response to infection. He corrected
the genetic defect in the cells by inserting a normal copy of the ADA gene to
compensate for the one that was defective.

   It is not possible to insert a gene directly into a T cell so it was inserted
into a type of virus and the virus used to infect the T cells that had been
extracted from the patient. Although it may sound paradoxical to try to treat an
immune disorder by deliberately creating a viral infection - albeit not of the
patient but of cells being cultured in the laboratory - the virus inserted the
correct ADA gene into the cells without doing any other damage.

   Dr Blaese and his colleagues then grew the genetically modified cells in
culture and transfused the cultured, gene-corrected cells back into the patient.
The transfused cells appear to have remained active in the patient's body for up
to 40 days after transfusion, he said, and they have been correctly producing
the ADA previously lacking.


                              496 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1990 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           December 10, 1990, Monday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 2

LENGTH: 324 words

HEADLINE: Leukaemia linked to genetic abnormality

BYLINE: By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent

BODY:

   A GENETIC abnormality may be responsible for the commonest form of leukaemia
in middle-aged people, according to research carried out at the Royal Victoria
Hospital in Bournemouth.

   Doctors have shown that up to 20 per cent of their patients suffering from
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia do not have the the retinoblastoma (RB) gene.
There are 1,200 new cases of this form of leukaemia a year affecting people over
50 and the cause is unknown.

   The hospital treats a high proportion of older patients because of
Bournemouth's popularity as a retirement town. Doctors see between 40 and 50 new
cases of this leukaemia each year, according to Dr David Oscier, a consultant
haematologist.

   The RB gene, which is present in all cells of the body on chromosome 13, is
important in controlling cell division. When it is absent or defective, cell
growth is uncontrolled and a cancer develops. The gene is linked to several
cancers, but this is the first time that it has been linked to a leukaemia.

   In chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, white blood cells called lymphocytes, a
vital part of the immune system, occur in far greater numbers than normal
causing a range of symptoms. The disease progresses slowly and most patients are
still alive five years after diagnosis, but death often results from infections.

   Dr Oscier said yesterday that the genetic abnormality alone was unlikely to
be the sole cause of the disorder. ''It is possible that proteins produced by a
virus could bind on to the RB gene and deactivate it.''

   The findings are unlikely to have any immediate impact on the treatment of
leukaemia, although scientists are hopeful of developing ''gene therapy''. But
they represent further progress in establishing the genetic orgins of cancer.
Within the last 12 months, genetic defects have been linked to lung, breast and
bowel cancer.

   It is thought that external factors, such as cigarette smoke, may trigger a
defect.


                              497 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1990 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                          November 21, 1990, Wednesday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 8

LENGTH: 274 words

HEADLINE: Aerosols may soon be used to treat cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: By LIZ HUNT

BODY:

   GENE THERAPY for cystic fibrosis sufferers - in the form of an aerosol spray
- should be available within five to 10 years, a leading doctor said yesterday,
writes Liz Hunt.

   The aerosol would deliver a normal form of the gene that is defective in the
disease to specific cells in the lungs. Dr Duncan Geddes, a consultant physician
at the Brompton Hospital, London, said that the gene would be incorporated in
the genetic material of the lung cells and could overcome the effects of the
abnormal gene.

   Dr Geddes said: ''Research has shown that we can get enough of this gene into
cells in the respiratory tract of animals and we know that it can correct the
defect. The next stage is to show that we can do the same thing safely in humans
and that should be possible in the next five years.''

   Dr Geddes said that the gene could be introduced in the form of a harmless
virus.

   Cystic fibrosis is the most common inherited disease, affecting one in 2,500
babies. In sufferers, glands throughout the body produce abnormal amounts of
mucus, particularly in the lungs, leading to infections and destruction of lung
tissue. The defective gene was identified in 1989, opening up the possibility of
prenatal screening and gene therapy.

   A report from the Royal College of Physicians published yesterday says that
advances in paediatric care mean that most sufferers, who used to die in their
20s, are surviving to their forties. There is an increasing need for specialist
centres to treat adults, the report says.

   It recommends that the NHS should bear the costs of treatment with funds
allocated direct to regional health authorities.


                              501 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1990 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 28, 1990, Tuesday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 3

LENGTH: 334 words

HEADLINE: Breakthrough in gene defects gives hope to children

BYLINE: By ANN LLOYD and CELIA HALL

BODY:

   THE GENE responsible for Hunter's disease, a rare degenerative condition few
children survive, has been isolated by a doctor who will make his discovery
public at an international meeting in Manchester at the weekend.

   Dr John Hopwood, from Adelaide Children's Hospital, Australia, is also
expected to announce that he has identified the gene responsible for Hurler's
syndrome - once called gargoylism because it causes facial distortions.

   Both are single gene defects arising in about one in every 100,000 births.
Mental retardation and physical changes result. The breakthrough offers the
opportunity in the near future for accurate screening of embryos in affected
families.

   Two British boys with Hunter's disease gave Dr Hopwood the final proof of the
defect. DNA was amplified from their blood by Dr Edmond Wraith, consultant
paediatrician at Royal Manchester Children's Hospital. It showed Dr Hopwood a
complete deletion of the ''Hunter gene'' he had targeted after 10 years' work.

   Dr Wraith said that in two- thirds of cases of Hunter's disease the mother
was the carrier. But in the remaining third the defect was a new mutation
occurring spontaneously in the egg. ''The immediate effect is that we will be
able to detect which ladies are carriers, accurately,'' he said.

   In the future, it may be possible to treat affected embryos with the gene
which they lack or which is defective, though gene therapy raises difficult
ethical questions.

   Professor Robert Winston, director of the reproductive unit at Hammersmith
Hospital, west London, and director of Progress, the campaign for embryo
research, said yesterday: ''Once these genes have been isolated there is the
real possibility we can screen early in pregancy.''

   In Hunter's disease and Hurler's syndrome, gene defects cause enzyme
deficiencies that lead to a progressively damaging build up of waste cellular
tissue in organs. Affected babies usually appear normal; symptoms appear at
about age two.

   Gene breakthrough, page 19


                              503 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1990 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                            August 21, 1990, Tuesday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 5

LENGTH: 498 words

HEADLINE: British Association for the Advancement of Science / Science 90:
Scientist warns of a moral dilemma over gene therapy

BYLINE: By TOM WILKIE, Science Editor

BODY:

   BIOLOGISTS may soon be able to graft new genes into human eggs and embryos
and society will have to decide whether to allow such human genetic engineering,
the annual meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science was
told yesterday.

   Such ''germ line'' therapy is completely different to transplanting
''healthy'' genes into individuals who are suffering from an hereditary disease.

   Treating individuals would not affect their progeny or the genetic
inheritance of the human race, whereas germ line therapy would have effects down
the generations, Dr Martin Johnson, an embryologist at Cambridge University,
told the meeting in Swansea.

   But treating individuals with gene therapy raised few moral issues, he said -
it was in essence another form of organ transplant.

   Dr Johnson was speaking at a debate on human embryo research, organised at
the association's annual meeting by the Ciba foundation.

   He said germ line treatment has clear medical advantages, but ''it is also
clearly open to abuse''.

   The fear is that some people might add genes for what they think are
desirable characteristics, so manipulating people and all their descendants.

   Germ line therapy is progressing in animals and plants, although the
technology is presently very primitive. Dr Johnson said society must look at the
issue in advance of the technology developing.

   ''This is not to advocate it nor say it will be thrust upon us, but that the
authorities should confront it in advance,'' he added.

   The Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority, set up by the Embryo Bill
which has recently passed into law, was the right body to examine the issues, he
said.

   Ian Kennedy, Professor of Medical Law and Ethics at King's College, London,
warned that the issue of what consitituted a ''defective gene'' was one that
could not be avoided.

   There was the possibility that some people might prefer to have a male child
and so would regard having a female as some sort of genetic defect.

   Parents will make demands of their doctors, Professor Kennedy said. The
question is whether these demands will be dealt with as private arrangements
between doctors and their patients, or whether they are so important as to be
regulated by society, he said.

   Dr Johnson pointed out that about 50,000 pregnancies a year - some 10 per
cent of the total - were at risk of producing a genetically diseased baby. About
14,000 such babies are born, 7,000 of them having serious conditions that result
in painful lives or early deaths. Advances in human embryo research were aimed
at diagnosing such conditions before the embryo implanted itself in the womb, he
said.

   If such research were to be prohibited, ''if we are to ask the infertile and
the genetically diseased to accept value and celebrate their conditions, then
politicians, church people and the media will need to show more tolerance
towards and give more positive images of unconventional family structures'', Dr
Johnson concluded.


                              504 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1990 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             July 31, 1990, Tuesday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 5

LENGTH: 314 words

HEADLINE: US may allow first gene transplant

BYLINE: By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent

BODY:

   Scientists in America will hear today whether they can attempt a human gene
transplant to treat a genetic disease in children which is usually fatal.

   Up to 10 children suffering from a rare enzyme deficiency are likely to
receive the pioneering treatment within the next few months if ethical and
medical committees in Washington grant approval.

   Gene therapy has applications in many other genetic diseases and in the
long-term it is hoped that it will benefit cancer sufferers. Several cancers are
known to be linked to genetic abnormalities and evidence is accumulating that
many others - including breast, bowel and lung cancer - are also initiated in
this way.

   The new treatment involves removal of white blood cells, known as T-cells,
from the children's blood and insertion of new genetic material into the cell's
chromosomes. The cells are, in effect, reprogrammed and should produce the
missing enzyme called adenosine deaminase (ADA).

   A deficiency of ADA leads to severe immune deficiency because of its effect
on white blood cells and other components of the immune system.

   The children are vulnerable to a wide-range of bacterial and viral infections
and many die before the age of five.

   Animal studies in Italy using this gene transplant technique have proved so
successful that scientists at the National Institute of Heart, Lung and Blood
(NIHLB), and the National Cancer Institute in Washington, where much of the
preliminary work has been done, decided to seek approval for it to be tried in
humans.

   ADA deficiency is extremely rare and there are no more than 30 children with
it in the world. But it is an ideal disease upon which to attempt the first
human gene transplant because it is caused by a defect in one particular gene
which has been identified. A spokeswoman for the NIHLB said: ''We are optimistic
that the therapy will be successful.''


                              505 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1990 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             July 13, 1990, Friday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 7

LENGTH: 318 words

HEADLINE: Gene hope for muscle disease boy

BYLINE: By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent

BODY:

   A NINE-year-old American boy with Duchenne muscular dystrophy has become the
first recipient of ''gene therapy'' in an attempt to combat the disease.

   Muscle cells from the leg of the boy's adoptive father were injected into
muscle in the boy's hand. Normal genes from the father's cells were then
incorporated in the boy's defective muscle cells, some of which started to
produce the protein dystrophin. Dystrophin is missing in the muscle fibres of
DMD sufferers and its absence causes progressive degeneration of their muscles.

   More than 90 days after the injection, the injected cells were continuing to
develop and there was no sign of rejection, according to a report in The Lancet.

   Researchers from the University of Tennessee in Memphis said that myoblast
transfer therapy, as the technique is known, offers a ''safe and effective means
for alleviating biochemical deficit inherent in the muscles of DMD''.

   Their work also has implications for several other types of muscular
dystrophy because it can ''repair and replenish'' degenerating cells.

   The technique is possible because of the way muscle cells develop and
regenerate themselves, which allows the donor and recipient's cells to fuse.

   The researchers emphasised that the treatment was in the preliminary stages
and that its clinical application was in the future. It was too early to
determine an improvement, if any, in the boy's condition.

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy is the most common and severe form of muscular
dystrophies. It affects 1 in 3,000 boys (women carry the defective gene but are
unaffected) who become progressively disabled. There is no effective treatment.

   Dr Sarah Yates, research manager of the Muscular Dystrophy Group of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, said: ''This is certainly scientifically a very
interesting piece of work. But in terms of clinical benefit, it is something for
the future.''



                              506 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1990 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             July 13, 1990, Friday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 7

LENGTH: 318 words

HEADLINE: Gene hope for muscle disease boy

BYLINE: By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent

BODY:

   A NINE-year-old American boy with Duchenne muscular dystrophy has become the
first recipient of ''gene therapy'' in an attempt to combat the disease.

   Muscle cells from the leg of the boy's adoptive father were injected into
muscle in the boy's hand. Normal genes from the father's cells were then
incorporated in the boy's defective muscle cells, some of which started to
produce the protein dystrophin. Dystrophin is missing in the muscle fibres of
DMD sufferers and its absence causes progressive degeneration of their muscles.

   More than 90 days after the injection, the injected cells were continuing to
develop and there was no sign of rejection, according to a report in The Lancet.

   Researchers from the University of Tennessee in Memphis said that myoblast
transfer therapy, as the technique is known, offers a ''safe and effective means
for alleviating biochemical deficit inherent in the muscles of DMD''.

   Their work also has implications for several other types of muscular
dystrophy because it can ''repair and replenish'' degenerating cells.

   The technique is possible because of the way muscle cells develop and
regenerate themselves, which allows the donor and recipient's cells to fuse.

   The researchers emphasised that the treatment was in the preliminary stages
and that its clinical application was in the future. It was too early to
determine an improvement, if any, in the boy's condition.

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy is the most common and severe form of muscular
dystrophies. It affects 1 in 3,000 boys (women carry the defective gene but are
unaffected) who become progressively disabled. There is no effective treatment.

   Dr Sarah Yates, research manager of the Muscular Dystrophy Group of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, said: ''This is certainly scientifically a very
interesting piece of work. But in terms of clinical benefit, it is something for
the future.''


                              507 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1990 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                              May 21, 1990, Monday

SECTION: SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PAGE; Page 17

LENGTH: 762 words

HEADLINE: The new way to put on genes; John Newell on a chance find that may be
a medical breakthrough

BYLINE: By JOHN NEWELL

BODY:

   In a few years' time, doctors may be injecting genes into their patients as
routinely as they inject antibiotics today. That is the startling prospect
opened up by Dr Jon Wolff, of the department of medical biochemistry at the
University of Wisconsin, who has has discovered that all that is necessary to
add extra genes to muscle tissue is to fill a hypodermic with a solution of the
wanted genes and inject it into muscle.

   One main target for such treatment is likely to be Duchenne muscular
dystrophy. Since the gene which is defective in this progressive,
muscle-weakening condition was identified a few years ago, research teams have
been working on ways to get enough normal genes into the muscles of sufferers to
compensate at least partially for the defective genes.

   One problem is that the gene involved is very large, which makes it difficult
to handle using complex genetic-engineering procedures, which often involve
using a virus which has a very small genetic structure to ''carry'' the gene to
its target. Simply injecting solutions of such genes could be a very attractive
alternative.

   To other genetic engineers, who are presently designing complex methods
involving elaborately engineered viruses, electric shocks and other ways to
insert genes into human cells, the success of Dr Wolff's injections is
astonishing.

   The technique was discovered accidentally. Dr Wolff was testing another,
typically complex gene- therapy procedure, in which genes confined in artificial
cell membranes were inserted into the muscles of mice. A solution of DNA
(dioxyribonucleic acid) in ordinary water was being used as a control - the
ineffective procedure performed in parallel with the one under test in trials of
new therapies to act as a baseline against which any improvement will show up.

   As Dr Wolff disarmingly admits, he was stupefied when the control worked
better than the therapy. At least 5 per cent of the injected genes were
expressed in the muscle they were injected into - that is, the product for which
the genes represented the blueprint was made by 5 per cent of the injected
muscle cells.

   Five per cent may not sound a lot, but for gene-therapy experiments, which
are all still at an early stage of development, it is a good success rate. And
since his first, wholly unexpected advance, Dr Wolff has already boosted the
proportion of genes expressed in muscle considerably, simply by altering the
constitution of the solution in the hypodermic. He is confident he can raise the
level of expression to what would be required for human-gene therapy.

   An important question is, how long would such a treatment last? On the face
of it, genes simply injected into muscles seem less likely to go on working
properly than genes targeted - as in other gene-therapy research programmes - to
integrate with those of the body they are put into. But Dr Wolff has already
found that injected genes go on working in mice for several months, and it now
seems likely they will do so for the mouse's lifetime. This does not mean the
same will be true for humans, but it is a hopeful indication.

   Even if the genes do not work for long, it might not matter: repeated
injections could be given. Dr Wolff is already considering using gene therapy in
other ways, perhaps even to treat conditions not caused by genetic defects at
all. For such purposes, instead of genes made of DNA, he plans to try RNA
(ribonucleic acid), which acts as a ''messenger'' conveying instructions written
in the genes to the cell's protein-making machinery. RNA vanishes once its
message has been delivered.

   By injecting RNA for some substance that a patient's body badly needs, the
body could be given a massive boost. There should be no dangers of lingering
after-effects or side-effects because the RNA would be quickly destroyed and its
product would be a wholly natural human body substance.

   The injection technique only works in muscle. Dr Wolff was quick to test it
in other tissues, but without success. However, that need not limit its use.
Muscle comprises nearly half the human body, so conditions such as growth
hormone deficiency might be treated by injecting genes into muscles to turn the
muscles into factories that would produce the missing hormone directly into the
bloodstream. Human muscle is well supplied with blood vessels, making it
potentially able to provide large amounts of other substances missing because of
genetic defects.

   John Newell is Science Editor of the BBC World Service and author of 'The
Gene Shifters', published by W H Allen.


                              509 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1990 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 30, 1990, Monday

SECTION: SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PAGE; Page 17

LENGTH: 1281 words

HEADLINE: Viewpoint: Genetic advances will test our moral mettle

BYLINE: By TOM WILKIE

BODY:

   NOW THAT the issues of embryo research and abortion law reform have been
settled, at least for the time being, it must be tempting for MPs exhausted by
emotional debate and successive late-night sittings to think that they have
finally dealt with the legal and moral questions thrown up by the advance of
biomedical science.

   There is still the issue of genetic engineering of plants and animals, and
the deliberate release of such genetically modified organisms into the
environment, but this, so MPs might reason, is covered by clauses in the ''Green
Bill'' now making its way through Parliament.

   Moreover, the Government has nominated Professor John Beringer, of Bristol
University, as chairman of the committee that will oversee the regulation of
such deliberate releases. He is an impressive man of manifest integrity,
convinced that the safety of new biotechnology should be regulated properly and
be seen to be regulated properly. It is difficult to think of an individual in
whom the public could have more confidence. By nominating Professor Beringer,
ministers have ensured that the safety of the deliberate release of genetically
modified organisms into the environment should cease to be a public issue.

   Before politicians return their attention to such matters as the poll tax,
they should pause to consider the difference between the safety of biomedical
science and its morality.

   For the truth is that embryo research is but the first in a series of moral
and legal issues which will confront society and our elected representatives in
the coming decades. Is there any way in which these issues can be identified,
debated, clarified and some sort of consensus arrived at, without the need for
passionate late-night debate on the floor of the House of Commons?

   The traditional British practice has been one of ''firefighting''- waiting
until an issue (such as embryo research) becomes a matter of public concern and
then setting up an ad hoc committee to examine the subject. Is there a better
way of securing for everyone the undoubted benefits of biomedical science, and
addressing the practical and moral issues that scientific advance also raises?

   Two issues are imminent. Some doctors will very soon want to carry out gene
therapy. This involves transplanting into a patient suffering from an inherited
disease, non-defective genes from someone else. The transplanted genes will take
over the affected body cells, instructing them to make the proteins needed for
the patient's health and which are not being produced as a result of the
inherited genetic lesion.

   The procedure is analagous to an organ transplant, and will affect only the
individual and not his or her children. But is it right to alter someone's
genetic make- up in this way?

   The second issue is quite simply: ''Who owns my genetic information and who
has a right to know what is written in my genes?'' This matter is partly
connected with the business of genetic screening for inherited disease and also
with the huge project now under way to map and, ultimately, sequence the human
genome.

   At first sight, it seems that our researchers and physicians have brought us
a wonderful boon: the ability to warn in advance people likely to be at risk of
passing on genetic defects (and there are more than 4,000 single gene defects
that afflict humanity).

   This is not an unmitigated blessing, however. Suppose it is discovered, for
example, that a pregnant woman is carrying a foetus that will suffer from
Huntingdon's chorea? The person will have a completely normal life for 35 to 40
years and then suffer a distressing, inevitable and incurable deterioration
which could last 10 or 20 years. Unaccountable changes in mood and personality
would be followed by physical decline.

   The first moral problem is whether the foetus should be aborted, thus
depriving an individual of 35 or 40 years of life for fear of two decades of
misery.

   There are other problems, too: if the child is born, is it right to burden it
for all its life with the knowledge that it is living under a sentence of
premature death? If afflicted people know of their condition, what happens if
they try to apply for life assurance? Should they tell their employers that at
about the age of 35 to 40 their decision-making might no longer be trustworthy?
Could such people ever get a job in the first place?

   And what of unexpected discoveries, when a researcher looking for one defect,
the cystic fibrosis gene for example, serendipitously discovers another, a
propensity for leukaemia, say? Many illnesses, such as cancer and heart disease,
almost certainly have a non-trivial genetic component where environmental
factors may work their effect on an underlying genetic predisposition. Who has a
right to know that I may have a susceptibility to heart disease?

   Are we about to create a sub- class of the population which is unable to
obtain life assurance, or pension arrangements because they have to declare
their genetic make-up to outside companies?

   If I were to be genetically susceptible to heart disease, does this count as
a ''defect'' which needs to be ''cured'' by gene therapy? If so, where is the
line to be drawn at interference in people's genetic make-up?

   As researchers read more and more of the genetic program that is written in
our DNA, and as molecular biology becomes a branch of information technology,
how are we to define and treat abnormality; what limits are to be placed on
interference in the genetic process; what are the proper limits to eugenic
pressures; how are we to continue to respect animals and the environment in the
face of genetic engineering; and, finally, how are we to balance the value that
we put on human life, on our own humanity, with the value and the importance of
pursuing knowledge in itself?

   Last weekend, the Nuffield Foundation took the first steps towards working
out a mechanism to allow our society better to confront the moral issues
presented by the advance of science.

   The foundation held a conference on bioethics at Cumberland Lodge in the
tranquil surroundings of Windsor Great Park, where some of the leaders of the
professions which will be the first to confront these problems articulated their
fears that the mechanisms we have will not be able to move quickly enough to
keep abreast of developments in science and technology.

   The conference concluded that a national body was needed because the task
could not be performed by ad hoc committees of inquiry, nor, unaided, by
existing institutions such as the Medical Research Council, the Royal Society,
or the various Royal Colleges. There are some possible role models for such a
body. These include the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution, and the
Interim (Voluntary) Licensing Authority that regulates in-vitro fertilisation
clinics.

   To be effective, such a body would have to command the respect and assent of
the practitioners in the field, to have a productive relationship with
Parliament and the Government, to be publicly visible, and to be sensitive to
public concern and matters of public interest.

   The trustees of the Nuffield Foundation have yet to decide whether to support
such a development, presumably working in concert with the other great
foundations. It also remains to be seen whether the various learned institutions
and professional bodies will take up the idea and, perhaps, provide financial
support to a national body which would have to be independent of them.

   It is to the credit of the researchers and the doctors that they have raised
these matters in advance; they should maintain the momentum to take the issues
through to a proper resolution.


                              510 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1990 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                             April 23, 1990, Monday

SECTION: EDITORIAL PAGE; Page 18

LENGTH: 456 words

HEADLINE: Letter: House of Commons decision on research into human embryos

BYLINE: From Professor R. G. EDWARDS

BODY:

   Sir: In the recent House of Commons debate on the Human Fertilisation and
Embryology Bill (2 April), several MPs stated that embryo research was not
needed to treat infertility by in vitro fertilization. I challenge this
assumption.

   Research has been and is still needed, for the birth of the first IVF baby
and all subsequent ones world-wide. The need for more knowledge is acute to
improve the method and introduce new ideas, e g on the optimal media for growth,
the treatment of severe male infertility, the metabolic needs of embryos, the
causes of chromosomal and embryological disasters in so many of them, and why so
many fail to implant.

   Julian Brazier MP is mistaken in his claims that his own IVF baby depended on
the number of procedures carried out and not on research. He is a benefactor of
all previous research. He now has a child, but many thousands of other couples
with all types of clinical problems have not conceived after many attempts and
still others await cheaper alternatives.

   Ann Winterton MP believes that a ban on research would not prevent
improvements and developments in IVF, because the method will not help to
eliminate handicap or help to find out why particular embryos fail to implant in
their mother. Her viewpoint is unacceptable, for only by research will we
analyse those chromosomal, developmental and physiological factors which lead to
distorted embryonic growth: there is no other way but to examine such embryos in
order to isolate the causes of damage.

   And her belief that serious gene defects in a child will be cured by gene
therapy could require complicated procedures which may not be realised for many
years to come, whereas the typing of embryos carrying such diseases should be
available this year or next.

   Finally, Albert Duffy MP shares the belief that lack of experiments would not
impede treatment for infertility or genetic disease. He is also quite wrong on
these counts and in his belief that research is forbidden in all countries of
Europe. Spain has passed an Act remarkably similar to our proposed legislation,
permitting research to day 14, and research is in progress in several other
countries in Europe and elsewhere. (MORE)

    There are enough ethical complexities in IVF to insist on its most careful
examination and regulation. Most - perhaps all - practitioners in the field
welcome the prospect of Parliamentary regulation through a recognised authority.
But we will not reach a fair consensus if some MPs make misleading comments or,
in Mr Brazier's case, believe the birth of his own child did not depend to a
very large extent on embryo research.

   R. G. EDWARDS

   Professor of Human

   Reproduction

   Physiological Laboratory

   Cambridge

   20 April


                              512 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1990 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                            The Independent (London)

                           February 19, 1990, Monday

SECTION: HOME NEWS PAGE; Page 8

LENGTH: 613 words

HEADLINE: American Association for the Advancement of Sciene: Modified HIV virus
could be used as Aids treatment

BYLINE: By TOM WILKIE, Science Editor

BODY:

   A GENETICALLY modified version of the Aids virus could be used to treat
people suffering from the disease, the American Association for the Advancement
of Science, meeting in New Orleans, was told yesterday.

   The modified variety of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) would act as a
sort of biological guided weapon to seek out and destroy natural HIV in those
suffering from the disease, William Haseltine, of Harvard University, said. ''We
are proposing to eviscerate HIV and use it as a vector to deliver gene therapy
for Aids. We have made the first steps.''

   Professor Haseltine's idea is to remove the genes in the virus that cause the
disease and replace them with a set of genes that will interfere with the
natural, disease-causing entire virus as it tries to replicate itself within the
cells of infected people.

   The genetically-engineered virus would still seek out the body cells that HIV
infects but, instead of making people sick, it would combat the pathogenic virus
within the cells of the host.

   One of the great problems in treating viral disease is that the virus hijacks
the cellular mechanisms of its host's body and perverts the machinery that ought
to be making more cells into replicating the viruses. The immune system has
difficulty in recognising the infected cells because outwardly they look little
different from normal ones.

   By using HIV itself, Professor Haseltine's scheme would deliver anti-viral
therapy exactly where it was needed. And if the engineered virus hijacked the
cell's machinery, it would produce even more anti-HIV viruses.

   But Professor Haseltine warned that a decade of work had to be done before
his idea could be turned into a proper treatment for humans. He drew an analogy
with the history of childhood leukaemias. Although major breakthroughs in
understanding that disease had happened in the 1950s, it was only in the late
1970s that cures were established.

   He said he was confident that a series of treatments will come into use over
the next five years, but he warned: ''The treatments are expensive, hard to
deliver and need monitoring. Unless we can come up with a vaccine, then the
future of this epidemic world- wide is extremely grim.''

   Professor Haseltine pointed out that the predicted rise in Aids cases in the
United States over the next decade would put strains on its health care system,
and that expensive treatments would be beyond the means of developing countries.
He predicted that incidence of the disease in the US would rise tenfold by the
end of the century.

   He said he was confident that a vaccine might be found, but it could take
another 10 years. ''There has been definite progress in animal systems but it is
too early to extrapolate to humans.''

   His optimism was endorsed by Dr Sten Vermund, of the US National Institute of
Health, who said there had been despondency among researchers about the
feasibility of a vaccine as recently as two years ago, but now there was a
possibility of intelligent design of a vaccine in humans.

    - A world-wide epidemic of tuberculosis could follow in the wake of Aids, a
researcher warned the conference.

   Dr John Mills, from the San Francisco General Hospital, said that people who
had previously dormant TB ran a 100 per cent chance of reactivating the TB after
they contracted Aids.

   ''Because TB is more infectious than Aids, this has ominous implications for
the developing countries,'' he said. And he warned that in North America
incidence of the disease was increasing as rapidly as it had once declined,
raising the possibility that Aids sufferers would contract it and infect their
family and friends.

   HIV legal battle, page 18


                              514 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1989 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                                The Independent

                          November 29 1989, Wednesday

LENGTH: 348 words

HEADLINE: Limits to be set for gene therapy

BYLINE: NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Social Services Correspondent

BODY:


    A COMMITTEE has been set up by the Government to draw up an ethical
framework within which doctors could carry out gene therapy - a form of
treatment which may eventually allow inherited disorders such as cystic fibrosis
and muscular dystrophy to be corrected.

    Gene therapy would involve transplanting missing or defective genes to
produce the enzymes or other biologically active substances which are absent in
these conditions.


    Virginia Bottomley, Minister for Health, said that 'within the next two to
three years' there was 'the prospect of treating adults and children with
serious conditions of genetic origin by gene modification'.

    The treatment would affect only ordinary body cells, not the germ cells
which pass information on to the next generation, and was little different, in
principle, to transplantation. But she said the Government wanted guidance, to
include the issue of informed consent, before treatment began.

    Because of the complexity of gene functions, the first candidates for such
treatment are likely to be relatively simple 'housekeeping' genes which could
correct conditions such as Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, a defect which causes severe
mental retardation and death in about 20 children a year in the UK, and even
rarer immune deficiencies which affect two or three children a year.

    But in theory, such an approach might, in time, be used in more common
disorders among the 3,000 known single gene defects such as cystic fibrosis.

    The Committee on the Ethics of Gene Therapy, due to report in a year to 18
months' time, will be chaired by Sir Cecil Clothier, a former Ombudsman and
chairman of the Police Complaints Authority.

    The Voluntary Licensing Authority, which has been overseeing embryo research
pending the introduction of legislation, yesterday warned that parents at risk
of having children affected by cystic fibrosis, Huntington's chorea and other
conditions would lose the chance of ensuring their off- spring were not
affected, without the need for an abortion, if such research were banned.

    Home News Page 8

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2000


                              517 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1989 Newspaper Publishing PLC
                                The Independent

                           February 18 1989, Saturday

SECTION: Letters ; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 969 words

HEADLINE: Free Speech 3: Scientific chances to be seized

BYLINE: BARRY CROSS

BODY:


    Director of Research at the AFRC Institute of Animal Physiology and Genetics
Research since 1974; former professor of anatomy at Bristol Medical School

    Switching on the Walkman or microwave oven, who thinks of the brilliant
discoveries of the thermionic valve and solid state electronics that presaged
such modern convenience? We take our vaccinations, our beta blockers, our
transplant surgery and our superior livestock as standard perquisites of the
industrialised state. Only when new threats like AIDS or ozone perforations
shake our complacency does the clamour begin for more spending on research. For
a species whose domination over other creatures depends on transfer of acquired
skills from generation to generation we show a woeful lack of foresight. The
corrective measures we apply today to offset the assaults of nature originate
from research generally inspired by intellectual curiosity, not social
necessity. But we begrudge the scientific resources necessary to counter
unforeseen calamities or generate unimagined benefits.


    Watson and Crick could not have predicted the extraordinary developments in
medicine, agriculture and biotechnology flowing from their DNA discoveries,
which now include the ability to shift genes around between living organisms.
Happily, the potential of transgenic biology has been recognised and substantial
funds have been awarded to the Agriculture and Food Research Council (AFRC) for
work in this field.

    The spectacular experiments of Palmiter and Brinster in the United States in
creating giant mice from embryos injected with the genes for human growth
hormone, and the British work on transgenic sheep which secrete human Factor IX
in their milk (used in the treatment of haemophiliacs) have raised awareness of
the implications of gene transfer. But there are widespread misapprehensions,
including the false notion that sheep/goat chimeras are in some way related to
this.

    Nor is it appreciated that much more research will be necessary before
significant agricultural or pharmaceutical applications are possible. There is
so far a pitifully small number of genes that have been identified as coding for
useful characteristics such as lean muscle growth, fertility or disease
resistance. With current methodology there is only about a 1 per cent chance of
success in incorporating the chosen gene into the genetic make-up of young that
survive. Even if this happens, there is then only a one-in-ten chance that the
characteristic will actually show up in the grown animal. This makes experiments
in farm livestock so expensive that most of the enabling research is done in
mice.

    More efficient ways of introducing the DNA into embryos are being tried, and
much effort is directed at finding the mechanisms that switch on the genes at
the appropriate times in an animal's life. Already dramatic advances have been
made. Some of the genes that determine body form (homeobox genes) have been
revealed, as have the differing effects of the same gene according to whether it
is inherited from the mother or the father (genomic imprinting). As models of
human disease, mice are also valuable. Mutant dwarfism and degenerative nervous
disease have been successfully treated by gene therapy and human disorders such
as Huntington's chorea and myotonic dystrophy may eventually yield to similar
measures. Another tantalising prospect is that quantities of human monoclonal
antibodies for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes will be produced in culture
from cells obtained from transgenic mice. Ultimately, we can expect to see added
value in animal products which conventional breeding alone could not produce.
Once a new character is fixed in the gene map it can be passed on in the normal
way to progeny.

    Safe science like safe sex, must be the goal of all earnest practitioners.
The Advisory Committee on Genetic Manipulation of the Health and Safety
Executive has published guidelines for transgenic research covering the safety
of human operators, containment and welfare of animals, testing for potential
harmful effects before release into the environment, disabling of retroviral
vectors and separate notification of experiments, release from containment and
any intended use for food. The AFRC has been active in the deliberations and
convened a workshop on the subject last October with participants from
universities, government departments and industry.

    Evolution is a conservative process and uses the same DNA sequences over and
over again in different combinations. We know that mice have DNA sequences that
are also found in fruit flies. A man is no less human nor a sheep less ovine if
one foreign gene is inserted among the several hundred thousand already present.
All the transgenic farm animals produced in Britain are entirely normal in
appearance and health. Only genetic fingerprinting or the presence of new
protein products in tissues or secretions reveals their identity. Indeed, much
greater changes in body form can be wrought by rearing siblings at different
environmental temperatures.

    So ethical objections based upon concepts of 'species integrity' are
questionable. Those based on animal welfare considerations are equally
misplaced. Animals used in transgenic research have the full protection of the
Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986, and since all transgenes are
invaluable animals they receive maximum possible care and supervision.

    Public concern on these issues is to be applauded, and it is incumbent on
the regulatory bodies to guard against any misdemeanour on the part of the
scientific community. But when new opportunities open up which could lead to
enhanced ability to tame nature for the advantage of man and animals it would be
foolhardy to reject them.

    Letters Page 15

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2000
