
                              4 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2010 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                           December 2, 2010 Thursday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16,17

LENGTH: 1164 words

HEADLINE: IT'S A RACE TO SAVE MILLIE'S LIFE..AND YOU CAN HELP HER;
RARE DISEASE ONE CURE

BYLINE: MELISSA THOMPSON

BODY:

   LIKE all parents, Millie D'Cruz Parsley's mum and dad savour every moment
with their six-year-old daughter.

   But, unlike most parents, they fear she'll die before she even reaches her
teens.

   Millie's mum Twila D'Cruz and dad Phil Parsley have to watch while Millie
succumbs to an incredibly rare genetic illness.

   There is a lifeline for the bubbly girl - because while the UK offers no
possible treatment, it is available in the US.

   However, it comes with an enormous pounds 380,000 price tag that needs to be
raised as soon as possible if Millie has any chance of still being well enough
to receive it.

   "It's a race against time," admits Twila, 38. "Every day we see Millie
getting poorlier and all we want to do is make her better. But pounds 380,000 is
so much money. I don't know if we'll be able to raise it in time."

   Millie has metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD), a condition so rare only 17
people in Britain have been diagnosed with it.

   The illness gets progressively worse as it damages the nervous system,
kidneys, gallbladder and other organs.

   Eventually it causes dementia before leading to death.

   Millie was only diagnosed in June and the symptoms are already starting to
show, with walking becoming more and more difficult. Now even the short trek to
school is almost too much for her.

   She can no longer walk down the stairs, so shuffles along on her backside
instead. Most devastating for her parents is seeing her sit out of games played
by her siblings and friends as she can no longer keep up.

   It's a huge change from when Millie would be the first up and about playing
with her five siblings and friends. She was slower learning to walk than her
brothers and sisters, starting at 16 months, but after that she was away.

   "We were a bit worried," says Twila. "But I spoke to the health visitor who
said we should only start to worry if she still wasn't walking when she was 18
months."

   So when Millie got on her feet, her parents' fears were calmed. But then
there were other things. At first, they seemed like small issues but soon they
began to cause worries of their own.

   At three, Millie's nursery teacher told her parents that the toddler was
struggling to use scissors.

   "But then what three-year-old can use scissors properly?" says Twila, who
brushed off the observation. "I just assumed her hands weren't strong enough yet
to hold them."

   Once Millie progressed to school there were more signs. Her teacher noticed
she struggled to grip her pencil properly, and that she was a "bit sleepy".

   But if the signs were symptoms of an underlying illness, they were also
traits you'd expect from a small child.

   Twila, who found out in December that she was expecting her sixth child,
says: "With most three-or four-year-olds their grip isn't that strong.

   "Millie would fall over, but then children always run around too fast and
trip. Alarm bells weren't yet ringing."

   Last February the family moved to a new area of Milton Keynes and Millie
enrolled at a new school, St Mary Magdalene, which Twila credits with saving her
life.

   "They were brilliant," says Twila. "They picked up on her awkward walking
gait and said her hips looked very uncomfortable when she's running and
walking." Last spring Twila took Millie to her GP and, after reading about
muscular dystrophy, asked for Millie to be tested.

   But the test came back negative, and other tests turned up nothing, despite
Twila and Phil constantly taking her back for more.

   "We were told it was just growing pains," says Twila, a full-time mum.

   Unfortunately, the truth for Millie was much more devastating. After MRI
scans and other tests, Millie was diagnosed with MLD, a disease that targets the
nervous system and leads to an early death.

   DEVASTATING

   #x22;We knew it was going to be bad when the doctor wanted to speak to me and
Phil by ourselves," says Twila. "But I still couldn't believe what they were
saying. We went from everything being OK to having our lives turned
upside-down."

   Worse, the couple found out that the condition is incurable - and that they
had unknowingly passed the condition onto Millie themselves.

   Both are carriers of the gene that causes MLD. And while neither suffers from
it, any of their children will have a 25% chance of developing the condition.

   Tests later revealed the couple's other children were free of it. "I hate
myself," says Twila. "I feel as though I've done this to my child. We know it's
not our fault but we're not ill, and Millie is.

   It was bittersweet - we were finding out that our other children were OK, but
still Millie was ill."

   Although the condition has no cure, Twila and Phil were told they had a
couple of options.

   In August they travelled to Milan - just two weeks after the birth of Phil
and Twila's daughter Cadie - to see if Millie could undergo a gene therapy
trial.

   Sadly, her illness was too far progressed for it to be worth it.

   The only other possible alternative was in America, at the Duke University in
North Carolina, where pioneering bone marrow treatment could halt the
progression of Millie's condition. It wouldn't cure her, but it would stop the
illness in its tracks and stop her from getting worse.

   TREATMENT

   But the parents' joy was short-lived.The treatment comes with a pounds
380,000 price tag - and for Millie to stand a chance of being deemed suitable
enough for treatment, she needs to be well enough.

   So the parents have started organising fundraising events, with the help of
Millie's school.

   But the hundreds of pounds raised at each event is only one small step
towards the ultimate goal, which so far seems unreachable. "I think about that
amount of money and it seems impossible to reach it," says Twila, the scale of
the mission ahead reflected in the fear in her eyes.

   "I still don't know, deep down, if we'll be able to raise that much money.
All the time I'm noticing changes in her. Whether it's because she can't walk
very far, or in her behaviour.

   "One of the symptoms of MLD is aggression, and we've noticed that with Millie
sometimes she'll strike out at her little brother for no reason.

   "But the worst thing is seeing Millie not be able to keep up with her
friends. If she's at a children's party and everyone's dancing, she won't be
able to keep up and sits on the side watching everyone else.

   It's heartbreaking. Millie doesn't know about her condition, she just knows
she's got poorly legs.

   "Hopefully we'll be able to get her treatment before she needs to find out
how bad she could be.

   HEARTBREAKING

   "It's a race against time. We'll never know how long it'll make her better
for but at least it will give her more time."

   Father Phil, 35, who works in mobile security, believes the fundraising task
seems all but impossible.

   "I don't know if we'll get there," he says. "When I'm at home it's fine. But
then I'll be at work, and because I'm on my own, it's all I think about. I'll
think about how Millie used to be and what she might have ahead, and it just
makes me sad."

   If you would like to help the family, email milliesfund@live.co.uk to find
out how

GRAPHIC: PRECIOUS Newborn Millie in July 2004 IN THE SHADES Putting on the style
at two years old RIDING HIGH Donkey ride in Devon, aged four HOPE With mum Twila
and dad Phil

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2010


                              5 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2010 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                           December 2, 2010 Thursday
                                 Ulster Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16,17

LENGTH: 1164 words

HEADLINE: IT'S A RACE TO SAVE MILLIE'S LIFE..AND YOU CAN HELP HER;
RARE DISEASE ONE CURE

BYLINE: MELISSA THOMPSON

BODY:

   LIKE all parents, Millie D'Cruz Parsley's mum and dad savour every moment
with their six-year-old daughter.

   But, unlike most parents, they fear she'll die before she even reaches her
teens.

   Millie's mum Twila D'Cruz and dad Phil Parsley have to watch while Millie
succumbs to an incredibly rare genetic illness.

   There is a lifeline for the bubbly girl - because while the UK offers no
possible treatment, it is available in the US.

   However, it comes with an enormous pounds 380,000 price tag that needs to be
raised as soon as possible if Millie has any chance of still being well enough
to receive it.

   "It's a race against time," admits Twila, 38. "Every day we see Millie
getting poorlier and all we want to do is make her better. But pounds 380,000 is
so much money. I don't know if we'll be able to raise it in time."

   Millie has metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD), a condition so rare only 17
people in Britain have been diagnosed with it.

   The illness gets progressively worse as it damages the nervous system,
kidneys, gallbladder and other organs.

   Eventually it causes dementia before leading to death.

   Millie was only diagnosed in June and the symptoms are already starting to
show, with walking becoming more and more difficult. Now even the short trek to
school is almost too much for her.

   She can no longer walk down the stairs, so shuffles along on her backside
instead. Most devastating for her parents is seeing her sit out of games played
by her siblings and friends as she can no longer keep up.

   It's a huge change from when Millie would be the first up and about playing
with her five siblings and friends. She was slower learning to walk than her
brothers and sisters, starting at 16 months, but after that she was away.

   "We were a bit worried," says Twila. "But I spoke to the health visitor who
said we should only start to worry if she still wasn't walking when she was 18
months."

   So when Millie got on her feet, her parents' fears were calmed. But then
there were other things. At first, they seemed like small issues but soon they
began to cause worries of their own.

   At three, Millie's nursery teacher told her parents that the toddler was
struggling to use scissors.

   J"But then what three-year-old can use scissors properly?" says Twila, who
brushed off the observation. "I just assumed her hands weren't strong enough yet
to hold them."

   Once Millie progressed to school there were more signs. Her teacher noticed
she struggled to grip her pencil properly, and that she was a "bit sleepy".

   But if the signs were symptoms of an underlying illness, they were also
traits you'd expect from a small child.

   Twila, who found out in December that she was expecting her sixth child,
says: "With most three-or four-year-olds their grip isn't that strong.

   "Millie would fall over, but then children always run around too fast and
trip. Alarm bells weren't yet ringing."

   Last February the family moved to a new area of Milton Keynes and Millie
enrolled at a new school, St Mary Magdalene, which Twila credits with saving her
life.

   "They were brilliant," says Twila. "They picked up on her awkward walking
gait and said her hips looked very uncomfortable when she's running and
walking." Last spring Twila took Millie to her GP and, after reading about
muscular dystrophy, asked for Millie to be tested.

   But the test came back negative, and other tests turned up nothing, despite
Twila and Phil constantly taking her back for more.

   "We were told it was just growing pains," says Twila, a full-time mum.

   Unfortunately, the truth for Millie was much more devastating. After MRI
scans and other tests, Millie was diagnosed with MLD, a disease that targets the
nervous system and leads to an early death.

   DEVASTATING

   "We knew it was going to be bad when the doctor wanted to speak to me and
Phil by ourselves," says Twila. "But I still couldn't believe what they were
saying. We went from everything being OK to having our lives turned
upside-down."

   Worse, the couple found out that the condition is incurable - and that they
had unknowingly passed the condition onto Millie themselves.

   Both are carriers of the gene that causes MLD. And while neither suffers from
it, any of their children will have a 25% chance of developing the condition.

   Tests later revealed the couple's other children were free of it. "I hate
myself," says Twila. "I feel as though I've done this to my child. We know it's
not our fault but we're not ill, and Millie is.

   It was bittersweet - we were finding out that our other children were OK, but
still Millie was ill."

   Although the condition has no cure, Twila and Phil were told they had a
couple of options.

   In August they travelled to Milan - just two weeks after the birth of Phil
and Twila's daughter Cadie - to see if Millie could undergo a gene therapy
trial.

   Sadly, her illness was too far progressed for it to be worth it.

   The only other possible alternative was in America, at the Duke University in
North Carolina, where pioneering bone marrow treatment could halt the
progression of Millie's condition. It wouldn't cure her, but it would stop the
illness in its tracks and stop her from getting worse.

   TREATMENT

   But the parents' joy was short-lived.

   The treatment comes with a pounds 380,000 price tag - and for Millie to stand
a chance of being deemed suitable enough for treatment, she needs to be well
enough.

   So the parents have started organising fundraising events, with the help of
Millie's school.

   But the hundreds of pounds raised at each event is only one small step
towards the ultimate goal, which so far seems unreachable. "I think about that
amount of money and it seems impossible to reach it," says Twila, the scale of
the mission ahead reflected in the fear in her eyes.

   "I still don't know, deep down, if we'll be able to raise that much money.
All the time I'm noticing changes in her. Whether it's because she can't walk
very far, or in her behaviour.

   "One of the symptoms of MLD is aggression, and we've noticed that with Millie
sometimes she'll strike out at her little brother for no reason.

   "But the worst thing is seeing Millie not be able to keep up with her
friends. If she's at a children's party and everyone's dancing, she won't be
able to keep up and sits on the side watching everyone else.

   It's heartbreaking. Millie doesn't know about her condition, she just knows
she's got poorly legs.

   "Hopefully we'll be able to get her treatment before she needs to find out
how bad she could be.

   HEARTBREAKING

   "It's a race against time. We'll never know how long it'll make her better
for but at least it will give her more time."

   Father Phil, 35, who works in mobile security, believes the fundraising task
seems all but impossible.

   "I don't know if we'll get there," he says. "When I'm at home it's fine. But
then I'll be at work, and because I'm on my own, it's all I think about.

   "I'll think about how Millie used to be and what she might have ahead, and it
just makes me sad."

   If you would like to help the family, email milliesfund@live.co.uk to find
out how

GRAPHIC: PRECIOUS Newborn Millie in July 2004 IN THE SHADES Putting on the style
at two years old RIDING HIGH Donkey ride in Devon, aged four HOPE With mum Twila
and dad Phil

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2010


                              6 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2010 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                           December 2, 2010 Thursday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16,17

LENGTH: 1164 words

HEADLINE: IT'S A RACE TO SAVE MILLIE'S LIFE..AND YOU CAN HELP HER;
RARE DISEASE ONE CURE

BYLINE: MELISSA THOMPSON

BODY:

   LIKE all parents, Millie D'Cruz Parsley's mum and dad savour every moment
with their six-year-old daughter.

   But, unlike most parents, they fear she'll die before she even reaches her
teens.

   Millie's mum Twila D'Cruz and dad Phil Parsley have to watch while Millie
succumbs to an incredibly rare genetic illness.

   There is a lifeline for the bubbly girl - because while the UK offers no
possible treatment, it is available in the US.

   However, it comes with an enormous pounds 380,000 price tag that needs to be
raised as soon as possible if Millie has any chance of still being well enough
to receive it.

   "It's a race against time," admits Twila, 38. "Every day we see Millie
getting poorlier and all we want to do is make her better. But pounds 380,000 is
so much money. I don't know if we'll be able to raise it in time."

   Millie has metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD), a condition so rare only 17
people in Britain have been diagnosed with it.

   The illness gets progressively worse as it damages the nervous system,
kidneys, gallbladder and other organs.

   Eventually it causes dementia before leading to death.

   Millie was only diagnosed in June and the symptoms are already starting to
show, with walking becoming more and more difficult. Now even the short trek to
school is almost too much for her.

   She can no longer walk down the stairs, so shuffles along on her backside
instead. Most devastating for her parents is seeing her sit out of games played
by her siblings and friends as she can no longer keep up.

   It's a huge change from when Millie would be the first up and about playing
with her five siblings and friends. She was slower learning to walk than her
brothers and sisters, starting at 16 months, but after that she was away.

   "We were a bit worried," says Twila. "But I spoke to the health visitor who
said we should only start to worry if she still wasn't walking when she was 18
months."

   So when Millie got on her feet, her parents' fears were calmed. But then
there were other things. At first, they seemed like small issues but soon they
began to cause worries of their own.

   At three, Millie's nursery teacher told her parents that the toddler was
struggling to use scissors.

   "But then what three-year-old can use scissors properly?" says Twila, who
brushed off the observation. "I just assumed her hands weren't strong enough yet
to hold them."

   Once Millie progressed to school there were more signs. Her teacher noticed
she struggled to grip her pencil properly, and that she was a "bit sleepy".

   But if the signs were symptoms of an underlying illness, they were also
traits you'd expect from a small child.

   Twila, who found out in December that she was expecting her sixth child,
says: "With most three-or four-year-olds their grip isn't that strong.

   "Millie would fall over, but then children always run around too fast and
trip. Alarm bells weren't yet ringing."

   Last February the family moved to a new area of Milton Keynes and Millie
enrolled at a new school, St Mary Magdalene, which Twila credits with saving her
life.

   "They were brilliant," says Twila. "They picked up on her awkward walking
gait and said her hips looked very uncomfortable when she's running and
walking." Last spring Twila took Millie to her GP and, after reading about
muscular dystrophy, asked for Millie to be tested.

   But the test came back negative, and other tests turned up nothing, despite
Twila and Phil constantly taking her back for more.

   "We were told it was just growing pains," says Twila, a full-time mum.

   Unfortunately, the truth for Millie was much more devastating. After MRI
scans and other tests, Millie was diagnosed with MLD, a disease that targets the
nervous system and leads to an early death.

   DEVASTATING

   #x22;We knew it was going to be bad when the doctor wanted to speak to me and
Phil by ourselves," says Twila. "But I still couldn't believe what they were
saying. We went from everything being OK to having our lives turned
upside-down."

   Worse, the couple found out that the condition is incurable - and that they
had unknowingly passed the condition onto Millie themselves.

   Both are carriers of the gene that causes MLD. And while neither suffers from
it, any of their children will have a 25% chance of developing the condition.

   Tests later revealed the couple's other children were free of it. "I hate
myself," says Twila. "I feel as though I've done this to my child. We know it's
not our fault but we're not ill, and Millie is.

   It was bittersweet - we were finding out that our other children were OK, but
still Millie was ill."

   Although the condition has no cure, Twila and Phil were told they had a
couple of options.

   In August they travelled to Milan - just two weeks after the birth of Phil
and Twila's daughter Cadie - to see if Millie could undergo a gene therapy
trial.

   Sadly, her illness was too far progressed for it to be worth it.

   The only other possible alternative was in America, at the Duke University in
North Carolina, where pioneering bone marrow treatment could halt the
progression of Millie's condition. It wouldn't cure her, but it would stop the
illness in its tracks and stop her from getting worse.

   TREATMENT

   But the parents' joy was short-lived.The treatment comes with a pounds
380,000 price tag - and for Millie to stand a chance of being deemed suitable
enough for treatment, she needs to be well enough.

   So the parents have started organising fundraising events, with the help of
Millie's school.

   But the hundreds of pounds raised at each event is only one small step
towards the ultimate goal, which so far seems unreachable. "I think about that
amount of money and it seems impossible to reach it," says Twila, the scale of
the mission ahead reflected in the fear in her eyes.

   "I still don't know, deep down, if we'll be able to raise that much money.
All the time I'm noticing changes in her. Whether it's because she can't walk
very far, or in her behaviour.

   "One of the symptoms of MLD is aggression, and we've noticed that with Millie
sometimes she'll strike out at her little brother for no reason.

   "But the worst thing is seeing Millie not be able to keep up with her
friends. If she's at a children's party and everyone's dancing, she won't be
able to keep up and sits on the side watching everyone else.

   It's heartbreaking. Millie doesn't know about her condition, she just knows
she's got poorly legs.

   "Hopefully we'll be able to get her treatment before she needs to find out
how bad she could be.

   HEARTBREAKING

   "It's a race against time. We'll never know how long it'll make her better
for but at least it will give her more time."

   Father Phil, 35, who works in mobile security, believes the fundraising task
seems all but impossible.

   "I don't know if we'll get there," he says. "When I'm at home it's fine. But
then I'll be at work, and because I'm on my own, it's all I think about. I'll
think about how Millie used to be and what she might have ahead, and it just
makes me sad."

   If you would like to help the family, email milliesfund@live.co.uk to find
out how

GRAPHIC: PRECIOUS Newborn Millie in July 2004 IN THE SHADES Putting on the style
at two years old RIDING HIGH Donkey ride in Devon, aged four HOPE With mum Twila
and dad Phil

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2010


                              7 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2010 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                           December 2, 2010 Thursday
                                 Ulster Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16,17

LENGTH: 1164 words

HEADLINE: IT'S A RACE TO SAVE MILLIE'S LIFE..AND YOU CAN HELP HER;
RARE DISEASE ONE CURE

BYLINE: MELISSA THOMPSON

BODY:

   LIKE all parents, Millie D'Cruz Parsley's mum and dad savour every moment
with their six-year-old daughter.

   But, unlike most parents, they fear she'll die before she even reaches her
teens.

   Millie's mum Twila D'Cruz and dad Phil Parsley have to watch while Millie
succumbs to an incredibly rare genetic illness.

   There is a lifeline for the bubbly girl - because while the UK offers no
possible treatment, it is available in the US.

   However, it comes with an enormous pounds 380,000 price tag that needs to be
raised as soon as possible if Millie has any chance of still being well enough
to receive it.

   "It's a race against time," admits Twila, 38. "Every day we see Millie
getting poorlier and all we want to do is make her better. But pounds 380,000 is
so much money. I don't know if we'll be able to raise it in time."

   Millie has metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD), a condition so rare only 17
people in Britain have been diagnosed with it.

   The illness gets progressively worse as it damages the nervous system,
kidneys, gallbladder and other organs.

   Eventually it causes dementia before leading to death.

   Millie was only diagnosed in June and the symptoms are already starting to
show, with walking becoming more and more difficult. Now even the short trek to
school is almost too much for her.

   She can no longer walk down the stairs, so shuffles along on her backside
instead. Most devastating for her parents is seeing her sit out of games played
by her siblings and friends as she can no longer keep up.

   It's a huge change from when Millie would be the first up and about playing
with her five siblings and friends. She was slower learning to walk than her
brothers and sisters, starting at 16 months, but after that she was away.

   "We were a bit worried," says Twila. "But I spoke to the health visitor who
said we should only start to worry if she still wasn't walking when she was 18
months."

   So when Millie got on her feet, her parents' fears were calmed. But then
there were other things. At first, they seemed like small issues but soon they
began to cause worries of their own.

   At three, Millie's nursery teacher told her parents that the toddler was
struggling to use scissors.

   J"But then what three-year-old can use scissors properly?" says Twila, who
brushed off the observation. "I just assumed her hands weren't strong enough yet
to hold them."

   Once Millie progressed to school there were more signs. Her teacher noticed
she struggled to grip her pencil properly, and that she was a "bit sleepy".

   But if the signs were symptoms of an underlying illness, they were also
traits you'd expect from a small child.

   Twila, who found out in December that she was expecting her sixth child,
says: "With most three-or four-year-olds their grip isn't that strong.

   "Millie would fall over, but then children always run around too fast and
trip. Alarm bells weren't yet ringing."

   Last February the family moved to a new area of Milton Keynes and Millie
enrolled at a new school, St Mary Magdalene, which Twila credits with saving her
life.

   "They were brilliant," says Twila. "They picked up on her awkward walking
gait and said her hips looked very uncomfortable when she's running and
walking." Last spring Twila took Millie to her GP and, after reading about
muscular dystrophy, asked for Millie to be tested.

   But the test came back negative, and other tests turned up nothing, despite
Twila and Phil constantly taking her back for more.

   "We were told it was just growing pains," says Twila, a full-time mum.

   Unfortunately, the truth for Millie was much more devastating. After MRI
scans and other tests, Millie was diagnosed with MLD, a disease that targets the
nervous system and leads to an early death.

   DEVASTATING

   "We knew it was going to be bad when the doctor wanted to speak to me and
Phil by ourselves," says Twila. "But I still couldn't believe what they were
saying. We went from everything being OK to having our lives turned
upside-down."

   Worse, the couple found out that the condition is incurable - and that they
had unknowingly passed the condition onto Millie themselves.

   Both are carriers of the gene that causes MLD. And while neither suffers from
it, any of their children will have a 25% chance of developing the condition.

   Tests later revealed the couple's other children were free of it. "I hate
myself," says Twila. "I feel as though I've done this to my child. We know it's
not our fault but we're not ill, and Millie is.

   It was bittersweet - we were finding out that our other children were OK, but
still Millie was ill."

   Although the condition has no cure, Twila and Phil were told they had a
couple of options.

   In August they travelled to Milan - just two weeks after the birth of Phil
and Twila's daughter Cadie - to see if Millie could undergo a gene therapy
trial.

   Sadly, her illness was too far progressed for it to be worth it.

   The only other possible alternative was in America, at the Duke University in
North Carolina, where pioneering bone marrow treatment could halt the
progression of Millie's condition. It wouldn't cure her, but it would stop the
illness in its tracks and stop her from getting worse.

   TREATMENT

   But the parents' joy was short-lived.

   The treatment comes with a pounds 380,000 price tag - and for Millie to stand
a chance of being deemed suitable enough for treatment, she needs to be well
enough.

   So the parents have started organising fundraising events, with the help of
Millie's school.

   But the hundreds of pounds raised at each event is only one small step
towards the ultimate goal, which so far seems unreachable. "I think about that
amount of money and it seems impossible to reach it," says Twila, the scale of
the mission ahead reflected in the fear in her eyes.

   "I still don't know, deep down, if we'll be able to raise that much money.
All the time I'm noticing changes in her. Whether it's because she can't walk
very far, or in her behaviour.

   "One of the symptoms of MLD is aggression, and we've noticed that with Millie
sometimes she'll strike out at her little brother for no reason.

   "But the worst thing is seeing Millie not be able to keep up with her
friends. If she's at a children's party and everyone's dancing, she won't be
able to keep up and sits on the side watching everyone else.

   It's heartbreaking. Millie doesn't know about her condition, she just knows
she's got poorly legs.

   "Hopefully we'll be able to get her treatment before she needs to find out
how bad she could be.

   HEARTBREAKING

   "It's a race against time. We'll never know how long it'll make her better
for but at least it will give her more time."

   Father Phil, 35, who works in mobile security, believes the fundraising task
seems all but impossible.

   "I don't know if we'll get there," he says. "When I'm at home it's fine. But
then I'll be at work, and because I'm on my own, it's all I think about.

   "I'll think about how Millie used to be and what she might have ahead, and it
just makes me sad."

   If you would like to help the family, email milliesfund@live.co.uk to find
out how

GRAPHIC: PRECIOUS Newborn Millie in July 2004 IN THE SHADES Putting on the style
at two years old RIDING HIGH Donkey ride in Devon, aged four HOPE With mum Twila
and dad Phil

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2010


                              8 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2010 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                 Sunday Mirror

                            November 21, 2010 Sunday
                                  Eire Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 902 words

HEADLINE: THE APPLIANCE OF SCIENCE;
REVEALED: TOP TEN MEDICAL MARVELS

BYLINE: LUKE CONLON

BODY:

   WE MAY be in the middle of the recession, but Irish scientists are leading
the way with medical marvels.

   From electronic noses programmed to sniff out cancer, to a drastic
revaluation of our unirishsundaymirror.

   derstanding of cystic fibrosis sufferers, Irish researchers are producing
amazing breakthroughs in the fields of medicine and science.

   And here we look at the top 10 inventions by Irish boffins.

   1 AN ELECTRONIC NOSE THAT CAN SNIFF OUT CANCER

   THE electronic nose under development at Tyndall National Institute in Cork
offers the potential to identify aggressive cancers, such as prostate and
bladder, at an early stage - by sniffing out the disease.

   Although similar studies have been conducted in other countries, Tyndall
Institute's use of special nano-materials means it is the most advanced to date.

   Project coordinator Dr Vladimir Ogurtsov said: "The same technology could
also have applications in food safety, or in security and environment by using
smell sensors."

   2 A GENETIC LINK TO BLOOD CLOTS IS DISCOVERED

   PEOPLE at risk of clot formation are on the way to being able to be
identified earlier - possibly even at birth - after the establishment of a
genetic link.

   A research team from the Conway Institute at University College Dublin in
collaboration with a Europe-wide consortium discovered the breakthrough.

   The UCD team examined the genetic pathways involved in platelet activity in
the blood to understand better how they are involved in heart disease.

   3 BREAKTHROUGH IN TREATMENT OF CYSTIC FIBROSIS FOUND

   ALMOST four times as many people suffer from cystic fibrosis in Ireland than
in other EU countries or the US, with the survival rate of female sufferers much
lower than that of males.

   And now, researchers at the Royal College of Surgeons in Dublin have made an
important discovery explaining the gender discrepancy.

   They found that the oestrogen hormone, which is found in much higher levels
in women, prevents the release of a chemical signal that can help trigger white
blood cells to fight infection in the lungs when the bacteria attack cells.

   4 A NEW CELL TO TREAT ASTHMA

   SCIENTISTS at Trinity College Dublin have helped make a discovery that could
prove crucial to the future treatment of asthma and other similar conditions.

   More than 500,000 people are affected by respiratory problems in this country
and this ground breaking research could mark the beginning of a new
understanding of the condition.

   A previously unknown white blood cell has been identified which has been
found to play a key role in triggering allergic responses by releasing a
chemical when exposed to allergens - with scientists hopeful it can bring new
treatments in just three years' time.

   5 BEGINNING OF LIFE EXPLAINED

   IT is generally accepted that life on Earth began about three billion years
ago with single cell organisms. However, the process by which these single cell
organisms became multi-celled is a question which has puzzled scientists for
years.

   And now Dr James McInerney from NUI Maynooth has discovered multi-celled
organisms came to be when two single-celled organisms combined - an event which
has happened only once and takes us some way in understanding the complex
origins of life.

   6 A NEW BREAKTHROUGH TREATING LUNG DISEASE

   A NEBULISER technique to help get gene therapies into the lungs intact is
being developed in Galway.

   The research by The Regenerative Medicine Institute in collaboration with the
Galway based medical device company Aerogen is looking to improve the delivery
of future gene therapies through ventilators for patients in intensive care.

   To date, the team conducting the research have shown in a lab situation that
therapeutic agents can pass through the new nebuliser and still remain able to
hit target cells - a significant breakthrough in treating lung disease.

   7 A SAFE WAY TO OPERATE ON ELBOWS

   A MEDICAL firm has created a new wiring device that allows surgeons to
accurately place pins during operations on patients' elbows.

   The O-Jig device, developed in Dublin, allows doctors to take the guesswork
out of pin placement.

   And by accurately guiding the surgeon's pins in, any risk of hitting soft
tissue is avoided - halting the need for any follow-up surgery.

   8 A NEW NOTIFIER FOR BREAST CANCER

   A BREAKTHROUGH in the identification of telltale signs, in both tissue
samples and blood, that will alert doctors to the presence of, or potential for,
breast cancer has been found.

   The Royal College of Surgeons and Beaumont Hospital's research will act as a
"red flag" to the treatment of breast cancer.

   And it will give the patient and doctors more time to discuss how to treat
the disease.

   9 A VACCINE AGAINST MENINGITIS TRINITY

   College in Dublin have produced a breakthrough vaccine against both
meningitis and pneumonia.

   The research is now expected to aid in the production of even more effective
vaccines.

   The study was conducted along with the University of Leicester, and examined
how the body's immune system responds to the infection.

   NEW UNDERSTANDING 10 OF DIABETES

   IRISH scientists have made a breakthrough in our understanding of insulin
producing cells.

   The research from the Royal College of Surgeons and Mater Hospital shows that
when insulin producing cells die, they send out a signal to other cells to
produce a regenerating protein which triggers the surrounding cells to
reproduce.

   And the scientists' work could now result in new treatment of diabetes in the
future.

GRAPHIC: Exploring... life and scientific breakthroughs Examine... CT scan of a
child's chest showing masses from a tumour Investigate... An X-ray of
pneumoconiosis lung disease White Blood cells Injection... Vaccine against
Meningitis

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2010


                              9 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2010 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                 Sunday Mirror

                            November 21, 2010 Sunday
                                  Eire Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 902 words

HEADLINE: THE APPLIANCE OF SCIENCE;
REVEALED: TOP TEN MEDICAL MARVELS

BYLINE: LUKE CONLON

BODY:

   WE MAY be in the middle of the recession, but Irish scientists are leading
the way with medical marvels.

   From electronic noses programmed to sniff out cancer, to a drastic
revaluation of our unirishsundaymirror.

   derstanding of cystic fibrosis sufferers, Irish researchers are producing
amazing breakthroughs in the fields of medicine and science.

   And here we look at the top 10 inventions by Irish boffins.

   1 AN ELECTRONIC NOSE THAT CAN SNIFF OUT CANCER

   THE electronic nose under development at Tyndall National Institute in Cork
offers the potential to identify aggressive cancers, such as prostate and
bladder, at an early stage - by sniffing out the disease.

   Although similar studies have been conducted in other countries, Tyndall
Institute's use of special nano-materials means it is the most advanced to date.

   Project coordinator Dr Vladimir Ogurtsov said: "The same technology could
also have applications in food safety, or in security and environment by using
smell sensors."

   2 A GENETIC LINK TO BLOOD CLOTS IS DISCOVERED

   PEOPLE at risk of clot formation are on the way to being able to be
identified earlier - possibly even at birth - after the establishment of a
genetic link.

   A research team from the Conway Institute at University College Dublin in
collaboration with a Europe-wide consortium discovered the breakthrough.

   The UCD team examined the genetic pathways involved in platelet activity in
the blood to understand better how they are involved in heart disease.

   3 BREAKTHROUGH IN TREATMENT OF CYSTIC FIBROSIS FOUND

   ALMOST four times as many people suffer from cystic fibrosis in Ireland than
in other EU countries or the US, with the survival rate of female sufferers much
lower than that of males.

   And now, researchers at the Royal College of Surgeons in Dublin have made an
important discovery explaining the gender discrepancy.

   They found that the oestrogen hormone, which is found in much higher levels
in women, prevents the release of a chemical signal that can help trigger white
blood cells to fight infection in the lungs when the bacteria attack cells.

   4 A NEW CELL TO TREAT ASTHMA

   SCIENTISTS at Trinity College Dublin have helped make a discovery that could
prove crucial to the future treatment of asthma and other similar conditions.

   More than 500,000 people are affected by respiratory problems in this country
and this ground breaking research could mark the beginning of a new
understanding of the condition.

   A previously unknown white blood cell has been identified which has been
found to play a key role in triggering allergic responses by releasing a
chemical when exposed to allergens - with scientists hopeful it can bring new
treatments in just three years' time.

   5 BEGINNING OF LIFE EXPLAINED

   IT is generally accepted that life on Earth began about three billion years
ago with single cell organisms. However, the process by which these single cell
organisms became multi-celled is a question which has puzzled scientists for
years.

   And now Dr James McInerney from NUI Maynooth has discovered multi-celled
organisms came to be when two single-celled organisms combined - an event which
has happened only once and takes us some way in understanding the complex
origins of life.

   6 A NEW BREAKTHROUGH TREATING LUNG DISEASE

   A NEBULISER technique to help get gene therapies into the lungs intact is
being developed in Galway.

   The research by The Regenerative Medicine Institute in collaboration with the
Galway based medical device company Aerogen is looking to improve the delivery
of future gene therapies through ventilators for patients in intensive care.

   To date, the team conducting the research have shown in a lab situation that
therapeutic agents can pass through the new nebuliser and still remain able to
hit target cells - a significant breakthrough in treating lung disease.

   7 A SAFE WAY TO OPERATE ON ELBOWS

   A MEDICAL firm has created a new wiring device that allows surgeons to
accurately place pins during operations on patients' elbows.

   The O-Jig device, developed in Dublin, allows doctors to take the guesswork
out of pin placement.

   And by accurately guiding the surgeon's pins in, any risk of hitting soft
tissue is avoided - halting the need for any follow-up surgery.

   8 A NEW NOTIFIER FOR BREAST CANCER

   A BREAKTHROUGH in the identification of telltale signs, in both tissue
samples and blood, that will alert doctors to the presence of, or potential for,
breast cancer has been found.

   The Royal College of Surgeons and Beaumont Hospital's research will act as a
"red flag" to the treatment of breast cancer.

   And it will give the patient and doctors more time to discuss how to treat
the disease.

   9 A VACCINE AGAINST MENINGITIS TRINITY

   College in Dublin have produced a breakthrough vaccine against both
meningitis and pneumonia.

   The research is now expected to aid in the production of even more effective
vaccines.

   The study was conducted along with the University of Leicester, and examined
how the body's immune system responds to the infection.

   NEW UNDERSTANDING 10 OF DIABETES

   IRISH scientists have made a breakthrough in our understanding of insulin
producing cells.

   The research from the Royal College of Surgeons and Mater Hospital shows that
when insulin producing cells die, they send out a signal to other cells to
produce a regenerating protein which triggers the surrounding cells to
reproduce.

   And the scientists' work could now result in new treatment of diabetes in the
future.

GRAPHIC: Exploring... life and scientific breakthroughs Examine... CT scan of a
child's chest showing masses from a tumour Investigate... An X-ray of
pneumoconiosis lung disease White Blood cells Injection... Vaccine against
Meningitis

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2010


                              15 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2010 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                            October 25, 2010 Monday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 920 words

HEADLINE: WE LOVE TELLY;
PICK OF THE DAY

BYLINE: JANE SIMON

BODY:

   SPOOKS BBC1, 9pm

   IS MI5 already feeling the pinch of public spending cuts? The Americans are
delivering a highly-prized computer expert to London and with their customary
efficiency, MI5 has sent a grand total of one person to make sure that she
arrives safe and sound.

   Regular viewers will know that Spooks' track-record of guarding anyone from
anything is nothing to write home about (I'd think twice about entrusting them
to pick up my dry cleaning).

   But as our cyber geek is being looked after by the increasingly unreliable
Lucas North, there is probably even more reason to be worried this week. For his
colleagues, this is actually one of the most challenging weeks Spooks has faced
as they discover the entire Grid has been hacked into and someone is watching
and listening to their every move.

   Ooops. With their hands tied firmly behind their backs (metaphorically at
least) they are powerless to warn Lucas of the danger his precious cargo is in,
or to notice how thoroughly offpiste he's going.

   After discovering that his beloved Maya is shacked up with his old adversary
Vaughan, Lucas is a tortured man with scores of his own to settle and Queen and
country can go hang.

   Just as well, then, that the girl he's driving is so annoying that viewers
would quite happily strangle her themselves.

   DAYBREAK ITV1, 6am-8.30am

   THE Mirror's Pride of Britain Awards are just two weeks away and every
morning this week you can meet our emergency services heroes on Daybreak.

   Today, we encounter courageous copper PC Steve Hargrave, who twice leapt into
stormy seas to rescue people.

   The first time, PC Hargrave, 41, swam 100metres in Worthing to save a
drowning 19-year-old - guided only by the light of the torch he held in his
mouth. A month later he saved a woman who had fallen from Worthing Pier.

   PC Hargrave says: "I don't consider myself brave. It was just good timing I
was there and knew what to do."

   To see PC Hargrave's story, watch Daybreak on ITV1 from 6am to 8.30am today.
Mirror readers and Daybreak viewers can vote for an Emergency Services finalist
online on Friday.

   The winner will be honoured at Pride of Britain 2010, sponsored by
Littlewoods.com, on November 8 on ITV1.

   WE LOVE SCIENCE

   HORIZON BBC2, BBC HD, 9pm

   A DECADE ago, when scientists produced the first draft of the human genome,
there was huge excitement that this knowledge would change the future of
medicine and be used to find a cure for all kinds of diseases.

   Even people who didn't really understand what the boffins had done
(practically all of us) felt this could only be a good thing.

   Now, 10 years on, Horizon has sent three people with a vested interest in
gene therapy to see for themselves exactly how far science has come since then.

   Sophie has cystic fibrosis, Emma has been diagnosed with cancer three times
and Tom is a recovering alcoholic.

   All their diseases are caused by faulty genes and so they naturally want to
know whether new types of treatment will come along in time to benefit them or
their children.

   They are questions that will have implications for every last one of us.

   WE LOVE QUIZ

   THE MILLION POUND DROP LIVE C4, 10pm

   BACK in May, Kate and Andy Jackson must have been the only people to bet
pounds 400,000 on Britain's Eurovision entrant Josh Dubovie.

   Eurovision was the right answer in one round of the first series of this
nail-biting quiz. Kate and Andy walked away with just pounds 75,000, and they
have been the only winners on the show so far.

   So will anybody get all eight questions correct and walk away with pounds
1,000,000 in series two? Davina McCall returns to host another nine episodes
filled with greed, panic and - most probably - despair.

   The rules are simple: contestants start out with one million pounds which
they place on trapdoors corresponding to four possible answers.

   If they put the money on the wrong answer, they'll lose it for ever when the
trapdoor opens and it falls into the hands of the burly security guards below.

   For the rest of us, just seeing what one million pounds actually looks like
in used banknotes does bring on a certain warm glow.

   WE LOVE SOAPS

   EMMERDALE ITV1, 7pm

   IT'S Maisie's turn in the witness box tonight - and we also hear the
all-important necklace evidence.

   But somehow, by the time this gets to court it doesn't sound quite like the
dramatic bombshell we thought it might be.

   Thank heavens then for Cain, who's still got Nathan trussed up like a
chicken. Whatever he's planning to do with him, we hope he does it soon - Nathan
must be proper stinky by now.

   CORONATION STREET ITV1, 7.30pm & 8.30pm

   BECKY will do ANYTHING to stop social workers taking away Max.

   So if that means impersonating her flaky sister Kylie during one of their
inspection visits, then bring it on.

   Fingers crossed that Owen doesn't burst in like he did with John Stape and
insist on greeting everyone by name 17 times. And also let's hope the social
worker doesn't notice all those photos on the sideboard of "Kylie" looking very
lovey-dovey with her "brother-in-law" Steve.

   EASTENDERS BBC1, 8pm

   YOU don't often see people really losing it on soaps. Usually, even in their
darkest moments, all we get is a discreet tear, a trembling lip.

   Not tonight though. It's Billie's funeral and Carol's giving it some
full-blown, falling-apart grief.

   She's banned the rest of the family, but Billie's dad Alan is back and so is
gran Blossom. She's just in time to see the all-new (OK, slightly different)
Queen Vic unveiled.

   DON'T MISS YOUR FANTASTIC T V MAG FREE IN THE MIRROR ON SATURDAY

   TURN OVER FOR BRITAIN'S BEST TV GUIDE

GRAPHIC: BRAVE PC Steve Hargrave UNSAFE HANDS Lucas North guards computer expert
Ortiz WORRY Emma with son Duncan DAVINA One in a million GRAVE Carol, Bianca,
Max and Jack

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2010


                              16 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2010 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                            October 25, 2010 Monday
                                 Ulster Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 920 words

HEADLINE: WE LOVE TELLY;
PICK OF THE DAY

BYLINE: JANE SIMON

BODY:

   SPOOKS BBC1, 9pm

   IS MI5 already feeling the pinch of public spending cuts? The Americans are
delivering a highly-prized computer expert to London and with their customary
efficiency, MI5 has sent a grand total of one person to make sure that she
arrives safe and sound.

   Regular viewers will know that Spooks' track-record of guarding anyone from
anything is nothing to write home about (I'd think twice about entrusting them
to pick up my dry cleaning).

   But as our cyber geek is being looked after by the increasingly unreliable
Lucas North, there is probably even more reason to be worried this week. For his
colleagues, this is actually one of the most challenging weeks Spooks has faced
as they discover the entire Grid has been hacked into and someone is watching
and listening to their every move.

   Ooops. With their hands tied firmly behind their backs (metaphorically at
least) they are powerless to warn Lucas of the danger his precious cargo is in,
or to notice how thoroughly offpiste he's going.

   After discovering that his beloved Maya is shacked up with his old adversary
Vaughan, Lucas is a tortured man with scores of his own to settle and Queen and
country can go hang.

   Just as well, then, that the girl he's driving is so annoying that viewers
would quite happily strangle her themselves.

   DAYBREAK ITV1, 6am-8.30am

   THE Mirror's Pride of Britain & NI Awards are just two weeks away and every
morning this week you can meet our emergency services heroes on Daybreak.

   Today, we encounter courageous copper PC Steve Hargrave, who twice leapt into
stormy seas to rescue people.

   The first time, PC Hargrave, 41, swam 100metres in Worthing to save a
drowning 19-year-old - guided only by the light of the torch he held in his
mouth. A month later he saved a woman who had fallen from Worthing Pier.

   PC Hargrave says: "I don't consider myself brave. It was just good timing I
was there and knew what to do."

   To see PC Hargrave's story, watch Daybreak on ITV1 from 6am to 8.30am today.
Mirror readers and Daybreak viewers can vote for an Emergency Services finalist
online on Friday.

   The winner will be honoured at Pride of Britain 2010, sponsored by
Littlewoods.com, on November 8 on ITV1.

   WE LOVE SCIENCE

   HORIZON BBC2, BBC HD, 9pm

   A DECADE ago, when scientists produced the first draft of the human genome,
there was huge excitement that this knowledge would change the future of
medicine and be used to find a cure for all kinds of diseases.

   Even people who didn't really understand what the boffins had done
(practically all of us) felt this could only be a good thing.

   Now, 10 years on, Horizon has sent three people with a vested interest in
gene therapy to see for themselves exactly how far science has come since then.

   Sophie has cystic fibrosis, Emma has been diagnosed with cancer three times
and Tom is a recovering alcoholic.

   All their diseases are caused by faulty genes and so they naturally want to
know whether new types of treatment will come along in time to benefit them or
their children.

   They are questions that will have implications for every last one of us.

   WE LOVE QUIZ

   THE MILLION POUND DROP LIVE C4, 10pm

   BACK in May, Kate and Andy Jackson must have been the only people to bet
pounds 400,000 on Britain's Eurovision entrant Josh Dubovie.

   Eurovision was the right answer in one round of the first series of this
nail-biting quiz. Kate and Andy walked away with just pounds 75,000, and they
have been the only winners on the show so far.

   So will anybody get all eight questions correct and walk away with pounds
1,000,000 in series two? Davina McCall returns to host another nine episodes
filled with greed, panic and - most probably - despair.

   The rules are simple: contestants start out with one million pounds which
they place on trapdoors corresponding to four possible answers.

   If they put the money on the wrong answer, they'll lose it for ever when the
trapdoor opens and it falls into the hands of the burly security guards below.

   For the rest of us, just seeing what one million pounds actually looks like
in used banknotes does bring on a certain warm glow.

   WE LOVE SOAPS

   EMMERDALE ITV1, 7pm

   IT'S Maisie's turn in the witness box tonight - and we also hear the
all-important necklace evidence.

   But somehow, by the time this gets to court it doesn't sound quite like the
dramatic bombshell we thought it might be.

   Thank heavens then for Cain, who's still got Nathan trussed up like a
chicken. Whatever he's planning to do with him, we hope he does it soon - Nathan
must be proper stinky by now.

   CORONATION STREET ITV1, 7.30pm & 8.30pm

   BECKY will do ANYTHING to stop social workers taking away Max.

   So if that means impersonating her flaky sister Kylie during one of their
inspection visits, then bring it on.

   Fingers crossed that Owen doesn't burst in like he did with John Stape and
insist on greeting everyone by name 17 times. And also let's hope the social
worker doesn't notice all those photos on the sideboard of "Kylie" looking very
lovey-dovey with her "brother-in-law" Steve.

   EASTENDERS BBC1, 8pm

   YOU don't often see people really losing it on soaps. Usually, even in their
darkest moments, all we get is a discreet tear, a trembling lip.

   Not tonight though. It's Billie's funeral and Carol's giving it some
full-blown, falling-apart grief.

   She's banned the rest of the family, but Billie's dad Alan is back and so is
gran Blossom. She's just in time to see the all-new (OK, slightly different)
Queen Vic unveiled.

   DON'T MISS YOUR FANTASTIC TV MAG FREE IN THE MIRROR ON SATURDAY

   TURN OVER FOR THE UK'S BEST TV GUIDE

GRAPHIC: BRAVE PC Steve Hargrave UNSAFE HANDS Lucas North guards computer expert
Ortiz WORRY Emma with son Duncan DAVINA One in a million GRAVE Carol, Bianca,
Max and Jack

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2010


                              17 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2010 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                            October 25, 2010 Monday
                                  Eire Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 645 words

HEADLINE: WE LOVE TELLY;
DAY WE SAID HI TO JFK

BYLINE: MAEVE QUIGLEY

BODY:

   JFK: A HOMECOMING RTE One, 9.30pm

   IT'S the TV show to go with the book that we've been hearing about for over a
year.

   Tonight Ryan Tubridy retraces President John F Kennedy's historic visit to
Ireland in 1963 and the impact it had on the country.

   Having spent the past 18 months researching the event, Ryan now takes us on a
journey behind the scenes of the tour.

   This documentary delves behind the story to examine the President's
relationship with us - and ours, as a nation, with him. Was the 1963 visit
actually important? Why did Kennedy have such a profound effect on us? Did
Ireland really affect Kennedy or was it for show? Was it all just sentimental or
was he closing a significant circle of history? JFK: A Homecoming also examines
and reflects on the Ireland into which Kennedy arrived.

   The echoes of modern times are also present as the documentary looks at the
comparisons between the Kennedy story and that of President Obama - both
presidential mould-breakers in their own way.

   WE LOVE SCIENCE

   HORIZON BBC2, BBC HD, 9pm

   A DECADE ago, when scientists produced the first draft of the human genome,
there was huge excitement that this knowledge would change the future of
medicine and be used to find a cure for all kinds of diseases.

   Even people who didn't really understand what the boffins had done
(practically all of us) felt this could only be a good thing.

   Now, 10 years on, Horizon has sent three people with a vested interest in
gene therapy to see for themselves exactly how far science has come since then.

   Sophie has cystic fibrosis, Emma has been diagnosed with cancer three times
and Tom is a recovering alcoholic. They want to know if new treatments will come
along in time to benefit them or their children.

   WE LOVE REALITY

   MISSION BEACH USA RTE Two, 5pm

   EIGHT Irish 16-year-olds join a Junior Lifeguard course in Florida in this
new reality TV show.

   Daniel, Colin and Clodagh from Dublin, James from Co Tyrone, Niall from Co
Cork, Helen and Nicole from Co Sligo and Amira from Belfast, spend three weeks
having their physical and mental endurance put to the test.

   As well as beach safety, lifesaving and swimming skills they are taught
bodysurfing, body boarding and how to jump from a 30ft high pier.

   The teens are pitted against each other and their American counterparts.

   They face a gruelling course to graduate as cadets, all under the eye of head
coach Chris Hoch, who runs the course with an iron fist.

   WE LOVE SOAPS

   EMMERDALE TV3 7pm

   IT'S Maisie's turn in the witness box tonight - and we also hear the
all-important necklace evidence.

   But somehow, by the time this gets to court it doesn't sound quite like the
dramatic bombshell we thought it might be.

   Thank heavens then for Cain, who's still got Nathan trussed up like a
chicken. Whatever he's planning to do with him, we hope he does it soon - Nathan
must be proper stinky by now.

   CORONATION STREET TV3, 7.30pm & 8.30pm

   BECKY will do ANYTHING to stop social workers taking away Max.

   So if that means impersonating her flaky sister Kylie during one of their
inspection visits, then bring it on.

   Fingers crossed that Owen doesn't burst in like he did with John Stape and
insist on greeting everyone by name 17 times. And also let's hope the social
worker doesn't notice all those photos on the sideboard of "Kylie" looking very
lovey-dovey with her "brother-in-law" Steve.

   EASTENDERS RTE One, 8pm

   YOU don't often see people really losing it on soaps. Usually, even in their
darkest moments, all we get is a discreet tear, a trembling lip.

   Not tonight though. It's Billie's funeral and Carol's giving it some
full-blown falling-apart grief.

   She's banned the rest of the family, b u t Billie's dad Alan is back and so
is gran Blossom. She's just in time to see the all-new (OK, slightly different)
Queen Vic unveiled.

   DON'T MISS YOUR FANTASTIC TV MAG FREE IN THE MIRROR ON SATURDAY

   TURN OVER FOR IRELAND'S BEST TV GUIDE

GRAPHIC: HISTORY President Kennedy gets a warm welcome to Dublin in 1963 WORRY
Emma with son Duncan TESTED James Garvey GRAVE Carol, Bianca, Max and Jack

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2010


                              30 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                             June 15, 2010 Tuesday

LENGTH: 161 words

HEADLINE: PORTFOLIO

BODY:

   COLUMN

   BUY

   OXFORD BIOMEDICA

   Splash out on shares in pharmaceuticals group Oxford BioMedica, suggests
Panmure Gordon. The gene therapy company announced positive news about trials of
its ProSavin drug for Parkinson's disease. "We expect the two-year data from
that trial cohort to emerge in the coming weeks, and it should be even better,"
analysts add.

   SELL

   BT

   Dump shares in telecoms giant BT, say analysts at Execution Noble. "It is
unlikely that we will see a UK cyclical recovery in 2010 or 2011 and that, plus
cuts in public sector spending, will make it tough for BT's Global Services arm
to preserve revenues," notes Execution. It gives the shares a fair-value price
of 130p and says sell.

   HOLD

   AGGREKO

   Hang on to shares in temporary power group Aggreko, says Collins Stewart,
which gives the firm a hold rating. The broker flags up Aggreko's conviction
that it can grow revenues in the International Power Projects business at a
double-digit rate over the next five years.

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2010


                              32 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2010 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             June 2, 2010 Wednesday
                                  Eire Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 127 words

HEADLINE: WE ARE ON BRINK OF BIG DISCOVERY

BYLINE: MIRIAM STOPPARD

BODY:

   EVER since I qualified as a doctor, which was a long time ago, we have been
saying there will be a cure for cancer in 10 to 15 years. It has never come to
pass, but this time I think it probably will. We are on the brink of a very big
discovery as three strands of research for treatment are being pursued - stem
cell, vaccines and gene therapy. I think one will throw up a treatment which
will give us great hope. But cancer is the subject of a lot of hype and the hype
is often inaccurate. This latest research on breast cancer has only been done on
mice and you can't transfer it directly to humans.It will almost certainly yield
a useful result but it's still 10 years away. There won't be a vaccine that
tackles all cancers - and lifestyle will always be vital.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2010


                              33 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2010 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                              June 1, 2010 Tuesday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 126 words

HEADLINE: WE ARE ON BRINK OF BIG DISCOVERY

BYLINE: MIRIAM STOPPARD

BODY:

   EVER since I qualified as a doctor, which was a long time ago, we have been
saying there will be a cure for cancer in 10 to 15 years.

   It has never come to pass, but this time I think it probably will.

   We are on the brink of a very big discovery as three strands of research for
treatment are being pursued - stem cell, vaccines and gene therapy.

   I think one will throw up a treatment which will give us great hope.

   But cancer is the subject of a lot of hype and the hype is often inaccurate.

   This latest research on breast cancer has only been done on mice and you
can't transfer it directly to humans.

   It will almost certainly yield a useful result but it's still 10 years away.

   There won't be a vaccine that tackles all cancers - and lifestyle will always
be vital.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2010


                              34 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2010 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                              June 1, 2010 Tuesday
                                 Ulster Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 126 words

HEADLINE: WE ARE ON BRINK OF BIG DISCOVERY

BYLINE: MIRIAM STOPPARD

BODY:

   EVER since I qualified as a doctor, which was a long time ago, we have been
saying there will be a cure for cancer in 10 to 15 years.

   It has never come to pass, but this time I think it probably will.

   We are on the brink of a very big discovery as three strands of research for
treatment are being pursued - stem cell, vaccines and gene therapy.

   I think one will throw up a treatment which will give us great hope.

   But cancer is the subject of a lot of hype and the hype is often inaccurate.

   This latest research on breast cancer has only been done on mice and you
can't transfer it directly to humans.

   It will almost certainly yield a useful result but it's still 10 years away.
There won't be a vaccine that tackles all cancers - and lifestyle will always be
vital.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2010


                              37 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2010 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             April 13, 2010 Tuesday
                                  Eire Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 285 words

HEADLINE: YOGHURT HOPE FOR CANCER SUFFERERS;
PROBIOTIC BACTERIA COULD GET INSIDE TUMOURS & KILL THEM

BYLINE: SARAH BARDON

BODY:

   EATING yoghurts can prolong the life of cancer sufferers, Irish scientists
have discovered.

   The breakthrough at UCC found bacteria in probiotic yoghurts can deliver gene
therapies to treat the disease.

   A research team at the Cork Cancer Research Centre showed the bacteria is a
safe and effective way to treat cancer.

   Dr Mark Tangney, principal investigator at Cork Cancer Research Centre, UCC
said: "The main goal of cancer treatment is to focus therapy on tumours without
harming healthy cells.

   "Current chemotherapy drugs administered are toxic to many healthy cell
types, often resulting in severe side effects for the patient. This is why we
are so excited.

   "We have demonstrated for the first time that following ingestion of
bifidobacteria in large numbers, these harmless bacteria can leak out from the
gut into the blood and grow inside tumours where they can produce whatever we
want.

   "We can now genetically engineer these bacteria so that they will pump out
anticancer agents inside tumours."

   Cancer is predicted to overtake heart disease as the main killer in the
developed world.

   Noriyuki Kasahara, president of the International Society for Cell and Gene
Therapy of Cancer, said: "The work being done at Cork Cancer Research Centre at
UCC is certainly at the cutting edge of science.

   "No one has ever shown before that you can take an orally-administered safe
bacteria and have it hone into a tumour mass before and act there."

   Enda Connolly, Health Research Board chief executive, said the discovery is
vital to improving cancer care.

   He added: "Turning this type of discovery into a reality is where our future
lies.

   "This is the type of work that the HRB will be supporting in order to improve
patient care."

GRAPHIC: PIONEERS J Shelly Cronin and Dr Mark Tangney of The Cork Cancer
Research Centre at University College Cork

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2010


                              46 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                           November 4, 2009 Wednesday

LENGTH: 1989 words

HEADLINE: LESS BOOZE, LESS WORK AND LOTS MORE SEX

BYLINE: VIV GROSKOP

BODY:

   THERE ARE A FEW SIMPLE RULES TO FOLLOW IF YOU ARE TRYING TO GET PREGNANT,
FERTILITY EXPERT ZITA WEST TELLS VIV GROSKOP

   How much alcohol is too much if you're trying to conceive a baby? Or should
you really not drink at all? What about a sneaky cigarette? If you're not
willing to adopt a macrobiotic diet and take multiple vitamin supplements, do
you have any chance of getting pregnant? Maximising your fertility [#x2039] and
giving your body the best chance of carrying a pregnancy to term [#x2039] has
become big business. In London the biggest name associated with it is Zita West,
who in 25 years as a midwife and fertility consultant has seen more than 10,000
patients at her £195-an-hour Marylebone clinic. Her biggest worry, though? That
couples just aren't having enough sex to get pregnant.

   Assuming you've got that side of things covered, there are other ways you can
improve your chances. West has strict advice for parents-to-be whether they are
trying to conceive naturally or preparing for IVF. "I tell people to keep to
less than six units of alcohol a week. It's an absolute no to cigarettes or
marijuana: smoking and drugs affect fertility. With alcohol, we don't really
know. Research came out last week that suggests you shouldn't drink at all."

   Some of the advice on enhancing your fertility is draconian, but much of it
is good advice for life in general: take a daily multivitamin and mineral
supplement; if you're underweight, put on some weight; if you're overweight, get
in shape; find a middle ground with your exercise routine (not too little, not
too much). West herself has a lot of complicated rules on diet: avoid barbecued
food ("it produces glycotoxins which have been linked to infertility"), cut out
all processed foods and any trans-fats (found in deep-fried foods and pastries)
[#x2039] "they affect ovulation" [#x2039] and don't eat low-fat products (too
processed, too many chemicals).

   This is all doubtless sound advice but it's important to note that millions
of parents the world over have eaten all these things in great quantities and
gone on to produce babies. Fascinatingly, West says 40 per cent of her clients
don't have physical problems with fertility at all [#x2039] their issues are
psychological and emotional. This is hugely overlooked, she believes. "There can
be all kinds of blocks to overcome in the subconscious: previous terminations,
low self-esteem, former abusive partners [#x160] So many factors can prevent a
conception." She believes tackling these mental barriers is at least as
important as the physical side. "If 95 per cent of your subconscious is telling
you that you won't be a good mother, that can have a big effect. Everybody has
their little thing that they want to tell me about in consultation. Things that
seem inconsequential can have an impact. Women are great multi-taskers but when
it comes to emotions it can be difficult for them, especially if they are
perfectionists or control freaks." She advises reading up on this [#x2039] her
own book, Zita West's Guide to Fertility and Assisted Conception (Vermilion,
£14.99) is out in January, as is The Baby-Making Bible by alternative health
guru Emma Cannon (Pan Macmillan, £14.99) and What to Expect Before You're
Expecting by Heidi Murkoff (Simon & Schuster, £10.99). Otherwise, find a
counsellor through your GP or seek help with the Infertility Network or
Fertility Friends (one of the best online resources on infertility). If you're
convinced your problem is physical and you've been trying [#x2039] with sex at
least three times a week [#x2039] for more than a year, see your GP. West also
recommends a fertility MOT (done privately) or ovarian reserve tests (available
from chemists) as a starting point if you're worried.

   "Blood tests looking at egg reserves can be useful. But they are only part of
the picture: you can still get pregnant even if the reserve is low. And they
don't tell you about the quality of the eggs or other underlying problems such
as endemetriosis or blocked tubes."

   West worries that too many couples are rushing for assistance when they are
just not having enough sex to get pregnant. "For most couples fertility is about
having the time and opportunity for sex. If you're having sex three times a
week, then you're OK." She adds that it's important to remain optimistic: "It
can take 12 months or longer at any age. About 84 per cent of couples having
regular sex will get pregnant during that time [#x2039] but people's
expectations are huge. A lot of women are running down the IVF route too quickly
and very often it's not about an ability to conceive [#x2039] it's about
impatience."

   THE FERTILITY EXPERTS

   The Assisted Reproduction and Gynaecology Centre

   Specialism: created Britain's only "saviour sibling" twins. Profile of
patients is mid-thirties to early forties.

   The expert: Mohamed Taranissi has the second highest success rate in the
country.

   Success rate: above national average for women under 40.

   Under-35: 52.1% 35-37: 44%, 38-39: 33.3% 40-42: 21.8%

   Cost: £2,500 including procedures such as ultrasound.

   Contact: 13 Upper Wimpole Street, W1 (020 7486 1230, www.argc.co.uk).

   The Lister Fertility Clinic

   Specialism: successful egg donation programme. Reputation for treating older
couples in their forties.

   The expert: Sam Abdulla, who helped model Normandie Keith get pregnant.

   Success rate: above/consistent with national average for women under 40.

   Under-35: 44.5% 35-37: 35.2% 38-39: 25.8% 40-42: 18.8%

   Cost: £3,210.

   Contact: Chelsea Bridge Road, SW1 (020 7881 4087, www.ivf.org.uk).

   London Women's Clinic

   Specialism: trialling new embryo screening technique which could treble
chance of pregnancy. The clinic is popular with same-sex couples.

   The expert: Kamal Ahuja, who pioneered egg sharing in the early 1990s.

   Success rate: consistent with national average for women under 40.

   Under-35: 40.8% 35-37: 30.9% 38-39- 24.1% 40-42: 11.4%

   Cost: £2,950.

   Contact: 113-115 Harley Street, W1 (020 7487 5050, www.lwclinic.co.uk).

   The Bridge Centre

   Specialism: embryo screening. Offers a test that can screen for any one of
15,000 genetic conditions.

   The expert: scientific director Alan Thornhill is one of the UK's leading
specialists in preimplantation genetics and clinical embryology.

   Success rate: consistent with national average for women under 40.

   Under-35: 34.6% 35-37: 31.6% 38-39: 22.3% 40-42: 12.8%

   Cost: £3,150.

   Contact: 1 St Thomas Street, SE1 (020 7403 3363, www.thebridgecentre.co.uk).

   Centre for Reproductive and Genetic Health at UCH

   Specialism: screening for breast, ovarian and prostate cancer.

   The expert: Paul Serhal helped create the world's first "cancer-free" baby.

   Success rate: above average/consistent with national average for women under
40.

   Under 35: 56.8% 35-37: 48.1% 38-39: 23.1% 40-42: 24%

   Cost: £3,000.

   Contact: 256 Grays Inn Road, WC1 (020 7837 2905, www.crgh.co.uk).

   London Fertility Centre

   Specialism: first clinic in Britain to produce IVF twins. Has helped women
over 50 get pregnant.

   The expert: Magdy Assad offers vitrification, a new method of freezing eggs.

   Success rate: consistent with national average for women under 40.

   Under-35: 30.5% 35-37: 27.1% 38-39: 16.4%, 40-42: 10.5%

   Cost: £2,950.

   Contact: 53 Portland Place, W1 (020 7224 0707, www.lfc.org.uk).

   Assisted Conception Unit at Guy's and St Thomas' NHS

   Specialism: runs the largest screening programme in the UK for couples with
inherited conditions.

   The expert: Yacoub Khalaf treats women suffering recurrent miscarriage as
well as male infertility.

   Success rates: consistent with national average for women under 40.

   Under-35: 29.9% 35-37: 23.5% 38-39: 13.5% 40-42: 14%

   Costs: £2,600.

   Contact: 4th Floor, Southwark Wing, Guy's Hospital, SE1 (020 7188 2300,
www.guysandstthomas.nhs.uk).

   Chelsea & Westminster Hospital assisted conception unit

   Specialism: treatments include ICSI where sperm is injected directly into the
egg.

   The expert: Julian Norman-Taylor, who worked with fertility pioneer Professor
Robert Winston.

   Success rate: consistent with national average for women under 40.

   Under-35: 24.2% 35-37: 12.2% 38-39: 9.3% 40-42: 4.2%

   Cost: £2,950.

   Contact: 369 Fulham Road, SW10 (020 8746 8585, www.chelwest.nhs.uk).

   Bourn Hall Clinic

   Specialism: Its founders Patrick Steptoe and Robert Edwards created the first
IVF baby, Louise Brown.

   The expert: Peter Brinsden, an inspector for watchdog the Human Fertilisation
and Embryology Authority.

   Success rate: consistent with national average for women under 40.

   Under-35: 32.9% 35-37: 30.6% 38-39: 17% 40-42: 9.4%

   Cost: £2,950.

   Contact: Bourn, Cambridge (01954 719111, www.bourn-hall-clinic.co.uk).

   Barts and the London Centre for Reproductive Medicine

   Specialism: runs donor sperm bank for single women.

   The expert: Dr Amanda Tozer, who backs the extension of free IVF to women
aged over 39.

   Success rate: consistent with national average. Under-35: 28% 35-37: 26.9%
38-39: 14.4% 40-42: 9.5%

   Cost: £2,900.

   Contact: 2nd Floor, Kenton and Lucas Wing, Little Britain, EC1 (020 7601
7176, www.bartsandthelondon.nhs.uk).

   Assisted Conception Unit at King's College

   Specialism: sperm washing for HIV-positive men.

   The expert: John Parsons, whose interests include premature menopause and
polycystic ovary syndrome.

   Success rate: consistent/below average for women under 40.

   Under-35: 25.2% 35-37: 15.7% 38-39: 14.6% 40-42: 8%

   Cost: on application.

   Contact: 1st Floor, Mapother House, King's College Hospital, SE5 (020 3299
5390, www.kch.nhs.uk/fertility).

   CRM London

   Specialism: shortest waiting list in the UK for egg donation.

   The expert: Robert Forman has 25 years experience in IVF.

   Success rate: above/consistent with national average.

   Under-35: 43% 35-37: 47.7% 38-39: 28.3% 40-42: 15%

   Cost: £2,750.

   Contact: 111 Park Road NW8 (020 7616 6767, www.ivfcliniclondon.com).

   IVF Hammersmith

   Specialism: free fertility counselling.

   The expert: Geoffrey Trew helped Jools Oliver conceive.

   Success rate: consistent with national average for women under 40.

   Under-35: 31.4%, 35-37: 23.7% 38-39: 15.3% 40-42: 9.3%

   Cost: £2,950.

   Contact: Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, W12 (020 3313 4411,
www.ivfhammersmith.com).

   Oxford Fertility Unit

   Specialism: IVF using donor sperm and eggs

   The expert: Dagan Wells, who is trialling a new method of embryo screening
that could treble the chance of pregnancy.

   Success rate: above/consistent with national average for women under 40

   Under-35: 42.4% 35-37: 31.6%, 38-39: 20%, 40-42: 16.6%

   Cost: £2,800.

   Contact: Institute of Reproductive Sciences, Oxford Business Park North, OX4
2HW (01865 782800, www.oxfordfertilityunit.com).

   Source: HFEA

   TREATMENTS: THE ALTERNATIVES TFERTILIT

   Diet: a good diet is crucial to a successful pregnancy and a healthy baby.
Supplements such as folic acid and B vitamins are crucial to conceiving. Cut out
alcohol, caffeine and smoking, which are all proven to lower fertility.

   Acupuncture: the experts are divided on its effect on fertility but there is
no doubt that it can reduce anxiety and stress, which are significant factors in
getting pregnant.

   Chinese medicine: an increasingly popular fertility booster. This ancient
technique can improve egg quality and strengthen the womb lining to increase the
chance of successful implantation. This is particularly relevant in older
patients.

   TREATMENTS: THE FUTURE

   Genetic testing: screening embryos for genetic flaws is considered by many
fertility experts as the Holy Grail for improving IVF success rates. One test
devised by Dr Dagan Wells at Oxford University has been shown in trials to
treble the chance of pregnancy. It works by analysing the genes of embryos then
implanting the healthy ones.

   Gene therapy: male infertility accounts for a third of all cases. Factors can
include defective genes which undermine healthy sperm production. Japanese
scientists are currently working on treatments that could overcome this genetic
flaw.

   Egg freezing: most fertility clinics now offer patients the chance to
preserve their eggs but survival rates for thawed eggs vary. A new method being
investigated is called microcyplast cryopreservation which could increase these
rates.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2009


                              48 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                            October 16, 2009 Friday

LENGTH: 322 words

HEADLINE: PORTFOLIO

BYLINE: STANDARD REPORTER

BODY:

   BUY

   OXFORD BIOMEDICA

   KBC Peel Hunt advises investors to splash out on shares in biotechnology
specialist Oxford BioMedica. The recommendation comes after the pharma firm
announced the latest trial results from its ProSavin drug, which has
demonstrated a 34% improvement in the health of Parkinson's patients at medical
tests. KBC's analysts say that the latest trial news puts ProSavin in line with
the top range of gene therapy treatments currently in development, although they
note that the treatment is delivered by a six-to-eight-hour surgical procedure
that could may well limit its commercial potential. The broker gives Oxford
BioMedica a target price of 17p.

   SELL

   MICHAEL PAGE

   Altium Securities recommends shareholders in recruitment giant Michael Page
dump the stock. The sell rating comes following Page's announcement to the
market that Charles-Henri Dumon, managing director of the continental Europe and
Americas division of the firm, had disposed of 60,000 shares, worth about
£222,000. Altium's analysts flag up the fact that this dumping is the second
time in five months that Dumon has sold off shares, and advises investors to
follow his actions. The broker reckons the value of Michael Page shares already
has the forecast for economic recovery priced in, and gives the stock a target
price of 300p.

   HOLD

   DIAGEO

   Evolution Securities names Tango and Robinson's squash maker Diageo a hold,
saying that the soft drink firm's first-quarter sales figures, which were
published yesterday, fell short of market expectations. Evolution's analysts
reckon that uncertainties about trading are likely to hang over Diageo for the
next few months, at least until a clearer picture of the consumer mood at
Christmas becomes clear. The broker notes, however, that Diageo has received a
positive boost from currency movements, so tips investors to hold on to the
stock rather than dump it. Evolution gives Diageo a target price of 950p.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2009


                              49 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                            October 16, 2009 Friday

LENGTH: 322 words

HEADLINE: PORTFOLIO

BYLINE: STANDARD REPORTER

BODY:

   BUY

   OXFORD BIOMEDICA

   KBC Peel Hunt advises investors to splash out on shares in biotechnology
specialist Oxford BioMedica. The recommendation comes after the pharma firm
announced the latest trial results from its ProSavin drug, which has
demonstrated a 34% improvement in the health of Parkinson's patients at medical
tests. KBC's analysts say that the latest trial news puts ProSavin in line with
the top range of gene therapy treatments currently in development, although they
note that the treatment is delivered by a six-to-eight-hour surgical procedure
that could may well limit its commercial potential. The broker gives Oxford
BioMedica a target price of 17p.

   SELL

   MICHAEL PAGE

   Altium Securities recommends shareholders in recruitment giant Michael Page
dump the stock. The sell rating comes following Page's announcement to the
market that Charles-Henri Dumon, managing director of the continental Europe and
Americas division of the firm, had disposed of 60,000 shares, worth about
£222,000. Altium's analysts flag up the fact that this dumping is the second
time in five months that Dumon has sold off shares, and advises investors to
follow his actions. The broker reckons the value of Michael Page shares already
has the forecast for economic recovery priced in, and gives the stock a target
price of 300p.

   HOLD

   DIAGEO

   Evolution Securities names Tango and Robinson's squash maker Diageo a hold,
saying that the soft drink firm's first-quarter sales figures, which were
published yesterday, fell short of market expectations. Evolution's analysts
reckon that uncertainties about trading are likely to hang over Diageo for the
next few months, at least until a clearer picture of the consumer mood at
Christmas becomes clear. The broker notes, however, that Diageo has received a
positive boost from currency movements, so tips investors to hold on to the
stock rather than dump it. Evolution gives Diageo a target price of 950p.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2009


                              50 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                            October 16, 2009 Friday

LENGTH: 476 words

HEADLINE: INVESCO ACE TAKES UP MAJOR CHUNK OF LAWSUIT FINANCIER

BYLINE: STANDARD REPORTER

BODY:

   Neil Woodford, the ace fund manager at Invesco Perpetual, has taken a huge
stake in Burford Capital as the litigation financing fund lists its shares on
the junior alternative investment market of the London Stock Exchange.

   Invesco has ended up with 45% of the 100p shares in the £80 million
institutional share placing.

   The shares start trading on Wednesday.

   Woodford is also a major backer of Burford's rival Jurica, where he took a
near-30% stake when it floated last year. Alongside Invesco other big backers of
the Burford float included Sanjeev Shah at Fidelity, who has taken a 9.9% stake,
and Baillie Gifford, which has ended up with 10.6% of the placing.

   Burford will use the $130 million (£80 million) it has raised from the share
placing to fund corporate legal disputes in the United States working on a
no-win, no-fee basis but collecting a hefty percentage in cases where it is
successful.

   PORTFOLIO

   BY STANDARD REPORTER

   BUY

   OXFORD BIOMEDICA

   KBC Peel Hunt advises investors to splash out on shares in biotechnology
specialist Oxford BioMedica. The recommendation comes after the pharma firm
announced the latest trial results from its ProSavin drug, which has
demonstrated a 34% improvement in the health of Parkinson's patients at medical
tests. KBC's analysts say that the latest trial news puts ProSavin in line with
the top range of gene therapy treatments currently in development, although they
note that the treatment is delivered by a six-to-eight-hour surgical procedure
that could may well limit its commercial potential. The broker gives Oxford
BioMedica a target price of 17p.

   SELL

   MICHAEL PAGE

   Altium Securities recommends shareholders in recruitment giant Michael Page
dump the stock. The sell rating comes following Page's announcement to the
market that Charles-Henri Dumon, managing director of the continental Europe and
Americas division of the firm, had disposed of 60,000 shares, worth about
£222,000. Altium's analysts flag up the fact that this dumping is the second
time in five months that Dumon has sold off shares, and advises investors to
follow his actions. The broker reckons the value of Michael Page shares already
has the forecast for economic recovery priced in, and gives the stock a target
price of 300p.

   HOLD

   DIAGEO

   Evolution Securities names Tango and Robinson's squash maker Diageo a hold,
saying that the soft drink firm's first-quarter sales figures, which were
published yesterday, fell short of market expectations. Evolution's analysts
reckon that uncertainties about trading are likely to hang over Diageo for the
next few months, at least until a clearer picture of the consumer mood at
Christmas becomes clear. The broker notes, however, that Diageo has received a
positive boost from currency movements, so tips investors to hold on to the
stock rather than dump it. Evolution gives Diageo a target price of 950p.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2009


                              51 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                           October 14, 2009 Wednesday

LENGTH: 122 words

HEADLINE: NEW CENTRE TO DEVELOP CANCER TREATMENTS

BODY:

   SOPHIE GOODCHILD

   London's first specialist centre for patients with hard-to-treat cancers
opened today.

   The UCL Cancer Research UK Centre will focus on new treatments such as gene
therapy and drug development.

   It brings together experts from University College London Hospital, Great
Ormond Street, the Royal Free Hampstead and Moorfields Eye Hospital as well as
the London School of Pharmacy and Cancer Research UK.

   They will focus on cancers which have poor long term survival rates.
Professor David Linch, director of the unit, said the aim was to create a centre
which would be a world leader in developing treatments. Cancer Research UK
already has six specialist centres in the UK. It has pledged £1 million a year
to the London unit.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2009


                              58 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2009 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                          September 17, 2009 Thursday
                                 1 Star Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 213 words

HEADLINE: MONKEY IN SIGHT HOPE

BYLINE: MIKE SWAIN

BODY:

   SCIENTISTS have raised hopes of curing colour blindness after successfully
treating monkeys with the condition.

   A US team of experts used gene therapy to make the primates' eyes more
sensitive to red light.

   Opthalmologist Professor William Hauswith from the University of Florida
said: "We added red sensitivity to cone cells in animals that are born with a
condition that is exactly like human colour blindness. Although colour blindness
is only moderately life-altering, we have shown that we can cure a cone disease
in a primate very safely.

   "That's extremely encouraging for the development of therapies for human cone
diseases."

   Research colleague Professor Jay Neitz of the University of Washington,
added: "If we could find a way to do this with complete safety in human eyes I
think there would be a lot of people who would want it. Beyond that, we hope
this technology will be useful in correcting lots of different vision
disorders."

   Colour blindness is the most common genetic disorder in people, affecting
millions around the world. It mostly hits men. One in eight males are unable to
differentiate between green and red.

   Prof Neitz, who began the research 10 years ago with his eye doctor wife
Maureen, said: "People who are colour blind feel that they are missing out."

GRAPHIC: TESTS Eye monkey

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2009


                              59 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2009 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                          September 17, 2009 Thursday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 58 words

HEADLINE: APE AID FOR COLOUR BLIND;
SIGHT

BODY:

   SCIENTISTS have cured colour blind monkeys, raising hopes they can do the
same for people.

   The US team in Seattle used gene therapy to make the eye more sensitive to
red light. One in eight men are unable to differentiate between green and red.

   Prof Jay Neitz said: "If we could find a way to do this in complete safety, a
lot of people would want it."

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2009


                              61 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                            August 27, 2009 Thursday

LENGTH: 354 words

HEADLINE: BUY

BODY:

   OFFICE2OFFICE WH Ireland reckons investors should snap up shares in business
supply firm Office2Office, which runs brands Banner and Accord. The broker
describes the company's interim results [#x2039] its first-half revenue was up
14% to £96 million [#x2039] as a "very creditable performance against a
challenging market backdrop". Although it notes that Banner receives more than
50% of its revenue from the public sector, (it is a major supplier to NHS Trusts
around the country), WH Ireland says it is "mindful" of potential spending
constraints in this area from next year, but still sees the stock as a buy. The
broker names a 175p price target. Shares in Office2Office were today changing
hands for 3.5p more at 158.5p.

   SELL

   ARK THERAPEUTICS

   KBC Peel Hunt advises investors to dump shares in Ark Therapeutics, making
the pharmaceuticals company a sell. The rating comes after the gene therapy
specialist yesterday reported a financial performance in line with the broker's
expectations, but KBC Peel Hunt's analysts say Ark's Cerepro brain-cancer drug
could be key to its performance. The broker reckons the drug might need another
round of clinical trials in both the EU and America, which would prove a further
drain on Ark's existing cash resources. KBC is unsure of the likely time span
for Cerepro's approval, and therefore sees the stock as a sell, naming a 20p
target price. Shares in Ark today were trading flat at 47 p.

   HOLD

   H&T Daniel Stewart describes pawnbroking giant H&T's interim results
yesterday as stunning as it makes the stock a hold. The firm showed that
pawnbroking is thriving in the recession, posting a 30% rise in gross profit,
which hit £22.1 million, as well as reporting the opening of three new stores
across the UK, taking its total estate to 111. As a result, Daniel Stewart says
it sees H&T as a compelling investment, particularly rating it over its sector
rival Albemarle & Bond, against which H&T is currently trading at a 19% discount
[#x2039] the broker reckons this discrepancy should be corrected as it names a
260p target price. Shares in H&T were today changing hands at the unchanged
level of 263.5p.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2009


                              65 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2009 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             July 28, 2009 Tuesday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 924 words

HEADLINE: WHY MUM AND DAD MAP YOUR FUTURE..;
DEAR MIRIAM

BYLINE: MIRIAM STOPPARD

BODY:

   We inherit a great deal more from our parents than you might think.

   As well as looks and mannerisms, our physical and mental health is linked
genetically to Mum and Dad.

   So the more we know about family medical history, the more clued up we can be
about the future health of our own family - and what to watch out for.

   My own history is a case in point - I inherited an underactive thyroid from
my mum.

   Now research has found a strong link in obesity between mothers and daughters
and fathers and sons, but not across the gender divide.

   Although I'm sure this is partly down to copying the eating habits of
parents, as family environment is important, too, genes play a role.

   So it's a good idea to ask your parents and grandparents, as well as aunts
and uncles, about health conditions running in your family, and to see your GP
if you suspect you may carry a disease gene.

   Regular testing can help ensure you get an early diagnosis and the best
possible treatment - and referral to a genetic counsellor can help prevent you
unwittingly passing on a condition to your kids.

   Running in the family

   FROM MUM

   Early menopause

   WHAT IS IT?

   It's considered early to go through the menopause before the age of 40.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN:

   One in five cases is hereditary - and the more women in your family who've
had an early menopause, the higher your risk.

   WHAT TO DO:

   Ask your mum and other older female relatives what age they were at
menopause, so you can be prepared for the symptoms and plan to start your family
earlier if necessary.

   Haemophilia

   WHAT IS IT?

   A condition in which blood can't clot, so even a minor injury can result in
uncontrolled bleeding.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN:

   It's generally caused by a genetic mutation in the X (female) chromosome.

   It's carried by women but only shows up in sons - although daughters can be
silent carriers.

   WHAT TO DO:

   Any woman with a family history should be tested for the gene before starting
a family and referred for genetic counselling to talk about ways to avoid
passing on the disease.

   FROM DAD

   Bipolar disorder

   WHAT IS IT?

   A psychiatric illness. Mood can alternate between being manic and bouts of
deep depr ession.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN:

   Scientists suspect that men who get bipolar disorder may have had it
genetically passed down from their father. Women also suffer from this condition
but it's not thought to have such a strong genetic element.

   WHAT TO DO:

   Question your family if you think bipolar disorder, or any form of
depression, runs in your family so you know the signs to watch out for and can
seek help if necessary.

   Huntington's disease

   WHAT IS IT?

   An incurable genetic disorder which damages nerve cells in the brain, slowing
reducing the ability to walk, think and talk.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN:

   If symptoms occur before age 20, the gene is usually inherited from the
father. If they appear later, it could be from either parent. Having a parent
with Huntington's gives you a 50% chance of developing it.

   WHAT TO DO:

   If your family has a history of Huntington's, you can find out if you've
inherited the gene with a blood test. This can help with family planning and
preparing for the future.

   FROM BOTH PARENTS

   Sickle-cell anaemia

   WHAT IS IT?

   A blood disorder in which red blood cells are misshapen (sickle shaped) and
burst, causing severe pain and organ damage. There's no cure but episodes, known
as crises, can be reduced with early treatment. Sickle-cell is most common in
people from Africa, the Caribbean, India or the Mediterranean.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN:

   To develop it, a child has to inherit the gene from both parents. Those who
inherit the gene from one will only become carriers of the condition but can
pass the gene to their children.

   WHAT TO DO:

   If you or your partner has a family history, you should be tested. If you're
both carriers, you'll be offered genetic counselling if you're planning a
family. IVF may be offered so embryos can be screened for the sickle-cell gene.

   Cystic fibrosis

   WHAT IS IT?

   A genetic disease in which the lungs and digestive system become clogged with
thick, sticky mucus, making it difficult to breathe and digest food. It can
shorten lifespan but research into new treatments using gene therapy look
promising.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN:

   You need to inherit a CFTR gene from both parents to develop it. If you
inherit only one gene, you'll be a carrier but won't have symptoms. When both
parents are carriers, there's a one-in-four chance of the child being born with
it with each pregnancy.

   WHAT TO DO:

   If you or your partner has a family history of cystic fibrosis, you should
both be tested to see if you carry the gene before you start a family.

   If you both have the gene, doctors may recommend IVF so any embryos can be
screened for it.

   Breast cancer

   WHAT IS IT?

   A malignant tumour in the breast, affecting one in nine women.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN:

   Up to 10% of breast cancer cases are believed to be genetic, caused by the
BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. The daughter of a woman with hereditary breast cancer has
a 40 to 50% risk of developing it.

   These genes are also linked to ovarian, bowel and prostate cancer, so the
hereditary element can affect men too. Plus the colon cancer gene, HNPCC, is
linked to a higher breast cancer risk. So a man who had bowel cancer caused by
the gene could pass a genetic susceptibility to breast cancer to his daughters
and granddaughters. This is why you should look at grandparents' health history,
too.

   WHAT TO DO:

   Talk to your GP if you have a family history of any of the above cancers, as
you may be eligible for early mammogram (before 50) and genetic screening.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2009


                              66 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2009 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             July 28, 2009 Tuesday
                                  Eire Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 933 words

HEADLINE: WHY MUM AND DAD MAP YOUR FUTURE..;
DEAR MIRIAM

BYLINE: MIRIAM STOPPARD

BODY:

   We inherit a great deal more from our parents than you might think.

   As well as looks and mannerisms, our physical and mental health is linked
genetically to Mum and Dad.

   So the more we know about family medical history, the more clued up we can be
about the future health of our own family - and what to watch out for.

   My own history is a case in point - I inherited an underactive thyroid from
my mum.

   Now research has found a strong link in obesity between mothers and daughters
and fathers and sons, but not across the gender divide.

   Although I'm sure this is partly down to copying the eating habits of
parents, as family environment is important, too, genes play a role.

   So it's a good idea to ask your parents and grandparents, as well as aunts
and uncles, about health conditions running in your family, and to see your GP
if you suspect you may carry a disease gene.

   Regular testing can help ensure you get an early diagnosis and the best
possible treatment - and referral to a genetic counsellor can help prevent you
unwittingly passing on a condition to your kids.

   Running in the family

   FROM MUM

   Early menopause WHAT IS IT? It's considered early to go through the menopause
before the age of 40.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN: One in five cases is hereditary - and the more women in
your family who've had an early menopause, the higher your risk.

   WHAT TO DO: Ask your mum and other older female relatives what age they were
at menopause, so you can be prepared for the symptoms and plan to start your
family earlier if necessary.

   Haemophilia

   WHAT IS IT? A condition in which blood can't clot, so even a minor injury can
result in uncontrolled bleeding.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN: It's generally caused by a genetic mutation in the X
(female) chromosome.

   It's carried by women but only shows up in sons - although daughters can be
silent carriers.

   WHAT TO DO: Any woman with a family history should be tested for the gene
before starting a family and referred for genetic counselling to talk about ways
to avoid passing on the disease.

   FROM DAD

   Bipolar disorder

   WHAT IS IT? A psychiatric illness. Mood can alternate between being manic and
bouts of deep depr ession.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN: Scientists suspect that men who get bipolar disorder
may have had it genetically passed down from their father. Women also suffer
from this condition but it's not thought to have such a strong genetic element.

   WHAT TO DO: Question your family if you think bipolar disorder, or any form
of depression, runs in your family so you know the signs to watch out for and
can seek help if necessary.

   Huntington's disease

   WHAT IS IT? An incurable genetic disorder which damages nerve cells in the
brain, slowing reducing the ability to walk, think and talk.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN: If symptoms occur before age 20, the gene is usually
inherited from the father. If they appear later, it could be from either parent.
Having a parent with Huntington's gives you a 50% chance of developing it.

   WHAT TO DO: If your family has a history of Huntington's, you can find out if
you've inherited the gene with a blood test. This can help with family planning
and preparing for the future.

   FROM BOTH PARENTS

   Sickle-cell anaemia

   WHAT IS IT? A blood disorder in which red blood cells are misshapen (sickle
shaped) and burst, causing severe pain and organ damage. There's no cure but
episodes, known as crises, can be reduced with early treatment. Sickle-cell is
most common in people from Africa, the Caribbean, India or the Mediterranean.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN: To develop it, a child has to inherit the gene from
both parents. Those who inherit the gene from one will only become carriers of
the condition but can pass the gene to their children.

   WHAT TO DO: If you or your partner has a family history, you should be
tested. If you're both carriers, you'll be offered genetic counselling if you're
planning a family. IVF may be offered so embryos can be screened for the
sickle-cell gene.

   Cystic fibrosis

   WHAT IS IT?

   A genetic disease in which the lungs and digestive system become clogged with
thick, sticky mucus, making it difficult to breathe and digest food. It can
shorten lifespan but research into new treatments using gene therapy look
promising.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN: You need to inherit a CFTR gene from both parents to
develop it. If you inherit only one gene, you'll be a carrier but won't have
symptoms. When both parents are carriers, there's a one-in-four chance of the
child being born with it with each pregnancy.

   WHAT TO DO: If you or your partner has a family history of cystic fibrosis,
you should both be tested to see if you carry the gene before you start a
family.

   If you both have the gene, doctors may recommend IVF so any embryos can be
screened for it.

   Breast cancer

   WHAT IS IT? A malignant tumour in the breast, affecting one in nine women.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN: Up to 10% of breast cancer cases are believed to be
genetic, caused by the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. The daughter of a woman with
hereditary breast cancer has a 40 to 50% risk of developing it.

   These genes are also linked to ovarian, bowel and prostate cancer, so the
hereditary element can affect men too. Plus the colon cancer gene, HNPCC, is
linked to a higher breast cancer risk. So a man who had bowel cancer caused by
the gene could pass a genetic susceptibility to breast cancer to his daughters
and granddaughters. This is why you should look at grandparents' health history,
too.

   WHAT TO DO: Talk to your GP if you have a family history of any of the above
cancers, as you may be eligible for early mammogram (before 50) and genetic
screening.

   Additional research: CAROLINE JONES

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2009


                              67 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2009 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             July 28, 2009 Tuesday
                                 Ulster Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 924 words

HEADLINE: WHY MUM AND DAD MAP YOUR FUTURE..;
DEAR MIRIAM

BYLINE: MIRIAM STOPPARD

BODY:

   We inherit a great deal more from our parents than you might think.

   As well as looks and mannerisms, our physical and mental health is linked
genetically to Mum and Dad.

   So the more we know about family medical history, the more clued up we can be
about the future health of our own family - and what to watch out for.

   My own history is a case in point - I inherited an underactive thyroid from
my mum.

   Now research has found a strong link in obesity between mothers and daughters
and fathers and sons, but not across the gender divide.

   Although I'm sure this is partly down to copying the eating habits of
parents, as family environment is important, too, genes play a role.

   So it's a good idea to ask your parents and grandparents, as well as aunts
and uncles, about health conditions running in your family, and to see your GP
if you suspect you may carry a disease gene.

   Regular testing can help ensure you get an early diagnosis and the best
possible treatment - and referral to a genetic counsellor can help prevent you
unwittingly passing on a condition to your kids.

   Running in the family

   FROM MUM Early menopause WHAT IS IT?

   It's considered early to go through the menopause before the age of 40.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN: One in five cases is hereditary - and the more women in
your family who've had an early menopause, the higher your risk.

   WHAT TO DO: Ask your mum and other older female relatives what age they were
at menopause, so you can be prepared for the symptoms and plan to start your
family earlier if necessary.

   Haemophilia

   WHAT IS IT?

   A condition in which blood can't clot, so even a minor injury can result in
uncontrolled bleeding.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN: It's generally caused by a genetic mutation in the X
(female) chromosome.

   It's carried by women but only shows up in sons - although daughters can be
silent carriers.

   WHAT TO DO: Any woman with a family history should be tested for the gene
before starting a family and referred for genetic counselling to talk about ways
to avoid passing on the disease.

   FROM DAD

   Bipolar disorder

   WHAT IS IT?

   A psychiatric illness. Mood can alternate between being manic and bouts of
deep depr ession.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN: Scientists suspect that men who get bipolar disorder
may have had it genetically passed down from their father. Women also suffer
from this condition but it's not thought to have such a strong genetic element.

   WHAT TO DO: Question your family if you think bipolar disorder, or any form
of depression, runs in your family so you know the signs to watch out for and
can seek help if necessary.

   Huntington's disease

   WHAT IS IT? An incurable genetic disorder which damages nerve cells in the
brain, slowing reducing the ability to walk, think and talk.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN: If symptoms occur before age 20, the gene is usually
inherited from the father. If they appear later, it could be from either parent.
Having a parent with Huntington's gives you a 50% chance of developing it.

   WHAT TO DO: If your family has a history of Huntington's, you can find out if
you've inherited the gene with a blood test. This can help with family planning
and preparing for the future.

   FROM BOTH PARENTS

   Sickle-cell anaemia

   WHAT IS IT? A blood disorder in which red blood cells are misshapen (sickle
shaped) and burst, causing severe pain and organ damage. There's no cure but
episodes, known as crises, can be reduced with early treatment. Sickle-cell is
most common in people from Africa, the Caribbean, India or the Mediterranean.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN: To develop it, a child has to inherit the gene from
both parents. Those who inherit the gene from one will only become carriers of
the condition but can pass the gene to their children.

   WHAT TO DO: If you or your partner has a family history, you should be
tested. If you're both carriers, you'll be offered genetic counselling if you're
planning a family. IVF may be offered so embryos can be screened for the
sickle-cell gene.

   Cystic fibrosis

   WHAT IS IT?

   A genetic disease in which the lungs and digestive system become clogged with
thick, sticky mucus, making it difficult to breathe and digest food. It can
shorten lifespan but research into new treatments using gene therapy look
promising.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN: You need to inherit a CFTR gene from both parents to
develop it. If you inherit only one gene, you'll be a carrier but won't have
symptoms. When both parents are carriers, there's a one-in-four chance of the
child being born with it with each pregnancy.

   WHAT TO DO: If you or your partner has a family history of cystic fibrosis,
you should both be tested to see if you carry the gene before you start a
family.

   If you both have the gene, doctors may recommend IVF so any embryos can be
screened for it.

   Breast cancer

   WHAT IS IT? A malignant tumour in the breast, affecting one in nine women.

   HOW IT'S PASSED DOWN: Up to 10% of breast cancer cases are believed to be
genetic, caused by the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. The daughter of a woman with
hereditary breast cancer has a 40 to 50% risk of developing it.

   These genes are also linked to ovarian, bowel and prostate cancer, so the
hereditary element can affect men too. Plus the colon cancer gene, HNPCC, is
linked to a higher breast cancer risk. So a man who had bowel cancer caused by
the gene could pass a genetic susceptibility to breast cancer to his daughters
and granddaughters. This is why you should look at grandparents' health history,
too.

   WHAT TO DO: Talk to your GP if you have a family history of any of the above
cancers, as you may be for early mammogram (before 50) and screening.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2009


                              77 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                             April 14, 2009 Tuesday

LENGTH: 121 words

HEADLINE: GENE BOOST TO CUT STILLBIRTHS

BODY:

   KIRAN RANDHAWA

   LONDON scientists are close a breakthrough gene therapy for a condition which
causes 1,000 miscarriages and stillbirths each year.

   A team from University College Hospital is hoping to start a trial later this
year of drugs to prevent severe foetal growth restriction.

   The condition occurs because of reduced blood flow to the placenta. It
affects more than 1,000 pregnancies in Britain each year resulting in
stillbirth, miscarriage and enforced abortions.

   The treatment, developed jointly with biotechnology company Ark Therapies,
uses a genetically engineered virus to deliver extra copies of a gene that
promotes blood flow to the mother's uterine arteries, in the hope that it would
get the foetus growing again.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2009


                              78 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                             March 10, 2009 Tuesday

LENGTH: 346 words

HEADLINE: NEW TREATMENT THAT SENDS TUMOUR BUSTERS STRAIGHT TO THE TARGET

BODY:

   MARK PRIGG SCIENCE CORRESPONDENT

   A TReATMeNT that delivers tumourbusting drugs directly to cancer cells for
the first time has been revealed by London researchers.

   Initial trials have shown the treatment can shrink or eradicate tumours in
about 80 per cent of subjects.

   Cancer Research UK scientists at the School of Pharmacy in Brunswick Square
believe their discovery could be used in humans within two years.

   The researchers were able to package tumour-busting genes in microscopic
nanoparticles programmed to release the drug only when they come in contact with
cancerous cells.

   Cancer Research UK's Dr Andreas Schatzlein, who led the study, said: "This is
the first time that nanoparticles have been shown to target tumours in such a
selective way, and this is an exciting step forward in the field. Once inside
the cell, the gene enclosed in the particle recognises the cancerous environment
and switches on.

   "The result is toxic, but only to the offending cells, leaving healthy tissue
unaffected."

   Once taken up by cancer cells, the genes enclosed in the nanoparticles force
the cell to produce proteins that can kill the cancer, according to the study
published today in the journal Cancer Research.

   In this study the cells were forced to make a protein which was then visible
in whole-body scans of mice revealing that healthy cells were not affected by
the treatment.

   Previous studies showed that the type of gene therapy used in this study can
shrink tumours and even cure about 80 per cent of the mice given the treatment.

   Scientists say the technique is particularly relevant for people with cancers
that are inoperable because they are close to vital organs, such as the brain or
lungs.

   Dr Lesley Walker, Cancer Research UK's director of cancer information, said:
"These results are encouraging, and we look forward to seeing if this method can
be used to treat cancer in people.

   "Gene therapy is an exciting area of research, but targeting genetic changes
to cancer cells has been a major challenge. This is the first time a solution
has been proposed, so it's exciting news."

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2009


                              79 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2009 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                            February 20, 2009 Friday
                                 Ulster Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 149 words

HEADLINE: PUT YOUR SHIRT ON CF

BYLINE: BY MIRROR REPORTER

BODY:

   AFTER running 26 miles you could probably do with a fresh shirt - and if you
raise plenty of cash for charity you could get one from a Premiership
footballer.

   Organisers of the May 4 Deep RiverRock Belfast City Marathon said yesterday
whoever raises most money will get a jersey signed by Man United player John
O'Shea.

   And the Cystic Fibrosis Trust - official charity for the May Day Bank Holiday
race - is also offering the chance to win the Ireland defender's boots.

   Those who raise more than pounds 50 for the CF Trust will be entered into a
draw to win a signed pair. The charity is calling on people to take part and
help "See Off CF".

   CF's Linda Alexander said: "Money raised by runners helps fund our gene
therapy research which hopes to stop CF claiming so many lives."

   For more details visit www.belfastcitymarathon.com.

   pounds 50

   raised in any of four Marathon events will put you in CF draw

GRAPHIC: STAR PRIZES Cystic fibrosis sufferer Elena Byrne and Andrew Sinclair of
the CF Trust with signed shirt and boots from Man U star John O'Shea, inset,
yesterday

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2009


                              85 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                            January 23, 2009 Friday
                                   A Edition

SECTION: Pg. 29

LENGTH: 362 words

HEADLINE: £100,000 appeal to save boy with rare illness

BYLINE: ELLEN WIDDUP

BODY:

   THE parents of a seven-year-old boy diagnosed with a brain tumour which
cannot be operated on in this country are trying to raise £100,000 to take him
to the US for a new treatment.

   Fabian Burke-Georgiou was told he had a diffuse pontine glioma a rare,
high-grade malignant tumour four months ago after experiencing severe headaches
and tiredness.

   His parents Wayne, 31, and Zorzia, 32, were told by doctors at Great Ormond
Street Hospital that his only chance of survival was to have chemotherapy but
that even with treatment, he only had a five per cent chance of making his
eighth birthday.

   Only 40 children a year are diagnosed with the disease and most die within a
year of being diagnosed.

   But the couple, from Finsbury Park, who have a second son, five-year-old
Gabriel, refused to give up hope.

   They spent day and night researching medical books and the internet and found
the Burzynski Clinic in Houston, Texas, which was running 18 trials into new
gene therapies for cancer.

   Mr Burke-Georgiou, a sports coach, said: "I will do everything I can to get
him the best possible care and if it can't be done in the UK, I will find a way
to take him abroad." The clinic says its antineoplaston therapy, which targets
cancer cells without destroying normal cells, could give Fabian a 30 to 50 per
cent chance of survival.

   But the treatment will cost £100,000 for the first year and is not eligble
for NHS funding. A spokesman for Great Ormond Street Hospital said there was no
medical evidence to suggest it would be more effective than chemotherapy.

   Mr Burke-Georgiou said it was worth it if it gave a chance of saving his son:
"It is a small amount of money to save a person's life but it is an amount I
cannot find on my own. I really feel that this is Fabian's last chance to live."
The Burke-Georgious have also been in touch with Steven and Natasha
Perrin-Skippen, from Romford, Essex, whose daughter Maya, six, was diagnosed
with the same tumour in 2006.

   They raised the money to take Maya to the clinic at the end of last year and
she is responding well to the treatment.

   Mr Burke-Georgiou said: "It just makes me realise that by hook or by crook,
we need to find the money."

GRAPHIC: Determined: Wayne and Zorzia Burke-Georgiou with their sons Fabian,
left, and Gabriel

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2009


                             100 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                          September 3, 2008 Wednesday
                                   A Edition

SECTION: Pg. 28

LENGTH: 64 words

HEADLINE: US suitor calls off BioMedica chase;
IN BRIEF

BODY:

   US VETERINARY diagnostics group GeneThera has called off a bid for gene
therapy company Oxford BioMedica, which had earlier spurned the all-share
takeover worth £46.5 million as "not credible". Oxford BioMedica shares, which
had risen 27% on news of the US firm's approach, took a hit last week when the
company's chief executive Mike McDonald left after less than two months at the
helm..

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2008


                             101 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                          September 3, 2008 Wednesday
                                   A Edition

SECTION: Pg. 28

LENGTH: 64 words

HEADLINE: US suitor calls off BioMedica chase;
IN BRIEF

BODY:

   US VETERINARY diagnostics group GeneThera has called off a bid for gene
therapy company Oxford BioMedica, which had earlier spurned the all-share
takeover worth £46.5 million as "not credible". Oxford BioMedica shares, which
had risen 27% on news of the US firm's approach, took a hit last week when the
company's chief executive Mike McDonald left after less than two months at the
helm..

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2008


                             110 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                            August 7, 2008 Thursday
                                   A Edition

SECTION: Pg. 16

LENGTH: 560 words

HEADLINE: Health giants join forces in research powerhouse

BYLINE: ANNA DAVIS

BODY:

   LONDON'S most renowned health experts are to unite to create the biggest
medical research centre in Europe, it was announced today.

   More than 3,000 scientists will join the powerhouse, looking for cures and
treatments for everything from cancer to deafness.

   It means experts in child health from Great Ormond Street Hospital will work
with researchers from Moorfields Eye Hospital and transplant specialists from
the Royal Free Hampstead NHS trust for the first time.

   They will be joined by academics from University College London and
specialists from University College Hospital.

   The group, known as UCL Partners, will concentrate on 10 areas: cancer, heart
disease, transplants, the nervous system, children's health, immunology,
ophthalmology, deafness and hearing impairment, dental and oral disease and
women's health.

   Leaders of the institutions hailed the move as a landmark for medical
research. It will mean notoriously competitive researchers will combine their
knowledge instead of working independently.

   Dr Jane Collins, chief executive of Great Ormond Street Hospital, said: "This
is a very significant moment. Research is equally as important as caring for
sick children." Malcolm Grant, president of UCL, said: "The combined skill,
expertise and knowledge of our five organisations promises to deliver to
patients the benefits of cutting-edge research at its best as quickly as
possible. This is a great step forward." The organisation, which will launch
officially next month, has so far cost about £200,000 to set up. Dr Collins
said: "Even though all the experts are in the same city, it hasn't always been
easy to collaborate.

   "There is a recognition that people need to work together to make big
breakthroughs.

   You can't do it on your own with a pipette and a bunsen burner in the corner
of the laboratory any more." There are already strong links between some of the
hospitals involved which have resulted in major medical breakthroughs.

   UCL and Great Ormond Street researchers collaborated to find a cure for two
diseases that cause children to be born without an immune system.

   Meanwhile, researchers at Moorfields have started working with staff at the
UCL Institute of Ophthalmology to use gene therapy in treating inherited
blindness..

   KEY PLAYERS FROM THE FIVE INSTITUTIONS

   Andrew Way, chief executive, Royal Free Hampstead A former student nurse who
has worked in paediatric services. Also worked at Heatherwood & Wexham Park
Hospitals NHS Trust and Hammersmith Hospitals NHS Trust.

   Professor Malcolm Grant, president and provost of University College London
Born in New Zealand, he is a barrister, environmental lawyer and academic. He
also chairs the Russell group of UK research universities.

   Sir Robert Naylor, chief executive, University College London Hospitals
Knighted this year for services to healthcare. Known as a pioneer of foundation
trust hospitals. Oversaw the 2005 construction of UCLHs Euston Road site.

   Dr Jane Collins, chief executive, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children A
consultant paediatric neurologist who writes a regular newspaper column giving
advice and information about a range of health topics.

   John Pelly, chief executive, Moorfields Eye Hospital Has 18 years experience
of the NHS in London and joined Moorfields in April. Previously worked at Queen
Elizabeth Hospital trust in Woolwich and Guys and St Thomas.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2008


                             112 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                             August 5, 2008 Tuesday
                                   B Edition

SECTION: Pg. 9

LENGTH: 565 words

HEADLINE: Athletes 'inject super DNA' to foil dope testers

BYLINE: KIRAN RANDHAWA, SHEKHAR BHATIA

BODY:

   THE Beijing Olympics may be plagued by an undetectable form of doping, a
leading British scientist has warned today.

   This month's Games are believed to feature a new generation of "genetically
modified" athletes whose performance has been improved by the injection of
foreign DNA.

   It could be the first Olympics to be tainted by "gene doping", the latest and
most dangerous threat to drugfree sport.

   The process, placed on the list of banned substances and methods by the World
Anti-Doping Agency in 2003, involves genes being inserted into muscle or bone
cells and their proteins fed directly into tissue or red blood cells.

   This is usually done by injecting, or sometimes inhaling, the necessary DNA.

   Dr Andy Miah, in Beijing conducting research during the Games, said: "Gene
doping is the next major headache for the world of sport.

   "In 2004, people were starting to talk about its use at the Athens Olympics.
This year in Beijing, the case is even stronger that this will be the first
genetically modified Games.

   "Many scientists will say it's still not possible, but I'm not taking this
for granted. We need to assume that it's happening. It's already feasible." Dr
Miah's allegations will cast yet another unwelcome shadow over preparations for
the 29th modern Olympics, which begin on Friday. He added: "There is no other
technology that is likely to change the Olympics [more] than gene doping. It's
not possible to detect and there's a good chance that it will never be
detectable in any meaningful sense.

   "This forces the world of sport to reconsider what it does about testing.
It's time for their plans to change. It's time for the era of human enhancement
to take full effect in the Olympics." Gene doping, to date, has been considered
by most experts to ' It's not detect a good that it be a hypothetical threat.
Many believed it would not register on the Olympic radar until at least the 2012
Games in London.

   Dr Miah's claims will cause the WADA and the International Olympic Committee
serious concern.

   Dr Miah is a researcher in bioethics at the University of the West of
Scotland and the Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies in the US. He is
also the author of several books on the subject.

   He added: "London 2012 should be watching Beijing very carefully to see
what's possible. There has never been a 'clean' Olympics.

   This latest development comes weeks after a documentary revealed that a
doctor heading a hospital gene therapy department in China was willing to give
illegal performanceenhancing gene therapy treatment to an Olympic swimmer.

   The doctor was caught on camera by a German television investigator saying he
wanted £12,000 for a twoweek treatment. The documentary, broadcast on Germany's
main channel, showed him being approached by a fictitious coach. The doctor
replied: "We have no experience with sports people here, but the treatment is
safe and we can help you." Asked how it would work, the doctor said: "It
strengthens lung function and stem cells go into the bloodstream and reach the
organs. I recommend four intravenous injections ... 40 million stem cells or
double that, the more the better." Frederic Donze, of the WADA, told the Evening
Standard in Beijing today: "We have been preparing for gene doping since 2002.

   "We have to believe that athletes will try anything to get an edge and this
might occur at the Olympics and we work on that basis."

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2008


                             113 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                             August 5, 2008 Tuesday
                                   A Edition

SECTION: Pg. 8

LENGTH: 659 words

HEADLINE: Beijing on alert for invisible GM drugs;
Athletes 'injecting super DNA'

BYLINE: SHEKHAR BHATIA

BODY:

   THE Beijing Olympics may be plagued by an undetectable form of doping, a
leading British scientist has warned today.

   This month's Games are believed to feature a new generation of "genetically
modified" athletes whose performance has been improved by the injection of
foreign DNA.

   It could be the first Olympics to be tainted by "gene doping", the latest and
most dangerous threat to drug-free sport.

   The process, placed on the list of banned substances and methods by the World
Anti-Doping Agency in 2003, involves genes being inserted into muscle or bone
cells and their proteins fed directly into the tissue or red blood cells.

   This is usually done by injecting, or sometimes inhaling, the necessary DNA.

   Dr Andy Miah, in Beijing conducting research during the Games, said: "Gene
doping is the next major headache for the world of sport.

   "In 2004, people were starting to talk about its use at the Athens Olympics.
This year in Beijing, the case is even stronger that this will be the first
genetically modified Games. Many scientists will say it's still not possible,
but I'm not taking this for granted. We need to assume that it's happening. It's
already feasible."

   Dr Miah's allegations will cast yet another unwelcome shadow over
preparations for the 29th modern Olympics, which begin on Friday. He added:
"There is no other technology that is likely to change the Olympics [more] than
gene doping. It's not possible to detect and there's a good chance that it will
never be detectable in any meaningful sense.

   "This forces the world of sport to reconsider what it does about testing.
It's time for their plans to change. It's time for the era of human enhancement
to take full effect in the Olympics" Gene doping, to date, has been considered
by most experts to be a hypothetical threat..

   Many believed it would not register on the Olympic radar until at least the
2012 Games in London.

   Dr Miah's claims will cause the WADA and the International Olympic Committee
serious concern.

   Dr Miah is a researcher in bioethics at the University of the West of
Scotland and the Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies in the US. He is
also the author of several books on the subject. He added: "London 2012 should
be watching Beijing very carefully to see what's possible. There has never been
a 'clean' Olympics.

   "The main problem for sports is that there are so many technologies that are
under the radar of anti-doping, that its policies do little more than to point
us to successes of anti-doping testing." This development comes just weeks after
a documentary revealed that a hospital doctor in China was prepared to give
illegal performance-enhancing gene therapy treatment to an Olympic swimmer.

   The doctor was caught on camera by a German television investigator saying
that he wanted £12,000 for a two-week treatment that would help to strengthen
the fictitious American swimmer's lungs.

   The documentary, broadcast by ARD on Germany's main channel this month,
showed the head of a hospital gene therapy department being approached by a
fictitious swimming coach seeking stem-cell treatment.

   The doctor replied: "Yes. We have no experience with sports people here, but
the treatment is safe and we can help you." Asked how it would work, the doctor
said: "It strengthens lung function and stem cells go into the bloodstream and
reach the organs. It takes two weeks.

   "I recommend four intravenous injections ... 40 million stem cells or double
that, the more the better.

   We also use human growth hormones, but you have to be careful because they
are on the doping list." Frederic Donze, of WADA, told the Evening Standard in
Beijing today: "We have been preparing for gene doping since 2002.

   "We have to believe that athletes will try anything to get an edge and this
might occur at the Olympics and we work on that basis." He said that the WADA
had called together experts at a meeting in St Petersburg recently to draw up
plans to combat the new drugs menace.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2008


                             118 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2008 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                              July 21, 2008 Monday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 1017 words

HEADLINE: YOUR LIFE: DEAR MIRIAM - CONDEMNED BY THEIR GENES TO A LIFE OF PAIN;
HEALTH

BYLINE: DR. MIRIAM STOPPARD

BODY:

   Thousands of sufferers have an appalling illness that's likely to kill them
in their 40s - yet few people have heard of it.

   Sickle cell disease (SCD) gets little media coverage, even though Britain has
12,000 sufferers and 250,000 carriers.

   So, as this is Sickle Cell Awareness month, I want to increase the profile of
this painful and debilitating lifelong illness.

   If you've just had a baby with SCD, carry the sickle cell gene or you have
the disease yourself, here are the best ways to deal with it.

   What is it?

   It can't be caught and people with SCD have inherited an abnormal form of the
red blood pigment (haemoglobin) in their blood cells. Haemoglobin carries oxygen
round the body.

   Normal red blood cells can flex but in people with SCD the blood cells are
rigid and sickle or C-shaped.

   As a result, they can't squeeze through small blood vessels which get
blocked.

   This stops oxygen from getting through to where it's needed, leading to
severe pain.

   Sufferers are often well but their lives are marred by painful attacks,
called crises, and the risk of other complications, including chest infections,
organ damage, strokes, gallstones and bone infections.

   Life expectancy is around 42 years for men and 48 for women but scientific
research is ongoing to try to increase this.

   Who gets it?

   It's most common in people (or their descendants) from sub-Saharan Africa,
Asia, India, Caribbean and the eastern Mediterranean.

   We all have two genes for haemoglobin - one inherited from each parent.

   If one parent carries the sickle cell gene, a child could inherit it and
become a carrier.

   Carriers are usually healthy with normal life expectancy.

   But if both parents carry the gene, there's a one in four chance a child
could inherit a sickle gene from each of them and have SCD.

   How do you know you're a carrier?

   If you suspect you may be a carrier, ask your GP to refer you for a genetic
test.

   How it's treated...

   From drugs to surgery

   Pain killers

   A crisis can last from a few hours to several weeks. For milder crises,
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (such as diclofenac or naproxen) may be
enough. However, in the most severe crises, sufferers need hospital treatment
with intravenous morphine or pethidine, and possibly antibiotics if there's an
infection.

   In acute chest syndrome - severe chest pain, fever and breathing difficulties
- oxygen therapy is essential and the sufferer may need a blood transfusion.

   Folic acid

   Children born with sickle cell disease need to take folic acid daily for life
to help produce red blood cells quickly.

   Penicillin

   From birth to five years old, they'll also have to take penicillin daily, due
to the immature immune system which makes them more prone to early childhood
illnesses.

   Hydroxyurea

   This drug helps decrease the number and severity of attacks by boosting
production of foetal haemoglobin.

   Bone-marrow transplants

   Bone-marrow transplants have proven effective but a shortage of suitable
donors means getting the right match can be difficult.

   Iron-removal drugs

   After repeated transfusions, the body can become overloaded with iron, which
is deposited in the heart muscle causing heart problems. Taking drugs such as
Exjade regularly will help remove it.

   FOR MORE INFORMATION, CONTACT THE SICKLE CELL SOCIETY ON 020 8961 7795 OR
VISIT WWW.SICKLECELLSOCIETY.ORG

   HOPE IN THE PIPELINE

   There are ongoing studies into the usefulness of omega-3s, magnesium, zinc,
African yams, certain herbs and natural antioxidants such as vitamin C.

   Scientists are also investigating ways of replacing sickle genes with normal
genes, using gene therapy.

   SIX WAYS TO AVERT A CRISIS

   (1) Drink plenty of water - even mild dehydration can trigger a sickle
crisis.

   (2) Eat five to 10 portions of fruit and veg a day. Fruit and veg contain
powerful antioxidants, helping to bolster immunity against infections like colds
and flu which can trigger crises. Particularly potent are dark leafy greens such
as spinach and dark red and black fruits.

   (3) Don't scrimp on portions - recent research shows that people with SCD
need 20 per cent more calories a day than normal children to replace red blood
cells that are destroyed.

   (4) Keep your weight under control - obesity can promote early onset of hip
bone disease. So keep snacks healthy - such as nuts, yoghurt and fruit bars.

   (5) Eat plenty of fibre - medication can cause constipation so it's important
to counteract that with fibre. Good sources include whole grains - wholemeal
bread, brown rice and pasta, plus fruit and vegetables.

   (6) Take it easy - stress, fatigue and overexertion can trigger crises. Stay
active but avoid exercise that needs lots of stamina like long-distance running.
Try walking, golf or cricket.

   I wake up every morning in pain

   Sally-Ann Ephson, 41, has sickle cell anaemia. She's single with a
19-year-old son, Donovan, and lives in London

   "I had my first sickle cell crisis when I was six months old. Back then my
parents didn't know much about the condition and I had a difficult childhood.

   My family is from Ghana, west Africa, and back in the 60s and 70s none of the
teachers had any idea about the disease.

   I spent a lot of my early years in hospital, but it calmed down in my 20s and
30s. My condition is severe.

   During a crisis the pain is excruciating - I'd rather give birth. But even
when I'm not having a crisis, I wake up every day in pain.

   I've also had countless blood transfusions - on average one every six to
eight weeks for the past 10 years. Consequently I have too much iron in my
blood, and I need to have a drug injected into me for nine to 10 hours a day.

   It makes me feel very lethargic. There's another drug called Exjade, which
could make my life much better, but my primary care trust has turned down my
application.

   It's been stressful, which doesn't help as stress can trigger a crisis.

   But I've had tremendous support from family, friends and the Sickle Cell
Society.

   Now I'm studying for a diploma in sickle cell management and would like to
teach others about the condition.

   I've had a hard life, but maybe I can help change things for people with
sickle cell in the future."

   Additional research: CHRISTINE M ORGAN

GRAPHIC: PICTURE: CORBIS

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2008


                             126 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2008 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             July 5, 2008 Saturday
                                  Eire Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 344 words

HEADLINE: OUR SON HAS ONE OF THE WORLD'S RAREST DISEASES ..HELP US TO FIND A
CURE;
MUM DESPERATE FOR RESEARCH MIRACLE

BYLINE: BY MICHELLE O'KEEFFE

BODY:

   THE parents of an 18-monthold boy - one of only 50 people in the world with a
rare disease - have pleaded for help to find a cure to save him.

   Brave Joseph Swift has Aicardi-Goutieres Syndrome and has to be fed through a
tube to prevent him from choking. He needs round-theclock care.

   The tot needs to visit the hospital every day because of the condition which
leaves him with very little control over any muscle in his body.

   His distraught mum Colette, 34, originally from Fermoy, Co Cork, is desperate
to raise money for research.

   She is living in hope that a cure may be found for the degenerative
neurological disease. Colette said: "The oldest person with this syndrome still
surviving is 17.

   "Every day counts as far as we are concerned. Every day with Joseph is
precious. I would hate for any parent to go through the year we have gone
through.

   "We keep hoping that one day soon researchers might make a breakthrough in
either stem cell research or gene therapy."

   Colette is a former international cyclist who represented Ireland in two
world championships.

   She and her husband Matt now live near Grenoble in France.

   They said their son's condition is so severe he needs round-the-clock care
and daily sessions at care centres and hospitals.

   Matt is taking part in the Ironman Triathlon in Switzerland on July 13 to
raise money for research.

   He will compete in a 3.8km swim, a 180km cycle and a 42km run.

   Several of Colette's relatives in Ireland are fundraising with cake sales and
other events.

   And Colette added she is hoping people might make a donation through a
special website set up to highlight her son Joseph's plight.

   See www.tri4joe.com/donate.

   FATAL SIGNS SHOW EARLY IN LIFE

   SYMPTOMS of Aicardi-Goutieres Syndrome usually appear within the first six
months of life. It is generally either fatal or results in a persistent
vegetative state. Generally, the first symptoms are vomiting, feeding
difficulties, and lack of progress in motor and social skills. The course of the
disease is severe and progressive - death occurs in 25 per cent of patients
before 17.

GRAPHIC: BRAVE BATTLE Colette, Matt and Joseph Swift yesterday

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2008


                             139 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2008 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             April 29, 2008 Tuesday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 123 words

HEADLINE: BLIND LAD GENE OP SUCCESS

BODY:

   A CURE for inherited blindness could be within reach after a teenager had his
vision improved significantly with pioneering gene therapy.

   Steven Howarth, 18, could barely see at night because his retinas do not
detect light.

   But now he can walk alone in the dark after genes were inserted into his
right eye.

   The breakthrough offers hope to hundreds of thousands of eye disease
sufferers.

   Steven, from Bolton, said: "I used to rush home from college when it was
getting dark. Now I take my time."

   The medical trial at Moorfields Eye Hospital in Central London involved two
other patients with progressive sight deterioration. They experienced vision at
least equivalent to before the op.

   Prof Robin Ali declared: "It's a significant milestone."

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2008


                             145 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                             April 28, 2008 Monday

SECTION: A; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 193 words

HEADLINE: Pioneering surgery lets blind boy, 17, see again

BYLINE: RASHID RAZAQ

BODY:

   A BLIND teenager has started to regain his vision after groundbreaking
surgery by doctors at Moorfields Eye Hospital.

   Budding musician Stephen Howarth, who suffers from a rare form of childhood
blindness, is now able to walk alone at home and outside.

   Researchers from UCL Institute of Ophthalmology worked with a surgical team
at the specialist eye hospital in east London to use gene therapy to regenerate
dying cells in the 17-year-old's right eye.

   Under the pioneering technique, healthy copies of a faulty gene were injected
into the student's eye to enable him to detect light and to prevent the cells
degenerating further and leading to complete sight loss.

   Before the procedure, he was barely able to see at night but is now able to
move around without bumping into objects and frequently walks home late at night
from his local railway station in Bolton. He is the third person to have
undergone the operation.

   The Evening Standard reported last May on the first patient, Robert Johnson,
23, to receive the treatment.

   Although the gene therapy did not improve Mr Johnson or the second patient's
vision, it may well have stopped their eyesight from declining..

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                             154 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2008 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             April 22, 2008 Tuesday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 348 words

HEADLINE: THE BIONIC EYE;
TWO BLIND MEN ARE GIVEN PARTIAL SIGHT BY IMPLANT

BYLINE: BY EMILY COOK HEALTH CORRESPONDENT

BODY:

   TWO blind patients have regained some of their vision after revolutionary
surgery to implant "bionic eyes".

   Surgeons at Moorfields Eye Hospital in London operated on two men in their
50s who suffer from the hereditary disease retinitis pigmentosa.

   They planted a tiny electronic receiver and electrode panel at the back of
the eye and attached it to the retina.

   A small camera and transmitter mounted in a pair of glasses then sends a
wireless signal to the implant.

   This then stimulates the patient's remaining retinal nerves into sending
another signal along the optic nerve to the brain. It allows the brain to see
light and dark spots - giving the patient a basic form of vision.

   The operations were carried out last week by consultant retinal surgeon
Lyndon da Cruz under the supervision of American colleagues who developed the
system.

   Mr da Cruz said: "The devices were implanted successfully in both patients
and they are recovering well from the operations.

   It is very special to be part of a programme developing a totally new type of
treatment for patients who would otherwise have no chance of visual
improvement."

   The procedure, aimed at those with diseases of the retina, is currently
undergoing clinical trials.

   But doctors hope it may be available on the NHS within the next few years.
They hope to develop a pea-size camera that can be implanted in the eye itself.

   David Head, of the British Retinitis Pigmentosa Society, said: "These are
significant advances. Taken in conjunction with the advances being made in stem
cell therapy and gene therapy, they make for really exciting times as we work to
translate science into treatment."

   But Professor John Marshall, chairman of the BRPS medical advisory board,
warned that it was still "very early days".

   He said: "It is very, very good news that devices have been developed. It is
very good news that in experimental trials some individuals have had these
inserted.

   "However, the public should not run away with the idea this will be routine
surgery for blind people in the immediate future because there is an enormous
amount to learn."

GRAPHIC: VISIONARY Mr Cruz; CAMERA THAT WILL FIT IN EYEBALL Graphic: Roy Cooper;
1; 2; 3

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2008


                             155 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2008 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             April 22, 2008 Tuesday
                                 2 Star Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 349 words

HEADLINE: THE BIONIC EYE;
TWO BLIND MEN ARE GIVEN PARTIAL SIGHT BY IMPLANT

BYLINE: BY EMILY COOK HEALTH CORRESPONDENT

BODY:

   TWO blind patients have regained some of their vision after revolutionary
surgery to implant "bionic eyes".

   Surgeons at Moorfields Eye Hospital in London operated on two men in their
50s who suffer from the hereditary disease retinitis pigmentosa.

   They planted a tiny, ultra-thin electronic receiver and electrode panel at
the back of the eye and attached it to the retina.

   A small camera and transmitter mounted in a pair of glasses then sends a
wireless signal to the implant.

   This then stimulates the patient's remaining retinal nerves into sending
another signal along the optic nerve to the brain. It allows the brain to see
light and dark spots - giving the patient a basic form of vision.

   The operations were carried out last week by consultant retinal surgeon
Lyndon da Cruz under the supervision of American colleagues who developed the
system.

   Mr da Cruz said: "The devices were implanted successfully in both patients
and they are recovering well from the operations. It is very special to be part
of a programme developing a totally new type of treatment for patients who would
otherwise have no chance of visual improvement."

   The procedure, aimed at those with diseases of the retina, is currently
having clinical trials.

   But doctors hope it may be available on the NHS within the next few years.
They hope to develop a pea-size camera that can be implanted in the eye itself.

   David Head, of the British Retinitis Pigmentosa Society, said: "These are
significant advances. Taken in conjunction with the advances being made in stem
cell therapy and gene therapy, they make for really exciting times as we work to
translate science into treatment."

   But Professor John Marshall, chairman of the BRPS medical advisory board,
warned that it was still "very early days".

   He said: "It is very, very good news that devices have been developed. It is
very good news that in experimental trials some individuals have had these
inserted.

   "However, the public should not run away with the idea this will be routine
surgery for blind people in the immediate future because there is an enormous
amount to learn."

GRAPHIC: VISIONARY Mr Cruz; CAMERA THAT WILL FIT IN EYEBALL Graphic: Roy Cooper;
1; 2; 3

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2008


                             159 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2008 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             April 18, 2008 Friday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 68 words

HEADLINE: MAGNET CURE

BODY:

   A REVOLUTIONARY cancer treatment using tiny magnets to attack tumours is
being developed by scientists.

   They insert microscopic magnets into white blood cells - which can be used to
carry cancer fighting genes to tumours. Then they put another tiny magnet on the
tumour so it pulls the cancer fighting ones towards it.

   Prof Claire Lewis, of Sheffield University, said: "It could herald a new era
in gene therapy."

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2008


                             170 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2008 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                          February 20, 2008 Wednesday
                                  Eire Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 523 words

HEADLINE: HOW HARD CAN I PUNCH WITHOUT BUSTING MY FIST?;
LIMITS OF THE HUMAN BODY EXCLUSIVE

BYLINE: BY MATT ROPER

BODY:

   EVER wanted to know how hard you could punch without breaking your hand?

   Or what is the hottest curry you could eat, or how much water would kill you?

   Did you know, for example, that if a person ran any faster than 26.9 mph, the
tendons would rip from their knees.

   These and other absolute limits of human physical endurance have been
revealed in a fascinating study.

   Experts set out to find out just how far the body could be pushed before
bones shattered, organs ruptured or you died.

   Using scientific knowledge and mathematical calculations, BBC Focus magazine
worked out such limits as the lowest temperature and loudest noise humans could
survive or how many bee stings would be fatal.

   The research assumed Olympic Committee rules - no drugs, gene therapy or
bionic implants.

   No humans were harmed during the study which found 10 litres of water in an
hour would kill you and 100 vindaloos could induce a heart attack.

   LOSS OF BLOOD

   Q HOW much blood can you lose and still survive?

   A UP to half. You will feel dizzy from 15 per cent loss. At 40 per cent blood
pressure drops fatally.

   Q How hard can a human punch before the arm bones would shatter?

   A Theoretically 50 kilonewtons of force - equivalent to 5,000 kilos or 2,000
five pound bags of potatoes dropping to the ground. The arm muscles contribute
half of the force of the punch so you would need a tricep of around 22ins
circumference to do it.

   ELECTRIC SHOCK

   Q How much electricity can pass through the body without killing you?

   A Most humans cannot survive an electric shock of 20,000 volts on dry skin -
on wet skin, a tenth of this would kill you.

   SURVIVING A CRASH

   Q HOW hard can you get hit by a car and live to tell the tale?

   A WHEN a car hits at 23mph there is an 87 per cent chance of survival. At
30mph that falls to 27 per cent. At speeds above 38mph it's less than one per
cent.

   ALCOHOL

   Q How much alcohol will kill you?

   A Nine or 10 drinks an hour are enough - a blood alcohol level of 0.4 per
cent.

   BEE STINGS

   Q How many bee stings can you survive?

   A The greatest number of bee stings ever survived was 2,243. But suffer 600
stings and there's a 50 per cent chance that it will be fatal.

   HOT CURRY

   Q What is the hottest curry you can stomach?

   A The active ingredient in chillis is capsaicin. While capsaicin does not
actually cause a chemical burn, the effect on the nervous system is similar to
an allergic reaction, causing incredible pain, body spasms and severe breathing
difficulties.

   More than 100 bowls of vindaloo and you risk a heart attack.

   KILLER COLD

   Q What is the lowest body temperature you can survive?

   A Hypothermia sets in if body temperature, normally 37C, drops by even a
small amount. At 32C most will collapse. At 20C the heart stops beating.

   LOUD NOISE

   Q How loud is too loud for our ears to stand?

   A The loudest sound you can safely hear is 160 decibels before the eardrums
rupture. A jet taking off 50 metres away is 125.

   TOP SPEED

   Q How fast can a human being run?

   A Running faster than 26.9mph requires forces high enough to rupture the
quadriceps tendon, which attaches the thigh muscle to the knee. 100m record
holder Asafa Powell runs at 22.9 mph.

   matt.roper@mirror.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2008


                             171 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2008 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                           February 19, 2008 Tuesday
                                 1 Star Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 523 words

HEADLINE: HOW HARD CAN I PUNCH WITHOUT BREAKING MY FIST?;
LIMITS OF THE HUMAN BODY EXCLUSIVE

BYLINE: BY MATT ROPER

BODY:

   EVER wanted to know how hard you could punch without breaking your hand?

   Or what is the hottest curry you could eat, or how much water would kill you?

   Did you know, for example, that if a person ran any faster than 26.9 mph, the
tendons would rip from their knees.

   These and other absolute limits of human physical endurance have been
revealed in a fascinating study.

   Experts set out to find out just how far the body could be pushed before
bones shattered, organs ruptured or you died.

   Using scientific knowledge and mathematical calculations, BBC Focus magazine
worked out such limits as the lowest temperature and loudest noise humans could
survive or how many bee stings would be fatal.

   The research assumed Olympic Committee rules - no drugs, gene therapy or
bionic implants.

   No humans were harmed during the study which found 10 litres of water in an
hour would kill you and a 100 vindaloos could induce a heart attack.

   LOSS OF BLOOD

   Q HOW much blood can you lose and still survive?

   A UP to half. You will feel dizzy from 15 per cent loss. At 40 per cent blood
pressure drops fatally.

   Q How hard can a human punch before the arm bones would shatter?

   A Theoretically 50 kilonewtons of force - equivalent to 5,000 kilos or 2,000
five pound bags of potatoes dropping to the ground. The arm muscles contribute
half of the force of the punch so you would need a tricep of around 22ins
circumference to do it.

   ELECTRIC SHOCK

   Q How much electricity can pass through the body without killing you?

   A Most humans cannot survive an electric shock of 20,000 volts on dry skin -
on wet skin, a tenth of this would kill you.

   SURVIVING A CRASH

   Q HOW hard can you get hit by a car and live to tell the tale?

   A WHEN a car hits at 23mph there is an 87 per cent chance of survival. At
30mph that falls to 27 per cent. At speeds above 38mph it's less than one per
cent.

   ALCOHOL

   Q How much alcohol will kill you?

   A Nine or 10 drinks an hour are enough - a blood alcohol level of 0.4 per
cent.

   BEE STINGS

   Q How many bee stings can you survive?

   A The greatest number of bee stings ever survived was 2,243. But suffer 600
stings and there's a 50 per cent chance that it will be fatal.

   HOT CURRY

   Q What is the hottest curry you can stomach?

   A The active ingredient in chillis is capsaicin. While capsaicin does not
actually cause a chemical burn, the effect on the nervous system is similar to
an allergic reaction, causing incredible pain, body spasms and severe breathing
difficulties. More than 100 bowls of vindaloo and you risk a heart attack.

   KILLER COLD

   Q What is the lowest body temperature you can survive?

   A Hypothermia sets in if body temperature, normally 37C, drops by even a
small amount. At 32C most will collapse. At 20C the heart stops beating.

   LOUD NOISE

   Q How loud is too loud for our ears to stand?

   A The loudest sound you can safely hear is 160 decibels before the eardrums
rupture. A jet taking off 50 metres away is 125.

   TOP SPEED

   Q How fast can a human being run?

   A Running faster than 26.9mph requires forces high enough to rupture the
quadriceps tendon, which attaches the thigh muscle to the knee. 100m record
holder Asafa Powell runs at 22.9 mph.

   matt.roper@mirror.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2008


                             177 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2008 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                           February 14, 2008 Thursday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: SPORT; Pg. 70

LENGTH: 960 words

HEADLINE: FOOTBALL: YEAR 2020 VISION;
EXCLUSIVE: WHY BEAUTIFUL GAME WILL BE A TECHNICAL KNOCKOUT ROBOT LINESMEN FAN
CONSOLES WITH INSTANT REPLAYS PLAYER HOLOGRAMS 'STIMULATING' SCENT EVERY GAME
LIVE ON YOUR MOBILE.. IT'S FOOTBALL'S AMAZING

BYLINE: MIKE WALTERS

BODY:

   HERE is the future of football - and for those brought up in the era of baggy
shorts and rattles, it bears little relation to the game as we know it.

   If you thought Premier League chief Richard Scudamore's crackpot idea of
exporting matches to Beijing or Bangkok was frightening, cop a load of this.
Players will be pounds 1billion-a-year super-athletes, sustained by stem cell
banking and gene therapy to speed recovery from injuries, with blunder-proof
referees in charge of games - watched by fans with 3D consoles. Experts from the
Future Laboratory, avant-garde fortune tellers who predict trends for blue-chip
businesses, have compiled a dossier on ways the game could evolve over the next
20 years.

   It's football, folks - but not as we know it.

   In a scented stadium, with the stimulating aroma of nutmeg generating
excitement and vibrating seats to get fans on their feet (no kidding),
supporters could soon be watching replays on personal mini monitors.

   Running late? Stuck in traffic and going to miss the kick-off? No problem -
you'll be able to tune in via your mobile phone, upload the game on to your
computer and join in the virtual action as if you were there yourself.

   Graham Fisher, head of research and development at mobile phone giants
Orange, who commissioned the Orange Future of Football survey, said: "In the
future it is not impossible that what you will be seeing will be an avatar-based
representation of the game, rather than a video version.

   "You could choose where you were sat in the stadium, and people watching
remotely will be able to zoom in, pull out and watch their own personalised
coverage, increasing the level of participation."

   The most devoted fans even will be able to LIVE at their home ground as the
new trend for residential and retail partnerships between clubs and developers
gathers pace.

   But the advent of fantasy football for the obsessive supporter, armed with
more gadgets and hi-tech consoles than a James Bond car, comes with a perceptive
warning from Roy Jones, professor of sports technology at Loughborough
University, that saturation coverage often leads to empty seats and he said: "We
could have a scenario in the future where noone goes to watch sport live,
preferring instead to watch it on television.

   "A member of our LifeSigns Network took their daughter to a football match
and she couldn't understand why she couldn't rewind the action as she was used
to watching the action on Sky Plus.

   "As there are not sufficient spaces in our leading stadia to fulfil demand,
clubs and broadcasters will look to create richer viewing experiences for fans.
We will watch TV in 3D in pubs, on giant screens outside the stadium and,
eventually, in the home."

   For all the holographic viewing and console-twiddling, however, it is the
players who will be at the forefront of the game's headlong rush towards the
22nd century.

   Before you can say 'Scudamore Out', they will be wearing nanoshirts with
built-in healing systems to treat minor scrapes which will make the physio's
magic sponge redundant.

   Stem cell banking will accelerate their recovery from injury, and improved
nervous system nutrition will produce a new breed of super-athletes capable of
running 20km in 90 minutes - which would be a culture shock for the strolling
millionaires who cost Steve McClaren the England job. Chameleon kits infused
with radio frequency identification microchips will scroll through a range of
advertising logos while the game is in progress, turning players into moving
billboards.

   And, perhaps, before the end of his career, we may know for sure whether
Cristiano Ronaldo goes down too easily.

   Impact sensors, embedded in players' socks and shinpads, will send signals to
the referee's watch if they have been clattered by opposition defenders -
exposing cheats and divers who use simulation to win penalties.

   The playing area will become a 'live' arena with players, referees and
managers all linked to a network of sensors and global positioning systems (GPS)
designed to eradicate human error.

   Richard Crane, principal researcher at France Telecom's development division,
claimed: "Wrong decisions, like offside and whether the ball crossed the line,
will cease to exist.

   "The technology will lower the frustration of fans and enable referees to
make correct decisions in real time."

   When Fabio Capello's time is up, get your money on Buck Rogers to be the next
England coach. He's the only bloke who will understand all this space-age
malarkey.

   And in the meantime, if boffins remove duff refereeing decisions and
controversy from football, whatever are we going to talk about down the pub?

   TALKING SENSORS

   Offside? Did the ball cross the line? There won't be any doubts .. the
playing area will become 'live' with players, referees and managers all linked
to a network of sensors and global positioning systems (GPS) designed to
eradicate human error.

   LIVE FOR FOOTBALL.. LIVE NEAR FOOTBALL

   CONSOLES can provide fans with all the home comforts including instant action
replays while allowing them to order food and drink.

   FANS of the future could live in apartment blocks built right next door to
their team's stadium.

   HOLOGRAMS could enhance the enjoyment of viewers in pubs or at home. Players
could leap from the screen and join in with celebrating fans.

   Well, that's what boffins say!

   ..but here are 10 things that WON'T change

   1 Arsene Wenger's eyesight..

   2 Sir Alex Ferguson's hairdryer..

   3 Huge queues for the toilets..

   4 Pies that burn the roof of your mouth..

   5 That lovely smell of police horses..

   6 Local roadworks on match days..

   7 Roy Keane being scary..

   8 Radio 5Live's Alan Green's moaning..

   9 'Arry being down to the bare bones..

   10 Chelsea winning ugly.

   Orange Future of Football. To see the full report go to
www.orange.co.uk/sport

GRAPHIC: TALKING SENSORS; GREEN; WENGER; LIVE FOR FOOTBALL.. LIVE NEAR FOOTBALL
Pictures courtesy of Orange

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2008


                             183 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2007 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                          December 19, 2007 Wednesday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 61 words

HEADLINE: BUBBLE LAD HAS CANCER

BODY:

   A CHILD who had pioneering gene therapy to combat his "boy in a bubble
syndrome" has developed leukaemia.

   The lad of three fell ill two years after successful treatment for X-SCID in
trials at Great Ormond Street Hospital, London.

   Boys with X-SCID lack a proper immune system and live in a sterile "bubble"
environment.

   Doctors are hopeful he could make a full recovery.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2007


                             184 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                           December 18, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: B; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 399 words

HEADLINE: Boy in gene therapy trial suffering from leukaemia

BYLINE: AMY IGGULDEN

BODY:

   A THREE-YEAR-OLD has developed leukaemia after pioneering gene treatment at
Great Ormond Street hospital.

   The boy was born with no immune system and was undergoing experimental
therapy to replace faulty genes.

   Doctors today admitted the new technique had triggered his blood cancer but
said the risk was known and insisted medical trials would not stop.

   The boy who has not been identified is the first child in Britain to develop
the disease after receiving the therapy. Nine others are involved in the trial.

   It means fresh agony for his family, who had hoped for a cure for the fatal
"boy in the bubble syndrome".

   It is also a setback for doctors and scientists involved in the breakthrough
treatment, which involves removing bone marrow and replacing faulty genes with
healthy copies.

   Professor Bobby Gaspar, consultant immunologist at the hospital, said: "Our
first thoughts are to secure the best treatment for this child and to support
his family at this very difficult time.

   "They are very upset but he seems to be responding well to chemotherapy and
we will know more in four weeks. We are already planning to use a safer
technique next year." The gene therapy regulator said families had been warned
of the risk and given consent.

   Professor Martin Gore, chairman of the gene therapy advisory committee, said:
"My sympathy goes out to the child. I feel for the nurses, doctors and
researchers in the gene therapy team.

   They are utterly dedicated to helping children." Boy babies born with the
life-threatening syndrome severe combined immunodeficiency (X-scid) are forced
to live in a sterile "bubble". It affects one boy in every 50,000 births and is
fatal if untreated.

   Traditional treatment is by bone marrow transplant but a good donor can only
be found for one in three boys. Gene therapy is being pioneered at Great Ormond
Street.

   The first boy to be cured at the hospital was Rhys Evans, from Caerphilly,
South Wales, who was given the therapy in April 2002 and is now six, at school
and healthy.

   Ten boys have taken part in the current trial and all have seen "clinical
benefit", doctors said today.

   But leukaemia was a known risk that was first highlighted when four of 11
boys on a similar trial in France developed the disease.

   Paris trials were halted in 2002 because of the problem and one of the
children has since died. Three have recovered but it led to a safety review of
the UK scheme..

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2007


                             197 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                            November 2, 2007 Friday

SECTION: A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 270 words

HEADLINE: The mice that can run for five hours and breed like rabbits

BYLINE: SRI CARMICHAEL

BODY:

   A SO-CALLED supermouse with extraordinary physical capabilities has been
created by scientists.

   The mouse has incredible stamina, running up to 20 yards a minute for five
hours or more without stopping. It also has an envious metabolism, eating 60 per
cent more food than an ordinary mouse but not putting on weight..

   Add to that a longer life expectancy than usual and an ability to breed for
three times as long as a standard mouse. The technology used to develop the
rodent may lead to new drugs or treatments that could "enhance" the natural
powers of athletes.

   Scientists at Cape Western Reserve University in Ohio, who bred the creature
by accident, now have a colony of 500 supermice.

   The animal was developed by genetically modifying a single metabolism gene
that is shared with humans. The changes made to the mouse gene appeared to have
helped the animals turn body fat into energy more easily. It also stopped them
suffering from the burning sensation in their muscles during exercise when
lactic acid builds up.

   The best endurance athletes also display that quality. Professor Richard
Hanson said: "They are metabolically similar to Lance Armstrong biking up the
Pyrenees. In short, they are remarkable animals... they eat twice as much as
'control' mice, but they are half the weight." The results are published for the
first time today in the Journal of Biological Chemistry.

   Professor Hanson added: "We do not think that this mouse model is an
appropriate model for human gene therapy. It is currently not possible to
introduce genes into the skeletal muscles of humans and it would not be ethical
to even try."

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2007


                             220 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                            July 25, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: A; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 653 words

HEADLINE: Investors fight to beat Wall Street sell-off blues;
MARKET ROUND-UP

BYLINE: MICKEY CLARK

BODY:

   CITY investors were fighting a fierce rearguard action today as they
attempted to limit the damage following the biggest sell-off on Wall Street
overnight in more than three months, which reverberated around the world.

   Overall, they did a pretty good job, with the FTSE 100 index restricting its
loss to just 6.4 at 6492.3 Â-- stretching the two-day deficit to 133 points.

   In the US investors are worrying about the collapse in subprime lending and
its knock-on effect on debt markets, while over here there are signs that rising
interest rates and a strong pound are starting to put the brakes on the UK
economy.

   Centrica rose 2p to 37714p after Lehman Brothers moved from underweight to
overweight. More importantly, the broker has jacked up its target from 340p to
440p claiming the British Gas services group will gain from a more benign
outlook for commodity prices.

   GlaxoSmithKline traded nervously, down 4p at 1242p ahead of half year
results. But the outcome in the eyes of several brokers was a foregone
conclusion. Shares in the drugs giant have been cut by Bear Stearns to
underperform, accusing the drugs giant of losing earnings momentum. Goldman
Sachs is also believed to be taking an increasingly bearish view of prospects.
It has been a tough few months for Glaxo after its new diabetes treatment
increased the risk of heart attacks.

   Lehman Brothers has downgraded Scottish & Southern Energy, 21p cheaper at
1420p, from equalweight to underweight but increased its target from 1180p to
1330p on valuation grounds. Scottish & Southern has been one of the worst
performers in the European utilities sector this year and the broker reckons
this underperformance will continue because management has not fully addressed
balance sheet inefficiency.

   Oxford Biomedica, down 12p at 4212p, has been told by the independent Data
Safety Monitoring Board that Phase III trial of its TroVax drug for renal cancer
should continue as planned. The gene therapy company said the board reviewed
safety and anticancer immune responses from the first 50 patients enrolled.

   Bob Morton's Vislink expects first-half adjusted operating profit to top
Â£7.5 million, in line with market expectations after absorbing the impact of
the significantly weaker dollar. That compares with last year's Â£6.9 million.
The transmission products company remains confident for the full year and will
announce its first half results on 30 August. The shares marked time at 8434p.

   New York extended its rollercoaster performance overnight, with share prices
falling sharply in the face of disappointing secondquarter earnings from
blue-chip companies and fresh worries about the collapse of the subprime lending
market. The Dow ended a white-knuckle ride for investors down 226.47 at
13,716.95.

   The sell-off depressed shares in Asian markets today. Prices in Tokyo fell to
their lowest in six weeks, led by the big exporters such as Canon, Toyota and
Honda Motor, which were affected by a strong yen. The Nikkei 225 closed 143.61
lower at 17,858.42.

   Hong Kong also felt the shock waves. The Hang Seng index ended the morning
down 66.64 at 23,406.24.

   TRADERTALK OCTOPUS INVESTMENTS, a specialist small-cap fund manager, has
increased its position in AIM-listed Bioganix. Octopus has bought an additional
103,448 shares in the Â£10 million company, lifting its stake from 4.39% to
5.42%. Shareholders in Bioganix, which turns waste material Â-- mainly
by-products from food processing and domestic waste collected by local
authorities Â-- into compost fertiliser, have approved a share placing which
aims to raise Â£2.25 million. It intends to use the proceeds to fund the
construction and development of its next in-vessel composting plant at Sharpness
Docks in Gloucestershire. www.citywire.co.uk

   YOU CAN BUY AND SELL SHARES ONLINE FOR Â£12.50 AT www.thisismoney.co.uk The
Sharedealing Service is provided by The Share Centre in association with This is
Money

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2007


                             221 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2007 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             July 24, 2007 Tuesday
                                 Ulster Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 718 words

HEADLINE: GM MICE PUSH ANIMAL TESTS PAST 3MILLION;
WELFARE GROUPS CONDEMN SUFFERING

BYLINE: BY MIKE SWAIN SCIENCE EDITOR

BODY:

   MORE than three million tests were carried out on animals last year, it was
revealed yesterday.

   It is the highest figure since 1991 - and a third of all "procedures"
involved genetically modified mice.

   Experts believe the tests could lead to huge medical advances - and say they
are likely to increase.

   But welfare groups including the RSPCA are outraged and claim the new Home
Office statistics do not reflect the suffering involved.

   The latest figure of 3.1million is four per cent up - around 100,000 - on
2005.

   The rise is mainly due to the growing trend of using genetically modified
animals - mainly mice - for gene therapy research.

   Two-thirds of all experiments were on mice. Rats, birds and fish accounted
for most of the rest. Less than one per cent involved cats, dogs, horses and
monkeys.

   The use of GM animals has quadrupled since 1995.

   Research scientist Prof Dominic Wells, of Imperial College, defended the
tests.

   He said: "We are in a very exciting area. We have now started to enter human
clinical trials with a whole variety of treatments derived from GM animals.

   "The end result will be better treatments in the future." Alastair Kent,
director of Genetic Interest Group, said: "It is good news for patients.

   The rise in GM mice to investigate brings hope to many people with currently
incurable conditions."

   But RSPCA spokesman Barney Reed said: "Numbers alone can never convey the
ways in which animals can suffer and it is important that the nature and level
of animal suffering is also made clear.

   "The Home Office statistics should enable people to understand how much
suffering animals experience and for what purposes but the figures do not do
this."

   Meanwhile a top zoologist yesterday backed claims that the Government was
misleading the public over animal testing.

   Prof Michael Balls - father of Cabinet minister Ed Balls - said certain
procedures on primates involved "substantial discomfort and suffering".

   Anti-vivisectionists are challenging the Government in the High Court today,
claiming it has failed to keep animal suffering to a minimum.

   SHOULD THE EXPERIMENTS BE BANNED?

   YES says MICHELLE THEW of the BUAV

   THE Government's handling of the entire animal experiment licensing system is
deeply flawed.

   The Home Office is this week charged at the High Court with ignoring its duty
to ensure animal suffering is kept to a minimum and pulling the wool over the
public's eyes about the numbers of experiments that cause substantial animal
suffering.

   The fact that the numbers of animals used in experiments jumped by four per
cent in 2006 goes to prove the lie that the Government is putting its "best
efforts" into reducing the numbers of animals used in experiments.

   Over 90 per cent of "successful" animal experiments go on to fail in human
drug trials.

   The system is failing human health as well as causing morally unacceptable
suffering to three million animals a year.

   It's time the Government woke up to public concern by demonstrating real
political will to take steps to end the suffering.

   The very least the public should expect is a long overdue open and honest
public debate.

   NO says Professor ROBERT WINSTON

   THE number of animals used in research - though half what it was 30 years ago
- is slowly increasing each year.

   This is good news for human health as some of the most exciting medical
advances of the last two years (such as recent observations in stem cells) have
come from research on animals.

   Using genetically modified mice means that we have the best way of studying
genes and their action - vital in the fight against human and animal diseases.

   A newly developed GM mouse is the first way of testing a malaria vaccine not
on monkeys.

   Although researchers have developed a wide range of nonanimal methods, these
techniques cannot answer questions requiring a whole body system.

   In the UK animal research is carefully regulated, only conducted when there
is no other way and adheres to the highest standards in the world.

   The vast majority of scientists and doctors believe it should continue as
long as is necessary for human health.

   Animal tests peaked at over five million in the 70s

   Over three million procedures were carried out last year, up 4 per cent on
2005

   A total of 2.95 million animals were used

   GM animals, mainly mice, were subjected to 1.04 million tests

   m.swain@mirror.co.uk

GRAPHIC: TESTING TIME: A lab mouse is given injection

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2007


                             222 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2007 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                            June 27, 2007 Wednesday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 1065 words

HEADLINE: YOUR LIFE: MY LITTLE GIRL ONLY TALKS TO ..ANIMALS

BYLINE: JENNY STALLARD

BODY:

   ESME Willcocks was adamant nothing could be wrong with her baby. Then doctors
told her Rose may never speak... but none of them had reckoned on the power of
animals. Here Esme, 37, explains how Rose has become a regular little "Miss
Dolittle"...

   'HOLDING my newborn daughter Rose to my breast, I cooed: "Come on darling,
it's the best thing for you." But it was no good, Rose just didn't want to
breastfeed.

   Rose was my first child. I'd heard breastfeeding could be difficult but I
didn't worry too much - after all, she didn't mind a bottle. She even made a
little grunting noise when she fed.

   And, apart from the feeding, Rose was the perfect baby. She fed, then slept,
fed, then slept.

   "Textbook!" me and my husband Dave, now 40, would joke.

   She didn't even cry - we'd never hear a peep from her.

   When I mentioned the grunting at a check-up, the doctors examined her. "Her
larynx and trachea are floppy," they said. But it was nothing to worry about.

   Then, at three-and-a-half weeks, we were at another check-up and this time
there was more serious news. "I'd like to send Rose for a second opinion," the
doctor said.

   Rose may have behaved like a textbook baby but according to the paediatrician
she didn't look like one. "She has what we call dysmorphic features," he said.

   I felt such a failure and imagined my baby girl with extreme features, her
face distorted because of the "dysmorphic". They said it wasn't Down's or cystic
fibrosis, but what was wrong with my Rose?

   The doctors said they needed to carry out blood tests and look at her
chromosomes - the make-up of her DNA. But I still didn't feel too concerned.
"There can't be anything wrong with her, she sleeps and eats so well," I said,
not wanting to admit my beautiful baby had any kind of condition or illness. I
just couldn't bear for something to be wrong with Rose.

   The weeks turned into months and she continued to behave like an ideal baby -
except for the strange grunting when she fed.

   At five-and-a-half months we were called back. "Rose has a chromosomal
abnormality," the doctor said. Two of her chromosomes had swapped around. So had
mine, it turned out - but mine had done it perfectly so the role of each
chromosome wasn't changed. "Rose's didn't make a complete swap and so altered
her genetic make-up," the doctor said.

   I felt another wave of relief - something was wrong but at least they knew
what it was. But there was another shock in store.

   After checking a genetic database of people with chromosomal conditions, the
doctors had found that Rose was the only person in the world with this
condition. So there were no other mums whose child had grown up with the same
abnormality.

   There was a support group for families in the same position as us, called
Unique, but I couldn't call another mum and ask about Rose's condition in
particular.

   I'd thought Rose was a perfect baby because she was so wellbehaved. In fact
it was the terrible opposite. I thought I had been lucky because she didn't cry
until she was eight months old - but now I knew why.

   We could only wait and see how Rose progressed. There was one thing the
doctors did know, though.

   "It's possible that Rose may never speak," they told us. She would have
learning difficulties too. I was devastated. Of all the things I'd expected,
this wasn't one.

   She might never say "Mummy" or "Daddy", might never tell me she loved me or
how her day had been.

   When Rose was 14 months we moved to Bishop's Stortford in Hertfordshire and
enrolled Rose at Grove Cottage, a centre for children and adults with learning
disabilities.

   It was such a relief to be around other mums whose children had learning
difficulties - suddenly I didn't feel so alone and my feeling of "failure" began
to abate. It was brilliant for Rose, too. She really progressed being there.
Then one day, collecting Rose, I got chatting to another mum who told me about
Megan Baker House in Herefordshire. It was a centre for kids with special needs
where she could have intense therapy. I prayed it could be the answer to helping
her at least make some sounds.

   We decided to book a four-week placement and went in September 2006. It was
so successful that we went back in February 2007 for another month.

   The second time we found a holiday let that seemed idyllic. It was a
400-year-old working farm and horseriding centre.

   The owner told us we could have the run of the farm and so we went to see the
cows.

   Suddenly, Rose perked up. Then, I did a double-take as I struggled to take in
what I was hearing. She wasn't actually saying words, but there were no two ways
about it - she was talking to the cow! She was communicating as best she could
by making noises, trying to form words.

   Gobsmacked, I raced to find Dave. "She's talking!" I gabbled. "She's trying
to talk to the animals!" It sounded silly, but it was true. There was something
about animals that made Rose connect.

   We could barely get her to make eye contact or moan or groan, but here she
was, "chatting" like an old friend to the cows and horses.

   She was alive in a way I'd never seen before. Every morning she'd be up, by
our bed with her wellies and coat, wanting to see the animals.

   Sleepy-eyed, I was happy to agree.

   The change in Rose was astounding. The doctors were amazed too.

   "There's no explanation - just go with it," they said.

   She's four now, and I take her horseriding as often as I can. Her affinity
with animals amazes everyone. She changes from introvert to a right little
chatterbox!

   As a mum I can tell what Rose needs, and she has ways of asking for things or
telling me something's wrong. With new people she will lie on the floor and open
her arms to you if she "accepts" you. But with animals she's as relaxed as if
they're old friends. I want to take her swimming with dolphins as I think it
could unlock the door to her speech problem.

   There's a centre in the US which combines swimming with dolphins and therapy
which has had some incredible results. It's got to be worth a try. We'll do
anything we can to help our little girl.

   We have another daughter now, Ruby, 15 months, and unfortunately Rose ignores
her completely. But I hope that one day she'll be able to talk to her like other
sisters do.

   All we can do is make sure Rose sees as many animals as possible and hope
that she'll talk to us one day the way she talks to them.

   My Rose was the only person in the world with this particular condition

   AS TOLD TO JENNY STALLARD

GRAPHIC: SWAN LOVE: Rosie bonds with the birds; BREAKTHROUGH: Rose found an
affinity with the animals Pictures: JOHN McLELLAN

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2007


                             223 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2007 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                            June 27, 2007 Wednesday
                                 Ulster Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 1066 words

HEADLINE: YOUR LIFE: MY LITTLE GIRL ONLY TALKS TO ..ANIMALS

BYLINE: JENNY STALLARD

BODY:

   ESME Will cocks was adamant nothing could be wrong with her baby. Then
doctors told her Rose may never speak... but none of them had reckoned on the
power of animals. Here Esme, 37, explains how Rose has become a regular little
"Miss Dolittle"...

   HOLDING my newborn daughter Rose to my breast, I cooed: "Come on darling,
it's the best thing for you." But it was no good, Rose just didn't want to
breastfeed.

   Rose was my first child. I'd heard breastfeeding could be difficult but I
didn't worry too much - after all, she didn't mind a bottle. She even made a
little grunting noise when she fed.

   And, apart from the feeding, Rose was the perfect baby.

   She fed, then slept, fed, then slept. "Textbook!" me and my husband Dave, now
40, would joke. She didn't even cry - we'd never hear a peep from her.

   When I mentioned the grunting at a check-up, the doctors examined her. "Her
larynx and trachea are floppy," they said. But it was nothing to worry about.

   Then, at three-and-a-half weeks, we were at another check-up and this time
there was more serious news. "I'd like to send Rose for a second opinion," the
doctor said.

   Rose may have behaved like a textbook baby but according to the paediatrician
she didn't look like one. "She has what we call dysmorphic features," he said.

   I felt such a failure and imagined my baby girl with extreme features, her
face distorted because of the word "dysmorphic". They said it wasn't Down's or
cystic fibrosis, but what was wrong with my Rose?

   The doctors said they needed to carry out blood tests and look at her
chromosomes - the make-up of her DNA. But I still didn't feel too concerned.

   "There can't be anything wrong with her, she sleeps and eats so well," I
said, not wanting to admit my beautiful baby had any kind of condition or
illness. I just couldn't bear for something to be wrong with Rose.

   The weeks turned into months and she continued to behave like an ideal baby -
except for the strange grunting when she fed.

   At five-and-a-half months we were called back. "Rose has a chromosomal
abnormality," the doctor said.

   Two of her chromosomes had swapped around. So had mine, it turned out - but
mine had done it perfectly so the role of each chromosome wasn't changed.

   "Rose's didn't make a complete swap and so altered her genetic make-up," the
doctor said. I felt another wave of relief - something was wrong but at least
they knew what it was. But there was another shock in store.

   After checking a genetic database of people with chromosomal conditions, the
doctors had found that Rose was the only person in the world with this
condition. So there were no other mums whose child had grown up with the same
abnormality.

   There was a support group for families in the same position as us, called
Unique, but I couldn't call another mum and ask about Rose's condition in
particular.

   I'd thought Rose was a perfect baby because she was so well-behaved. In fact
it was the terrible opposite. I thought I had been lucky because she didn't cry
until she was eight months old - but now I knew why.

   We could only wait and see how Rose progressed. There was one thing the
doctors did know, though. "It's possible that Rose may never speak," they told
us. She would have learning difficulties too. I was devastated. Of all the
things I'd expected, this wasn't one.

   She might never say "Mummy" or "Daddy", might never tell me she loved me or
how her day had been.

   When Rose was 14 months we moved to Bishop's Stortford in Hertfordshire and
enrolled Rose at Grove Cottage, a centre for children and adults with learning
disabilities.

   It was such a relief to be around other mums whose children had learning
difficulties - suddenly I didn't feel so alone and my feeling of "failure" began
to abate. It was brilliant for Rose, too. She really progressed being there.
Then one day, collecting Rose, I got chatting to another mum who told me about
Megan Baker House in Herefordshire.

   It was a centre for kids with special needs where she could have intense
therapy. I prayed it could be the answer to helping her at least make some
sounds.

   We decided to book a four-week placement and went in September 2006. It was
so successful that we went back in February 2007 for another month.

   The second time we found a holiday let that seemed idyllic. It was a
400-year-old working farm and horseriding centre.

   The owner told us we could have the run of the farm and so we went to see the
cows.

   Suddenly, Rose perked up. Then, I did a double-take as I struggled to take in
what I was hearing. She wasn't actually saying words, but there were no two ways
about it - she was talking to the cow!

   She was communicating as best she could by making noises, trying to form
words.

   Gobsmacked, I raced to find Dave. "She's talking!"

   I gabbled. "She's trying to talk to the animals!" It sounded silly, but it
was true. There was something about animals that made Rose connect.

   We could barely get her to make eye contact or moan or groan, but here she
was, "chatting" like an old friend to the cows and horses.

   She was alive in a way I'd never seen before. Every morning she'd be up, by
our bed with her wellies and coat, wanting to see the animals.

   Sleepy-eyed, I was happy to agree.

   The change in Rose was astounding. The doctors were amazed too.

   "There's no explanation - just go with it," they said.

   She's four now, and I take her horseriding as often as I can. Her affinity
with animals amazes everyone. She changes from introvert to a right little
chatterbox!

   As a mum I can tell what Rose needs, and she has ways of asking for things or
telling me something's wrong.

   With new people she will lie on the floor and open her arms to you if she
"accepts" you. But with animals she's as relaxed as if they're old friends. I
want to take her swimming with dolphins as I think it could unlock the door to
her speech problem.

   There's a centre in the US which combines swimming with dolphins and therapy
which has had some incredible results. It's got to be worth a try. We'll do
anything we can to help our little girl.

   We have another daughter now, Ruby, 15 months, and unfortunately Rose ignores
her completely. But I hope that one day she'll be able to talk to her like other
sisters do.

   All we can do is make sure Rose sees as many animals as possible and hope
that she'll talk to us one day the way she talks to them.

   My Rose was the only person in the world with this particular condition

   AS TOLD TO JENNY STALLARD

GRAPHIC: SWAN LOVE: Rosie bonds with the birds; LITTLE TREASURES: Rosie with,
from left, mum Esme, younger sister Ruby and dad Dave; BREAKTHROUGH: Rose found
an affinity with the animals Pictures: JOHN McLELLAN

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2007


                             225 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2007 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                 Sunday Mirror

                              June 24, 2007 Sunday
                                  Eire Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 117 words

HEADLINE: GENETICS ADDICTION RESEARCH

BODY:

   GENE therapy may hold the key to curbing alcoholism and helping sufferers of
Parkinson's disease.

   Rats bred to crave alcohol drink 50 per cent less for more than a month after
being injected with viruses engineered to disrupt a gene, Aldehyde
dehydrogenase, needed to absorb alcohol.

   The same gene is blocked by the anti-drink drug Antabuse, but it has to be
taken every day.

   It is claimed the first attempt to treat Parkinson's disease with gene
therapy reduced symptoms by at least 25 to 30 per cent in all patients treated
with some patients reporting up to a 70 per cent improvement.

   Patients received single injections into their brains of a harmless virus
that delivered genes to relieve the condition.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2007


                             234 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                             June 6, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: B

LENGTH: 141 words

HEADLINE: Scientists find gene for Alzheimers

BODY:

   SCIENTISTS have discovered a gene they believe is responsible for Alzheimers
disease.

   They hope the breakthrough could lead to an accurate new test for the
disease, which affects around 700,000 Britons in some form. It could also one
day lead to radical new gene therapies, the researchers say.

   The team at the Translational Genomics Research Institute in Phoenix,
Arizona, found a gene called GAB2 that puts people at far higher risk if they
have a damaged version of it.

   The scientists now hope to develop a simple test for the damaged gene that
could be used to tell people if they are at risk of the disease in later life.

   This may eventually allow us to improve our ability to diagnose Alzheimers
disease, even before it strikes, said Dr Diet-rich Stephan of TGen.

   Alzheimers is the most common form of memory and thinking problems in older
people.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2007


                             235 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                             June 6, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: B

LENGTH: 142 words

HEADLINE: Scientists find gene for Alzheimer's

BODY:

   SCIENTISTS have discovered a gene they believe is responsible for Alzheimer's
disease.

   They hope the breakthrough could lead to an accurate new test for the
disease, which affects around 700,000 Britons in some form. It could also one
day lead to radical new gene therapies, the researchers say.

   The team at the Translational Genomics Research Institute in Phoenix,
Arizona, found a gene called GAB2 that puts people at far higher risk if they
have a damaged version of it.

   The scientists now hope to develop a simple test for the damaged gene that
could be used to tell people if they are at risk of the disease in later life.

   "This may eventually allow us to improve our ability to diagnose Alzheimer's
disease, even before it strikes," said Dr Dietrich Stephan of TGen.

   Alzheimer's is the most common form of memory and thinking problems in older
people..

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2007


                             236 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                             June 6, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: C

LENGTH: 118 words

HEADLINE: Gene linked to risk of Alzheimer's

BODY:

   SCIENTISTS have discovered a gene they believe is responsible for Alzheimer's
disease.

   They hope the breakthrough could lead to a new test for the illness, which
affects about 700,000 Britons in some form. It could also lead to radical gene
therapies,the researchers say.

   They found that people with a damaged version of the GAB2 gene were at far
higher risk of developing the memory disorder.

   The scientists, based at the Translational Genomics Research Institute in
Arizona, now hope to develop a simple test for the damaged gene. Dr Dietrich
Stephan said: "This may eventually allow us to improve our ability to diagnose
Alzheimer's, even before it strikes." The research will be published in journal
Neuron..

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2007


                             244 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                             May 17, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: C

LENGTH: 98 words

HEADLINE: Herpes virus to help cure cancer

BODY:

   A TREATMENT for cancer that uses a genetically modified herpes virus to
attack tumours is being tested in London.

   The potential cure, created from the virus that causes cold sores, has been
in development for a decade.

   Doctors at the Royal Marsden hospital and neighbouring Institute of Cancer
Research hope it will also prevent cancer returning.

   The virus is administered via injections and used alongside radiotherapy and
chemotherapy.

   "This is an enormously exciting opportunity to bring virus and gene therapy
into frontline treatment," said Dr Kevin Harrington, who is leading the trial..

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2007


                             247 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2007 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             May 9, 2007 Wednesday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 1308 words

HEADLINE: YOUR LIFE: AMAZING CURE THAT GAVE ME BACK MY FREDDIE..

BYLINE: ADRIAN MONTI

BODY:

   LITTLE Freddie Leaworthy was less than a year old when doctors discovered he
had no immune system. A cold could kill the infant and for his safety he was
forced to live in a sterile bubble. Here mum Julie, 37, from Bristol, tells how
miraculous gene therapy saved her son.

   WHEN Freddie was born at the start of summer 2005 he couldn't have been a
happier baby. But as winter began he developed a horrible, hacking cough that
just wouldn't go away.

   We tried everything but even two courses of antibiotics didn't help and by
January last year he couldn't keep any food down and was vomiting several times
a day. His weight plummeted and a month later he was admitted to Bristol
Children's Hospital for tests.

   Me and my husband Kris, 34, were terrified. We hadn't had anything like this
with our daughter Jasmin, who is now five.

   But a few days later the doctor said Freddie had a problem with his immune
system. It meant he'd need daily medication for the rest of his life. It was a
terrible blow.

   We were still trying to take in that our eight-month-old son had a lifelong
illness when we were hit by an even bigger bombshell the following day.

   They said Freddie had severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID). Basically he'd
been born without an immune system because of a defective gene. It meant an
infection that most children would fight off easily, could kill him.

   We were told it was very rare, with only between one in 50,000 to 100,000
babies having it, and it only affects boys.

   We were totally stunned. Our main hope was a bone-marrow transplant - with
Jasmin, who was three, the most likely suitable match.

   Kris and I scoured the internet for answers but what we read frightened us
even more.

   It was a very scary time but there, for the first time, we read about gene
therapy treatment - a pioneering way of dealing with Freddie's condition. We
asked his consultants about it, but they wanted to find a good bonemarrow match
first.

   Sadly Jasmin proved unsuitable and so did both of us. A national and then
world-wide search was launched. But because Freddie has an extremely rare tissue
type, we weren't very confident.

   Meanwhile, Freddie was worsening. He went down with a sickness and diarrhoea
bug for seven months, and doctors found pneumonia and flu in his lungs.

   He had to spend the whole of March in an air-locked isolation ward. Only me,
Kris and two grandparents could see him.

   Every time we visited we had to put on hospital gowns, scrub our hands and
clean everything we touched with surgical wipes.

   It was heartbreaking when neither Kris nor I could see him for five days
because we both had a slight cold, but it wasn't worth the risk.

   Before he came home, we had the carpets and curtains steam-cleaned and the
house literally scrubbed from top to bottom. It was isolation again, but this
time at home.

   Then, at the end of April, the doctors said as no suitable donor had been
found, we'd need to look at gene therapy. Trials had been taking place in Paris
with mixed results and at Great Ormond Street Hospital in London which was more
promising. If Freddie had the gene therapy in the UK, he'd be the 10th and last
child to have the ground-breaking treatment. No one else would be allowed to
have it until an ethics committee had looked at the results.

   Freddie's case was a particular challenge for the doctors. Most of the other
children had an immune system which hadn't kickstarted. Freddie didn't have one
at all.

   The gene therapy treatment meant Freddie wouldn't have to endure chemotherapy
which he would have if he had a bone marrow transplant. He was so weak and thin,
I wasn't sure his tiny body would have been able to stand it.

   He was admitted to Great Ormond Street in May. Doctors explained that the
therapy works by adding a correctly working version of the faulty gene into
Freddie's body by inserting it via a virus - in his case a deactivated leukaemia
virus. It allows the gene to get where it needs to - but without giving him the
cancerous disease.

   It would then develop inside him and grow him a new immune system. It all
sounded so amazing to us, but all that mattered was helping him lead a normal
life.

   Freddie had his first birthday in hospital. Jasmin - who wasn't allowed in -
sang Happy Birthday over the ward intercom and waved to him through the large
window looking into his room.

   I stood watching, thinking how often I'd doubted he'd even reach this
milestone.

   On the Friday of that week, Kris and I were with Freddie when a nurse came
into his room with the bag containing the genes which would give our boy his
immune system. It looked like apple juice but we were in awe of what was in the
bag. It gave us such hope. Soon it was slowly pumping into his body. We knew
then that Freddie was receiving cutting-edge treatment that so many other
children like him wouldn't get. It was quite humbling to think how lucky he was.

   He was allowed home after one week and closely monitored. We just so wanted
it to work and we still needed to keep anyone but close family away in case of
germs.

   I did occasionally take him out in his buggy, but with the rain cover down in
the middle of summer I got so many odd looks, I didn't do it often. We were
still terrified an everyday infection could kill Freddie.

   But despite our worries everything went well. By August he had finally shaken
off the diarrhoea bug and started to put on weight. In November his medical team
were really pleased with his progress. Since then his tests have shown his
immunity has improved slowly. He's now doing really well. As his system gets
stronger, we don't have to make sure everything is totally sterile, but we still
have to keep him away from big crowds as his body's defence is still weak.

   While his immune system matures we give him weekly booster injections of
antibodies in his thigh and daily medication.

   He's still regularly seen by doctors and has frequent blood tests, which will
continue for years to come. But his prospects are now really good and he's
expected to live a normal life.

   Being so ill has meant he hasn't developed as quickly as other children of
his age, although he's very bright and full of energy. He's still only eating
pureed food but we know that will get better over time.

   Freddie will be two in May and we're over the moon he's here with us. There
were some dark days when it seemed he'd never live so long. We know that if he'd
been born a few years earlier, this amazing treatment wouldn't have been
available.

   Once the experts are happy that this treatment is the best way forward, it
will hopefully become more easily available to other seriously ill children who
need it.

   For that reason Kris ran the London Marathon this year for the Jeans for
Genes charity, which raises funds for this type of research.

   Just knowing what work they've done to keep our son alive was enough to keep
him going those 26 miles.

   WHAT IS GENE THERAPY?

   SOME people's genetic make-up does not function as it should, giving rise to
illnesses. Gene therapy is a new way of treating these diseases.

   It puts the properly working information into the body's cells and this
corrects the fault once the genes are returned into the body. The key to success
is to deliver the right gene to the correct cells which need it. This is done by
using a deactivated virus.

   This treatment is still at a very early stage but it's hoped it will soon be
able to treat many other genetic conditions and blood disorders. So far the
treatment has produced encouraging results and marks a huge leap forward in the
world of medicine.

   Even a minor infection most children would fight off could easily kill him

   Jasmin had to sing Happy Birthday to him over the ward intercom

   AS TOLD TO ADRIAN MONTI

   To support Kris visit www.justgiving.com/leaworthy For more information on
the Jeans for Genes charity or to make a donation, visit www.jeansforgenes.com
or call 020 7163 6901.

GRAPHIC: FUTURE'S BRIGHT: Freddie is two this month Picture: JOHN FERGUSON;
SURVIVOR: Freddie with his family; BRAVE: The tot in hospital

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2007


                             248 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2007 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             May 9, 2007 Wednesday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: LETTERS; Pg. 52

LENGTH: 209 words

HEADLINE: DEAR MIRIAM: PERFECT MATCH?

BYLINE: DR MIRIAM STOPPARD

BODY:

   Dear Miriam I'M a semi-pro footballer and wonder, if I had an injury, would
my baby's stem cells get me match-fit quicker?

   I saw the answer you gave on saving stem cells from your baby's blood when
it's born, in case you need to use them as a treatment if he or she develops a
serious illness such as leukaemia.

   I know you're against that but what about stem cells for athletes? Would you
agree with saving your baby's blood in case you had an injury that could end
your career?

   WHY would you want to use your child's stem cells when you could use your
own?

   Here, we're talking about stem cell "repair kits", the latest fad to heal
professional athletes and weekend warriors alike. I know it sounds like science
fiction but it could transform sports medicine.

   Research at the moment concentrates on primitive stem cells from infants'
umbilical-cord blood to grow new knee ligaments and create a gene therapy that
could magic away sports injuries.

   But you could also bank tissue taken from your own body as an insurance
policy against a careerending infirmity.

   And it's not just you. If you have a child of five or six who has exceptional
sports talent, you might want to get a muscle or fat biopsy from them and freeze
some young stem cells for later, just in case.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2007


                             254 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2007 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             May 2, 2007 Wednesday
                                  Eire Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 190 words

HEADLINE: BLINDNESS 'CURE' IS A WORLD FIRST IN PIONEERING OP

BYLINE: BY EMILY COOK, HEALTH CORRESPONDENT

BODY:

   MEDICS have carried out the world's first gene therapy op to prevent a man
going blind.

   Robert Johnson, 23, who was losing his sight through an inherited genetic
disorder, had healthy copies of the faulty genes injected straight into his eye.

   Surgeons hope it will get the cells of his retina detecting light properly so
he can see clearly.

   The team at Moorfields Eye Hospital in London, who spent 15 years working on
the technique with researchers at UCL, have proved it works on animals.

   Robert's operation is the first in a series of clinical trials on people.

   Doctors warned there was no guarantee it would succeed and it could be months
before they know for certain.

   Before the operation, Robert said he had mixed feelings "ranging from extreme
nervousness to a bit of excitement".

   And lead researcher Prof Robin Ali, of UCL's Institute of Ophthalmology, said
it was "exciting" but added: "I can't help feeling somewhat apprehensive."

   But surgeon Robert Maclaren, who took part, said it went "extremely well - we
couldn't have asked for a better result".

   Alastair Kent, of the Genetic Interest Group, said it was "fantastic" news.

   news@irishmirror.ie

GRAPHIC: RECOVERING: Robert after op

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             255 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2007 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             May 2, 2007 Wednesday
                                  Eire Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 122 words

HEADLINE: GENE GENIUS

BODY:

   THE new technique involves inserting healthy copies of the gene into the
cells of the retina using a harmless virus to carry the gene into the cells.

   Restoring activity in retina cells should restore vision.

   The virus was manufactured by a firm called Targeted Genetics in Seattle,
USA. It had the viral element removed so it would not cause any harm but was
still able to act as a vehicle for the gene.

   The healthy copy of the gene was also manufactured through standard genetic
engineering techniques.

   Robert Maclaren, assistant surgeon said: "We couldn't have asked for a better
result. In fact, if I sat and drew what the perfect result would have been on a
piece of paper - the retina would have looked pretty much as it does now."

GRAPHIC: PAINSTAKING: Surgeons work on Robert's eye; RETINAL GENE THERAPY

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             256 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2007 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             May 2, 2007 Wednesday
                                 1 Star Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 278 words

HEADLINE: GENE GENIUS;
BLINDNESS 'CURE' IS A WORLD FIRST FOR BRITISH DOCS

BYLINE: BY EMILY COOK, HEALTH CORRESPONDENT

BODY:

   BRITISH doctors have carried out the world's first gene therapy op to prevent
a man going blind.

   Robert Johnson, 23, who was losing his sight through an inherited genetic
disorder, had healthy copies of the faulty genes injected straight into his eye.

   Surgeons hope it will get the cells of his retina detecting light properly so
he can see clearly.

   The team at Moorfields Eye Hospital in London, who spent 15 years working on
the technique with researchers at UCL, have proved it works on animals.

   Robert's operation is the first in a series of clinical trials on people.

   Doctors warned there was no guarantee it would succeed and it could be months
before they know for certain.

   Before the operation, Robert said he had mixed feelings "ranging from extreme
nervousness to a bit of excitement".

   And lead researcher Prof Robin Ali, of UCL's Institute of Ophthalmology, said
it was "exciting" but added: "I can't help feeling somewhat apprehensive."

   But surgeon Robert Maclaren, who took part, said it went "extremely well - we
couldn't have asked for a better result".

   Alastair Kent, of the Genetic Interest Group, said it was "fantastic" news.

   HOW IT WORKS

   THE new technique involves inserting healthy copies of the gene into the
cells of the retina using a harmless virus to carry the gene into the cells.

   Restoring activity in retina cells should restore vision.

   The virus was manufactured by a firm called Targeted Genetics in Seattle,
USA. It had the viral element removed so it would not cause any harm but was
still able to act as a vehicle for the gene.

   The healthy copy of the gene was also manufactured through standard genetic
engineering techniques.

   emily.cook@mirror.co.uk

GRAPHIC: RECOVERING: Robert after op; PAINSTAKING: Surgeons work on Robert's
eye; RETINAL GENE THERAPY Surgeon injects replacement gene; Pigment layer
rejuvenated in treated area; Lens; Optic nerve; Light-sensitive cells

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             257 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                              May 1, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: B

LENGTH: 176 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy could restore sight to blind

BODY:

   SCIENTISTS today revealed the world's first genetic cure that could give the
blind their sight back.

   Doctors from the UCL Institute of Ophthalmology and Moorfields Eye Hospital
in east London hope the surgery could initially cure a rare form of childhood
blindness. The first huma trial of the treatment is already under way, and
doctors hope to have the results within months.

   The trial, funded by the Department of Health, involves inserting healthy
copies of the gene into the cells of the retina to help them function normally.

   Restoring the activity in these cells should restore vision.

   Patient Robert Johnson, 23, has had genes inserted into one eye. He was born
with a progressive sight disorder caused by a faulty gene called RPE65, which
restore sight stops the layer of cells at the back of the eye working.

   Lead researcher Professor Robin Ali, of UCL's Institute of Ophthalmology,
said: "Testing it for the first time in patients is very exciting, and
represents a huge step towards establishing gene therapy for the treatment of
many eye conditions."

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2007


                             275 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2007 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                          February 14, 2007 Wednesday
                                  Eire Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 412 words

HEADLINE: MEET THE 13-YEAR-OLD DOCTOR WHO PERFORMED HIS FIRST OPERATION AGED
JUST SEVEN. NOW HE WANTS TO FIND A.. CURE FOR CANCER

BYLINE: BY MIRROR REPORTER

BODY:

   THIS is the surgeon who is working towards developing a cure for cancer - and
he's just 13.

   Gifted Akrit Jaswal shot to fame in India when he operated on an
eight-year-old girl to separate her fingers that had been badly burned and fused
together.

   The operation made headlines around the world - not least because the surgeon
was just seven at the time.

   Now 13-year-old Akrit has an IQ of 146 and is considered the one of the most
intelligent thinkers in India.

   The medical boy wonder was recently invited to London's famed Imperial
College to exchange ideas with scientists on the cutting edge of medical
research.

   He is also researching a cure for cancer while working toward bachelor's
degrees in zoology, botany and chemistry.

   Akrit appeared on Oprah Winfrey's talk show to speak about his plans.

   He revealed he has millions of medical ideas but is currently focused on
developing a cure for cancer.

   Akrit said: "I've developed a concept called oral gene therapy on the basis
of my research and my theories.

   "I'm quite dedicated towards working on this mechanism."

   Akrit revealed he developed a passion for science and anatomy at an early
age.

   Doctors at local hospitals took notice and started allowing him to observe
surgeries when he was just six.

   Inspired by what he saw, Akrit read everything he could on the topic.

   When an impoverished family heard about his abilities they asked if he would
operate on their daughter for free. Her surgery was a success and afterwards
Akrit was hailed as a medical genius in India.

   At age 11 he was admitted to Punjab University becoming the youngest student
ever to attend an Indian university.

   The same year he was invited to London's Imperial College to exchange ideas
with scientists on the cutting edge of medical research.

   Growing up Akrit said he used to see cancer patients lying on the side of the
road because they couldn't afford treatment, which has inspired him to now try
for a cancer cure.

   He added: "I've been going to hospitals since the age of six, so I have seen
first-hand people suffering from pain.

   "I get very sad, and so that's the main motive of my passion about medicine,
my passion about cancer.

   "I've got millions of ideas right now but what I want to do is discover a
final cure for cancer."

   Asked how he views his achievements Akrit gives a humble reply.

   He said: "For me, its all normal."

   news@irishmirror.ie

   I've seen people suffer at firsthand and I get very sad, so that's my main
passion about medicine

   - AKRIT JASWAL

GRAPHIC: INCREDIBLE: Akrit Jaswal has been hailed as a genius; STUDIES: Akrit
gets to grips with anatomy; MARVEL: His first operation at seven; IDEAS: Akrit
talks to Oprah Winfrey

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2007


                             286 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                           January 11, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: A MERGE; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 527 words

HEADLINE: Bid to kill cancer with a cold

BYLINE: MARK PRIGG

BODY:

   A RADICAL way of fighting cancer is to be tested in which tumours are killed
by infecting them with viruses such as the common cold.

   If successful, the virus therapy could become a third main method - alongside
radiotherapy and chemotherapy - in the battle against cancer.

   Experts predict that it could become even more effective than chemotherapy in
certain types of cancer.

   Leonard Seymour, professor of gene therapy at Oxford University, who has been
working in London and the US, will lead the trials this year. He has been
working with viruses that kill cancer cells while avoiding harming healthy
tissue.

   The move was welcomed by cancer charities. Richard Sullivan, Cancer Research
UK's director of clinical programmes, said today: "We are pleased to be
supporting this new and important research.

   "While this approach is still at an early stage of development it has
exciting potential, particularly for the treatment of cancer which has spread ,
a notoriously difficult stage of the disease to treat." Professor Seymour said
that in principle the treatment could be "many times more effective than regular
chemotherapy".

   He added: "If you can get a virus into a tumour, viruses find them a very
good place to be because there's no immune system-to stop them replicating.

   "You can regard it as the cancer's Achilles heel."

   He said that only a small amount of the virus needed to get to the cancer as
"they replicate, you get a million copies in each cell and the cell bursts and
they infect the tumour cells adjacent and repeat the process".

   Preliminary research on mice has shown that the viruses work well on tumours
which resist standard cancer drugs.

   American scientists have previously injected viruses into tumours directly
but this will not work if the cancer is inaccessible or has spread.

   Professor Seymour's technique, which would be useful for secondary cancers,
involves a "stealth virus", masked from the body's immune system with a "polymer
coat", which could spread through the blood and reach tumours, it was reported.

   The Guardian said that two viruses are likely to be involved in the first
clinical trials - adenovirus, which causes a coldlike illness, and vaccinia,
which causes cowpox and is also used in the vaccine against smallpox.

   Both will be "disabled" for safety to make them less likely to cause disease,
but Professor Seymour eventually hopes to use natural viruses.

   Several more years of trials will be needed, eventually using the
polymer-coated viruses, before the therapy can be considered for use on the NHS,
it was reported.

   It is hoped that they can eventually be used on all cancers.

   THE NHS might never hit its target of halving infection from the hospital
superbug MRSA, a leaked government memo shows.

   The memo discusses how the news could be managed to prevent negative
publicity.

   Former health secretary John Reid's target of halving MRSA cases by April
2008 is unlikely to be met, according to the memo sent to ministers by Liz
Woodeson, director of health protection at the Department of Health.

   It said experts believed it was possible to reduce MRSA by a third but even
if given extra time it might not be possible to halve it.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2007


                             287 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                           January 11, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: A MERGE; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 619 words

HEADLINE: Grade gets the nod from Deutsche as ITV saviour;
market round up

BODY:

   BIG things are expected of ITV's new chairman Michael Grade and Deutsche Bank
believes he is the right man to turn the independent TV broadcaster's fortunes
around.

   As a result, it has raised its rating on the shares, up 214p at 10914p, from
hold to buy while jacking up its 12-month target price from 100p to 130p.
Deutsche is now telling clients it believes Grade will "transform the group's
prospects".

   It feels there is considerable value in the franchise, suggested by recent
bid approaches to be well above the current price. Marketshare data also
indicate ITV1 may be past the worst of its advertising share loss.

   But other brokers say Grade will have his work cut out. Rupert Murdoch's
BSkyB now owns an 18% stake in ITV which it bought to thwart an offer of an 122p
a share from NTL and Sir Richard Branson.

   A consortium that included Greg Dyke and Goldman Sachs pulled out of bidding
last April.

   Earlier this week, Grade said he wanted ITV to be bold and adventurous when
it came to programme-making in future, but that means spending more money. It
remains to be seen how BSkyB will react to such a move.

   Share prices generally were

   marked higher in early trading, enabling them to claw back some of the
previous days' losses. A late rally on Wall Street last night cheered sentiment.
The FTSE 100 index rose 23.7 to 6184.4.

   US broking house Lehman Brothers is the latest to take a look at the European
drugs sector and has downgraded GlaxoSmithKline, down 1p at 1358p, from
overweight to reduce while lowering its sights on the shares from 1630p to
1460p.

   It calculates Glaxo will lose more than Pounds 1 billion of profits this year
due to the loss of four of its products to generic competition. In addition, two
of its best-selling drugs, Advair and Avandia, will suffer in the US from rival
products while the weak dollar makes a dent in profits. Only yesterday, rival
broker Citigroup was tipping Glaxo as its wild card play for 2007.

   Elsewhere in the drugs sector, Ark Therapeutics jumped 614p to 125p after
positive talks with the US Food and Drug Administration on the end of Phase Two
trials for its Trinam gene therapy, which prevents blood vessels blocking in
kidney dialysis patients who have undergone vascular access graft surgery.

   Speculative buying lifted ICI a further 3p to 473p. Broker Collins Stewart
says talk of a possible takeover of the Dulux paint giant will remain the
driving force behind the ICI share price. Talk is of a bid from Holland's Akzo
Nobel.

   A late rally enabled share prices to end in positive ter ritory overnight in
New York. The investor enthusiasm evident at the start of the year has continued
to fade amid concerns about a slowdown in the world economy and the absence of
interest rate cuts.

   Bargain-hunters moved in during the last hour of trading to leave the Dow up
25.56 at 12,442.16.

   In Tokyo today, prices continued to lose ground and the Nikkei 225 closed
104.23 lower at 16,838.17.

   Heavy turnover was reported on the futures market ahead of monthly settlement
tomorrow.

   In Hong Kong, bargain-hunters began snapping up the shares in the banks but
the Hang Seng index ended the day down 182.97 points at TRADERTALK JP Morgan
Fleming Mercantile investment trust has increased its stake in Harry Potter book
publisher Bloomsbury to 3.26%. The trust, run by Martin Hudson and James
Soutter, bought 291,028 more shares after the group issued a profits warning at
the end of last year. Bloomsbury blamed weak trading on lowerthan-expected sales
over Christmas and delays in contract completions, which were budgeted for 2006.
The group said pre-tax profits would match targets of Pounds 5 million if the
major deals are completed and retail sales pick up.

   www.citywire.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2007


                             290 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                             January 5, 2007 Friday

SECTION: A MERGE; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 327 words

HEADLINE: A difficult decision, but it was the right one for her;
COMMENTARYAs research that could treat 'incurable' diseases faces ban, a tragic
little girl stirs up an ethical storm

BYLINE: ANNE MCELVOY

BODY:

   COMMENTARY

   AT the heart of the Ashley case is one of the oldest and most contentious
arguments where moral philosophy meets medical ethics: what rights - or
otherwise - has a seriously ill infant who will never grow into normal
adulthood?

   A spokesman for a disability rights group said that Ashley had "the same
human rights as anyone else" and that he believed these had been infringed by
the decision to use gene treatment.

   It is not at all clear that someone who will never be able to grow up to take
their own decisions is subject to the same criteria of rights as an ablebodied
child - or that it is in their interest to apply a rights-based argument here.

   Critics will point to the "slippery slope" of such drastic intervention, but
that is a philosophical last resort, Almost everything controversial in ethical
debates can be seen as a slippery slope to something else. One way or another,
the eugenics debate is here to stay as the possibilities they offer expand -
from stem cells to other gene therapies, so we will have to accustom ourselves
to such arguments.

   Critics have spoken of Ashley's "dignity" being imperiled by the gene
treatment which will keep her infantilised. But they are projecting their own
sense of dignity onto someone who is in an entirely different condition. The
girl, as one defender of her treatment points out, "lacks the cognitive capacity
to experience any sense of indignity".

   Most importantly, she will never have such a capacity, so it is hard to see
what potential is really being destroyed by keeping her as an infant.

   That sounds harsh but it is at the nub of the matter. To speak of her
treatment being only a matter of "convenience" for her parents and carers
misleads. The prevention of further suffering and maximising a very limited
quality of life now and in the future are the most important objectives in a
difficult human case.

   That is the calculation her family and doctors made - and they came to the
right conclusion.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2007


                             310 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2006 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                            December 1, 2006 Friday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 183 words

HEADLINE: 'CURE BREAKTHROUGH IN TWO YEARS';
CYSTIC FIBROSIS SUFFERER EMILY'S MESSAGE OF HOPE TO THE BROWNS

BODY:

   IN the 50s, the average life expectancy for a cystic fibrosis patient was
five. That has now risen to 31, which reflects the incredible progress made in
treating the genetic disease.

   Dr Jane Davies works with the Gene Therapy Consortium in the Royal Brompton
Hospital, London, to develop a cure for the disease.

   She says: "The medical world is incredibly excited about the potential to
cure cystic fibrosis. The disease is caused by a faulty gene and we believe that
getting a normal copy of that gene into the cells that line the airways to the
lungs can potentially help them operate normally again.

   "That would prevent the serious infections that can make CF a
life-threatening disease. We are working to set up the world's first gene
therapy trial within the CF population in spring.

   "That's why we feel a cure for CF is within reach. The potential for a
breakthrough is there, but is at least two years away. Early signs from
laboratory tests look good."

   FOR more information contact the Cystic Fibrosis Trust on 020 8464 7211 or
www.cftrust.org.uk The UK Transplant organ donation line is 0845 6060400.

GRAPHIC: HOPE: For the Browns

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2006


                             312 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                           November 30, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: A MERGE; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 422 words

HEADLINE: A message of hope for Browns on baby Fraser

BYLINE: JOE MURPHY

BODY:

   GORDON Brown was given hope today that gene therapy could offer a cure for
his son's cystic fibrosis by the time he reaches adulthood.

   The Chancellor and his wife Sarah said they are upbeat that medical advances
mean four-month-old Fraser will be able to lead a normal life despite the
diagnosis.

   Scientists are working to replace the faulty genes which cause the disease
and it is likely some form of inhaler containing corrected genetic material will
be available by the time he reaches adulthood.

   In the meantime he is likely to need regular antibiotic treatment to keep
chest infections under control and other drugs to thin mucus that is produced in
the lungs.

   Treatment for cystic fibrosis has improved dramatically and life expectancy
for patients has now increased to an average of 31.

   The Browns threw themselves back into their work today as friends expressed
shock at the news of their son's medical condition. Mrs Brown

   took her older son John to nursery in Westminster as usual, while the
Chancellor prepared for the weekly Cabinet meeting.

   The pair were determined to be upbeat after a traumatic evening in which they
broke the news to colleagues and friends, telling everyone they were
"optimistic" and coping well.

   Only a tiny handful of very close friends and family members had learned of
the condition before last night. Not even Tony Blair had been told.

   "Sarah is being confident and upbeat and they are both getting on with normal
life," said a friend.

   "There are days when things are almost normal and there are days when Fraser
is not well and things are difficult. But he is strong and advanced for his age
and he is already trying to stand up."

   Mrs Brown was spending today planning the guest list and activities for a
Christmas party at No 11 for Booktrust, a charity that provides books for young
families.

   She threw herself into charity work for children after the tragic death of
their first child, Jennifer Jane, in 2002.

   Her husband was at the Treasury preparing for one of most pressured dates of
his year next week when he presents his tenth Pre-Budget Report to the Commons.

   It is understood that Fraser is being treated at Great Ormond Street and the
Victoria Hospital.

   In a statement, a spokesman for Mr and Mrs Brown said Fraser was "fit,
healthy and making all the progress that you would expect any little boy to
make".

   Conservat ive leader David Cameron was among those who phoned with support
for the family.

   His son Ivan, born in 2001, is disabled by a rare condition that combines
epilepsy and cerebral palsy.

GRAPHIC: UPBEAT: GORDON AND SARAH BROWN ARE HOPEFUL FRASER WILL LEAD A NORMAL
LIFE

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2006


                             313 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                           November 30, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: A MERGE; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: My daughter looks, sounds and acts like any other child

BYLINE: ED OWEN

BODY:

   TWO YEARS ago, Gordon Brown stood in front of a packed audience in No 11
Downing Street to offer his support to the thousands of sufferers of cystic
fibrosis and their families.

   He had offered to host the reception to promote the work of the Cystic
Fibrosis Trust after hearing my story.

   The Chancellor could never have ever imagined that one day, he would join
those of us whose lives have been touched by what is Britain's most common
life-threatening genetic condition.

   Being told that your child has cystic fibrosis can be shocking and
bewildering. We found out a few days after the birth of our daughter, when
doctors discovered a blockage in her stomach. We knew nothing of the

   disease; there had been no family history of it. So in those weeks we were
desperate for answers to our questions. How did it happen? Who was to blame?

   As the realities of having a child with CF have become more routine, so we
have become more aware of the extent to which our four-year-old daughter is able
to live a full and active life.

   The treatments available to the 7,500 CF sufferers in Britain today

   have improved dramatically in recent years. So much so that what was
considered in the Sixties a solely childhood disease, with life expectancy at
barely five years old, is now a condition from which those affected can expect
to live to their thirties and beyond.

   Our daughter's daily treatment begins from the moment she gets up.

   Ten minutes trampolining is followed by 20 minutes intensive physiotherapy
(chest-beating, effectively) to help loosen the thick, sticky mucus that clogs
vital organs, particularly the lungs and pancreas.

   After that comes a course of nebulised antibiotics administered via a mask to
her face. Then comes a dose of another powerful antibiotic to help ward off
infections that might damage her lungs. A range of vitamins follow as well as
enzymes to help her stomach digest fatty foods.

   Only then can she sit down to breakfast.

   Most of this regime is then repeated every evening before tea. It can be
onerous and burdensome, particularly for a happy and energetic girl. But it
helps keep her well.

   Now at school fulltime, she may have a serious genetic condition but, for the
most part, she looks, sounds and behaves just like every other child in her
class.

   There are setbacks along the way and you never quite lose the fear that your
child will pick up a dangerous infection or fall ill. But in so many ways, the
future is positive for children like our daughter and Gordon and Sarah's son.

   Particularly encouraging is the ongoing research to find a cure for CF. It is
now 17 years since the defective gene that causes the condition was identified.
Today, there is genuine optimism that a workable gene therapy might be available
in the next five or six years.

   Like the Browns, we have been inspired by the dedication of the NHS staff and
research scientists doggedly working to find a cure.

   To learn more about the Cystic Fibrosis Trust or make a donation:
www.cftrust.org.uk

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2006


                             314 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                           November 30, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: LL 04; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 317 words

HEADLINE: My message of hope for the Browns' baby;
Cystic fibrosis sufferer is a triathlon runner

BYLINE: REBECCA SMITH

BODY:

   A CYSTIC fibrosis sufferer today sent out a message of hope to Gordon Brown
and his wife, Sarah.

   At one time, few cystic fibrosis sufferers lived beyond middle age. Now many
do, and the outlook is constantly getting better.

   Robert Longrigg, 33, is a prime example of this - living a full and energetic
life, taking part in charity runs and completing t he London Triathlon.

   Mr Longrigg, from Streatham, is an IT teacher at a centre in Clapham.

   Today he said: "I would like to say to Gordon Brown that in my lifetime,
treatment has changed dramatically.

   "When I was born, my parents were told I'd only live a year. I'm now 33 and I
am looking to the future - planning what to do next year and in three years.

   "I know people who are 40, 45 with cystic fibrosis."

   In his 20s, his health deteriorated - but in October 2003 he had a double
lung transplant.

   This gave him a new lease of life and enabled him to compete in numerous
charity runs.

   "Most people with CF will have to have a transplant. For a few years before
mine, my health deteriorated and I was on oxygen and in a wheelchair. But I now
swim, go to the gym [and] run," he said. Mr Brown was given hope today that gene
therapy could offer a cure for his son Fraser's cystic fibrosis by the time he
reaches adulthood. The Chancellor and his wife said they are upbeat that medical
advances will mean their four-monthold second son will be able to lead a normal
life despite the diagnosis.

   Scientists are working to replace the faulty genes which cause the disease
and it is likely some form of inhaler containing corrected genetic material will
be available by the time he reaches adulthood.

   In the meantime he is likely to need regular antibiotic treatment to keep
chest infections under control and drugs to thin mucus that is produced in the
lungs. Treatment for cystic fibrosis has improved and life expectancy for
patients has increased to an average of 31.

GRAPHIC: UPBEAT: GORDON AND SARAH BROWN ARE POSITIVE ABOUT FRASER'S DIAGNOSIS,
INSET ROB LONGRIGG

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2006


                             315 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                           November 30, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: LL 04; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 174 words

HEADLINE: 5 children born with disease each week

BODY:

   Q What is cystic fibrosis?

   A It is an inherited genetic disease which affects the salt balance in the
body creating thick mucus in the lungs. It affects digestion and limits life.

   When the faulty genes are passed on by both parents the child has a one in
four chance of developing the disease.

   Q How many babies are born with it in the UK?

   A Around one in every 250,000 babies born have the disease which means five
children diagnosed every week.

   Q What is the life expectancy of a baby with cystic fibrosis?

   A Until the Thirties, babies with the condition were only expected to live a
few months but today the life expectancy for those with the disease is in the
early 30s.

   Q What treatments are being developed?

   A Although there is no cure, scientists are working on gene therapy which
would allow patients to inhale the correct version of the genes involved.

   Inhaled antibiotics help with chest infections, cough and pneumonia, and
there are drugs to thin the mucus produced.

   Vigorous physiotherapy also helps the patient rid their lungs of the mucus.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2006


                             329 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                            October 3, 2006 Tuesday

SECTION: A MERGE; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 120 words

HEADLINE: Thirty with no business plan are kicked out of AIM

BODY:

   THIRTY companies had their AIM listings cancelled today after they failed to
come up with realistic prospects of turning from cash shells into real business.
The companies were among those who had trading in their shares suspended in
April and were given a deadline of today to find a business. Two crept under the
wire today, however. Azure Holdings has been reversed into by gene therapeutic
company ValiRx in a Pounds 12.7 million deal. Infinity Bio-Energy's shares were
readmitted to AIM today after it completed a deal to take control of three sugar
and ethanol producers in Brazil. The AIM team at the Stock Exchange has made it
clear it intends to take a tougher line with companies and their advisers in the
future.

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2006


                             333 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                           September 7, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: A MERGE; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 966 words

HEADLINE: Play the Standard Life loyalty card to cash in

BYLINE: NEIL COLLINS

BODY:

   WELL, you can't say you weren't told. After years of depressing bonus news,
the sensible policyholders in Standard Life should have something to celebrate
today, their company's first day in the FTSE 100 index. That Standard would go
into the top index was never in doubt, given its previous position as Europe's
largest mutual life office, but the storming performance of the shares has put
some sorely-needed gilt on the gingerbread.

   Standard was floated on 10 July at 230p, and the shares now cost 269p apiece.
For the qualifying policyholders who followed my advice on 1 June ("This is no
Standard offer, so get a Life") and invested heavily in extra shares, the
position is even better. They paid 2181/2p apiece (on top of their free ones
from the demutualisation), and a profit of 23% in less than three months, from a
low-risk investment, should bring a warm glow to longsuffering policyholders.

   There's more. If they hold onto their shares until 10 July next year, they
get a one-for-20 bonus; if the price then is 269p, their gain will be almost
30%, again not counting the value of the free shares, and they will have had a
useful income from the dividends. So far, it seems that most individuals are
hanging on, and the policyholders who bought or were given three-quarters of the
stock still do so.

   This is setting the tracker funds something of a problem as they try to find
sufficient shares to ref lect Standard's weighting as a mid-FTSE 100 stock.

   It is compounded by the sucessful efforts to get the shares into the hands of
genuine long-term institutional shareholders at flotation. Add in the
persistent, if vague, murmurs of a takeover bid, and the performance of the
shares looks less of a surprise.

   A takeover remains a possibility, albeit a remote one now that newish chief
executive Sandy Crombie and his men are trying to run the business for profit
rather than for vanity. Crombie shared the policyholders' pain by giving up his
bonus, but had to be content with virtue as its own reward, and now has every
incentive to maximise shareholder value, at the expense of the policyholders if
necessary.

   Even so, the price is now quite high enough, and there is a surfeit of life
assurance paper on the market. Thanks to today's entry of Resolution Life, there
are now eight life offices in the FTSE 100, while the risk-averse regulators
have made it more of a capital-hungry industry than ever.

   Standard's next figures, due at the end of the month, will reflect the surge
in pension contributions following this year's new rules on contributions, and
the statement will be positive. Given the combination of bonus-share and
dividend payments, policyholder shareholders should hang on. The cannier ones
might keep an eye on the Liffe traded options market for an early chance to
sell. By selling the right to buy Standard shares at a fixed price at a future
date, you can effectively lock in the profit while still qualifying for the
bonus.

   At present, the options go out only as far as next March, and the September
07 series (the first that settles after the bonus payment) won't trade until the
December 06 series disappears. It seems rather a dirty trick to cash in on a
yearlong loyalty bonus after only six months, but this is the modern world of
derivatives, and the professionals are doing this sort of thing all the time.
It's a rare chance for the private investor to take advantage of a modern
capital market.

   No smirks for Mirko

   IF Latin dancing keeps you young, many women would consider Pounds 8 million
for eight years'-worth of tuition to be worth every penny, especially if you can
sue for your money back for being called a lazy cow. Now we can see why Mimi
Monica Wong, 61, is head of private banking for HSBC in Hong Kong, with over
Pounds 20 billion of rich people's money to look after.

   Put the millions up, get undivided attention, and when the instructor
humiliates you in public, sue to get it back. We knew these bankers were smart,
but this shows why they're rich, too.

   The essence of clever investment banking is to exploit unexpected
developments, and when it all went wrong for Wong, she was not only cross but
had the firepower to take the hapless instructor to court.

   Now she's won, Mirko Saccani, her lover of Latin, will have to redefine his
idea of "motivational language" and must retrieve the cash from his Swiss bank
account to pay it back.

   Mimi, meanwhile, can dance on round the world. Expect the growing army of new
Hong Kong millionaires to come flocking to HSBC for their private banking. What
can the opposition offer after a case like this?

   Maybe Ford needs a little gene therapy

   ANY colour you like as long as it's black, and any chief executive you like
as long as it's Ford; it has taken long enough for the controllers of America's
secondbiggest car maker to work out that it is the customer, rather than the
supplier, who makes a successful manufacturing business, and that an introverted
gene pool of four generations might be short of a few commercial chromosomes.

   Like General Motors, Ford was so obsessed with its domestic rival that
neither noticed the Japanese eating their lunch, and it has taken the threat of
corporate collapse to bring in an outsider and give him real power. Well, the
appearance of real power, anyway, but with Bill Ford remaining as "executive
chairman" on top of Alan Mulally as chief executive, it doesn't augur well.

   The world makes five cars for every four buyers.That fifth car is frequently
a Ford, and the only comfort is that its worst problems are domestic.

   Ford's European business is in relatively good shape, as indeed is the
British motor industry, as demonstrated by Nissan's announcement of a new car to
be built in Sunderland. The Qashqai is sure to be a hit, at least among those
with the qash to qai it.

GRAPHIC: VIRTUE'S REWARD: SANDY CROMBIE GAVE UP HIS BONUS BUT HAS SINCE SEEN
STANDARD LIFE'S SHARE PRICE RISE BY 23%

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2006


                             334 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                           September 7, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: B MERGE; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 969 words

HEADLINE: Playing the Life loyalty card is way to cash in

BYLINE: NEIL COLLINS

BODY:

   WELL, you can't say you weren't told. After years of depressing bonus news,
the sensible policyholders in Standard Life should have something to celebrate
today, their company's first day in the FTSE 100 index. That Standard would go
into the top index was never in doubt, given its previous position as Europe's
largest mutual life office, but the storming performance of the shares has put
some sorely-needed gilt on the gingerbread.

   Standard was floated on 10 July at 230p, and the shares now cost 269p apiece.
For the qualifying policyholders who followed my advice on 1 June ("This is no
Standard offer, so get a Life") and invested heavily in extra shares, the
position is even better. They paid 21812p apiece (on top of their free ones from
the demutualisation), and a profit of 23% in less than three months, from a
low-risk investment, should bring a warm glow to longsuffering policyholders.

   There's more. If they hold on to their shares until 10 July next year, they
get a one-for-20 bonus; if the price then is 269p, their gain will be almost
30%, again not counting the value of the free shares, and they will have had a
useful income from the dividends. So far, it seems that most individuals are
hanging on, and the policyholders who bought or were given three-quarters of the
stock still do so.

   This is setting the tracker funds something of a problem as they try to find
sufficient shares to ref lect Standard's weighting as a mid-FTSE 100 stock.

   It is compounded by the successful efforts to get the shares into the hands
of genuine long-term institutional shareholders at flotation. Add in the
persistent, if vague, murmurs of a takeover bid, and the performance of the
shares looks less of a surprise.

   A takeover remains a possibility, albeit a remote one now that newish chief
executive Sandy Crombie and his men are trying to run the business for profit
rather than for vanity. Crombie shared the policyholders' pain by giving up his
bonus, but had to be content with virtue as its own reward, and now has every
incentive to maximise shareholder value, at the expense of the policyholders if
necessary.

   Even so, the price is now quite high enough, and there is a surfeit of life
assurance paper on the market. Thanks to today's entry of Resolution Life, there
are now eight life offices in the FTSE 100, while the risk-averse regulators
have made it more of a capital-hungry industry than ever.

   Standard's next figures, due at the end of the month, will reflect the surge
in pension contributions following this year's new rules, and the statement will
be positive. Given the combination of bonus-share and dividend payments,
policyholder shareholders should hang on.

   The cannier ones might keep an eye on the Liffe traded options market for an
early chance to sell. By selling the right to buy Standard shares at a fixed
price at a future date, you can effectively lock in the profit while still
qualifying for the bonus.

   At present, the options go out only as far as next March, and the September
2007 series (the first that settles after the bonus payment) won't trade until
the December 2006 series disappears. It seems rather a dirty trick to cash in on
a yearlong loyalty bonus after only six months, but this is the modern world of
derivatives, and the professionals are doing this sort of thing all the time.
It's a rare chance for the private investor to take advantage of a modern
capital market.

   Dancing to Mimi's merry tune

   IF Latin dancing keeps you young, many women would consider Pounds 8 million
for eight years' tuition to be worth every penny, especially if you can sue for
your money back for being called a lazy cow. Now we can see why Mimi Monica
Wong, 61, is head of private banking for HSBC in Hong Kong, with more than
Pounds 20 billion of rich people's money to look after.

   Put the millions up, get undivided attention, and when the instructor
humiliates you in public, sue to get it back. We knew these bankers were smart,
but this shows why they're rich, too.

   The essence of clever investment banking is to exploit unexpected
developments, and when it all went wrong for Wong, she was not only cross but
had the firepower to take the hapless instructor to court.

   Now she's won, Mirko Saccani, her lover of Latin, will have to redefine his
idea of "motivational language" and must retrieve the cash from his Swiss bank
account to pay it back.

   Mimi, meanwhile, can dance on round the world. Expect the growing army of new
Hong Kong millionaires to come flocking to HSBC for their private banking.

   What can the opposition offer after a case like this?

   Ford in need of gene therapy

   ANY colour you like as long as it's black, and any chief executive you like
as long as it's Ford; it has taken long enough for the controllers of America's
second-biggest car maker to work out that it is the customer, rather than the
supplier, that makes a successful manufacturing business, and that an
introverted gene pool of four generations might be short of a few commercial
chromosomes.

   Like General Motors, Ford was so obsessed with its domestic rival that
neither noticed the Japanese eating their lunch, and it has taken the threat of
corporate collapse to bring in an outsider and give him real power. Well, the
appearance of real power, anyway, but with Bill Ford remaining as "executive
chairman" on top of Alan Mulally as chief executive, it doesn't augur well. The
world makes five cars for every four buyers.That fifth car is frequently a Ford,
and the only comfort is that its worst problems are domestic.

   Ford's European business is in relatively good shape, as indeed is the
British motor industry, as demonstrated by Nissan's announcement of a new car to
be built in Sunderland. The Qashqai is sure to be a hit, at least among those
with the qash to qai it.

   Email: neil.collins@standard.co.uk

GRAPHIC: OBJECT LESSON: MIMI MONICA WONG SUED FOR THE RETURN OF 8 MILLION AFTER
"LAZY COW" JIBE BY HER PRIVATE TUTOR

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2006


                             336 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2006 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                 Sunday Mirror

                            September 3, 2006 Sunday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 350 words

HEADLINE: BUBBLING OVER;
EXCLUSIVE .. SICK BOY KEPT IN STERILE BUBBLE IS OFF TO SCHOOL

BYLINE: BY MARTYN HALLE AND GRANT HODGSON

BODY:

   A LITTLE boy who lived in a bubble for a year is finally about to start
school.

   Rhys Evans was born with the rare illness Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
Disorder. He wasn't expected to live beyond his second birthday and survived
inside a plastic bubble because any infection could kill him.

   This month - four years after receiving pioneering gene therapy - the happy
youngster will start school.

   Rhys, now five, was the first child in the world to have genes designed to
boost his immune system added to stem cells taken from his bone marrow.

   His parents, Mark, 44, and Marie, 35, from Nelson in Mid-Glamorgan, South
Wales, say they are thrilled their son can have a normal life.

   "We never thought Rhys would be well enough to start school," said teacher
Marie. "It really is a dream come true.

   "Rhys has changed from being a very sickly child who was on the brink of
dying to being a normal, healthy kid. He's really looking forward to starting
school and making lots of new friends."

   Dad Mark, who gave up his job as a gas board pipe-layer to care for his son,
said: "When Rhys was ill we could only hold him inside a special germ-free room.
If the treatment hadn't worked he would be dead by now. "We are so happy those
days are gone for good. He may need more treatment in the future but at the
moment he's doing brilliantly."

   Rhys appeared fine when he was born, but doctors realised he had no immune
system when Marie stopped breast-feeding him. Until then her milk had been
protecting him from infection.

   Suddenly Rhys became prone to infection, and a bout of pneumonia nearly
killed him. At seven months he was taken to Great Ormond Street Children's
Hospital in London, where doctors decided to place him inside a plastic bubble.

   They planned to give Rhys a bone marrow transplant to make his immune system
stronger.

   But it took so long to find a match they decided to give him a
newly-developed course of gene therapy. The improved stem cells were then
injected back into his blood, triggering his recovery.

   'It's a dream come true that Rhys is well enough to come into the world'

   grant.hodgson@mgn.co.uk

GRAPHIC: Protected... Toddler Rhys inside the bubble' Joy... Rhys with his
parents' Looking forward to school... Rhys in his smart new uniform Picture:
ROLAND LEON

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2006


                             348 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                            August 15, 2006 Tuesday

SECTION: A MERGE; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 486 words

HEADLINE: Huge boost for Shire in US patent case win

BYLINE: BILL CONDIE

BODY:

   BRITISH drugs giant Shire Pharmaceuticals was today poised for a major
breakthrough in the US market after settling a crucial patent case with American
rival Barr Pharmaceuticals on one of its biggest potential blockbuster
medicines.

   Under the deal, Barr will not now be allowed to launch a copycat generic
version of Shire's new attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) drug for
three years. The agreement gives Shire crucial breathing space in an intensely
competitive market.

   The Footsie-listed company believes Adderall XR, already one of its major
earners, will silence controversy over ADHD drugs in the US. It says the
slow-release version is less likely to be abused than the short-release form.

   Shire had been suing Barr over its generic copy of Adderall XR with the
matter due in court in October. Under today's settlement, Barr will not be able
to market a generic version of drug in the US until April 2009.

   As part of the deal, the American company will buy the older,
immediate-release version of Adderall for $63 million (Pounds 33 million).
Shire, with revenues of Pounds 846 million last year, is a specialist in central
nervous system and gastrointestinal complaints and genetic therapies.

   It had previously settled with Impax Laboratories in a deal that allows Impax
to market a generic version of Adderall XR 181 days after Barr's launch.

   Barr admitted the generic product would infringe a patent. Shire chief
executive Matthew Emmens said: "We are very pleased to have reached this
settlement on terms that are consistent with our beliefs that Shire's patents
are valid and enforceable and infringed by would-be generic competitors."

   The agreement will be submitted to the US Federal Trade Commission for
approval. The patent deal is good news for Shire as Adderall XR is its
best-selling product.

   While the treatment has attracted some controversy, Emmens has dismissed
fears that the US government, which has been looking at deals between large
pharmaceutical groups, might block the settlement.

   "If you do a deal in a thoughtful way that is pro-competitive and that brings
a generic drug to the market sooner, that is a good thing," he said.

   Shire recently reported half-year results in line with expectations, despite
a sharp fall in second-quarter earnings.

   Net profits were slightly down at $122.4 million in the six months to 30 June
while revenue was 12% higher at $850.1 million.

   Shire has a promising pipeline of drugs including an Alzheimer's treatment
that helps slow the brain damage caused by the disease. It has just won Food and
Drug Administration approval for Elaprase, the first and so far only treatment
for Hunter syndrome, a rare inherited disorder that can lead to an early death.

   Shire has been spending heavily to bring new drugs to market but some
analysts believe that, with those expenses largely behind it, the company is
heading for a Pounds 300 million full-year net profit.

GRAPHIC: THE RIGHT PRESCRIPTION: CHIEF EXECUTIVE MATTHEW EMMENS DISMISSED FEARS
THE ADDERALL XR DEAL WOULD BE BLOCKED BY THE US GOVERNMENT, SAYING IT HAS BEEN
DONE IN A "THOUGHTFUL WAY THAT IS PRO-COMPETITIVE"

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2006


                             349 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                            August 15, 2006 Tuesday

SECTION: B MERGE; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 500 words

HEADLINE: Blockbuster boost for Shire after US patent case victory

BYLINE: TRACEY BOLES

BODY:

   SHIRE Pharmaceuticals, Britain's third-biggest drugs company, has fended off
an American threat to its most important drug, settling a crucial patent case
with US rival Barr Pharmaceuticals on its potential blockbuster Adderall XR.

   The slow-release drug treats Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
in children. ADHD is characterised by a range of behavioural problems associated
with poor attention span, including hyperactivity and impulsiveness. Children
with the condition tend to be disruptive at home and at school.

   Barr had wanted to launch a cheap copycat generic version of the Shire drug,
which would have severely damagedAdderall XR sales. Under the agreement, Barr is
not allowed to launch its generic drug for three years but will have a 180-day
exclusivity period when it does.

   The deal, which gives Shire crucial breathing space in the intensely
competitive US market, heads off a case thatwas due to be heard in the US on 30
October. Shire had brought the litigation against Barr because its patent on
Adderall XR does not expire until 2018.

   As part of the deal, Barr will buy the older, immediate-release version of
Adderall for $63 million (Pounds 33 million).

   Shares in Shire, which had revenues of Pounds 846 million last year, surged
almost 6% on the news. Investment bank JPMorgan said the deal would give the
company time to switch patients to its next generation ADHD product, known as
NRP 104 - due for launch next year if, as expected, it is approved in October.

   An estimated 20 million children worldwide have been diagnosed with ADHD but
experts say this could be just 5%-10% of the total number suffering from the
disruptive condition.

   The market for ADHD drugs is worth more than $2.5 billion a year, with the
vast majority of sales in America. Rival products to Adderall include Eli
Lilly's Strattera.

   Shire believes Adderall XR, already its best-selling product, will silence
the controversy over ADHD drugs in the US.

   It says the slow-release version is less likely to be abused than the
quickrelease form of the amphetamine-based product.

   Adderall XR is approved for use in America and Canada, but not in Britain.

   Shire believes the drug could also be used to treat adults. It settled with
Impax, another generic challenger to Adderall XR, earlier this year.

   Impax will now launch its copycat product once Barr's exclusivity period ends
in October 2009.

   The British pharmaceuticals giant specialises in human genetic therapies and
gastrointestinal and renal diseases as well as ADHD. Its pipeline of drugs
includes an Alzheimer's treatment that helps slow the brain damage caused by the
disease. It has just won US Food and Drug Administration approval for Elaprase,
the only treatment for Hunter syndrome, a rare inherited disorder that can lead
to early death.

   How Adderall adds up

   . Adderall treats hyperactivity in children

   . Approved in America but not UK

   . 20 million children diagnosed globally

   . Market worth over $2.5 billion annually

   . Rival products include Ritalin

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2006


                             351 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                             July 25, 2006 Tuesday

SECTION: C MERGE; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 558 words

HEADLINE: Tonic for Shire as US gives drug green light;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: MICKEY CLARK

BODY:

   DRUGMAKER Shire found cause to celebrate today as the City continued to
digest news that US regulators have approved the use of Elaprase, a treatment
for genetic disorder Hunter syndrome.

   Shire led blue-chips higher with a jump of 341/2p at 8621/2p, after briefly
touching 874p. Broker Credit Suisse is excited by the deal and expects shares of
Shire to outperform in the second half.

   Morgan Stanley has repeated its overweight rating while Collins Stewart
remains on buy and has raised its price target from 1066p to 1088p. It says this
is an important milestone as it is the second product to reach the market
produced by Transkaryotic Therapies, which it bought last year.

   The move also lessens Shire's reliance on Adderall XL, its treatment for
hyperactivity. Sales of Elaprase are expected to reach $400 million (Pounds 216
million) annually.

   Share prices generally extended yesterday's strong gains, underpinned by a
strong overnight performance by the Dow. However, the pace in London slowed
considerably with the FTSE 100 index restricted to a rise of 17.2 at 5851.1 in
another day of thin trading.

   US broker Morgan Stanley expects big things from the budget airlines and
forecasts a strong performance by them during the summer, as highlighted by last
month's healthy traffic numbers. That trend is expected to continue, boosting
passenger yield in turn.

   The broker has raised its 12-month target price for easyJet, down 11/4p at
4373/4p, from 360p to 450p after a strong performance that has seen the price
rebound from a low of 3091/2p earlier this year. It says more "juice" will
follow the group's recent strong performance and further upgrades are expected.

   Morgan Stanley is also upbeat about Ryanair, up six cents at e7.89. It has
raised its target price to e9.70 from e9.10, and expects net income to top
consensus estimates of Pounds 325 million by 20%. Ryanair remains the broker's
preferred play.

   Oil shares were mixed despite stronger crude prices. BP fell 21/2p to 631p on
confirmation chairman Lord Browne will step down in 2008. Royal DutchShell put
on 4p at 1910p. Dealers say the oil price was being squeezed higher by news that
Venezuela's Amuay refinery, a main supplier of petrol to the US, will be shut
for up to eight months.

   Kevin Lomax no longer has the field to himself in his bid to take Pounds 1
billion software giant Misys private. The company's independent directors said
they had received a number of approaches to buy all or parts of the business and
will "to allow certain parties" to carry out due diligence.

   Lomax is said to have the backing of private equity firms but could now face
rival offers from trade and financial buyers. Sources say potential bidders are
looking at a price of between 235p and 250p a share. The shares put on 91/4p to
246p.

   Telephone directories publisher Yell rose 4p to 524p on the back of
firstquarter pre-tax profits of Pounds 78 million and a bullish trading update.

   Brokers said profits were in line with expectations but they were also
cheered by news that UK online revenues jumped 71%.

   A few cheap buyers were sniffing around Sportingbet as the shares climbed
back above 200p with a rise of 183/4p to 2173/4p. They plunged more than 100p a
week ago, along with the shares of other online gamblers, following the arrest
of BetonSports chief executive David Carruthers by FBI agents.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2006


                             352 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                             July 25, 2006 Tuesday

SECTION: D MERGE; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 569 words

HEADLINE: Tonic for Shire as US gives drug green light;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: MICKEY CLARK

BODY:

   DRUGMAKER Shire found cause to celebrate today as the City continued to
digest news that US regulators have approved the use of Elaprase, a treatment
for the genetic disorder Hunter syndrome.

   Shire helped lead blue-chips higher with a jump of 251/2p at 8531/2p, after
briefly touching 874p. Broker Credit Suisse is excited by the approval and
expects Shire shares to outperform in the second half.

   Morgan Stanley repeated its overweight rating, while Collins Stewart remains
on buy and raised its price target from 1066p to 1088p. Elaprase is the second
product from Transkaryotic Therapies, which Shire bought last year, to reach the
market, and annual sales are expected to reach $400 million (Pounds 216
million). The approval also reduces Shire's reliance on Adderall XL, its
hyperactivity treatment.

   Share prices generally extended yesterday's strong gains, underpinned by an
early mark-up on Wall Street this afternoon. The Dow rose 16.90 to 11,067.90 on
the back of an unexpected rise in US consumer confidence.

   Back in London, the FTSE 100 index rose 37.3 at 5871.2 in another day of thin
trading. AB Foods retreated 121/2p to 8471/2p. Broker Merrill Lynch has placed
3.7 million shares in the food manufacturer and Primark discount stores group at
848p.

   US broker Morgan Stanley expects big things from the budget airlines,
forecasting a strong performance this summer on the strength of last month's
healthy traffic numbers.

   The broker has raised its 12-month target price for easyJet, 3/4p better at
4393/4p, from 360p to 450p after a strong performance that has seen the price
rebound from a low of 3091/2p earlier this year. It says more "juice" will
follow the group's recent strong performance, and further upgrades are expected.

   Morgan Stanley is also upbeat about Ryanair, up a cent at e7.84. It has
raised its target price to e9.70 from e9.10, and expects net income to top
consensus estimates of Pounds 325 million by 20%. Ryanair remains the broker's
preferred play.

   Oil shares were mixed despite stronger crude prices. BP slipped 1/2p to 633p
on confirmation that chairman Lord Browne will step down in 2008.

   Royal Dutch Shell put on 15p at 1921p. Dealers say the oil price was being
squeezed higher by news that Venezuela's Amuay refinery, a main supplier of
petrol to the US, will be shut for up to eight months.

   Kevin Lomax no longer has the field to himself in his bid to take Pounds 1
billion software giant Misys private. The company's independent directors said
they had received a number of approaches to buy all or parts of the business and
will "to allow certain parties" to carry out due diligence.

   Lomax is said to have the backing of private equity firms, but could now face
rival offers from trade and financial buyers. Sources say potential bidders are
looking at a price of between 235p and 250p a share. The shares put on 81/4p to
245p.

   Telephone directories publisher Yell rose 2p to 522p on the back of
firstquarter pre-tax profits of Pounds 78 million and a bullish trading update.

   Brokers said profits were in line with expectations, but they were also
cheered by news that UK online revenues jumped 71%.

   A few cheap buyers were sniffing around Sportingbet as the shares climbed
back above 200p with a rise of 163/4p to 2153/4p. They plunged more than 100p a
week ago, along with those of other online gamblers, following the US arrest of
David Carruthers, then BetonSports chief executive .

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2006


                             358 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2006 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                              July 4, 2006 Tuesday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 1171 words

HEADLINE: YOURLIFE: WAITING FOR MY THIRD SON TO DIE;
TWO OF MY BOYS ARE DEAD NOW I'M..

BYLINE: BY TOM PARRY

BODY:

   LOSING one child is more than most parents can bear. But Rehena Ahmed has
already lost two sons and is now preparing her third for his death.

   Cradling her boy in her arms, she points to the night sky. "That's what you
are going to be... a star in the sky, just like your brothers," she tells him.

   It is hard to tell if Sunny understands, but it is the only way Rehena knows
how to explain to her child what lies ahead for him.

   The frail eight-year-old has ALD, an incurable brain disease which is
hereditary and has already claimed the lives of his two brothers. Rehena has had
to deal with unimaginable heartbreak and pain, but she knows she has to remain
positive for the sake of her youngest son.

   "With Sunny I have been able to say a lot of things that were difficult with
the other two," she says. "He is the most relaxed of all of them about death.

   "He has a really strong spirit and is as prepared as he can be. I have always
described his older brothers as stars in the sky and he knows that sooner or
later there will be another star in the sky, which will be him."

   When Rehena, now 43, became pregnant with her first child, Irfan, she had no
idea about the terrible fate that lay in store.

   Unbeknown to her, she carried a recessive gene that causes ALD - full name a
adrenoleukodystrophy. The condition, which first came to worldwide recognition
in the film Lorenzo's Oil, starring Nick Nolte and Susan Sarandon, leads to a
build-up of fatty acids in the brain and causes gradual loss of movement and
speech. The childhood form affects only boys and most sufferers do not reach
adulthood.

   "I found out Irfan had ALD when he was seven," Rehena says. "A month later he
was in a vegetative state and five months after that he died."

   Still struggling to come to terms with her loss, she was told there was a
chance her second son Rizwan also had the condition. Sure enough, just a year
later he started showing symptoms.

   "With him the deterioration was a lot more gradual," Rehena says. "He started
wobbling and losing his balance. Then he lost his power of speech. He died a
year later, when he was eight years old." Desperate to fill the huge void in
their lives, she and her partner decided to have another child. Surprisingly,
doctors told them the chances of it having ALD were low.

   But five months into her pregnancy Rehena discovered she was having a son -
and that he, too, would suffer from ALD.

   She aced an agonising choice: whether to keep a baby whose life she knew
would be cut brutally short. Was it fair on him - and could she cope with the
agony of losing another child?

   She decided to go ahead and give her third son the best life she could.

   When Sunny was born Rehena refused to wrap him in cotton wool. Instead she
made sure he attended his local primary school, played football and went
swimming.

   At school, Sunny - full name Sundeep - cooked for his friends and enjoyed l
playing the part of class chef.

   Rehena, who is no longer with the boys' father, refused to spoil her son but
did everything ) she could to make him happy. "Sunny has gone on trips to
wherever he asked to go, like to the seaside," she says. "He also had a party
where he got to dress up as the Incredible Hulk."

   His mother has never shielded him from the truth about his condition. She
tries to keep the memory of her first two sons alive by telling Sunny about them
and using them to illustrate what the future holds for him.

   "It's very difficult to explain these things to a child," she says. "You have
to be very creative, but I would advise other parents whose children inherit ALD
to be honest about what is going to happen.

   "I have had to prepare Sunny for death."

   The only way to slow the symptoms is a bone marrow transplant, but in many
sufferers the disease takes hold before a suitable donor can be found. Like his
brothers, Sunny enjoyed only a few healthy years before ALD began to show.

   "One day when Sunny was seven, I dropped him off in the morning and he went
running happily into the playground," Rehena recalls. "By the time I picked him
up outside the school gates he was virtually blind." Rehena, from Bethnal Green,
East London, knew it was the beginning of the end. Since then Sunny's condition
has deteriorated rapidly.

   Today he is desperately clinging to life. He spends his days in a reclining
chair, his sight has gone completely and he can only communicate by body
movements. He has a tube in his nose to help him breathe and needs constant
monitoring. He can no longer go to school but has been bombarded by goodwill
cards from well-wishers.

   Rehena says: "The condition is progressing really fast now. I know from what
has happened with my other two sons that there will soon come a time when his
medication is no longer going to help him.

   "But he still gets a lot of pleasure from listening to music. He lets me know
when he likes something."

   For the past two years Sunny has benefited from care provided by the Bethany
Project, a local therapy service for vulnerable children. But without his carer,
mother-of-three Chris Stone, 54, there would have been no assistance.

   For Rehena, the only positive action she can take is to ease her son's pain.
She rarely takes him for hospital treatment because she is resigned to the
doctors' response: "There's nothing we can do."

   As she stares up at the framed photographs of Sunny and the brothers he never
knew, she sighs and somehow holds back the tears.

   "It's difficult to accept that this happened to three of my sons," she says.
"When you're in this position, you say a prayer before you look at your child
every morning. But at the back of your mind you know you are going to lose him
soon.

   "For many years, I thought to myself: 'Have I done something wrong?' But now
I have gone past that. I have to be strong.

   For now, I just want Sunny to be comfortable, and to die at home when the
time comes.

   You say a prayer every morning. But you know you're going to lose him soon

   WHAT IS ALD?

   ADRENOLEUKODYSTROPHY is a very rare genetic disorder which occurs when the
sufferer can't break down long-chain saturated fatty acids from the diet. These
accumulate, causing nerve and brain damage and eventually leading to death.

   WHAT ARE THE SYMPTOMS?

   CHILDHOOD ALD affects only boys, and symptoms begin between the ages of four
and 10, with behavioural changes such as aggression, withdrawal and doing badly
at school. The child goes on to have problems with movement, vision, hearing and
speech and will become clumsy. Death occurs within 10 years of the onset of
symptoms, often sooner.

   WHAT TREATMENT IS AVAILABLE?

   THERE'S no cure for ALD, but supportive treatments such as physiotherapy plus
help at school can help a little. Bone marrow transplants have been used in the
early stages with some success. And research has identified the faulty gene,
giving hope of gene therapy one day.

   For more information, Contact A Family can answer your questions about the
disease, as well as putting you in touch with other families who have a child
with ALD. Visit www.cafamily.org.uk or phone 0808 808 3555.

GRAPHIC: CLINGING TO LIFE: Sunny with mum Rehena Picture: MIKE MOORE' NO HOPE:
The end came swiftly for Irfan' SADNESS: Rizwan died at the age of 8' IMPISH:
Sunny before ALD. But the fun-loving boy never knew his brothers Pictures: MIKE
MOORE

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2006


                             359 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2006 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             June 27, 2006 Tuesday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 1225 words

HEADLINE: YOURLIFE: A KISS MAY KILL HIM;
EXCLUSIVE

BYLINE: BY JULIE

BODY:

   WHEN the Nadeem family visit their new arrival, they walk up to a red line on
the hospital floor - and stop.

   They can't pick up five-week-old Zohaib for a cuddle, only stare at him from
a distance.

   Mum Rukhsana is allowed to cross the line, but first she has to follow a
strict regime of scrubbing her arms with disinfectant and sometimes even wear
gloves.

   Dad Sajid and big brother Hamid can only look on. They have never been
allowed to hold Zohaib.

   Apart from those few precious moments with his mum, Zohaib must remain in a
sterile, 8ft-square "bubble". It sounds distressing, but it is the only way to
save his life.

   He was born without an immune system, so catching any kind of germ could be
fatal. A cuddle from an undisinfected person could be enough to transmit a
deadly infection.

   Even a single kiss could kill him.

   "Coping with this illness is so, so hard," sighs Rukhsana. "All our family is
desperate to hug Zohaib, stare into his eyes, kiss his face and try to bond with
him.

   "But to reduce the risk of catching any bacteria and bugs, only a handful of
special nurses are allowed to touch him, and I'm allowed to hold him only to
breastfeed. It's sometimes hard to accept, but we know the bubble's saving his
life."

   Rukhsana, 26, and Sajid, 32, from Nelson, Lancs, were told that Zohaib had
the frightening disease Severe Combined Immune Deficiency (SCID) within hours of
his birth.

   IT wasn't a complete shock as the condition runs in their family. Elder son
Hamid, four, was also diagnosed within days of his birth.

   "Finding out about Hamid was terrifying, especially as we knew what lay ahead
of us because a nephew born the year before also had SCID," Rukhsana says.

   "We hoped with all our might that Zohaib might be lucky and escape the
disease, but that wasn't to be."

   Until recently "bubble babies" had to spend their first few months in actual
plastic bubbles. Now, thanks to scientific advances, they can survive in normal
rooms - but only within strict sterile areas. Sadly, many still die before their
first birthday.

   Their bodies are stripped of the ability to fight infection, and without
treatment children rapidly sicken and die. Their lives depend on the quality of
the air they breathe and the cleanliness of people and objects around them.

   The only cure is a bone marrow transplant - a difficult and painful process
which replaces the faulty gene causing the illness and helps sufferers grow a
new immune system.

   Tests showed that Rukhsana was a 100 per cent bone marrow match for Hamid. He
endured a gruelling course of treatment, which included chemo-therapy and
countless blood transfusions, and successfully increased his white blood cell
count to normal levels.

   He still needs regular tests to check his blood cell count, but now attends
nursery and lives a happy, normal life.

   "It was hard to see Hamid so ill," remembers Rukhsana. "We were so frightened
for him because he was so tiny and tired, but in a way we're glad he was too
young to feel scared about what he was going through."

   The family are now desperately hoping the same medical miracle will save
Zohaib's life and release him from his virtual prison into his family's arms.

   Rukhsana says: "It's heartbreaking to sit here and hear him cry, and be
unable to rush in there to cuddle and comfort him. He can't even have soft toys
in with him to brighten up his incubator, because of the risk of contamination.
It's sad to see him living in such isolation.

   "But we've been through all this before with Hamid, so as a family we never
complain because we'reso grateful that he's so happy and healthy now. He's very
sociable and we often wonder if that's because he lived his early months almost
completely alone.

   "Zohaib has a long way to go. It isn't easy going through a bone marrow
transplant. It's a long roller -coaster ride, but we'd do it a thousand times
over because it works amazingly well.

   "When Hamid finally got the all-clear, after three and a half months of
living in the bubble, I was desperate to shower him with all the kisses and
cuddles he'd missed.

   "But I was almost too scared to because at first he was still fragile and I
didn't want him to catch any illnesses.

   "I'd pick him up and hold him gently, but not too close because he was so
weak and in pain. I'd even direct my breath away from him. But hopefully Zohaib
will be as healthy as Hamid some day soon."

   Unfortunately for Zohaib, there's no guarantee the transplant will work.
Tests show that Rukhsana is only a 50 per cent match.

   Doctors have scoured a global database of bone marrow donors, but a closer
match has not been found, so she represents the best hope for Zohaib's survival.

   She says: "As a mother, I feel utterly helpless looking into his bubble for
hours on end while nurses tend to almost all his needs. So I just hope and pray
I can help my son in some way." Zohaib's hi-tech "bubble" in the Children's Bone
Marrow Transplant Unit in Newcastle upon Tyne is one of only a handful in Europe
and two in Britain - the other is in Great Ormond Street Hospital, London.

   Pioneering new research has shown that gene therapy - which involves removing
the patient's own bone marrow cells and replacing the faulty gene - has had good
results. Denise Robertson, the agony aunt from ITV1 's This Morning's show, is
president of The Bubble Foundation UK. The charity aims to raise money to fund
research into the devastating disease and provide meticulous medical care and
vital equipment at Newcastle General Hospital.

   ALTHOUGH she is involved with 34 other charities, The Bubble Foundation is
very special to Denise.

   She explains: "I visited the hospital 15 years ago and saw a little boy who
was 10 months old, living in a bubble. I have five sons of my own and felt
particularly drawn to him. But sadly, that little boy died.

   "Two years later his mother had another bubble baby, and happily he was saved
and is now 12 and growing up in Scotland. That shows just what giant leaps
medicine has made over recent years.

   "Yet the nation doesn't know this bubble exists. At times that has moved me
to tears of frustration. We are a tiny charity trying desperately to raise money
to pay for the research, but that research is achieving miracle after miracle."

   For now, Rukhsana will continue to keep vigil outside the bubble that is
keeping her little boy alive. "Sometimes I cry when I see him lying there in his
own, as he must feel so lonely," she says. "But I have to remind myself about
the amazing recovery Hamid has made.

   "Each time he visits, he raises his arms towards his little brother and
constantly asks to hold him. It's so hard to explain why we just can't do such a
simple, natural act.

   "I dream of that day Zohaib is well enough to be hugged and kissed and our
newest family member can finally come home.

   "And I don't think I'll ever stop thanking the doctors and nurses who made
that dream come true."

   BUBBLE BABIES' PLIGHT SEVERE Combined Immunodeficiency (SCID) means you are
born with an immune system that does not work. If left untreated, all babies die
before their first birthday. One in 20,000 live births is affected.

   The disease is caused by a genetic disorder, and the most successful way to
cure the condition is to give "bubble babies" a bone marrow transplant.

   To raise money, or find out more information, contact the Bubble Foundation
UK on 0191 256 3460/www.bubblefoundation. org.uk

GRAPHIC: STOP: Sajid and elder son Hamid mustn't cross the red line' CARE: This
Morning's Denise Robertson with 'bubble' kids' LAST HOPE: Zohaib's life depends
on Rukhsana's gift of bone marrow

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2006


                             360 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                            June 21, 2006 Wednesday

SECTION: C MERGE; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 357 words

HEADLINE: Christie: Test all athletes in 2012 for drugs

BYLINE: NICHOLAS CECIL

BODY:

   ALL athletes should be tested to stop use of banned substances and techniques
at the 2012 Olympics, Linford Christie told MPs today.

   The Olympic gold medal-winning sprinter also called for pupils to be taught
about the dangers of using drugs to boost performance.

   Christie was himself banned for two years by the International Amateur
Athletic Federation after testing positive for the anabolic steroid nandrolone
in 1999 though he has always protested his innocence.

   He gave evidence today to the allparty science and technology committee's
inquiry into human enhancement technologies in sport. The MPs voiced concerns
that revolutionary techniques such as gene doping may be being used by athletes
by 2012.

   Christie said he did not believe that cheating by athletes was common but
said that they should all be tested before and after events to stop abuses.

   Asked about new human enhancement techniques, such as gene therapy where
muscles can be grown or repaired faster, he told the MPs that tests to detect
their use should be kept secret. "If you keep it quiet you are going to catch
more people," he added.

   He also stressed athletes doubted the reliability of doping tests in some
"rogue countries" because of concerns over the competence of bodies carrying out
the tests or corruption, and he argued that penalties for breaches should be
uniform across all sports.

   Dr Roger Palfreeman, chief medical officer for British Cycling, told the MPs
that abuses tended to happen more among elite sportsmen and women than other
competitors.

   Professor Ron Maughan, an expert in sport and exercise nutrition at
Loughborough University, stressed the driving force for human enhancement
technologies was for medical purposes, rather than sport.

   . London's Paralympics are facing a Pounds 45 million funding black hole
despite being central to the 2012 Olympics.

   The Liberal Democrats claimed the lack of public funding for the disabled
athletes' event would damage the reputation of the London Games.

   Meanwhile 800 teenagers are to be recruited to spread the Olympic message in
schools across the country as part of the Young Ambassador programme launched
today.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2006


                             361 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                             June 20, 2006 Tuesday

SECTION: A MERGE; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 979 words

HEADLINE: My little girl has cystic fibrosis. Don't tell me that it is wrong for
society to work to prevent disease;
As a new embryo screening technique causes controversy, one father of a child
with a serious genetic illness argues that screening is more humane than
allowing further children to suffer

BYLINE: ED OWEN

BODY:

   THE technique is revolutionary. A faster new embryo test will help more
parents ensure their children are born free of severe genetic diseases. The new
technique is not simple for those involved, meaning that they will have to go
through IVF treatment even if they have no trouble conceiving. But it holds out
the possibility that thousands of children every year will be born healthy
rather than with debilitating conditions and low life-expectancy.

   So why have the usual group of selfappointed moralists reacted as they always
do - with predictable outrage and mutterings about a "slippery slope"?

   One outspoken critic said she was " horrified" by the idea. Others claim the
process is tantamount to "playing God".

   Such comments are an insult not only to the morality and dedication of those
who strive to prevent and treat disease, but also to the agonising decisions
that affected couples are faced with. Far from wanting to create designer
babies, the goal of most parents faced with a choice between a healthy child and
one whose life will be cut short by terrible illness is a somewhat more basic
one.

   I know because I have a daughter with cystic fibrosis (CF), Britain's most
common life-threatening inherited genetic disease.

   Cystic fibrosis is a condition that attacks the lungs and digestive system -
and demands a rigorous daily ritual of physiotherapy and medication.

   At almost four years old, our daughter is taking every day a cocktail of
powerful antibiotics, vitamin supplements and enzymes to accompany her food.

   She also has her chest beaten for 15 minutes twice a day to clear the lungs
of sticky mucus.

   She is doing well, and is fit and active.

   But life expectancy rates are barely 30 years, and many sufferers in the last
part of their lives need constant support to stay alive. While treatments have
improved over recent years, there is no cure.

   Our daughter's condition is down to the rather simple fact that both my
partner and I carry the same faulty gene. That we each have this defect is
neither rare (more than two million other people in Britain, about one in 25, do
so, too) nor detrimental to our health. But any child we have has a one-in-four
chance of being born with CF.

   We knew none of this until after our first child had arrived. But when we
came to discussing the possibility of a second, we were faced with a stark
choice. Either we went for genetic screening of my partner's embryos created by
IVF (know as Pre-Implantation Genetic Diagnosis - PIGD) or took a chance, with
the possibility of termination at a later stage of the pregnancy.

   For external arbiters of social and individual morality, such a choice
between embryo selection - and therefore the disposal of embryos identified with
CF - or possible abortion at 18 weeks or so would, no doubt, be an abhorrent
one. Either course would be unacceptable.

   Yet to take such a position is to deny altogether parents' legitimate ethical
concern for the wellbeing of their children. Worse, it forces families into
further suffering rather than make use of new medical techniques.

   In a wider sense, the arguments against screening - and the law only allows
PIGD procedures to be used for a small number of severe genetic conditions -
propagate a notion that somehow it is morally wrong for society to work to
prevent disease.

   Even as the parent of a child with a severe genetic disorder, I have no
difficulty in believing that in the 21st century, it is better to be free from
illness than to suffer from it.

   The critics, of course, argue that this is all a slippery slope, and that the
real danger is that procedures used today for CF and Huntingdon's Disease could
be used in the future by parents who want to ensure their future baby's eyes are
blue or hair is blonde. But no one is arguing for a free-for-all.

   The UK Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority (HFEA) is responsible for
overseeing a strict regulatory system. It may not be perfect - how can it be,
given the pace of new medical developments? But the HFEA helps recognise that
the moral arguments on these issues are often complex and difficult.

   A further argument against genetic screening is that it somehow devalues the
worth of those who are already living with the particular condition. A society
willing to eradicate embryos with CF, so this case goes, is only a small step
away from eradicating - or at least, undermining - those already born with it.

   But, in truth, this is the same argument put by the moral absolutists, and
would have the same consequence - parents denied the right to seek the best for
their children and society denied the chance to reduce disease and suffering.

   I also very much doubt that this view is held by the great majority of people
who suffer from genetic diseases like CF.

   One of the most striking aspects of the work going on to raise money to
develop a groundbreaking genetic therapy for CF (the research looks extremely
promising but more cash is needed to complete the work) is the support given by
sufferers who know that they will be too old to benefit from it.

   Nicky West was one such person. She worked tirelessly to help the cause and
inspired audiences with her beauty and courage. She died two years ago at the
age of 27 but would always say that she did not want others to have to suffer in
the way that she had done. No one would have dared to suggest that by
campaigning effectively to cure CF she was denying her own value and worth.

   This was one of the issues my partner and I discussed when deciding on
whether or not to go with genetic screening at the time of planning our second
child. But we were - and are - both adamant that the decision we took had no
bearing at all on our feelings for our older child.

   In the end, we took a chance. We got lucky and we have a healthy child
without CF. But I would defend to the last the right of parents in our position
to make that choice.

GRAPHIC: DOING WELL: ED OWEN WITH DAUGHTER ELLA, WHO SUFFERS FROM BRITAIN'S MOST
COMMON LIFE-THREATENING GENETIC DISEASE

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2006


                             363 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2006 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                             June 15, 2006 Thursday
                                 3 Star Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 1739 words

HEADLINE: YOURLIFE: THE BIG C;
WHY IT'S NO LONGER A DEATH SENTENCE MEDICAL BREAKTHROUGHS ARE INCREASING THE
CHANCES OF SURVIVING OUR MOST FEARED DISEASES. BY MADELEINE BAILEY

BYLINE: BY MADELEINE BAILEY

BODY:

   IT'S a terrifying thought that one third of us will get some form of cancer
during our lives. But thanks to medical advances over the past 20 years are we
are increasingly likely to beat the illness.

   Greater awareness, more sophisticated detection and new, smarter treatments
means more and more of us will reach the five-year milestone, when the risk of
cancer returning dramatically falls.

   Last week's government decision to back the use of the drug Herceptin for
women with early stage HER2-positive strain of breast cancer was a huge boost.

   Here, we look at some key steps in the fight against The Big C.

   BREAST CANCER

   SURVIVAL RATES These have increased steadily over the past 20 years. In the
early 70s, 52 per cent of UK women diagnosed were still alive after five years,
and this increased to 77 per cent in the late 90s.

   WHY MORE PEOPLE ARE LIVING

   Dr Emma Pennery, of charity Breast Cancer Care, says: "The national screening
programme for women aged 50 to 70 has had a huge impact on survival because
cancer tends to be more treatable the earlier it's diagnosed. Also, breast
awareness campaigns mean that women get symptoms checked out sooner."

   Through research doctors now know far more about treatment. "Clinical trials
have helped us find out what works best for each type and stage of cancer, so
treatment is tailor-made to the individual. For instance, we now know that women
who have a lumpectomy (lump removal) should always have radiotherapy, but those
with advanced cancer that's spread to the lymph nodes benefit best from
chemotherapy," says Dr Pennery.

   There's also been a huge improvement in the effectiveness of drugs.
"Tamoxifen, given to women whose cancer is fed by the hormone oestrogen, has
been one of the greatest contributors to reduced deaths," she adds. THE FUTURE
Survival rates are likely to increase in future years when the effects of the
new-generation smart drugs like Herceptin, which targets cancer cells and leaves
healthy cells alone, have an impact.

   Visit Breast Cancer Care at www.breastcancercare.org.uk or call 0808 800
6000.

   CERVICAL CANCER

   SURVIVAL RATES Deaths from cervical cancer have fallen by seven per cent a
year since 1988.

   And if you're one of the 3,000 women a year who are diagnosed with cancer,
your survival chances are better than ever. About 65 per cent of those diagnosed
in 2000-01 got to the five-year mark compared with just over 50 per cent in the
early 70s.

   WHY MORE PEOPLE ARE LIVING When the NHS Cervical Screening Programme was
introduced in 1988, 6,000 lives a year were saved. The test picks up
pre-cancerous changes, preventing cancer altogether.

   And a key treatment development was internal radiotherapy where a radioactive
pellet is temporarily inserted into the top of the vagina. "This focuses
treatment more precisely than external radiation, limiting damage to healthy
cells," explains consultant gynaecologist Ellis Downes, of screening company
Gynae Check.

   A chemotherapy and radiation combination therapy is now standard practice for
many stages of cervical cancer after clinical trials showed it to be very
effective.

   THE FUTURE The biggest hope is the Cevarix vaccine, which could be available
within a year for girls who aren't sexually active. It will protect them from
HPV (human papillomavirus), strains of which are associated with cervical
cancer.

   Visit Gynae Check at www.gynaecheck.co.uk or call 01707 877889.

   PROSTATE CANCER

   SURVIVAL RATES Men with prostate cancer still alive after five years leaped
from 42 to 65 per cent between 1986 and 1999.

   WHY MORE PEOPLE ARE SURVIVING These figures are partly the result of better
diagnosis, says Mark Emberton, consultant urologist at University College
Hospital, London.

   "Prostate cancer is more common in elderly men, and because it grows slowly
many of them die before it affects them. However, greater awareness of symptoms
plus improved detection has led to more diagnoses," he explains.

   But treatment has also improved. Emberton says: "Breakthroughs include
conformal radiotherapy, where the radiation beam fits the tumour exactly,
protecting healthy cells. This limits side effects and means higher doses can be
given, making treatment more effective."

   Other developments include attaching radioactive implants to the prostate to
target the cancer more accurately, plus better use of hormone therapy. And
photodynamic therapy is a new technique that uses a laser to destroy cancer
cells. It has fewer side effects and shorter recovery time than surgery or
radiotherapy.

   THE FUTURE Gene therapy could be the big future hope. A new study has shown
that blocking the action of a particular gene makes prostate cancer cells twice
as sensitive to radiotherapy and some chemotherapy.

   Visit The Prostate Cancer Charity at www.prostate-cancer.org.uk or call 0845
300 8383.

   BOWEL CANCER

   SURVIVAL RATES Deaths from bowel cancer dropped by an impressive 18 per cent
between 1995 and 2004. However, it still kills more than 16,000 people a year in
the UK, mainly because it's not diagnosed until late. WHY MORE PEOPLE ARE LIVING
According to Ian Beaumont, spokesperson for charity Bowel Cancer UK, the drop in
deaths is due to better treatment. "For 50 years the only drug available was a
chemotherapy drug called 5-v FU. Then more effective treatments such as Eloxatin
(oxaliplatin) and Xeloda (capecitabine) were introduced. They've now been
recommended by NICE (the National Institute for Clinical Excellence) for use
after surgery in patients whose cancers haven't spread beyond the bowel wall.
Seven out of 10 of these patients will survive."

   The biggest recent breakthrough, however, is the introduction of "smart"
drugs such as Avastin (bevacizumab), which stop cancer growth. They're used for
inoperable tumours but aren't yet widely available.

   THE FUTURE Experts predict that the national screening programme, starting in
July, will save around 1,200 lives a year. That's because 90 per cent of bowel
cancer cases are treatable if they're caught early. One day, a bowel cancer
vaccine, currently undergoing trials, could be used to stop cancer recurring.

   Call Bowel Cancer UK's advisory service, on 08708 506050 or log on to
www.bowelcanceruk.org.uk

   LUNG CANCER

   SURVIVAL RATES It's the most challenging cancer, responsible for 33,500 UK
deaths a year. And while the past 30 years have seen the numbers surviving one
year with the illness rise from 14 to 25 per cent, only seven per cent of
sufferers live five years.

   WHY MORE PEOPLE ARE LIVING Specialist Dr Jesme Baird, of the Roy Castle Lung
Cancer Foundation, explains: "Symptoms may not appear till later or may be
mistaken for other chest conditions. And while treatment has improved, research
needs to be done into the benefits of screening."

   Improvements include better surgical techniques so even tumours stuck to the
heart can now be removed, while radiotherapy is more precise. "When surgery
isn't possible, patients are given radical radiotherapy, which uses higher
doses. Better anti-sickness drugs mean they're more able to tolerate this," says
Dr Baird.

   THE FUTURE The most promising development is the introduction of Tarceva
(erlotinib), a smart drug that blocks cancer growth.

   Visit www.roycastle.org or call 0871 220

   7 WAYS YOU CAN HALVE YOUR RISK

   THESE lifestyle changes will slash your risk of cancer by 50 per cent.

   1 SAY NO TO NICOTINE (and all the other nasties in fags). Most of the 38,000
cases of lung cancer diagnosed each year in the UK are caused by smoking. The
evil weed also increases risk of cancers of the mouth, nose, oesophagus,
pancreas, stomach, liver, lower urinary tract, kidney, cervix and blood.

   2 WATCH YOUR WEIGHT The fatter you are, the greater your risk of cancers of
the breast, bowel, kidney and womb.

   3 CUT DOWN ON FAT The saturated type that includes butter, red meat and
full-fat milk and cheese.

   4 START SAFE DRINKING It's estimated that booze causes 2,000 cases of breast
cancer in the UK every year. It also increases risk of cancers of the mouth,
voice box, oesophagus, liver, and possibly bowel.

   5 BE BODY AWARE Get anything unusual, from changed bowel habits to
unexplained weight loss, checked by a GP.

   6 NEVER SKIP YOUR MAMMOGRAM OR SMEAR. These tests save thousands of lives
every year.

   7 GET YOUR TAN FROM A BOTTLE Too much sun is the main cause of malignant
melanoma, a killer form of skin cancer.

   Go to www.cancerresearchuk.org for more tips.

   Dr Miriam Stoppard says..

   THERE has always been good news about cancer for as long as I can remember,
just nobody knew about it.

   For many years cancer was an unmentionable subject. It was taboo to talk
about it. It was a terrifying unknown - The Big C. We would never have got cure
rates up had this veil of secrecy around cancer persisted.

   The most crucial factor in curing cancer is early diagnosis. To make an early
diagnosis everyone has to recognise suspicious signs and, having spotted
something unusual, seek a medical opinion as quickly as possible.

   All cancers benefit from this vigilance and cure rates soar. Regular
screening does the same, so take advantage of all the tests on offer.

   Now that people are less fear full they give themselves the best chance. This
sea change in people's thinking about cancer has meant earlier diagnosis,
earlier treatment and more people living to a ripe old age.

   New treatments emerge all the time, more specific, more targeted, more
successful. The latest being the once a day pill for chronic myeloid leukaemia.
New drugs completely change the outlook for some patients. Herceptin for breast
cancer is but one.

   Even the way we deliver always gets cleverer and cleverer to outwit the
cancerous cell. One very promising lead is to tag drugs on to viruses which,
once in the body, invade cancer cells, taking the anticancer drug with them and
zap them from the inside.

   Best of all we now know there are things we can do for ourselves that might
prevent those cancers growing in the first place. Things like not smoking, not
exposing ourselves to too much sun, not eating too much animal fat, eating lots
of fish, fruit and veg, taking regular exercise.

   The same old things, but they all help. Who would have thought at one time
there would be a vaccine that might prevent a cancer. Far fetched?

   Not so. There is, on the horizon, a vaccine against HPV, the virus known to
cause cervical cancer, which if given to pre-pubertal children, would stifle the
development of that cancer. Good news indeed!

   YourLIFE REAL STORIES.. REAL PEOPLE.. EVERY DAY

GRAPHIC: Pictures: JON FEINGERSH/ZEFA/CORBIS

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2006


                             373 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2006 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                 Sunday Mirror

                             March 19, 2006 Sunday
                                 Scots Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 530 words

HEADLINE: I'LL NEVER GIVE UP MY SEARCH FOR SKIN CURE;
EXCLUSIVE ALEX, 17, LONGING FOR DAY WITHOUT ANY BANDAGES

BYLINE: BY ANDREW TOLMIE

BODY:

   BUTTERFLY skin victim Alex Hood has vowed to step up her quest for a cure -
after surviving a terrifying cancer scare.

   The Scots teenager said the relief at being given the all-clear had inspired
her even more to beat the agonising disease which has blighted her life. Brave
Alex, 17, has become a role model for thousands of fellow sufferers around the
world through her determination to overcome Epidermolysis Bullosa (EB) which
makes her skin blister and tear at the slightest touch.

   She has spent much of her life swathed in bandages and has lived constantly
in the shadow of skin cancer, the disease which eventually kills most EB
victims.

   Two weeks ago her mother Virginia, 53, became alarmed by the worsening
condition of Alex's skin. It was agreed Alex should be tested for cancer.

   After an anxious wait for the test results, doctors at Great Ormond Street
Hospital in London broke the news that Alex was all-clear.

   Now she and her family are renewing their efforts to find a cure for EB. Alex
said: "My test results were a massive relief and now I just want to get on with
my life and help to raise awareness of EB."

   Alex's father Robin, who is the director of EB charity DebRA Scotland, said:
"Waiting for the results of the test was hell. It was like waiting to be shot at
dawn.

   "Jonny Kennedy, who featured in the documentary "The boy whose skin fell
off", died of skin cancer. It is a death sentence for EB sufferers. Now I have
to concentrate on staying positive and working day and night to find that cure
and stop my daughter's pain before it is too late."

   Despite having her hands constantly wrapped in bandages Alex is a talented
artist, and amazes her proud family with works painted on her art and design
course at college.

   Mr Hood, from Kirkcudbright, wants his daughter to lead a normal life, and
for that dream to come true gene therapy being pioneered by Scottish scientists
will have to receive constant funding.

   Professor Irwin McLean, of Ninewells Hospital in Dundee, is leading the
research that could find a cure for EB. The programme, which has cured the
disease in mice, has been pledged pounds 1 million by DebRA over the next three
years. It works by correcting the faulty gene that causes EB so that healthy
skin can be grown.

   Professor McLean warns that a lot more time and money will have to be spent
before the gene therapy is proven to work on humans . "I am confident that the
gene therapy will work once we can test it," he said. "But there are a number of
legal problems with testing gene therapies that slow the process down."

   DebRA, whose key supporters include Michael Portillo, president, model Nell
McAndrew, vice-president, and golf legend Peter Alliss, believes clinical trials
into effective treatments for EB are less than three years away. Around 200
children in Scotland suffer from the EB and many will die before they reach
adulthood unless a cure can be found.

   The constant blistering on their skin creates scar tissue which can cause
fingers and toes to completely fuse together. The throat can also narrow, making
eating almost impossible.

   Most victims like Alex spend hours every day having their bandages replaced.

   news@sundaymirror.co.uk

GRAPHIC: Smiling through.. Alex is bandaged to stop her skin blistering' Dad
Robin in battle to help find a cure for Alex

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2006


                             375 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2006 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                            March 16, 2006 Thursday
                                 1 Star Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 1269 words

HEADLINE: SURGEON AGED 7;
EXCLUSIVE AKRIT SPEAKS FOUR LANGUAGES AND IS TRYING TO FIND A CURE FOR CANCER IN
HIS SPARE TIME (BUT HE DOES QUITE LIKE SPIDER-M AN)

BYLINE: BY ANTONIA HOYLE

BODY:

   HIS mates may be preoccupied with their PlayStations and their favourite
sport but 12-year-old Akrit Jaswal has more pressing concerns...

   He's studying for a bachelor of science degree, speaks four languages and has
already performed a surgical operation.

   His bedroom is filled with medical books, not model planes, and he's better
at discussing politics than most men three times his age.

   A typical day for the pint-sized pre-teen involves meeting politicians,
working on cures for Aids and cancer, and treating the hundreds of ailing people
who see him as nothing short of a modern-day saint.

   With an IQ higher than Albert Einstein's, Akrit has been declared the
cleverest boy in the world - and he is determined to make the most of his gift.

   "I feel I've a duty to stop all the suffering in the world," he says. "It
would be a waste of my natural talent not to use it wisely.

   "I might not be the average scientist but I reckon I have a good chance of
coming up with the breakthrough technology to treat ill people."

   Akrit certainly isn't short of confidence and, as he discusses his superior
intelligence, he comes across as more than slightly smug.

   But, thankfully, the youngster does retain some childish qualities. He's at
pains to point out that, despite being a child prodigy and household name in his
native India, he's an ordinary boy at heart.

   "My hero is Spider-Man and I love going to the cinema with my friends," he
explains. "My favourite film is probably Titanic. I also enjoy a good game of
cricket and I'm pleased India are beating England in the Test series. If
anything, being born so clever makes me determined to enjoy life even more."

   An only child, Akrit's parents realised that he was different when he started
talking and walking at just 10 months old.

   By the time he was five, he was reading Shakespearean plays in English and
begging to sit in at his local doctor's surgery so he could learn how to
operate. "My parents explained that I was very clever," he recalls. "But I never
felt out of the ordinary."

   WHEN he was seven, however, Akrit performed complicated surgery on a girl in
his village of Nurpur, in the Himalayan mountains.

   Her fingers had been burnt and fused together after an accident with a pan of
boiling water. Her family couldn't afford to send her to a doctor, so Akrit
decided he could separate them.

   "I'd sat in on dozens of operations out of pure fascination and taught myself
what to do by reading up on procedures," he says. "I've always been fascinated
with the human body."

   He used a scalpel to disentangle her tendons. "I think I did a better job
than most surgeons," he boasts. "They would have opted for plastic surgery but I
didn't need to."

   The press soon got wind of the operation and Akrit, who's still only 5ft,
became an instant celebrity.

   "People started queueing up outside my house to see if I could cure their
ailments and illnesses." he says.

   "They came with any complaint - from twisted ankles to colds. I didn't mind.
I wanted to help." His dad, Julwant Singh, 42, and mum, Anju Raksha, 40, were
thrilled.

   "They saw my potential and wanted to help me excel in life," he says. "I
think they're of above average intelligence. But they're not as clever as me."

   They were both teachers, who ran their own school for the kids in the area.
Akrit attended but soon found it too easy. So, when his mother realised he was
correctly answering graduate-level questions, the roles were reversed and the
youngster began to teach maths and English to teenagers.

   When he was seven, the US-based Gifted Development Center tested Akrit's
intelligence and declared he had an IQ of 162 - slightly higher than Einstein.

   But Akrit won't compare himself to the genius. "I don't look to him or any
other academics for inspiration," he says somewhat indignantly.

   "I set my own standards. I'm not intimidated by the professors I meet either
- although I do admire them." So far, his proudest achievement has been
completing his school education with distinction aged 11.

   India's chief minister, Virbhadra Singh, awarded him his certificate,
describing him as an exceptional talent.

   He's now studying at Punjab University in Delhi - the youngest student ever
to enrol at an Indian campus - but still devotes his spare time to trying to
cure cancer.

   AKRIT'S parents knew that, without the multi-million pound resources most
academics have available to them, their son was at a distinct disadvantage.

   So they sold all their property, including their school, to set up a personal
research laboratory for their son in Delhi.

   Akrit now lives there with his mother and uncle. "His needs are more
important than mine," says Raksha. "It's our duty to encourage his talent." Last
year, the youngster spent two months aiding researchers at the Tata Cancer
Institute, in Mumbai.

   "There were days when nearly 300 patients and doctors would line up to see
me," he says. "But I didn't feel pressured. I wanted to help." However his
success has come at a price. Akrit's dad, Julwant, having spent years failing to
persuade the Indian government to provide funding for his son, claims his
efforts have exhausted him.

   He hasn't seen Akrit for a year and says he doesn't want to be reunited until
the youngster finds the cancer cure he's looking for.

   Julwant is still married to Akrit's mother but says he has done his part in
helping his son and is too exhausted to support him further.

   It seems like a huge amount of pressure for a boy to be put under but Akrit
insists this isn't the case.

   "Of course, I miss my father," he admits. "I wish he was still living with
us. But it has made me more determined to make the discovery I know I have in
me."

   When Akrit isn't researching his unique theory of oral gene therapy with the
76 adult co-workers in his lab, he's a dab hand at discussing politics.

   He's furious with George Bush's recent deal with India on nuclear weapons.
"They cause widespread destruction and should be discontinued straight away," he
says.

   And he's not a fan of the Iraq war either. "It's utterly useless," he
believes. "It's turning the world into a game. World leaders need to realise
we're all human.

   "We shouldn't be divided according to race, religion or class. We should work
together to get rid of our differences."

   IT may not come as a surprise to learn that Akrit wants to become the
youngest-ever Nobel Peace Prize winner.

   To help him on his way, he has met countless Indian ministers who, despite
not being able to finance his endeavours, are keen to encourage them.

   He also discussed his scientific theories with leading cancer specialists
during a trip to Imperial College London last year. His cure involves the
modification of malformed genes that cause cancer and their successful repair
either by activating enzymes or with the direct modification of genotoxic drugs.

   Confused? So were they. Although they admit his plans are theoretically
possible, they reckon they're too idealistic and not yet feasible.

   But Akrit is undeterred. "I've already developed the structure in my head,
although I haven't put it to the test yet.

   "It might take two years, or 40," he says. "But I know I can cure cancer. I
want to marry one day and have children of my own but my research will always be
the most important thing to me."

   And he admits that his outstanding intelligence has other benefits, too.

   "My friends think it's great, because they can ask for help with their
homework," he laughs. "I can be quite useful!"

   I've a duty to stop all the suffering in the world - I won't waste my talent

   THE Seven-Year-Old Surgeon: Extraordinary People, Channel Five, Monday, March
20 at 9pm.

   antonia.hoyle@mirror.co.uk

GRAPHIC: PROUD: With his mother, Anju Raksha' MISSION: Akrit Jaswal and, inset
below, performing surgery

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2006


                             377 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2006 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                           February 28, 2006 Tuesday
                                 2 Star Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 195 words

HEADLINE: NEWS

BODY:

   SNOW HERALDS FIRST DAY OF SPRING

   SOME of this winter's worst weather could bring a deluge of snow and
temperatures down to - 15 1/4 C on the first day of spring tomorrow. Aberdeen,
above, and much of Scotland was already feeling the blast from the Arctic
yesterday. It will hit coastal areas but southern and central England may get
only a light dusting of snow.

   EU GIVES pounds 83M TO PALESTINIANS

   THE EU is to give pounds 83million aid to the Palestinian caretaker
government. Israel has withheld pounds 28million a month since Hamas, considered
a terror group by the EU, won control of the authority.

   GENE THERAPY FIGHTS CANCER

   GENE therapy could protect healthy bone marrow cells in cancer patients who
need extra strong doses of debilitating radiotherapy to beat the disease, say
University of Manchester scientists.

   SADDAM QUITS HUNGER STRIKE

   SADDAM Hussein has called off his hunger strike for "health reasons" his
lawyer said yesterday. The Iraqi ex-tyrant stopped eating in protest at being
forced to attend his trial.

   TUBE WALKOUT OFF

   A LONDON Underground strike planned for Thursday was called off last night
after the drivers' union Aslef said talks were progressing.

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2006


                             382 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                            January 20, 2006 Friday

SECTION: A MERGE; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 134 words

HEADLINE: Doctor training 'would be hit'

BODY:

   DOCTOR training and research would be badly hit if the Bart's and the Royal
London hospital redevelopment is stopped.

   That's the view of Professor Nick Wright, head of the Queen Mary's medical
school, which would have a new Pounds 50million extension under the plan. The
Bart's campus is a key centre for cancer research, working on new treatments for
patients based on gene therapy and molecular diagnosis.

   Professor Wright said: "Our research is translational, it is clinical trials
that need patients. If the patients go, our research goes.

   It's not an exaggeration to say that if we lost cancer and cardiac [services
from Bart's] our future as a research-led medical school and our teaching would
be very seriously compromised.

   It would be absolutely catastrophic."

   The school produces 350 new doctors a year.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2006


                             385 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                            Copyright 2005 MGN Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   The Mirror

                           November 22, 2005 Tuesday
                                 Scots Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 135 words

HEADLINE: : TOT PLEA FOR BONE MARROW

BYLINE: BY LAUREN MIRZAI

BODY:

   THE desperate parents of a two-year-old girl battling a rare genetic disorder
have made a plea for a life-saving bone marrow donor.

   Teigan Dunnachie was diagnosed with Severe Combined Immunodeficiency two
weeks ago.

   The condition, which affects only one in 100,000 people, stops her fighting
off infections like colds and pneumonia.

   She cannot mix with other children and has to be isolated when she stays in
hospital.

   Doctors told mum Claire Reid, 25, and dad Stephen Dunnachie, 23, that even
with a perfect donor, there is only a 50-50 chance of a cure.

   If a match is not found, they may have to try an experimental form of
treatment called gene therapy.

   Bank worker Claire, from Grangemouth, Stirlingshire, said: "We are now
playing a waiting game.

   "We are just hoping and praying every day that a donor will be found."

GRAPHIC: ILL: Teigan & Claire

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2005


                             389 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                October 24, 2005

SECTION: D_MERGE; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 576 words

HEADLINE: DOCTORS TO DRILL SIX HOLES IN TODDLER'S HEAD TO SAVE HER

BYLINE: DAVID COHEN

BODY:


    A LONDON toddler who suffers from a rare genetic disorder is to have a
groundbreaking operation her parents hope will save her life.

    Three-year-old Jasmine Harris is to have six holes drilled into her head at
Cornell University in New York, into which doctors will inject a virus carrying
a gene she is missing.

    Medical experts believe this will halt the spread of the rare genetic
disorder which threatens to kill her.

    Jasmine, whose plight was featured in the Evening Standard this year,
suffers from Late Infantile Batten's Disease, a condition which has already left
her brother Jordan severely disabled.

    The children's parents Tina and Mark, from Shooter's Hill, flew to New York
with Jasmine last week in advance of the complex operation.

    Speaking to the Evening Standard Mrs Harris, 42, said: "We ask, 'Why should
both our children suffer this?'It would have been bad enough for just one, but
to have both like this is terrible.

    They are such lovely children."

    Mr Harris, 44, a maintenance engineer, said: "All we wanted was one healthy
child to start with and then two, and it's just unbearable to look at the
children and think that Jasmine is going to end up like Jordan."

    The three-year-old will be only the eighth person, and the second Briton, to
undergo this experimental operation.

    The last British child to undergo the treatment died a few months later.

    The toddler has already been subjected to a range of tests, including MRI
and ECG scans.

    The operation is an attempt to halt the debilitating disease, which doctors
have told the Harris family

    would kill her before her 10th birthday.

    Mrs Harris said: "They have never done it on a child as healthy as Jasmine
and they hope it will be a brilliant success. The British child who died was a
severe case. The doctors say Jordan might be too severely gone to have the
treatment.

    "Although Jasmine is fairly normal at the moment she will soon go blind and
be unable to walk or eat by herself.

    The deterioration is very rapid from the age of five." Doctors should know
within two weeks of the operation whether it has been successful, with
subsequent tests then determining any long-term improvements.

    Of the seven children who have had the procedure, the first three appear to
be improving, with no further regression in the 18 months that followed the
procedure. Three of the children are too recent to assess and only one has died.

    Late Infantile Batten's disease, a rare inherited genetic disorder, was
named after the British paediatrician, Frederick Batten, who first diagnosed the
condition in 1903.

    It affects about 500 children worldwide, gradually killing off the brain
cells, causing blindness, deafness and loss of muscle control. The prognosis is
death, typically between the ages of six and nine.

    For the disease to be triggered, both parents must not only carry the
defective gene, but must also pass it on. Theoretically there is only a 25 per
cent risk of this happening.

    Recently scientists at Cornell identified the specific enzyme, tripeptidyl
peptidase-1 (or TPP1), whose absence is the cause of Batten's and which leads to
the cells being unable to break down certain proteins, gradually killing off
brain cells.

    Their research focused on two possible remedies: gene therapy, where the
normal gene is implanted back into the cells; or enzyme therapy, where the
missing enzyme is reintroduced.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2005


                             394 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                October 6, 2005

SECTION: A_MERGE; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 536 words

HEADLINE: Just look at me now

BYLINE: REBECCA SMITH

BODY:


    TWO-YEAR-OLD Alexander Locke was born without an immune system, unable to
fight off even a common cold.

    His first eight months were spent in a sterile, air-locked room, as a
so-called "boy in a bubble".

    When he caught a chest infection and fell dangerously ill, his parents were
told to be prepared for his death. But he fought to survive and now, after
pioneering gene therapy, doctors say he should live a normal life.

    Alexander is back at home and has just returned from the Algarve after his
first family holiday.

    He was born with Severe Combined Immune Deficiency (SCID). Few sufferers
live beyond their first birthday. Alexander, who was treated at Great Ormond
Street Hospital for Children, is one of only a handful of children worldwide to
have the treatment.

    His father Colin, 43, an IT firm boss, said: "He is a lovely, happy boy now.

    You would never know he has been so ill to look at him.

    It is very special to have him home and have the hope of a normal life for
him."

    Alexander's condition was diagnosed after several bouts of illness and a
barrage of tests. When he was in his sterile "bubble" everyone who had contact
with him had to be decontaminated and pass through the air lock. He wasn't even
allowed cuddly toys that could harbour germs.

    His father and his mother, Carol, stayed with him most of the time and
helped bathe and feed him but a normal family life at home in Marlow,
Buckinghamshire, was impossible.

    The hope was to keep him alive long enough to find a bone marrow donor for a
transplant. But as time went on without a match and Alexander continually fought
infections, the experimental therapy was suggested.

    Dr Bobby Gaspar, consultant paediatric immunologist, is part of a Great
Ormond Street team who developed gene therapy for SCID. Dr Gaspar said: "It is a
devastating illness and in the past children just died from it."

    The patient's own bone marrow cells are removed, a working gene is added to
counter the defective one and the cells are replaced. Alexander was treated in
March last year and after a few weeks immune system cells started to appear in
his bloodstream, indicating it was beginning to work.

    After going home, he contracted the chest infection through one of his drug
lines and was rushed to intensive care. He was on powerful drugs and oxygen and
was fed through a tube.

    Mrs Locke, a computer network analyst, said: "The only things working were
his heart and brain. The nurses didn't think he would make it."

    But thanks to the dedicated hospital team Alexander pulled through.

    Great Ormond Street is one of only two centres successfully using the
technique and Alexander is one of just seven children to have been treated with
it at the hospital.

    Mr Locke said: "Gene therapy holds so many promises for so many people.

    We still have to give him drugs - he is not cured yet - but we could live
like this. He has the hope of a normal life."

    * Tomorrow is National Jeans for Genes day, when people are urged to wear
jeans instead of school uniform or work clothes and make a donation to the
charity. For details, call freephone 0800 980 4800 or visit the website
www.jeansforgenes.com

GRAPHIC: FULL OF LIFE: ALEXANDER LOCKE NOW, LEFT, AND, BELOW, WITH FATHER COLIN
AND MOTHER CAROL. A COMMON COLD COULD HAVE KILLED HIM AS A BABY, RIGHT

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2005


                             401 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                August 24, 2005

SECTION: C_MERGE; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 465 words

HEADLINE: 'Research must go on, for my daughter and for all our sakes'

BODY:


    I DON'T like the idea of using animals in medical research any more than
anyone else, and support attempts to find alternative tests for drugs and other
treatments. But it is inescapable that for now, without such work, my own
special daughter and countless others with serious conditions would not be with
us today.

    Our child has cystic fibrosis (CF), the UK's most common life-threatening
inherited condition. About one in 2,500 babies are born with this disease which
attacks the lungs and digestive system.

    Life expectancy is 31.

    Our three-year-old daughter's daily cocktail of drugs begins before
breakfast after her first physiotherapy session. There are antibiotics to ward
off bugs, vitamins to keep her fit and active and pancreatic enzymes to help her
digest fat.

    All are essential to help keep her alive and healthy. All will have been
tested on animals.

    It's not just the drugs which required such testing. When she was born she
needed an emergency operation using techniques almost certainly tested on
animals. Testing is involved, too, in the ongoing search for a gene therapy
which could free thousands of families from the pain and fear of CF.

    So I am afraid I have nothing but disdain for those who terrorise and
intimidate people who help eliminate disease.

    And the news extremists have forced closure of the Staffordshire farm
breeding guinea pigs, after a sickening campaign against its owners, is
profoundly disturbing.

    When I was at the Home Office, my then boss Jack Straw acted to protect
scientists - measures that have been toughened in recently. But we may need to
look again at coming down hard on these terrorists, who put the lives of rodents
before those of children like my daughter.

    But I also want to see a greater debate about animal research, and for
better information about both the benefits that are achieved and the strict
standards which ensure any suffering is kept to a minimum. Many people are
rightly concerned about animal welfare. But there are antivivisectionists - even
those who condemn violence - who exploit compassion to spread misinformation. So
we still see decades-old pictures of smoking beagles, or claims most tests are
for vanity products.

    THE truth on these issues is, as ever, less dramatic. The overwhelming
number of experiments is on specially bred mice and other rodents.

    Testing of cosmetics has been banned, and the use of great apes. The number
of primates in such experiments is at an absolute minimum, and there is serious
work going on to see if alternatives can be found.

    For the foreseeable future, we will only realise all our hopes of advances
in medical treatments through a clear commitment to animal research. It is that
simple. For me, there is no choice at all.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2005


                             415 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2005 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            July 28, 2005, Thursday

SECTION: Eire Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 941 words

HEADLINE: FUTURES MARKET;
 WELCOME TO TOMORROW'S WORLD.. WHERE ROBOTS HAVE RIGHTS AND THE MOON

BYLINE: BY NICK WEBSTER

HIGHLIGHT:
METAL MEDIC: RoboDoc is a fact of life in some hospitals; EARLY BATH: Video
tiles; PLUGGED IN: Artificial brain

BODY:


    CARS that drive themselves, artificial brains and human rights for robots...
it's just a matter of time.

    A Technology Timeline compiled by researchers at BT's futurology department
has come up with a list of advances it says will change tomorrow's world.

    And they should know what they're talking about - in the past they've
correctly predicted text messaging, email spam and internet search engines.

    According to BT's boffins, most of us will live to 100 while obesity and the
dentist's drill will be distant memories.

    But it's not all good news - an international financial collapse is on the
horizon at some time in the next 50 years and computers will eventually outsmart
humans.

    Here is their technology timeline...

    2006-2010

    EMOTIONALLY RESPONSIVE TOYS

    RESPONDING to the sound of its owner's voice, these toys will react with a
variety of emotions. Sony's Aibo dog robot can already simulate anger and fear,
surprise, dislike, sadness and joy.

    ELECTRONIC MEDICAL PRESCRIPTIONS

    THE doctor will enter his diagnosis into a handheld computer, prescribe
treatment and send instructions directly to a pharmacist via a text message.

    VIDEO TILES

    THESE will provide news or entertainment in the bath or shower. They can
even change a scene to let you bathe under an African sunset, for example

    2008 - 2012

    MEDICINE DELIVERED VIA FRUIT

    SCIENTISTS will be able to produce genetically modified fruit that carry
medicines and extra vitamins. For example apples could contain the polio
vaccine.

    VIDEO TATTOOS

    ONE worth waiting for ... ultra-thin polymer video screens stuck to the skin
will act as as "moving tattoos".

    SENSITIVE FABRICS

    CLOTHES made from smart fabrics will measure the wearer's heart rate and
temperature and transmit the data to a computer controlling the home. The
computer will use the information to judge our mood - and light and heat the
room accordingly.

    2011 - 2015

    SELF-DRIVING CAR

    CARS will steer themselves, using enhanced satellite navigation and sensors
to stop them getting too close to the car in front. Mercedes has already carried
out tests on a closed track.

    TOOTH REGENERATION

    FILLINGS will become a thing of the past. Using gene therapy, lost or
diseased teeth will be regrown in the mouth from a few cells. Scientists have
already successfully grown mouse teeth in a lab dish.

    MICROCHIPS IN FOOD

    INTELLIGENT microwave ovens will automatically read the information on a
chip hidden in the packaging of food and cook it exactly acc- ording to the
instructions.

    2013 - 2017

    ACTIVE MAKE-UP

    THE make-up is applied normally, but a small control unit in a handbag sends
out electronic pulses that change the colours.

    ROBOTS GUIDE BLIND PEOPLE

    A PROTOTYPE robot which helps blind people shop or find their way around
buildings already exists at Utah State university. Professor Vladimir Kulyukin
designed the machine that locates items and avoids collisions. The robot could
replace guide dogs.

    2016 - 2020

    ELECTRONIC LIFE FORM GETS BASIC RIGHTS

    AS robots become more sophisticated and involve the addition of organic
material into their construction there will be calls for their rights to be
safeguarded.

    VIEWERS PLAY FILM ROLES

    USING computer-simulated versions of themselves, viewers will be in the
thick of the action by introducing themselves into the movie.

    EMOTION CONTROL DEVICES

    THE most extreme use of emotion control devices would be to put a stop to
criminal activity. It could suppress anger or stimulate feelings in emotionless
psychopaths by sending electronic pulses to the brain.

    2021 - 2025

    E-TRANSLATION

    WITH computers automatically translating every language there will be less
need for humans to learn more than one. One universal language - probably
English - will dominate.

    HOLOGRAPHIC TV

    INSTEAD of a flat screen, TV will become a three-dimensional affair,
viewable from every side and projected into the middle of the room.

    2026 - 2030

    3D HOME PRINTERS

    COMPANIES including the US-based Z Corporation are already working on
technology which involves the printer building up layers of a material to create
a solid model of a digital image.

    2031 - 2035

    BIOSTASIS IN SPACE TRAVEL

    TECHNOLOGY will be available to slow the body's metabolism enough to delay
ageing on space journeys lasting decades. Travellers will sleep the whole time,
connected to drips to provide basic nutrients and vitamins.

    COMPUTER GENIUSES

    THE power of computers already doubles virtually monthly. At the rate the
technology advances, they could become more intelligent than their creators.

    2036 - 2040

    SPACE ELEVATOR

    A SEATTLE company is already planning to connect the earth to space via a
cable running between a floating ocean platform and a satellite. Passenger pods
and cargo could travel up and down the cable.

    2041 - 2045

    MOON BASE

    A VILLAGE will be firmly established on the Moon, serviced by regular
shuttle flights.

    2046 - 2050

    MARS COLONY

    A SMALL colony of scientists and explorers will be entirely self-sufficient,
growing food in large greenhouse-style pods.

    NUCLEAR FUSION

    THE idea is to recreate the nuclear reactions which take place at the heart
of the sun. Last month the EU, America, Japan, Russia, China and South Korea
agreed to build an experimental £9.3billion nuclear fusion reactor in France.

    2051+

    BRAIN DOWNLOADS

    EVERYTHING in your brain - thoughts, feelings and memories - will be
transferred to a computer, ensuring a form of digital immortality if eventually
uploaded into a human brain later.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2005


                             416 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2005 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             July 26, 2005, Tuesday

SECTION: Scots Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 941 words

HEADLINE: FUTURES MARKET;
 WELCOME TO TOMORROW'S WORLD.. WHERE ROBOTS HAVE RIGHTS AND THE MOON

BYLINE: BY NICK WEBSTER

HIGHLIGHT:
METAL MEDIC: RoboDoc is a fact of life in some hospitals; EARLY BATH: Video
tiles; PLUGGED IN: Artificial brain

BODY:


    CARS that drive themselves, artificial brains and human rights for robots...
it's just a matter of time.

    A Technology Timeline compiled by researchers at BT's futurology department
has come up with a list of advances it says will change tomorrow's world.

    And they should know what they're talking about - in the past they've
correctly predicted text messaging, email spam and internet search engines.

    According to BT's boffins, most of us will live to 100 while obesity and the
dentist's drill will be distant memories.

    But it's not all good news - an international financial collapse is on the
horizon at some time in the next 50 years, and computers will eventually
outsmart humans.

    Here is their technology timeline...

    2006-2010

    EMOTIONALLY RESPONSIVE TOYS

    RESPONDING to the sound of its owner's voice, these toys will react with a
variety of emotions. Sony's Aibo dog robot can already simulate anger and fear,
surprise, dislike, sadness and joy.

    ELECTRONIC MEDICAL PRESCRIPTIONS

    THE doctor will enter his diagnosis into a handheld computer, prescribe
treatment and send instructions directly to a pharmacist via a text message.

    VIDEO TILES

    THESE will provide news or entertainment in the bath or shower. They can
even change a scene to let you bathe under an African sunset, for example

    2008 - 2012

    MEDICINE DELIVERED VIA FRUIT

    SCIENTISTS will be able to produce genetically modified fruit that carry
medicines and extra vitamins. For example apples could contain the polio
vaccine.

    VIDEO TATTOOS

    ONE worth waiting for ... ultra-thin polymer video screens stuck to the skin
will act as as "moving tattoos".

    SENSITIVE FABRICS

    CLOTHES made from smart fabrics will measure the wearer's heart rate and
temperature and transmit the data to a computer controlling the home. The
computer will use the information to judge our mood - and light and heat the
room accordingly.

    2011 - 2015

    SELF-DRIVING CAR

    CARS will steer themselves, using enhanced satellite navigation and sensors
to stop them getting too close to the car in front. Mercedes has already carried
out tests on a closed track.

    TOOTH REGENERATION

    FILLINGS will become a thing of the past. Using gene therapy, lost or
diseased teeth will be regrown in the mouth from a few cells. Scientists have
already successfully grown mouse teeth in a lab dish.

    MICROCHIPS IN FOOD

    INTELLIGENT microwave ovens will automatically read the information on a
chip hidden in the packaging of food and cook it exactly according to the
instructions.

    2013 - 2017

    ACTIVE MAKE-UP

    THE make-up is applied normally, but a small control unit in a handbag sends
out electronic pulses that change the colours.

    ROBOTS GUIDE BLIND PEOPLE

    A PROTOTYPE robot which helps blind people shop or find their way around
buildings already exists at Utah State university. Professor Vladimir Kulyukin
designed the machine that locates items and avoids collisions. The robot could
replace guide dogs.

    2016 - 2020

    ELECTRONIC LIFE FORM GETS BASIC RIGHTS

    AS robots become more sophisticated and involve the addition of organic
material into their construction there will be calls for their rights to be
safeguarded.

    VIEWERS PLAY FILM ROLES

    USING computer-simulated versions of themselves, viewers will be in the
thick of the action by introducing themselves into the movie.

    EMOTION CONTROL DEVICES

    THE most extreme use of emotion control devices would be to put a stop to
criminal activity. It could suppress anger or stimulate feelings in emotionless
psychopaths by sending electronic pulses to the brain.

    2021 - 2025

    E-TRANSLATION

    WITH computers automatically translating every language there will be less
need for humans to learn more than one. One universal language - probably
English - will dominate.

    HOLOGRAPHIC TV

    INSTEAD of a flat screen, TV will become a three-dimensional affair,
viewable for every side and projected into the middle of the room.

    2026 - 2030

    3D HOME PRINTERS

    COMPANIES including the US-based Z Corporation are already working on
technology which involves the printer building up layers of a material to create
a solid model of a digital image.

    2031 - 2035

    BIOSTASIS IN SPACE TRAVEL

    TECHNOLOGY will be available to slow the body's metabolism enough to delay
ageing on space journeys lasting decades. Travellers will sleep the whole time,
connected to drips to provide basic nutrients and vitamins.

    COMPUTER GENIUSES

    THE power of computers already doubles virtually monthly. At the rate the
technology advances, they could become more intelligent than their creators.

    2036 - 2040

    SPACE ELEVATOR

    A SEATTLE company is already planning to connecting the earth to space via a
cable running between an floating ocean platform and a satellite. Passenger pods
and cargo could travel along the cable

    2041 - 2045

    MOON BASE

    A VILLAGE will be firmly established on the Moon, serviced by regular
shuttle flights.

    2046 - 2050

    MARS COLONY

    A SMALL colony of scientists and explorers will be entirely self-sufficient,
growing food in large greenhouse-style pods.

    NUCLEAR FUSION

    THE idea is to recreate the nuclear reactions which take place at the heart
of the sun. Last month the EU, America, Japan, Russia, China and South Korea
agreed to build an experimental £6.6billion nuclear fusion reactor in France.

    2051 - ??

    BRAIN DOWNLOADS

    EVERYTHING in your brain - thoughts, feelings and memories - will be
transferred to a computer, ensuring a form of digital immortality if eventually
uploaded into a human brain later.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2005


                             417 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2005 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             July 26, 2005, Tuesday

SECTION: 3 Star Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 941 words

HEADLINE: FUTURES MARKET;
 WELCOME TO TOMORROW'S WORLD.. WHERE ROBOTS HAVE RIGHTS AND THE MOON

BYLINE: BY NICK WEBSTER

HIGHLIGHT:
EARLY BATH: Video tiles; PLUGGED IN: Artificial brain; METAL MEDIC: RoboDoc is a
fact of life in some hospitals

BODY:


    CARS that drive themselves, artificial brains and human rights for robots...
it's just a matter of time.

    A Technology Timeline compiled by researchers at BT's futurology department
has come up with a list of advances it says will change tomorrow's world.

    And they should know what they're talking about - in the past they've
correctly predicted text messaging, email spam and internet search engines.

    According to BT's boffins, most of us will live to 100 while obesity and the
dentist's drill will be distant memories.

    But it's not all good news - an international financial collapse is on the
horizon at some time in the next 50 years, and computers will eventually
outsmart humans.

    Here is their technology timeline...

    2006-2010

    EMOTIONALLY RESPONSIVE TOYS

    RESPONDING to the sound of its owner's voice, these toys will react with a
variety of emotions. Sony's Aibo dog robot can already simulate anger and fear,
surprise, dislike, sadness and joy.

    ELECTRONIC MEDICAL PRESCRIPTIONS

    THE doctor will enter his diagnosis into a handheld computer, prescribe
treatment and send instructions directly to a pharmacist via a text message.

    VIDEO TILES

    THESE will provide news or entertainment in the bath or shower. They can
even change a scene to let you bathe under an African sunset, for example

    2008 - 2012

    MEDICINE DELIVERED VIA FRUIT

    SCIENTISTS will be able to produce genetically modified fruit that carry
medicines and extra vitamins. For example apples could contain the polio
vaccine.

    VIDEO TATTOOS

    ONE worth waiting for ... ultra-thin polymer video screens stuck to the skin
will act as as "moving tattoos".

    SENSITIVE FABRICS

    CLOTHES made from smart fabrics will measure the wearer's heart rate and
temperature and transmit the data to a computer controlling the home. The
computer will use the information to judge our mood - and light and heat the
room accordingly.

    2011 - 2015

    SELF-DRIVING CAR

    CARS will steer themselves, using enhanced satellite navigation and sensors
to stop them getting too close to the car in front. Mercedes has already carried
out tests on a closed track.

    TOOTH REGENERATION

    FILLINGS will become a thing of the past. Using gene therapy, lost or
diseased teeth will be regrown in the mouth from a few cells. Scientists have
already successfully grown mouse teeth in a lab dish.

    MICROCHIPS IN FOOD

    INTELLIGENT microwave ovens will automatically read the information on a
chip hidden in the packaging of food and cook it exactly according to the
instructions.

    2013 - 2017

    ACTIVE MAKE-UP

    THE make-up is applied normally, but a small control unit in a handbag sends
out electronic pulses that change the colours.

    ROBOTS GUIDE BLIND PEOPLE

    A PROTOTYPE robot which helps blind people shop or find their way around
buildings already exists at Utah State university. Professor Vladimir Kulyukin
designed the machine that locates items and avoids collisions. The robot could
replace guide dogs.

    2016 - 2020

    ELECTRONIC LIFE FORM GETS BASIC RIGHTS

    AS robots become more sophisticated and involve the addition of organic
material into their construction there will be calls for their rights to be
safeguarded.

    VIEWERS PLAY FILM ROLES

    USING computer-simulated versions of themselves, viewers will be in the
thick of the action by introducing themselves into the movie.

    EMOTION CONTROL DEVICES

    THE most extreme use of emotion control devices would be to put a stop to
criminal activity. It could suppress anger or stimulate feelings in emotionless
psychopaths by sending electronic pulses to the brain.

    2021 - 2025

    E-TRANSLATION

    WITH computers automatically translating every language there will be less
need for humans to learn more than one. One universal language - probably
English - will dominate.

    HOLOGRAPHIC TV

    INSTEAD of a flat screen, TV will become a three-dimensional affair,
viewable from every side and projected into the middle of the room.

    2026 - 2030

    3D HOME PRINTERS

    COMPANIES including the US-based Z Corporation are already working on
technology which involves the printer building up layers of a material to create
a solid model of a digital image.

    2031 - 2035

    BIOSTASIS IN SPACE TRAVEL

    TECHNOLOGY will be available to slow the body's metabolism enough to delay
ageing on space journeys lasting decades. Travellers will sleep the whole time,
connected to drips to provide basic nutrients and vitamins.

    COMPUTER GENIUSES

    THE power of computers already doubles virtually monthly. At the rate the
technology advances, they could become more intelligent than their creators.

    2036 - 2040

    SPACE ELEVATOR

    A SEATTLE company is already planning to connect the earth to space via a
cable running between a floating ocean platform and a satellite. Passenger pods
and cargo could travel up and down the cable.

    2041 - 2045

    MOON BASE

    A VILLAGE will be firmly established on the Moon, serviced by regular
shuttle flights.

    2046 - 2050

    MARS COLONY

    A SMALL colony of scientists and explorers will be entirely self-sufficient,
growing food in large greenhouse-style pods.

    NUCLEAR FUSION

    THE idea is to recreate the nuclear reactions which take place at the heart
of the sun. Last month the EU, America, Japan, Russia, China and South Korea
agreed to build an experimental £6.6billion nuclear fusion reactor in France.

    2051+

    BRAIN DOWNLOADS

    EVERYTHING in your brain - thoughts, feelings and memories - will be
transferred to a computer, ensuring a form of digital immortality if eventually
uploaded into a human brain later.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2005


                             428 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 June 21, 2005

SECTION: B; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 554 words

HEADLINE: WALL STREET BOOSTS CITY'S DRIVE TO THREE YEAR HIGH

BYLINE: MICKEY CLARK

BODY:


    CITY investors were pedalling hard to extend their recent recordbreaking
run, with share prices briefly touching a new three-year closing high.

    Sentiment was buoyed by a strong turnaround on Wall Street last night that
enabled the Dow to close modestly higher, despite worries about second-quarter
earnings and record oil prices. London's FTSE 100 index rose 8.3 to 5080.3.

    The City gave short shrift to the latest trading update from Alliance &
Leicester, down 61/2p at 8581/2p, despite better-than-expected news on bad-debt
provisions and rising costs. Dealers said that would help cushion the impact on
slower revenue growth.

    Among second liners, Photo-Me stood out with a jump of 5p to 104p.

    Broker Cazenove is said to have repeated its outperform rating and expects
full-year profits to be ahead of expectations.

    AIM-listed SR Pharma was suspended 1p cheaper at 26p at the company's
request pending an announcement relating to the reverse takeover of Atugen, a
biotechnology company based in Berlin.

    Atugen has focused on developing therapeutic molecules that it hopes can be
developed to treat various cancers. The deal now has to be voted on by SR Pharma
shareholders.

    Meanwhile, Shire Pharmaceuticals, which soared

    to the top of the leaderboard yesterday after Transkaryotic Therapies, the
US company it is buying, came out with some positive test results, paused for
breath with the price dipping 1/2p to 627p. Transkaryotic is developing a drug
to help cure Hunter Syndrome, a disease that attacks the central nervous system.

    Sinclair Pharmaceuticals, up 3p at 125p, says its dermatitis treatment
Atopiclair has been launched in the US after positive trial results. "We expect
Atopiclair to be one of our most important revenue drivers over the next three
years, and the launch of our biggest product to date in the biggest market is a
very significant event for us," said chief executive Michael Flynn. Sinclair
said the study, on 216 adult patients, "demonstrated significant clinical
benefits" compared with a control group.

    Music maker EMI shaded 1p to

    2483/4p. US investment bank JP Morgan remains bearish and has repeated its
underweight rating following the recent profits warning from rival Sanctuary.

    It points out EMI and Warner Music have failed to guide on the performance
of the recorded music market during the current year, and argues the evidence is
growing that pressures are increasing. The warning from Sanctuary highlighted
the increasing reliance on releases by a small number of key bands. Sanctuary
shaded 1/4p to 251/2p.

    Chrysalis slumped 111/2p to 146p following a downgrade to sell by broker
Bridgewell Securities after the radio group issued a trading update for the
three months to the end of May.

    Bridgewell noted that, over this period, radio revenues are down by 14.5%
with a similar outlook for June, while July and August are d i f f icult to
predic t .

    Bridgewell also warned the slowdown in consumer spending will have an impact
on the books division.

    United Business Media retreated 111/4p to 506p following its share
consolidation and proposed payment of an 89p special dividend.

    Reuters dipped 3/4p to 395p after broker Credit Suisse First Boston repeated
its outperform rating on the shares and 510p target.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2005


                             435 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                  May 3, 2005

SECTION: A; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1149 words

HEADLINE: We will fight every inch of the way to give our two beautiful children
a future

BYLINE: DAVID COHEN

BODY:



    IT IS around midnight when Tina Harris slips silently into her
super-kingsize bed and cuddles up alongside her son, Jordan, and her husband,
Mark, her cheeks wet with tears. For a while, she observes their sleeping son,
thinking, "You look so handsome, so peaceful, like a normal little boy.

    Oh why," she agonises, "couldn't you be"?

    And then, holding her son tightly to feel his warmth, Tina tries to grab a
few hours sleep, not knowing whether his lopsided smile will greet her in the
morning. "I go to bed with the fear that when I wake, Jordan will be dead," she
says. "He's six-anda-half and he's entered the zone where death could happen
anytime. I just want to freeze time until they discover a cure for this wretched
disease."

    Two years ago, Jordan, who for the first years of his life developed as a
regular little boy, was diagnosed with late-infantile Batten's disease, a rare
inherited genetic disorder that affects about 500 children worldwide.

    As yet, there is no treatment for this degenerative condition that gradually
kills off the brain cells, causing blindness, deafness and loss of muscle
control - and the prognosis is death, typically between the ages of six and
nine.

    As they watched their son's development halt and inexorably slide into
reverse, the heartbroken couple from south-east London were overtaken by one
all-consuming thought: did their gorgeous second child, Jasmine, then aged one,
also have Batten's?

    The doctors advised that Jasmine had a 75 per cent chance of being normal,
and that they should not traumatise themselves by having her tested. For the
next year, as Jordan progressively lost his ability to talk, walk or eat
independently, Jasmine was, in contrast, bursting with new life, reaching every
milestone ahead of time - walking at 10 months, talking at a year. They clung to
the hope that their daughter would be normal.

    But then Tina heard about pioneering research to find a cure for Batten's at
Cornell University in New York. If the worst came to the worst and Jasmine did
have Batten's, she wanted her, as well as Jordan, to have a chance for survival
and to be included in the clinical trial. It was crunch time: Jasmine's blood
was sent to three separate laboratories for testing. On these three test tubes
hinged everything.

    This is the story of how Tina, 42, and Mark, 44, a maintenance engineer
working for a bank in the City, are coping with an unfolding tragedy that few of
us could imagine. But the inspirational way they are doing it - refusing to give
up, raising £160,000 in a critical race against time to help fund Cornell's
groundbreaking research (which has already proceeded to the clinical trials of
four children) - is nothing short of remarkable.

    Recently scientists at Cornell have identified the specific enzyme,
tripeptidyl peptidase-1 (or TPP1), whose absence is the cause of Batten's and
which leads to the cells being unable to break down certain proteins, gradually
killing off brain cells.

    Their research has focused on two possible remedies: gene therapy, where the
normal gene is implanted back into the cells; or enzyme therapy, where the
missing enzyme is reintroduced. If either works, the Harris's prayers will be
answered.

    I meet Tina, snake-hipped, blonde and blue-eyed, on a beautiful sunny spring
afternoon, pink blossoms swirling in the breeze. She is sitting in her Toyota
people-carrier, parked up outside Jordan's Cherry Garden Special School in
Bermondsey.

    Jasmine is wriggling like a hyperactive puppy on her lap and playing, all at
once, with the steering wheel, gear stick, windscreen wipers and radio.

    "Mummy, mummy, look!" she says.

    "You clever little girl!" Tina coos, endlessly patient, as she waits to
attend Jordan's afternoon assembly and begins to tell me her story.

    Tina and Mark met in their twenties while on holiday on the Greek island of
Syros. From the start, they were an unlikely match: she was the daughter of a
middleclass factory owner in Denmark who had enrolled for a university law
degree, he the working-class son of a bricklayer from Elephant and Castle.

    But the holiday romance endured and the couple married in 1989, unaware that
they were both carriers of Batten's and that the consequences if they started a
family could be lethal for the children.

    FOR 10 years, the couple travelled, partied and pursued their careers,
until, in their thirties, they decided to start a family. "When Jordan was born,
I thought I was the luckiest person alive," recalls Tina. "I didn't know you
could love a person so much. For the first two years he was so active, so
sociable, so healthy - he didn't have allergies or even suffer colds like his
friends. I felt lucky my child was the healthy one."

    But then, when Jordan was two and a-half and sleeping in his car seat, Tina
turned around to find him in the middle of a seizure. "His arms and legs were
jerking wildly, his eyes were swimming in their sockets and he was foaming at
the mouth. I thought he was dying and started screaming and dialled 999."

    Their GP referred them to Guy's Hospital where a specialist diagnosed Jordan
with febrile convulsions, a condition not uncommon in infants. But one month
later, Jordan suffered his second seizure. This time they ran a battery of tests
and he was diagnosed with epilepsy. It would be another two years before the
Harris's would discover the full extent of their son's illness.

    Meanwhile, Jordan started falling

    over, and his vision and speech started to go. Not long after he turned
four, he was falling with such regularity that he stopped trying to walk. Six
months later, he was in a wheelchair.

    "We were annoyed with the doctors because nobody could tell us what was
wrong," says Tina. "I felt sure that if only they knew what it was, they could
fix it."

    But a skin biopsy taken in early 2003 showed that Jordan had something
neither Tina nor Mark had ever heard about - Batten's disease, a genetic
disorder named after the British paediatrician, Frederick Batten, who first
described the condition in 1903.

    For the disease to be triggered, both parents must not only carry the defec-
over, and his vision and speech started to go. Not long after he turned four, he
was falling with such regularity that he stopped trying to walk. Six months
later, he was in a wheelchair.

    "We were annoyed with the doctors because nobody could tell us what was
wrong," says Tina. "I felt sure that if only they knew what it was, they could
fix it."

    But a skin biopsy taken in early 2003 showed that Jordan had something
neither Tina nor Mark had ever heard about - Batten's disease, a genetic
disorder named after the British paediatrician, Frederick Batten, who first
described the condition in 1903.

    For the disease to be triggered, both parents must not only carry the defec-
END

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2005


                             436 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                  May 3, 2005

SECTION: A; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1580 words

HEADLINE: We will fight every inch of the way to give our two beautiful children
a future

BYLINE: DAVID COHEN

BODY:


    Tina and Mark Harris face an unimaginable nightmaretheir children are
unlikely to live beyond the age of nine. Yet their courage will inspire you IT
IS around midnight when Tina Harris slips silently into her super-kingsize bed
and cuddles up alongside her son, Jordan, and her husband, Mark, her cheeks wet
with tears. For a while, she observes their sleeping son, thinking, "You look so
handsome, so peaceful, like a normal little boy.

    Oh why," she agonises, "couldn't you be"?

    And then, holding her son tightly to feel his warmth, Tina tries to grab a
few hours sleep, not knowing whether his lopsided smile will greet her in the
morning. "I go to bed with the fear that when I wake, Jordan will be dead," she
says. "He's six-anda-half and he's entered the zone where death could happen
anytime. I just want to freeze time until they discover a cure for this wretched
disease."

    Two years ago, Jordan, who for the first years of his life developed as a
regular little boy, was diagnosed with late-infantile Batten's disease, a rare
inherited genetic disorder that affects about 500 children worldwide.

    As yet, there is no treatment for this degenerative condition that gradually
kills off the brain cells, causing blindness, deafness and loss of muscle
control - and the prognosis is death, typically between the ages of six and
nine.

    As they watched their son's development halt and inexorably slide into
reverse, the heartbroken couple from south-east London were overtaken by one
all-consuming thought: did their gorgeous second child, Jasmine, then aged one,
also have Batten's?

    The doctors advised that Jasmine had a 75 per cent chance of being normal,
and that they should not traumatise themselves by having her tested. For the
next year, as Jordan progressively lost his ability to talk, walk or eat
independently, Jasmine was, in contrast, bursting with new life, reaching every
milestone ahead of time - walking at 10 months, talking at a year. They clung to
the hope that their daughter would be normal.

    But then Tina heard about pioneering research to find a cure for Batten's at
Cornell University in New York. If the worst came to the worst and Jasmine did
have Batten's, she wanted her, as well as Jordan, to have a chance for survival
and to be included in the clinical trial. It was crunch time: Jasmine's blood
was sent to three separate laboratories for testing. On these three test tubes
hinged everything.

    This is the story of how Tina, 42, and Mark, 44, a maintenance engineer
working for a bank in the City, are coping with an unfolding tragedy that few of
us could imagine. But the inspirational way they are doing it - refusing to give
up, raising £160,000 in a critical race against time to help fund Cornell's
groundbreaking research (which has already proceeded to the clinical trials of
four children) - is nothing short of remarkable.

    Recently scientists at Cornell have identified the specific enzyme,
tripeptidyl peptidase-1 (or TPP1), whose absence is the cause of Batten's and
which leads to the cells being unable to break down certain proteins, gradually
killing off brain cells.

    Their research has focused on two possible remedies: gene therapy, where the
normal gene is implanted back into the cells; or enzyme therapy, where the
missing enzyme is reintroduced. If either works, the Harris's prayers will be
answered.

    I meet Tina, snake-hipped, blonde and blue-eyed, on a beautiful sunny spring
afternoon, pink blossoms swirling in the breeze. She is sitting in her Toyota
people-carrier, parked up outside Jordan's Cherry Garden Special School in
Bermondsey.

    Jasmine is wriggling like a hyperactive puppy on her lap and playing, all at
once, with the steering wheel, gear stick, windscreen wipers and radio.

    "Mummy, mummy, look!" she says.

    "You clever little girl!" Tina coos, endlessly patient, as she waits to
attend Jordan's afternoon assembly and begins to tell me her story.

    Tina and Mark met in their twenties while on holiday on the Greek island of
Syros. From the start, they were an unlikely match: she was the daughter of a
middleclass factory owner in Denmark who had enrolled for a university law
degree, he the working-class son of a bricklayer from Elephant and Castle.

    But the holiday romance endured and the couple married in 1989, unaware that
they were both carriers of Batten's and that the consequences if they started a
family could be lethal for the children.

    FOR 10 years, the couple travelled, partied and pursued their careers,
until, in their thirties, they decided to start a family. "When Jordan was born,
I thought I was the luckiest person alive," recalls Tina. "I didn't know you
could love a person so much. For the first two years he was so active, so
sociable, so healthy - he didn't have allergies or even suffer colds like his
friends. I felt lucky my child was the healthy one."

    But then, when Jordan was twoanda-half and sleeping in his car seat, Tina
turned around to find him in the middle of a seizure. "His arms and legs were
jerking wildly, his eyes were swimming in their sockets and he was foaming at
the mouth. I thought he was dying and started screaming and dialled 999."

    Their GP referred them to Guy's Hospital where a specialist diagnosed Jordan
with febrile convulsions, a condition not uncommon in infants. But one month
later, Jordan suffered his second seizure. This time they ran a battery of tests
and he was diagnosed with epilepsy. It would be another two years before the
Harris's would discover the full extent of their son's illness.

    Meanwhile, Jordan started falling

    over, and his vision and speech started to go. Not long after he turned
four, he was falling with such regularity that he stopped trying to walk. Six
months later, he was in a wheelchair.

    "We were annoyed with the doctors because nobody could tell us what was
wrong," says Tina. "I felt sure that if only they knew what it was, they could
fix it."

    But a skin biopsy taken in early 2003 showed that Jordan had something
neither Tina nor Mark had ever heard about - Batten's disease, a genetic
disorder named after the British paediatrician, Frederick Batten, who first
described the condition in 1903.

    For the disease to be triggered, both parents must not only carry the defec-
tive gene, but must also pass it on, theoretically only a 25 per cent risk.

    Neither Tina nor Mark knew of any infant deaths in their families.

    "It was just disbelief," says Tina, unable to hold back the tears. "I
remember looking at Jordan and thinking, my God, we're going to lose him, he's
going to die. For two weeks, I was in a daze, just crying, overwhelmed by
sadness."

    In the midst of their grief, and the physical exhaustion of managing
Jordan's decline from a normal lad to an almost totally incapacitated boy, their
hope turned to Jasmine. After holding their breath for a year, Jasmine was
tested - and the Harris's were called in by their specialist.

    Tina will never forget that moment.

    "He looked very sad, then he said, 'This doesn't get any easier as you get
older - it is Batten's'. I just fell in a heap on the floor, crying. Mark, too.
I felt all my hope evaporate. I just felt so sad, so frightened.

    Jasmine, too! It was too much to bear."

    SINCE EARLY 2004, the Harris's have clung to the hope that Cornell will find
a cure. Last September, they met the directors of the £4 million programme.

    "They told us that their method was to drill six holes in the skull and
inject the functioning gene to replace the defective one," says Tina.

    They said it had worked in animal testing and that they were about to start
clinical trials on humans. We got down on our knees and begged them to take our
children."

    So far, Cornell have given four children gene therapy. The first three are
reported to be doing well, says Tina, and an MRI scan shows that it appears to
have stopped, though not yet reversed, the spread of the disease. But there was
a severe setback late last year when a fourth child died weeks after receiving
therapy, halting the programme while further tests are carried out.

    "It is early days," says Tina, "but Jordan is seventh in line to receive the
treatment, and if they resume and are even able to keep Jordan the way he is, it
would be an honour for me to look after him for the rest of my life." The couple
have been told that Jasmine - who isn't showing symptoms yet - is still too
young to receive treatment, but any breakthrough could save her the awful fate
that has befallen her brother.

    Later, I watch as Tina strokes Jordan's head, holds his hand and lifts him
out of his wheelchair buggy into the car. Jasmine reaches out to touch him, and
to pass him a toy.

    "Neither of them know what they have," says Tina, who has been crying
throughout most of our interview.

    Back home, it is time for Tina to give Jordan physiotherapy, to massage him,
and to feed him through a tube that goes directly into his stomach. "It's
relentless," she says. " Sometimes I say to Mark, 'I love you, but I wish we'd
never met. Anyone else and we both would have had normal children'. But then he
puts his arm around me and says, 'Don't be silly, if we'd never met, we'd never
have known Jordan and Jasmine'.

    "Just as I am feeling the greatest despair, Jordan will smile at me. Or
laugh. And then I think - I must carry on. For the children."

    . www.jordanjaytrust.com.

GRAPHIC: CLINGING TO HOPE: TINA AND MARK HARRIS WITH THEIR PRECIOUS CHILDREN,
JASMINE AND JORDAN

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2005


                             437 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                  May 3, 2005

SECTION: A; Pg. 62

LENGTH: 220 words

HEADLINE: TRADER TALK

BODY:


    TRADER TALK

    SHAREHOLDER activist Laxey Partners has bought another million shares in
Wyevale Garden Centres to increase its holding to 10.2 million shares, or 18.3%
of the £271 million company. Property tycoon Jack Petchey, meanwhile, has
amassed a 4% holding. The property-rich group recently reported an improvement
in sales.

    www.citywire.co.uk

    CURRENCY WATCH

    CHINA faced fresh pressure today to revalue its currency, after a stinging
broadside from US Treasury Secretary John Snow that the yuan should be allowed
to trade more freely. It came as expectations of a move by Beijing reached fever
pitch after the currency - which is pegged to the US dollar traded briefly
outside its 8.276 to 8.280 per dollar band last week.

    SPEAKING OUT

    'You can't please everybody.'

    - Shire Pharmaceuticals chief executive Matthew Emmens on shareholder
worries about the proposed cash purchase of Transkaryotic Therapies of the US PA

    IN PROSPECT

    INVESTORS will this week get a fresh sense of how the US economy is
performing with the publication of employment data for last month. The
widely-watched figures for non-farm payrolls are expected to show that American
companies added between 160,000 and 175,000 positions in April.

    The forecast is well ahead of the last month's 110,000 gain.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2005


                             438 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                  May 3, 2005

SECTION: E; Pg. 62

LENGTH: 220 words

HEADLINE: TRADER TALK

BODY:


    TRADER TALK

    SHAREHOLDER activist Laxey Partners has bought another million shares in
Wyevale Garden Centres to increase its holding to 10.2 million shares, or 18.3%
of the £271 million company. Property tycoon Jack Petchey, meanwhile, has
amassed a 4% holding. The property-rich group recently reported an improvement
in sales.

    www.citywire.co.uk

    CURRENCY WATCH

    CHINA faced fresh pressure today to revalue its currency, after a stinging
broadside from US Treasury Secretary John Snow that the yuan should be allowed
to trade more freely. It came as expectations of a move by Beijing reached fever
pitch after the currency - which is pegged to the US dollar traded briefly
outside its 8.276 to 8.280 per dollar band last week.

    SPEAKING OUT

    'You can't please everybody.'

    Shire Pharmaceuticals chief executive Matthew Emmens on shareholder worries
about the proposed cash purchase of Transkaryotic Therapies of the US PA

    IN PROSPECT

    INVESTORS will this week get a fresh sense of how the US economy is
performing with the publication of employment data for last month. The
widely-watched figures for non-farm payrolls are expected to show that American
companies added between 160,000 and 175,000 positions in April.

    The forecast is well ahead of the last month's 110,000 gain.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2005


                             444 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 April 29, 2005

SECTION: D; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 160 words

HEADLINE: Shire says US buy plan 'fantastic'

BYLINE: JAMES ROSSITER

BODY:


    DRUGMAKER Shire Pharmaceuticals today insisted its planned $1.6 billion
(Pounds 839 million) buy of a US biotechnology business represented a "fantastic
opportunity" but acknowledged there was some shareholder unease about the deal.

    Delivering a 35% drop in firstquarter earnings per share, chief executive
Matthew Emmens said most of the "20 or more" big investors in Shire had
indicated they would "vote positively" for the proposed cash purchase of
Transkaryotic Therapies. But he added: "You can't please everybody" on deals
where management had to take a view.

    Britannic Asset Management, a 2% shareholder in Shire, has said the deal
runs counter to management strategy. Because of the size of the purchase, a
Shire shareholder vote is needed this summer before it completes.

    The company's first-quarter earnings per share from continuing operations
fell to 11 cents from 16.9 cents a year ago because of the cost of drug
launches.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2005


                             451 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 April 25, 2005

SECTION: A; Pg. 64

LENGTH: 545 words

HEADLINE: BP and Shell look sure to get Footsie motoring again

BYLINE: TOM NICHOLLS

BODY:


    HEAVYWEIGHTS BP and Shell could fill the FTSE 100's tank this week as they
report first-quarter earnings. Analysts are pencilling in more strong numbers
from the sector, thanks to another three months of high oil prices, although
results are not expected to match last year's record-breaking fourth quarter.

    Consensus forecasts for BP, reporting tomorrow, are for clean net income of
$4.33 billion (Pounds 2.27 billion) - up 24% on the year, but 7% weaker than the
last three months of 2004. Watch out for updates on the firm's share buyback
programme, dividend policy and chemicals spin-off.

    Shell follows on Thursday, with analysts expecting clean net income of about
$4.7 billion, about 33% higher than a year ago.

    JP Morgan, whose UK energy sector pick is BG Group, expects big oil to show
"another very robust quarter", but says while oil and gas exploration and
production is "still going strong", refining and marketing businesses will have
been unable to repeat spectacular fourth-quarter performances.

    Although long- term growth prospects for oil companies are good, the
weakening of the oil price from recent heights of $60 a barrel could put further
pressure on sector valuations, the broker warns.

    "As a result, we would not yet recommend aggressively increasing sector
weightings," it cautions.

    Leisure company Whitbread will report full-year results tomorrow.

    Broker Gerrard says it will be looking for guidance on cost savings from the
firm's Premier Lodge acquisition, improvements in operating efficiency in its
pubs and restaurants and its head office move from London.

    It will be a busy week for pharmaceuticals too, with Astra-Zeneca and
GlaxoSmithKline reporting first-quarter figures on Thursday, and Shire - which
gave the market plenty to chew on last week with its $1.6 billion (Pounds 838
million) acquisition of US biotech Transkaryotic Therapies - following up on
Friday.

    Interims from Imperial Tobacco, first-quarter figures from Amvescap and a
first-quarter trading statement from household cleaning products maker Reckitt
Benckiser tomorrow, plus a trading statement from gaming and entertainment group
Rank on Wednesday will be also be keenly watched.

    Meanwhile, Goldman Sachs has underlined the widening gap between the High
Street's strongest retailers and its underperformers. The broker sees Next as
good value but has added its voice to the chorus of downbeat comment on M&S,
cutting earnings estimates for 2006 and 2007. It feels another takeover approach
is unlikely, calls for a more radical overhaul of the company's estate and flags
ongoing competition from Tesco as a further worry.

    Another famous name yet to make a full High Street comeback is WH Smith but,
says Teather & Greenwood, that may still be some way off and advises clients to
sell.

    Financial spread betting company IG Group's shares will make their trading
debut on Thursday following IG's float, and institutions are valuing the firm at
about 130p a share.

    Share prices in the Far East got the week off to a flying start today.

    In Tokyo, the Nikkei 225 Average closed up 27.82 points at 11,073.77, while
in Hong Kong the Hang Seng index was 72.93 points higher at 13,766.48 by the end
of the morning session.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2005


                             459 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 April 22, 2005

SECTION: B; Pg. 48

LENGTH: 550 words

HEADLINE: Man U climbs as board sits on fence over Glazer's bid

BYLINE: TOM NICHOLLS

BODY:


    MANCHESTER United shares climbed 51/2p to 2751/2p today on reports that
senior members of the football club's board are unlikely either to recommend or
reject Malcolm Glazer's latest 300p-a-share offer.

    That would leave the American tycoon with the option of going directly to
shareholders without his approach being classed as hostile.

    The market in general was in buoyant mood. Lifted by yesterday's advance by
the Dow in New York and gains on the key Asian bourses, the FTSE 100 index added
28.2 to 4847.8. However, traders said the big question is whether there will be
much volume. Recent volatility in New York could keep many investors sidelined,
unsettling stock trading in London as well. "A lot of people are probably going
to stand back and wait for things to calm down," said one trader.

    One of the few stocks in the top flight to fall was Shire Pharmaceuticals,
amid a mixed reaction to its $1.6 billion (Pounds 838 million) purchase of US
biotech Transkaryotic Therapies.

    CSFB downgraded Shire to neutral from outperform, which pushed the shares
171/2p lower to 542p. However, Seymour Pierce initiated coverage with a buy
rating, setting a price target of 690p. It argues the acquisition "transforms
Shire into a company that can now begin to look beyond 2007" when its
exclusivity on its top-selling attentiondeficit hyperactivity-disorder drug
Adderall XR ends.

    Financial spread betting company IG Group is due to see its first day of
trading next Thursday following its float, and institutions are valuing the firm
at about 130p a share, toward the top end of the indicative range of 112p-139p,
according to a market source. At 130p, it would have an implied market value of
£409 million. The source said the book is well-covered, with a healthy level of
orders from the UK and US.

    Retailers were in the spotlight as Lehman Brothers cut its target on
Kingfisher to 260p from 275p. The broker does not expect the DIY retailer to
trade at a premium to the sector in the present harsh business environment.

    Lehman says new concepts the company is introducing will prove a hit
eventually, but adds that they could be disruptive in the short term. UBS,
keeping its neutral rating, also reduced its target on the stock from 320p to
300p. Kingfisher edged up 11/4p to 2741/2p.

    UBS slashed its price target on MFI to 105p from 130p, lowering its rating
to reduce from neutral.

    The furniture seller, off 11/2p at 1123/4p, has been touted as a takeover
target for months, and market sources interpreted the broker's downgrade as a
sign that it has abandoned hope of a bid materialising.

    Clothing retailer Next added 18p to 1535p after a Goldman Sachs upgrade to
outperform from inline.

    Shares in Blavod Extreme Spirits, maker of black vodka for trendy bars and
nightclubs, jumped 21/2p to 19p. The firm has seen a steep rise in case
shipments for its products. Strong trading means shipments of the black booze
are running higher than expected.

    Arla Foods, the dairy company, has named its new £350,000a-year chief
executive. Tim Smith is currently number two in the company and is seen as a
safe pair of hands, having spent his entire career in the industry.

    He takes over from Neil Davidson, who retires in June. The shares put on
1/4p

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2005


                             460 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 April 22, 2005

SECTION: C_MERGE; Pg. 48

LENGTH: 552 words

HEADLINE: Man U climbs as board sits on fence over Glazer's bid

BYLINE: TOM NICHOLLS

BODY:


    MANCHESTER United shares rose 4p to 274p today on reports that senior
members of the football club's board are unlikely either to recommend or reject
Malcolm Glazer's latest 300p-a-share offer.

    That would leave the American tycoon with the option of going directly to
shareholders without his approach being classed as hostile.

    Overall, the market was in buoyant mood, the FTSE 100 index adding 23.2 to
4842.8, although volume was on the thin side. Many investors, worried by Wall
Street's recent volatility, are staying on the sidelines until the market shows
greater stability.

    One of the few stocks in the top flight to fall was Shire Pharmaceuticals,
amid a mixed reaction to its $1.6 billion (Pounds 838 million) purchase of US
biotech Transkaryotic Therapies. CSFB downgraded Shire to neutral from
outperform, helping push the shares 111/2p lower to 548p. But other brokers were
upbeat.

    Seymour Pierce initiated coverage with a buy rating and a price target of
690p.

    Numis Securities, with a target of 630p, said add, Merrill Lynch retained
its buy rating, while WestLB upgraded Shire to neutral, raising its price target
to 600p from 550p.

    Retailers were in the spotlight as Goldman Sachs upgraded clothing retailer
Next from inline to outperform, arguing that the stock's growth prospects
outshine the sector in general. Shares rose 15p to 1532p.

    Meanwhile, Lehman Brothers cut its target on Kingfisher to 260p from 275p.

    The broker does not expect the DIY retailer to trade at a premium to the
sector in the present harsh business environment.

    UBS, keeping its neutral rating, also reduced its target on the stock from
320p to 300p. Kingfisher slipped 1/2p to 2723/4p.

    MFI was off 2p at 1121/4p as the merger premium that has been lending the
stock support threatened to evaporate. UBS has slashed its price target to 105p
from 130p, lowering its rating to reduce from neutral. Market sources
interpreted that move as a sign the broker has abandoned hope of a bid emerging.

    Shares in Blavod Extreme Spirits, maker of black vodka for trendy bars and
nightclubs, jumped 11/4p to 173/4p. The firm has seen a steep rise in case
shipments for its products.

    Dairy company Arla Foods, has named its new £350,000a-year chief executive.
Tim Smith is currently number two in the company and is seen as a safe pair of
hands, having spent his entire career in the industry. He takes over from Neil
Davidson, who retires in June. The shares dropped back 3/4p to 631/4p.

    AIM-listed Reefton Mining slumped after its chief executive, Simon Gilbert,
resigned. Reefton said Gilbert will stay on in a consultancy role but the shares
fell 1.12p to 3p.

    AIM-listed medical-equipment supplier Surgical Innovations was up 0.37p at
2.37p amid betterthanexpected full-year results, a confident outlook statement
and a strong order book.

    Financial spread betting company IG Group is due to see its first day of
trading next Thursday following its float, and institutions are valuing the firm
at about 130p a share, toward the top end of the indicative range of 112p-139p,
according to a market source.

    At 130p, it would have an implied market value of £409 million. The source
said the book is well-covered, with a healthy level of orders from Britain and
America.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2005


                             461 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 April 22, 2005

SECTION: D_MERGE; Pg. 48

LENGTH: 560 words

HEADLINE: Man U climbs as board sits on fence over Glazer's bid

BYLINE: TOM NICHOLLS

BODY:


    MANCHESTER United shares moved 1p higher to 271p today in the wake of
reports that senior members of the football club's board are unlikely either to
recommend or reject Malcolm Glazer's latest 300p-a-share offer.

    That would leave the American tycoon with the option of going directly to
shareholders without his approach being classed as hostile.

    Overall, the market was in buoyant mood, the FTSE 100 index adding 25.7 to
4845.3. However, with the Dow in New York down 25.7 at 10,192.9, US equities
were threatening to undermine sentiment in London.

    One of the few stocks in the top flight to fall was Shire Pharmaceuticals,
amid a mixed reaction to its $1.6 billion (Pounds 838 million) purchase of US
biotech Transkaryotic Therapies. CSFB downgraded Shire to neutral from
outperform, helping push the shares 16p lower to 5431/2p. Code Securities also
reduced the stock to hold from buy.

    But other brokers were upbeat. Seymour Pierce initiated coverage with a buy
rating and a price target of 690p. Numis Securities, with a target of 630p, said
add, Merrill Lynch retained its buy rating, while WestLB upgraded the drugs
company to neutral, raising its price target to 600p from 550p.

    Retailers were in the spotlight-as Goldman Sachs lifted its rating on
clothing retailer Next from inline to outperform, arguing that the stock's
growth prospects outshine the sector in general. the shares rose 14p to 1531p.

    Meanwhile, Lehman Brothers cut its target on Kingfisher to 260p from 275p.

    The broker does not expect the DIY retailer to trade at a premium to the
sector in the present harsh business environment.

    UBS, keeping its neutral rating, also reduced its target on the stock from
320p to 300p. Kingfisher edged up 3/4p to 274p.

    MFI was off 13/4p at 1121/2p as the merger premium that has been lending the
stock support threatened to evaporate. UBS has slashed its price target to 105p
from 130p, lowering its rating to reduce from neutral. Market sources
interpreted that as a sign the broker has abandoned hope of a bid emerging.

    Shares in Blavod Extreme Spirits- maker of black vodka for trendy bars and
nightclubs, rose 1p to 171/2p. The firm has seen a steep rise in case shipments
for its products.

    Dairy company Arla Foods, has named its new £350,000a-year chief executive.
Tim Smith is currently number two in the company and is seen as a safe pair of
hands, having spent his entire career in the industry. He takes over from Neil
Davidson, who retires in June. The shares were tweaked 1/4p higher at 641/4p.

    AIM-listed Reefton Mining slid after chief executive Simon Gilbert resigned.

    Reefton said Gilbert will stay on in a consultancy role but the shares were
off 0.94p at 3.18p. Medical-equipment supplier Surgical Innovations, another AIM
stock, was up 0.25p at 2.25p on the back of betterthanexpected full-year
results, a confident outlook statement and a strong order book.

    Financial spread betting company IG Group is due to see its first day of
trading next Thursday following its float, and institutions are valuing the firm
at about 130p a share, toward the top end of the indicative range of 112p-139p,
says a market source.

    At 130p, it would have an implied market value of £409 million. The source
said the book is well-covered, with healthy orders from Britain and America.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2005


                             462 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 April 22, 2005

SECTION: E_MERGE; Pg. 48

LENGTH: 564 words

HEADLINE: Misgivings over US biotech buy put Shire on the slide

BYLINE: TOM NICHOLLS

BODY:


    SHIRE Pharmaceuticals bucked the positive trend among bluechips today,
falling 21p to 5381/2p as the market found its $1.6 billion (Pounds 838 million)
purchase of US biotech Transkaryotic Therapies a bitter pill to swallow.

    There was a mixed reaction from analysts. CSFB downgraded Shire to neutral
from outperform while Code Securities reduced the stock to hold from buy. But
others were upbeat. Seymour Pierce initiated coverage with a buy rating and a
price target of 690p. Numis Securities, with a target of 630p, said add, Merrill
Lynch retained its buy rating and WestLB upgraded the drugs company to neutral,
raising its price target to 600p from 550p.

    Overall, the market was in buoyant mood, the FTSE 100 index adding 26.2 to
4845.8 as it shrugged off weakness on Wall Street, where the Dow was down 22.6
at 10,196.0.

    Manchester United shares gave up earlier gains, edging 3/4p lower to
2691/4p, in the wake of reports that senior members of the football club's board
are unlikely either to recommend or reject Malcolm Glazer's latest 300p-a-share
offer.

    However, that would still leave the American tycoon with the option of going
directly to shareholders without his approach being classed as hostile.

    Retailers were in the spotlight as Goldman Sachs lifted its rating on
clothing retailer Next from inline to outperform, arguing that the stock's
growth prospects outshine the sector in general. The shares rose 17p to 1534p.

    Meanwhile, Lehman Brothers cut its target on Kingfisher to 260p from 275p.

    The broker does not expect the DIY retailer to trade at a premium to the
sector in the present harsh business environment.

    UBS, keeping its neutral rating, also reduced its target on the stock from
320p to 300p. Kingfisher edged up 1/2p to 2733/4p.

    MFI was off 13/4p at 1121/2p as the merger premium that has been lending the
stock support threatened to evaporate. UBS has slashed its price target to 105p
from 130p, lowering its rating to reduce from neutral. Market sources
interpreted that as a sign the broker has abandoned hope of a bid emerging.

    Shares in Blavod Extreme Spirits, maker of black vodka for trendy bars and
nightclubs, rose 11/4p to 173/4p. The firm has seen a steep rise in case
shipments for its products.

    Dairy company Arla Foods has named its new £350,000a-year chief executive.
Tim Smith is currently number two in the company and is seen as a safe pair of
hands, having spent his entire career in the industry. He takes over from Neil
Davidson, who retires in June. The shares were 3/4p lower at 631/4p.

    AIM-listed Reefton Mining slid after chief executive Simon Gilbert resigned.

    Reefton said he would stay on in a consultancy role but the shares were off
0.87p at 3.25p.

    Medical-equipment supplier Surgical Innovations, another AIM stock, was up
0.25p at 2.25p on the back of better-than-expected fullyear results, a confident
outlook statement and a strong order book.

    Financial spread betting company IG Group is due to see its first day of
trading next Thursday following its float, and institutions are valuing the firm
at about 130p a share, toward the top end of the indicative range of 112p-139p,
says a market source.

    At 130p, it would have an implied market value of £409 million. The source
said the book is well-covered, with healthy orders from Britain and America.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2005


                             468 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2005 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             April 22, 2005, Friday

SECTION: 3-Star Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 228 words

HEADLINE: YOUR MONEY: STOCKWATCH

BYLINE: SIMON READ

BODY:


    ITV rose 3.9 per cent on the back of bid rumours. Private equity firm Apax
Partners, which pulled out of a takeover of Woolworths last week, is thought to
be considering a team-up with former BBC director general Greg Dyke to bid for
the broadcaster.

    Allied Domecq's proposed takeover added fizz to other drinks firms. Allied
also reported interim results yesterday and said profits rose seven per cent to
£285million. It climbed 3.4 per cent while SABMiller, which brews Miller Lite,
Castle and Nastro Azzurro, was up 2.8 per cent.

    However, the frothiness had gone flat for pub company Greene King, which
slipped 0.8 per cent after it said total beer sales were down from earlier in
the year. The company also announced that finance director Michael Shallow is to
leave.

    Shire Pharmaceuticals fell 7.8 per cent after it spent almost £1billion
buying US rival Transkaryotic Therapies, a price the market believes was too
high.

    Negative signals from telecoms equipment testing firm Spirent helped it
crash 21 per cent. The company said first-half profits would be significantly
below expectations.

    Corporate telecoms company Colt Telecom rang up a 3.6 per cent rise to 51p
on renewed takeover speculation, despite denials from the firm.

    It said turnover fell 0.4 per cent to £307.1m in the first quarter while the
loss for the period £30m.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2005


                             469 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 April 21, 2005

SECTION: E_MERGE; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 164 words

HEADLINE: Shire snaps up US drugs firm

BODY:


    TKT SHIRE Pharmaceuticals is paying $1.6 billion (Pounds 850 million) to
take over North American Transkaryotic Therapies (TKT), a drugs company focused
on treatments for rare diseases caused by protein deficiencies. Shire is paying
$37 a share against TKT's closing price on Nasdaq last night of $30.44.

    EBay hit by fears of slower sales growth WALL Street marked down shares in
online marketplace eBay today after a 28% rise in first-quarter net income to
$256.3 million (Pounds 136.6 million) failed to allay fears of slower sales
growth and a squeeze on margins. Sales rose to $1.03 billion from $756.2 million
a year ago. the shares slid 71 cents to $32.40.

    Character Group to step down to AIM ROBOSAPIENS distributor Character Group
is to move down to AIM and consider demerging its digital cameras business after
a first-half swing from profits of £2 million to losses of £1.9 million.

    The group is looking for a new chief executive and finance director.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2005


                             477 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 March 11, 2005

SECTION: LSE; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 321 words

HEADLINE: Hospital closes five wards months after £2m facelift

BYLINE: JASON BEATTIE

BODY:


    A LONDON hospital has closed five wards and its inpatient department less
than a year after a £2million refurbishment programme.

    Wandsworth's Bolingbroke Hospital has moved all its inpatients to other
hospitals after discovering their accommodation was a fire risk.

    Managers admit they identified the danger only after the project finished.

    The revelation comes days after the Evening Standard revealed that St
George's NHS Trust - the hospital's bosses - faces a £20million deficit.

    Tory Health spokesman Chris Grayling said: "They seem to have flushed £2
million down the drain at a time when operations are being cancelled because of
a lack of money." A spokesman for the Trust admitted: "Had we known there was a
serious fire problem we would not have spent that money.

    "Part of the money was £600,000 from the Government to change mixed wards
into single sex wards.

    Even so, it was still public money and should not have been spent," he said.

    A report by the Chief Executive of Wandsworth council said the money "has
effectively been wasted".

    The report continues: "It is also noteworthy that progress towards agreeing
long-term development plans for the hospital has been painfully slow."

    St George's NHS Trust said: "Some £800,000 of the £2 million bill had been
spent on upgrading the outpatient department which is open."

    Gt Ormond Street cure for 'bubble babies' BRITISH scientists have reached a
new gene therapy landmark by treating a four-year-old boy born with no immune
system.

    Doctors at Great Ormond Street Hospital used a harmless virus to carry a
corrective gene into the bone marrow of the boy, named only as Mustaf, and get
his immune system working.

    Such infants used to be called "bubble babies" because they had to be sealed
inside a protective plastic "bubble". Only five patients in Italy have
previously been treated using the new technique.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2005


                             478 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 March 11, 2005

SECTION: LSE; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 86 words

HEADLINE: Gt Ormond Street cure for 'bubble babies'

BODY:


    BRITISH scientists have reached a new gene therapy landmark by treating a
four-year-old boy born with no immune system.

    Doctors at Great Ormond Street Hospital used a harmless virus to carry a
corrective gene into the bone marrow of the boy, named only as Mustaf, and get
his immune system working.

    Such infants used to be called "bubble babies" because they had to be sealed
inside a protective plastic "bubble". Only five patients in Italy have
previously been treated using the new technique.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2005


                             479 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2005 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             March 8, 2005, Tuesday

SECTION: 3 Star Edition; NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 24 words

HEADLINE: STEM CELL £1BN

BODY:


    STEM cell research and gene therapy will get £1billion of a £10bn science
budget over the next three years, the Government said yesterday

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2005


                             486 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                February 7, 2005

SECTION: C; Pg. 66

LENGTH: 565 words

HEADLINE: Brokers check in with BA upgrades as revenue flows

BYLINE: MICKY CLARK

BODY:



    BRITISH Airways traded just below its seven-month high today with several of
the major City players telling clients that shares in the national carrier were
set for higher altitude following strong third-quarter profits last week.

    Dutch broker ABN Amro started the ball rolling by moving its recommendation
from hold to add while raising its 12-month target to 310p. US broker Smith
Barney has repeated its buy rating and raised its sights from 270p to 330p.

    Both houses make the point that January's traffic numbers showed strong
growth in business and first-class passengers. This has led to improved revenue
flow.

    Smith Barney has raised its forecast of operating profits from £483 million
to £515 million and earnings per share prediction from 20.4p to 23.5p.
Profit-taking left BA 21/4p cheaper at 272p, after briefly touching 278p.

    Meanwhile, discount rival easyJet dipped 23/4p to 2291/4p despite a jump in
passenger numbers during January of almost 24% to 2.08 million. BAA, which
operates Heathrow, Gatwick and Edinburgh airports among others, rose 4p to
6211/2p as Smith Barney raised its target from 600p to 700p.

    Share prices generally got off to a flying start, bursting through the 4960
resistance level noted by the chartists. The FTSE 100 index rose 30.5 to 4972.0.
Next stop 5000? It follows a last-gasp run that carried the Dow 123 points
higher in New York on Friday.

    Cigarette maker British American Tobacco was blowing smoke rings at US
government officials today after a ruling by a federal appeals court in
Washington that the government cannot receive up to $280 billion (Pounds 149
billion) in past profits as part of its racketeering case against the entire
industry.

    BAT, which has big interests in the US through its Brown & Williamson
subsidiary, responded with a jump of 211/2p to 964p. US broker Morgan Stanley
was moved to repeat its overweight rating and 1000p target. Rival Goldman Sachs
says the company's discount to its sector peers looks increasingly
inappropriate.

    Liberty International, owner of the Lakeside and MetroCentre shopping
centres, raced up 12p to a record 991p, giving it a market value of £3.2 billion
amid speculation that new blood will be brought in to strengthen the board.

    Chairman Donald "Donny" Gordon, whose family control 22% of Liberty, is due
to retire this June in time for his 75th birthday. Despite Gordon rebuffing talk
of selling his stake to a foreign buyer - he insists he is ready to increase his
holding - Liberty's shares have risen 511/2p in the past three weeks, increasing
his family stake to £702 million.

    Chemicals giant ICI dipped 1/2p to 2411/2p. Broker Merrill Lynch has chosen
to downgrade the shares ahead of Thursday's full-year numbers and is warning
clients the rising cost of raw materials is likely to erode profits.

    Construction outfit Boustead called for a suspension of its shares at 181/2p
pending clarification of the company's financial position.

    Shares in gene therapy firm Oxford BioMedica fell 5p to 191/2p after it said
deal talks with a mystery suitor had ended barely two weeks after telling the
market it had received an approach about a potential merger.

    The company, spun out of Oxford University nine years ago, has developed the
TroVax anticancer vaccine. Its investors include US-born Russian banking tycoon
Boris Jordan.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2005


                             487 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                February 7, 2005

SECTION: D; Pg. 66

LENGTH: 561 words

HEADLINE: Talk of a bid from US fuels a drive up for Avis Europe

BYLINE: MICKEY CLARK

BODY:


    CAR hire operator Avis Europe slipped into top gear today, accelerating
61/2p or 12% to 591/2p as talk of a US bid for the company gathered pace.

    American conglomerate Cendant heads the list of likely suitors and may have
already begun wooing Avis's biggest shareholder, Belgian company D'Ieteren with
58% of the shares. Brokers acknowledge that D'Ieteren would be the key to any
deal over Avis, which has been having a torrid time lately. It plunged £32.4
million into the red last year.

    Casinos operator Stanley Leisure stood out with a rise of 61/2p to 4401/2p
on news that Malaysian shareholder Genting had been adding to its holding. It
has picked up a further 2.8 million shares, stretching its total holding to 19.2
million or 14.9%. Genting bought its original stake in Stanley before Government
proposals for supercasinos were watered down.

    But its persistence in buying the shares suggests it may have other ideas on
its agenda. Brokers say Stanley is the most vulnerable of the gambling operators
following its profits warning in December, which saw the shares plunge from
about 490p.

    Dutch broker ABN Amro has raised its recommendation on British Airways from
hold to add while lifting its 12-month target to 310p. US broker Smith
Barney-has repeated its buy rating on BA and raised its share-price sights from
270p to 330p.

    Both houses make the point that January's traffic numbers showed strong
growth in business and first-class passengers. This has led to improved revenue
flow. Smith Barney has lifted its forecast of operating profits from £483
million to £515 million and earnings per share prediction from 20.4p to 23.5p.
Profit-taking left BA 21/2p cheaper at 272p, after the shares briefly touched
278p.

    BAA, which operates Heathrow, Gatwick and Edinburgh airports among others,
rose 1/2p to 618p as Smith Barney raised its target from 600p to 700p.

    Share prices generally made strong gains, bursting through the 4960
resistance level noted by the chartists. The FTSE 100 index rose 31.9 to 4973.4.
Next stop 5000? The Dow was lower in early trading this afternoon.

    Cigarette maker British American Tobacco was blowing smoke rings at US
government officials today after a ruling by a federal appeals court in
Washington that the government cannot receive up to $280 billion (Pounds 149
billion) in past profits as part of its racketeering case against the entire
industry.

    BAT, which has big interests in the US through its Brown & Williamson
subsidiary, responded with a jump of 20p to 9621/2p. US broker Morgan Stanley
was moved to repeat its overweight rating and 1000p target. Rival Goldman Sachs
says the company's discount to its sector peers looks increasingly
inappropriate.

    Chemicals giant ICI was up 1/2p at 2421/2p. Broker Merrill Lynch has chosen
to downgrade the shares ahead of Thursday's full-year numbers and is warning
clients the rising cost of raw materials is likely to erode profits.

    Shares in gene therapy firm Oxford BioMedica fell 5p to 191/2p as it said
deal talks with a mystery suitor had ended, barely two weeks after it told the
market it had received an approach about a potential merger.

    The company, spun out of Oxford University nine years ago, has developed the
TroVax anticancer vaccine. Its investors include US-born Russian banking tycoon
Boris Jordan.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2005


                             494 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2005 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                          January 12, 2005, Wednesday

SECTION: 3-Star Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 45 words

HEADLINE: DEAR MIRIAM: ANTISENSE

BYLINE: DR MIRIAM STOPPARD

BODY:


    THREE people with drug-resistant strains of HIV were the first to undergo a
new form of gene therapy, "antisense", designed to block the virus, pictured
right. Immune cells were filtered from their blood, exposed to the modified
virus, and put back in the body.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2005


                             496 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                January 5, 2005

SECTION: A_MERGE; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 130 words

HEADLINE: New treatment for cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: REBECCA SMITH

BODY:


    CHILDREN with cystic fibrosis could see their condition controlled with
revolutionary gene therapy within two years, it was revealed today.

    Doctors at Great Ormond Street Hospital are to begin testing the therapy,
developed by Dr Steve Hart at the Institute of Child Health. Cystic fibrosis
affects over 7,500 people in Britain, causing breathing difficulties and
respiratory infections. There is no cure and sufferers usually do not live
beyond their thirties, although regular physiotherapy and drugs can slow the
condition.

    The new therapy involves a mixture that can be inhaled, so healthy genes can
be transferred directly into the lungs.

    They stop the build-up of mucus which leads to breathing problems, although
they cannot cure the illness outright.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2005


                             499 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2004 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                          November 25, 2004, Thursday

SECTION: 3 Star Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 779 words

HEADLINE: BODY TALK: I MET MY HUBBIE AFTER GETTING PARKINSON'S;
 CATHERINE'S WORLD FELL APART WHEN AT ONLY 26 SHE WAS GIVEN A SHOCKING

BYLINE: HILARY FREEMAN

HIGHLIGHT:
BEATING ADVERSITY: Catherine and Kevin on their wedding day

BODY:


    NOW 33, Catherine McCartney, of Stoke-on-Trent, Staffs, tells how devastated
she felt on being told she had Parkinson's Disease. And how she rebuilt her life
- and met and fell in love with her husband Kevin, 34.

    I had bronchitis and when my doctor examined me she noticed the little
finger on my right hand was shaking - something I wasn't even aware of.

    She referred me to a neurologist for tests. What she didn't tell me then was
that she suspected I might have the first signs of Parkinson's Disease.

    Because I wasn't worried and work was very busy - I'm a manager at the
clothes shop Wallis - I kept putting off my appointment. It was six months
before I went into hospital for tests.

    By then my whole hand was shaking. But I was so focused on my career that
the tests just seemed an inconvenience. I didn't think it could be serious and
was oblivious to the fact I was put on the Parkinson's and MS ward. Nobody in my
family had suffered from Parkinson's and I didn't think it could affect someone
as young as me.

    On the last day of my hospital stay, a consultant told me "We think you have
Parkinson's." I went into shock. What would happen to me? Could I still work?
Mum was actually relieved. She'd convinced herself I might have something fatal,
so Parkinson's didn't seem so bad.

    I went through a range of emotions. First I felt guilty for having
Parkinson's - ashamed even. Then I felt depressed. Then I became determined to
fight it. I never felt angry. I believe it's happened to me because I can cope
and help others.

    When I was diagnosed I had a boyfriend of 12 years. He couldn't deal with my
condition and never came to appointments with me.

    In 2000, I ended the relationship. I was single for a couple of years, but I
didn't worry that Parkinson's would stop me meeting anyone - I knew any man who
couldn't cope with it wasn't worth having.

    In June 2002, I met Kevin. I told him about my Parkinson's straightaway. His
mum has MS so my condition didn't phase him at all. We realised we were
soulmates and he proposed after just a few months.

    My condition has deteriorated since. The whole of my right side is now
affected. As well as the hand tremor I get cramps and my leg is weak and tends
to freeze and become painful. I also get tired. I've tried lots of different
medication and am now on a low dose of the strongest Parkinson's drug, L-dopa,
which helps the tremors.

    I've only told my bosses and closest friends and they've all been
supportive. If anybody else asks why I sometimes drag my leg I'll joke, "I got
run over by a bus yesterday."

    Stress makes things worse. If I have a stroppy customer, my hand shakes. One
lady came in for a dodgy refund. When I refused, she became angry. She said,
"What's your problem - do I make you nervous?" "No, actually, I've got
Parkinson's," I said. She was gobsmacked.

    Having Parkinson's has make me want to make the most of my life. I've been
promoted at work and run a store. I've come to terms with my condition. I'm
hoping to try for a baby, which means coming off some tablets. Nobody knows why
I got Parkinson's or how it might affect me in the future.

    But I hope that scientific advances, such as stem cell therapy, mean there
will be a cure in the next 20 years.

    TREATMENT

    There is no cure for Parkinson's.

    But drugs can help restore the level of dopamine in the brain. Long-term use
results in confusion and hallucinations. Drugs can become less effective over
time.

    Scientists are looking at the use of gene therapy to treat Parkinson's. Stem
cell research also offers hope of a breakthrough in treatment in the longer
term.

    PARKINSON'S DISEASE SOCIETY

    www.parkinsons.org.uk

    General telephone: 020 7931 8080; Helpline: 0808 800 0303

    For donations please call: 020 7932 1303 or email
donorservices@parkinsons.org.uk

    PARKINSON'S: THE FACTS

    One in 500 of the UK population have Parkinson's, and one in 20 are
diagnosed under the age of 40.

    Parkinson's is a progressive, neurological disorder. It occurs when the
cells in the part of the brain that controls movement are lost. These cells
produce dopamine, a chemical messenger that enables people to perform smooth,
co-ordinated movements. It is not known why these cells die. Once 80 per cent of
these cells have been destroyed the symptoms of Parkinson's appear.

    The three main symptoms are shaking, muscle stiffness and slowness of
movement. Not everyone will experience all three.

    Other symptoms include a lack of facial expression, altered posture,
tiredness, difficulties with balance, speech and writing, depression. Some may
experience problems swallowing.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2004


                             505 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2004 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            October 8, 2004, Friday

SECTION: 3 Star Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 48 words

HEADLINE: DR MIRIAM: MONITOR

BYLINE: DR MIRIAM STOPPARD

BODY:


    A NEW treatment for people with aggressive brain tumour Glioma will use gene
therapy to correct defective genes responsible for disease development. The
treatment involves injecting modified herpes simplex virus into the tumour to
kill cancerous cells, leaving normal cells undamaged.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2004


                             507 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                October 4, 2004

SECTION: J; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1567 words

HEADLINE: She's been there

BYLINE: ANASTASIA STEPHENS

BODY:


    AT 26, Lorraine Walsh has had to face tougher questions and relinquish more
hopes and dreams than most people do in a lifetime.

    Born with cystic fibrosis, she hopes to have a child with her husband, Rob.
Yet the strain of giving birth could leave her permanently dependent on oxygen
and she is unlikely to be there to see her child grow to adulthood.

    It is a terrible prospect to cope with. Thankfully, Lorraine has someone
with immense knowledge of her condition to help her through the worst days -
consultant cystic fibrosis nurse Susan Madge.

    Lorraine was a one-year-old baby at Great Ormond Street Hospital when she
first came into contact with Susan, who is known to everyone as Su.

    "She was there to help my parents come to terms with my illness and explain
the test results," says Lorraine. "Since then she has been my rock.

    "As a teenager she became my friend, giving me advice whenever I felt angry
or upset because I wasn't like other people my age. She came with me for
meetings with doctors because I found it difficult talking to them.

    "Now she is there to advise me on the risks I face in becoming a mother."

    Su has given Lorraine more than emotional support. Cystic fibrosis, a
genetic disease associated with abnormally thick mucus, is a complex condition
marked by a slow and painful deterioration.

    Affecting all tissues that rely on secretions, sufferers are initially prone
to poor digestion and lung infections and, later on, complications such as
arthritis and liver disease.

    Each day, Lorraine has up to three sessions of physiotherapy to clear her
lungs and around 50 enzyme and vitamin pills per meal to keep her body going.

    That's not to mention the drugs she takes to open up her lungs and fight off
infections.

    As a pioneer of multidisciplinary teamwork in cystic fibrosis, Su Madge has
played a pivotal role in developing the complex management plans designed to
improve the length

    and quality of Lorraine's life.

    Paediatricians, respiratory specialists, dieticians, physiotherapists,
counsellors and researchers are all needed to provide the best possible care for
CF sufferers.

    "Getting specialists to work closely together was a new concept when I
started in the respiratory ward at Great Ormond Street," says Su. "But teamwork
means patients live longer, healthier lives. Today, this is the sort of service
you can expect at all CF centres."

    She is too modest to admit it, but this level of care is largely the result
of her own dedication to helping CF patients.

    Nominated as an NHS Champion nurse, Su, now a consultant nurse specialist at
The Royal Brompton NHS Trust, has dedicated more than half of her life to
helping around 7,000 young sufferers.

    Starting out at Great Ormond Street Hospital more than 20 years ago, today
she is chair of the International Nurse Specialist Group on Cystic Fibrosis.

    She helps to revise national guidelines on CF care, runs courses and
lectures on the subject nationally and abroad ... and still has time left to
give individual attention to patients such as Lorraine.

    "As soon as I started working with CF children I knew it was an area I would
stay in," says Su. "There is so much involved in managing the disease - physical
and psychological. The issues are big and I hoped that in some way, I could make
a difference."

    THE challenges begin when a CF ch i ld is born. "When parents discover the
news that their baby has a lifelimiting disease, you have to help them through
the shock and adjust their expectations," says Su.

    "You have to teach them the complex treatment that helps keep the child
alive, knowing the child could die anyway. From the beginning, children with CF
have to get used to a daily routine of drugs, nutritionalsupplements and
physiotherapy. They are prone to infections and when children do get ill, they
get hit badly and may end up in hospital."

    The tragic disease is marked by a slow and painful deterioration. Bodily
organs that rely on mucus secretions such as the lungs and liver gradually fail.
At first, patients become wheelchair-bound, and later have to wear an oxygen
mask.

    Pat ients, who aren' t expected to live much beyond 30, usually die because
their lungs are so damaged that they cannot function.

    "Some patients turn to drugs and alcohol. They think, what's the point - I'm
going to die anyway?" says Su. "In others, it brings out great resilience.

    "I remember a young girl called Nicola West who, because of her
deteriorating health, had to give up work. She knew she would die, so in the
time she had left, decided to do her best to raise the profile of cystic
fibrosis.

    "Nicola talked to every charity, to Downing Street, and got TV personalities
interested. Aged 30, she turned down a heart and lung transplant because she
knew she was dying. She died a month ago, having raised £1.5 million for
research into gene therapy."

    This kind of positive attitude is one that Su tries to instil in patients
and staff. And even though the illness has taken the lives of dozens of her
patients, her motivation is as great as ever.

    "I am there when I need to be there," she says. "Whether it is 5am or
midnight. Time is not the point. The reward for the work is the response from
the patients."

    One of the most painful issues for female CF sufferers is whether or not
they risk becoming mothers.

    "Childbirth can severely damage the health of CF women. They may die within
one or two years of their baby's birth," says Su.

    "However, some women have several children and cope with the demands of
motherhood. But unlike healthy women, they have to make arrangements for their
children after they're gone."

    Su helps former nanny Lorraine with these issues. "I am trying for a family
with Rob," says Lorraine. "He carries the CF gene, so there is a 25 per cent
chance that the child will have the disease. When I need advice, Su is a phone
call away. She has explained the risks. If I got pregnant, my lungs could be
damaged, leaving me dependent on oxygen and unable to look after a baby. But she
says that's the worst-case scenario."

    Lorraine's attitude, however, is positive. "Even if my life is shorter, Rob
and I would like a part of me to live on. If my child is born with CF, we know
all about the illness so are the best people to deal with it.

    "Su doesn't let me live in a fantasy world. My expectations are realistic.

    I am in the hands of an expert and lifelong friend and that gives me the
courage I need."

    DENNIS RENTON NHS CHAMPIONS CATEGORY Porter APORTER'S lot is not always a
happy one - lifting patients on and off trolleys, clearing up the wards and
dealing with dead bodies arriving at the mortuary. And yet without such
dedicated staff, hospitals would grind to a halt - porters like 61-year-old
Dennis Renton, who has worked at Bart's Hospital for more than 37 years. He has
seen the results of many major tragedies in London, from the Moorgate train
crash, the King's Cross fire to the Old Bailey bombing.

    Dennis, who is married to Elizabeth, a school administrator, and lives in
Stoke Newington, says his job is all about communicating with patients.

    "We may only see patients for 10 minutes while we are ferrying them around,
but they are often frightened or in pain. I am often the one they turn to for
light relief or sympathy."

    One person who knows how Dennis has managed to cheer up patients is
portering supervisor Clive Chisnell, who wants to nominate him as an NHS
champion.

    "You see how someone copes when the pressure is on and Dennis is so calm."

    Dennis is aware of the stresses. "If you can't laugh, you would sink into a
depression. To deal with the pressure, we used to get up to some high jinks. One
day we put a dummy on a trolley. I told a rookie porter to take this 'patient'
to the ward and not to bother talking to him because he was deaf and dumb. So he
started pushing the trolley - until it hit a bump and the dummy's head fell off.
He nearly collapsed with fright, but the staff fell about laughing."

    Part of the job is to look after the deceased's property, which once left
Dennis with the keys to the Crown Jewels. "The assistant governor to the Tower
of London dropped dead in the street and was brought in. I took possession of
all his valuables, including a huge set of keys.

    "Suddenly, I got a call from Special Branch. When I asked what all the fuss
was about, they told me they were the keys to the Crown Jewels!"

    Dennis says the hospital porter's role has changed beyond recognition.

    "There is still a lot of heavy lifting but we are no longer allowed to come
into physical contact with patients.

    "I am a union steward, too. Once we had a pay strike and I was chairing the
strike meeting. Suddenly, there was a bang and the sound of crashing masonry. A
bomb had gone off at the Old Bailey.

    "I ended the meeting and we set to work. There were more than 80 injuries in
the first hour and we worked through the night for free."

    But it hasn't all been doom and gloom. "I remember the Moorgate crash, when
a young policewoman, Margaret Lyall, was brought in. She lost a leg. Two others
came out alive but later died - 43 died in all.

    "Margaret joined Barts as a telephonist. She ended up marrying the son of
the telephone supervisor. It's lovely to have a happy ending."

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2004


                             533 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2004 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             June 22, 2004, Tuesday

SECTION: 1 Star Edition; NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 121 words

HEADLINE: 'CANCERS PREDICTED BY GENE'

BYLINE: LORRAINE FISHER

BODY:


    A ROGUE gene which can help predict if a smoker will develop lung cancer has
been discovered by scientists.

    Instead of protecting the body against the dangers of smoke as it should, it
fails to react.

    The gene was found in three of the 93 people in a trial - one of whom went
on to develop lung cancer.

    The gene should have generated more protein to guard against toxins.

    The researchers from Boston University, Massachusetts, said: "These
individuals failed to increase expression of a number of genes that serve as
protective detoxification and antioxidant genes."

    SCIENTISTS from Cancer Research UK believe they can use gene therapy with
viruses to trick ovarian cancer cells into committing suicide.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2004


                             541 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2004 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                              May 10, 2004, Monday

SECTION: 3 Star Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1141 words

HEADLINE: HI-TECH HEALING;
 HOW MICROSCOPIC MACHINES MAY OPEN THE WAY TO A CANCER-FREE AND

BYLINE: MATT ROPER

HIGHLIGHT:
BREAKTHROUGH: Scientist in California studies stem cells; TINY GENIUS: A
'nanosub' injects a cancer cell

BODY:


    T HERE is a medical revolution just around the corner.

    An astonishing array of new treatments promises to dramatically extend our
life-spans.

    This week it was announced that within five years people will be able to
grow new teeth from stem cells implanted in their gums.

    But this is not the only - or the most extraordinary - medical advance we
can look forward to.

    In the not-too-distant future cancer victims will be diagnosed and cured in
a few minutes by billions of microscopic "robo-docs", while cardiovascular
victims will have their damaged hearts regrown in a matter of months.

    And it might not be long before we're able to stop cells dying altogether -
heralding sharp minds and smooth skin well into old age.

    Here are some of the new technologies which look set to transform our lives.

    Nanotechnolog

    Y

    IT SOUNDS like the stuff of science fiction but microscopic hunter-killer
machines designed to find and destroy cancer cells could be just decades away.

    Scientists have already built the world's smallest biological computer,
which uses a handful of DNA molecules as its software, and measures just 100
nanos (10,000th of a millimetre).

    But it is powerful enough to detect the chemical signature of prostate or
lung cancer cells, and release a drug to destroy them.

    Scientists believe it will eventually be possible to build tiny medical
"nanosubmarines" that hunt down tumours and germs before delivering their drugs.

    If cancer is detected, the computer orders the release of a single-strand
DNA designed to induce cancer cells to self-destruct.

    Billions of the computers would be deployed at the same time, checking every
cell in the body for cancer, knocking out the abnormal ones while leaving the
healthy ones alone.

    So far, the tiny system can perform only one function every 20 seconds, and
must conduct eight to complete a diagnosis and treatment.

    "It's very slow compared to your home computer," said Prof Ehud Shapiro, who

    made the breakthrough at the Weizmann Institute in Israel.

    "But if you can diagnose and cure a patient in two minutes, that's pretty
fast."

    Stem Cells

    IT won't be long before heart failure patients can regrow muscle and blood
vessels, stroke victims will regenerate damaged brain tissue and burns victims
will be able to grow back their own skin.

    Within a few years research into human stem cells promises to treat an
impressive variety of human conditions, from Alzheimer's and diabetes to
baldness.

    It even raises the possibility that spinal injury victims could walk again.
Stem cells are the body's building blocks from which embryos grow in the womb.

    Plentiful in the early embryo, but scarce in adult tissues, they

    can be programmed to change into different types of tissue.

    One day whole organs may come "off the shelf" rather than from a human
donor.

    It will also provide us with perfect-tissue match, greatly reducing the
risks of rejection.

    However, it has also raised fears that the technology could be employed to
clone a human baby, which most experts

    consider to be unethical.

    Rad51d

    injections

    GROWING old may soon be a thing of the past in the not-to-distant future.

    Cancer researchers have stumbled on a discovery which could stop ageing by
preventing the body's cells dying.

    The breakthrough centres on a newly-discovered molecule known as RAD51D,
which can effectively stop the clock on a cell's ageing process.

    Such treatment could also halt the loss of brain cells, keeping the organ
young well into old age.

    "This could mean our skin, organs, everything in our body does not age at
all," says Dr Madalena Tarsounas, of Cancer Research UK's London Research
Institute. Conversely, removing the RAD51D molecule could kill up to ten per
cent of tumours.

    "Cancer has an amazing ability to shake off the shackles of ageing and
death, which is one of the reasons it can be so hard to treat," says Dr
Tarsounas.

    "Understanding how cancer cells remain eternally young has been a key focus
of research for more than a decade.

    "We've found evidence of a completely new mechanism for stopping the clock
on a cancer cell's timer and making them susceptible to death."

    FA

    t transformation

    WE'RE all desperate to lose it, but one day your excess fat might actually
save your life.

    Researchers have found that fat contains large numbers of stromal cells -
immature fat cells that retain the potential to turn into other types of tissue.

    One team in Indiana found that stromal cells manufacture several chemicals
called growth factors, which can stimulate the formation of new blood cells to
boost oxygen supply to the tissues.

    They believe it will soon be possible to treat circulatory problems by
giving patients a dose of their own fat cells, and could eventually lead to new
treatments for both heart disease and cancer.

    Another breakthrough has found that human fat can be turned into cartilage,
raising the possibility that it can be used to treat patients who have suffered
disabling injuries and arthritis.

    Scientists from Duke University Medical Center in the US created cartilage
cells from fat removed during liposuction procedures.

    Researcher Geoffrey Erickson said: "This holds out the possibility of taking
fat cells from someone with a cartilage injury and growing new cartilage to
replace the damaged tissue."

    Gene therapy

    IN another giant leap in the fight against the big-C, scientists have
managed to use genetically engineered bacteria to infiltrate cancer cells.

    The e-coli bugs - famous for causing food poisoning - are used to "smuggle"
a tumour-busting enzyme into the cells. Normally, the enzyme molecules would be
barred from entering cells or broken down before they can take action.

    Researchers modified the e coli bacteria to ensure they were harmless and
gave them the ability to penetrate human cell membranes. Once inside, they
release therapeutic molecules and wipe out a variety of cancer cells.

    In experiments using a range of cancer cells, more than 90 per cent invaded
by the bacteria were killed.

    Dr George Vassaux, lead researcher at St Bartholomew's cancer research unit,
said: "It's notoriously difficult to get some types of therapeutic molecule
inside cancer cells, which is why we turned to living organisms to do the job
for us."

    Another gene therapy technique that turns fat cells into fat-burning engines
could soon offer a solution to the global obesity epidemic. Experiments on rats
showed that injections of the gene for leptin lead to rapid weight loss, as fat
cells actually start consuming fat.

    However, another type of gene therapy which made the muscles of mice grow up
to 30 per cent stronger has led to fears it will be the next generation of
cheating in sport.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2004


                             545 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2004 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             April 6, 2004, Tuesday

SECTION: 3 Star Edition; NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 71 words

HEADLINE: GENE HELP FOR HEARTS

BODY:


    GENE therapy has been used for the first time to repair damaged human heart
cells in the lab.

    A virus carried a restorative gene, taken from people with heart failure,
into heart cells.

    This blocked the activity of an enzyme which stops a normal strong heart
contraction.

    American scientists hope to try the technique on patients soon.

    Professor Walter Koch said: "This study is last proof of concept."

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2004


                             557 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                               February 12, 2004

SECTION: A; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 834 words

HEADLINE: Thirty human embryos are created by scientists

BYLINE: MARK PRIGG; JAMES LANGTON

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS have successfully cloned 30 human embryos in an astonishing
breakthrough.

    They believe their work could lead to a cure for diseases such as cancer and
Parkinson's. But experts warned it could also open the door for the first cloned
human baby.

    Scientists from Seoul National University took genetic material from normal
cells in women donors and combined it with their eggs. They grew embryos to a
point at which stem cells - the body's "master cells" that can divide into any
type of tissue in the body - developed. The embryos were then destroyed to
harvest the stem cells.

    "These are the most advanced human embryo clones yet produced," said
Professor Woo Suk Hwang, the doctor behind the research. But he said any attempt
to create a cloned baby would be "crazy".

    The scientists' aim is to use the stem cells to grow replacements for cells
that have failed in patients with problems such as Alzheimer's disease.

    Because the cells are an exact genetic match with those of the donor, it is
thought the body will not reject them.

    "Our approach opens the door for the use of these specially developed cells
in transplantation medicine," said Professor Hwang.

    The breakthrough is the first time claims of a cloned human embryo have been
backed up by a scientific evidence. A paper detailing the research will appear
this week in the journal Science.

    However, anticloning campaigners in America have already condemned the
research.

    It was described last night as "a move towards creating new human lives
solely to destroy them in research," by a senior member of the United States
Conference of Catholic Bishops.

    Another opponent of cloning, Dr Leon Kass of the President's Council on
Bioethics, warned: "The age of human cloning has arrived."

    Experts stressed that the research is still at an early stage.

    Editor-in-chief of the journal Science, Donald Kennedy, said: "The potential
for embryonic stem cells is enormous - but researchers still must overcome
significant scientific hurdles.

    "These results seem promising. But it's important to remember that
cell-and-tissue transplantation and gene therapy are still emerging
technologies, and it may be years yet before embryonic stem cells can be used in
transplantation medicine."

    He also called for a worldwide ban on attempts to use the technology to
create living children. One US company claimed that, by publishing their work,
the Korean scientists were making it easy for others to copy it.

    Editorial Comment: Page 11

    CLONING THE FACTS

    How does it work?

    The aim of cloning is to produce an identical copy of an embryo. Whether
it's a human or Dolly the sheep, the process is basically the same.

    Researchers take DNA from one adult cell then put it into a "hollowed out"
egg, often from the same person. A short jolt of electricity or other trigger is
applied, the egg and DNA fuse, and the embryo cells start dividing as normal.

    What happens next is controversial.

    There are two types of cloning - therapeutic and reproductive.

    Reproductive cloning aims to produce a baby, and would involve the embryo
being implanted into a woman and left to grow.

    Therapeutic cloning - the Korean researchers' aim - seeks to create stem
cells which can grow replacement organs and cells. Effectively, we'd be able to
grow our own replacement organs. To get the stem cells, the embryo is terminated
and they are removed.

    Haven't we had cloning before?

    We've all read dozens of stories about cloned babies, and researchers have
known for years that it will one day be possible.

    Dr Panos Zavos, an American fertility expert, announced in January he had
implanted a cloned embryo in a woman, but said last week that pregnancy had
failed. Clonaid, which is linked to a UFO cult, also claimed today the birth of
its sixth clone in Australia - although, like Zavos, it failed to provide any
evidence.

    Today's announcement is, experts believe, the first "real" evidence that a
cloned embryo has been created. By publishing their research in a respected
journal like Science, the Koreans also had to have their work reviewed by other
scientists.

    Why is this so important?

    Because stem cells can be used to grow any cell or organ in the body, they
could potentially cure almost any disease.

    Degenerative brain diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's are likely
to be the first targets. Researchers to be able to regrow damaged brain tissue,
effectively reversing the effects of the disease.

    Why is it controversial?

    For any kind of cloning to work, embryos must be produced. Some people
believe scientists are effectively playing God, and creating humans at will by
doing this. For therapeutic cloning to work, embryos must be destroyed to remove
the stem cells, which has caused outrage in the prolife community.

    If the embryo were to be implanted in a woman, many experts believe it would
lead to massive deformities in any child.

    END

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2004


                             582 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2003 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                           October 1, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 144 words

HEADLINE: VACCINE HOPE FOR MELANOMA

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS yesterday announced a breakthrough which could lead to a cure for
skin cancer.

    A new gene therapy has been successful in animals and tests on people begin
in the next few months.

    Professor Lawrence Young of Birmingham University said: "Melanoma is a nasty
cancer which can spread into the lungs and brain.

    "But if you take samples of blood cells from the patient and treat them with
proteins from the cancer then the cells develop an appetite for the melanoma.
And when the cultured cells are injected back into the patient, they trigger a
response in the immune system to gobble it all up.

    "Gene therapy can stimulate the immune system in the same way that a vaccine
does. This is the first step towards creating vaccines to prevent cancer."
Around 6,000 new skin cancer cases are diagnosed each year in Britain with 1,600
deaths.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2003


                             583 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2003 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                           October 1, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 108 words

HEADLINE: MELANOMA VACCINE HOPE

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS yesterday announced a breakthrough which could lead to a cure for
skin cancer.

    A new gene therapy has been successful in animals and tests on people begin
in the next few months.

    Prof Lawrence Young of Birmingham University said: "If you take blood cells
from the patient and treat them with proteins from the cancer the cells develop
an appetite for the melanoma.

    "When cultured cells are injected back into the patient, they trigger the
immune system to gobble it all up.

    He added: "This is the first step towards vaccines to prevent cancer."

    Around 6,000 skin cancer cases are diagnosed each year in Britain.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2003


                             584 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2003 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                           October 1, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 91 words

HEADLINE: MELANOMA CURE HOPE

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS yesterday announced a breakthrough which could lead to a cure for
skin cancer.

    A new gene therapy has been successful in animals and tests on people begin
in the next few months.

    Professor Lawrence Young of Birmingham University said: "If you take samples
of blood cells from the patient and treat them with proteins from the cancer
then the cells develop an appetite for the melanoma.

    "And when the cultured cells are injected back into the patient, they
trigger a response in the immune system to gobble it all up."

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2003


                             587 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                               September 16, 2003

SECTION: B; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 165 words

HEADLINE: Boosey entertains potential suitor

BODY:


    BOOSEY & Hawkes, the music publisher, has said it is "co-operating" with
potential rival bidder HgCapital. Stirling Square Capital and European
Acquisition Capital have bid 42.2 million in cash.

    Pre-tax loss for the six months to the end of June was 1.1 million against
an 11.3 million deficit.

    Oxford Bio planning 20m rights issue

    GENE therapy group Oxford Biomedica is to raise 20.4 million via an
underwritten 27-for-50 rights issue at 17p a share. Cash from the 32.7%
discounted rights on last night's closing price will fund research and
development.

    Cost-cutting has saved 7 million in the past year. Its shares slipped 21/4p
to 23p.

    Baltimore aiming to damp down burn

    A SLIMMER Baltimore Technologies, the internet security firm, promised an
end to "operational cash burn" from the end of the year as headline losses fell
to 2.2 million from 9.9 million for the six months to June. Baltimore said it is
no longer trying to sell the whole company.

    END

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2003


                             588 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                               September 16, 2003

SECTION: C; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 161 words

HEADLINE: Boosey entertains potential suitor

BODY:


    BOOSEY & Hawkes, the music publisher, has said it is "co-operating" with
potential rival bidder HgCapital. Stirling Square Capital and European
Acquisition Capital have bid 42.2 million in cash.

    Pre-tax loss for the six months to the end of June was 1.1 million against
an 11.3 million deficit.

    Oxford Bio planning 20m rights issue

    GENE therapy group Oxford Biomedica is to raise 20.4 million via an
underwritten 27-for-50 rights issue at 17p a share. Cash from the 32.7%
discounted rights on last night's closing price will fund research and
development.

    Cost-cutting has saved 7 million in the past year. Its shares slipped 21/4p
to 23p.

    Boss leaves

    Future as it hits a high COMPUTER games magazines publisher The Future
Network confirmed its financial recovery today but said its chief operating
officer Colin Morrison, 52, is leaving.

    FUture pre-tax profits rose 22% to 1.1 million for the six months to the end
of June.

    END

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2003


                             589 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                               September 16, 2003

SECTION: D; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 161 words

HEADLINE: Boosey entertains potential suitor

BODY:


    BOOSEY & Hawkes, the music publisher, has said it is "co-operating" with
potential rival bidder HgCapital. Stirling Square Capital and European
Acquisition Capital have bid 42.2 million in cash.

    Pre-tax loss for the six months to the end of June was 1.1 million against
an 11.3 million deficit.

    Oxford Bio planning 20m rights issue

    GENE therapy group Oxford Biomedica is to raise 20.4 million via an
underwritten 27-for-50 rights issue at 17p a share. Cash from the 32.7%
discounted rights on last night's closing price will fund research and
development.

    Cost-cutting has saved 7 million in the past year. Its shares slipped 23/4p
to 221/2p.

    Boss leaves Future as it hits a high

    COMPUTER games magazines publisher The Future Network confirmed its
financial recovery today but said its chief operating officer Colin Morrison,
52, is leaving.

    Future pre-tax profits rose 22% to 1.1 million for the six months to the end
of June.

    END

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2003


                             591 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                               September 2, 2003

SECTION: C; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 438 words

HEADLINE: Top scientist slams pills that promise to cure all ills

BYLINE: ISABEL OAKESHOTT

BODY:


    A LEADING scientist today accused drugs companies of creating a generation
of pill poppers.

    Nobel prize-winning biologist Sydney Brenner says pharmaceutical giants are
encouraging patients to turn to drugs to treat basic problems they could cure
themselves.

    He fears drugs companies are misleading the public into believing
sophisticated new medicines are the answer to health problems such as obesity.

    Today he warned that a multi-millionpound drive to develop genetically
tailored medicines would simply boost drug companies' profits and called for
better public education.

    He said: "Everybody does what they like with their bodies and think the drug
companies or medical science will come to their rescue with a pill. That's the
standard assumption. What we may need is a new appraisal of the relationship of
all these things."

    Citing an "epidemic of obesity" in Europe and western America, he said: "I
found the gene for obesity years ago ...

    it's the gene that opens the mouth.

    People who have a tendency to get fat should go on a special diet, not
expect a pill to put them right."

    Professor Brenner's comments come after the Government announced a new drive
to develop gene therapy - research which involves identifying the link between
genes and ill-health and developing sophisticated new techniques to tackle
medical problems at the earliest possible stage. The Cambridge academic, who won
his Nobel Prize for research into the influence of genes on the development of
human organs, believes the government funding would be better invested in a
campaign of public education.

    Speaking about obesity on Radio 4's Today programme, he said: "Of course all
the drug companies are working hard on a pill, but effectively obesity is
self-induced.

    "If you look at everything that has been written on the nutritional value of
the foods that we are getting under the fast food industry, that's the pathology
of it. That's causing obesity ... and the lack of exercise and so on.

    "But that's treatable by health education - this is government spending
which would actually save more lives than anything else. Nobody is lobbying for
it, and that is why I think somebody right at the top has to sit down and say
this is going to be national policy."

    He added: "Everything is being driven into the support of the pharmaceutical
industry. There are two kinds of health care. There's taking care of the health
of the public and there's taking care of the financial health of the drug
companies.

    "I think now a lot of things are judged on their (commercial) applications
to this."

    END

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2003


                             619 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2003 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            June 25, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 258 words

HEADLINE: POUNDS 50M FOR NHS GENE MEDICINE

BYLINE: JILL PALMER, MEDICAL CORRESPONDENT

BODY:


    EVERY baby in Britain could be genetically screened at birth as part of a
pounds 50million health revolution unveiled by the Government yesterday.

    Doctors would be able to predict the child's future health from a tiny speck
of their genetic material.

    The Government will ask the Human Genetics Commission to consider the
possibility of every child's DNA profile being stored for future use as part of
the expansion of gene therapy and genetic testing.

    It paves the way for a future of hi-tech NHS medicine.

    But fears of a Brave New World emerging, with a genetic underclass, were
safeguarded by new laws making it illegal for anyone to be discriminated against
on the basis of their genetic characteristics. It will also be against the law
to test DNA without a person's consent.

    The potential use of genetics was outlined in a White Paper presented to
Parliament by Health Secretary John Reid.

    He said: "We are standing on the threshold of a revolution in healthcare."

    Plans include upgrading genetics labs, introducing genetics-based healthcare
into primary care and gene therapy research on single gene disorders, such as
cystic fibrosis.

    Baroness Helena Kennedy, head of the Human Genetics Commission welcomed the
paper, saying: "It clearly signals a major investment in genetics in the NHS."

    Prof Sir George Radda, of the Medical Research Council, said it would help
to uncover "genetic and environmental factors that lead to common conditions
including cancer, heart disease, diabetes and Alzheimer's".

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2003


                             620 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2003 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            June 25, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 136 words

HEADLINE: POUNDS 50M FOR GENETICS PROJECT

BYLINE: JILL PALMER MEDICAL CORRESPONDENT

BODY:


    EVERY baby in Britain could be genetically screened at birth as part of a
pounds 50million health revolution unveiled by the Government yesterday.

    Doctors would be able to predict the child's future health from a tiny speck
of their genetic material.

    The Government will ask the Human Genetics Commission to consider storing
every child's DNA profile for future use as part of the expansion of gene
therapy and genetic testing.

    But fears of the information being exploited were safeguarded by new laws
making it illegal for anyone to be discriminated against on the basis of their
genetic characteristics.

    It will also be against the law to test DNA without a person's consent.

    The potential use of genetics was outlined in a White Paper presented to
Parliament by Health Secretary John Reid.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2003


                             621 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 June 24, 2003

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 239 words

HEADLINE: MOVE FOR GENETIC SCREENING AT BIRTH

BYLINE: Isabel Oakeshott;Geraint Smith

BODY:


    EVERY baby in Britain could be genetically screened at birth as part of a
health revolution unveiled by the Government today.

    In a major development which would transform health care, the plan would see
every child's DNA profile stored for future use.

    Testing could be used to predict whether someone was likely to develop a
disease such as cystic fibrosis later in life. Experts say the development could
help treat a third of life-threatening diseases by 2015. The Government will ask
the Human Genetics Commission to consider the question as part of a massive
expansion of gene therapy and genetic testing heralded today as a revolution in
health care by Tony Blair.

    The Prime Minister threw his weight behind new research which could
transform the way diseases are treated, claiming groundbreaking techniques
including gene therapy and genetic testing marked the dawn of a "golden age" of
medical progress.

    Health Secretary Dr John Reid told the Commons: "We are standing on the
threshold of a revolution in healthcare. By working together, by building on our
strengths, by making the necessary investment and careful preparations now, I
believe that genetics can deliver real and lasting benefits in health and
healthcare for all of us."

    The first licensed gene therapy could be on stream within five to 10 years.

    But some experts have warned that testing could lead to a "genetic
underclass".


LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2003


                             622 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 June 24, 2003

SECTION: Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1351 words

HEADLINE: £50m boost for genetics as Blair heralds 'golden age'

BYLINE: Geraint Smith;Isabel Oakeshott

BODY:


    A REVOLUTION in health care brought about by advances in genetic science was
today heralded by Tony Blair.

    As £50million was announced to push the science forward, the Prime Minister
threw his weight behind new research which could transform the way diseases are
treated. He claimed that groundbreaking techniques including gene therapy and
genetic testing marked the dawn of a "golden age" of medical progress.

    The Prime Minister made the comments in a statement on the day a White Paper
is published which sets out how the public will benefit from dramatic advances
in genetics.

    He said: "It will make an enormous difference to the way we deliver health
care. I think it will change the whole way we deliver health care in this
country."

    Mr Blair predicted a transformation in the way diseases are treated and
preparations are made for future healthcare problems. But he warned: "It will
also raise a whole series of ethical issues. There are tremendous opportunities
in it but there are also some risks."

    Mr Blair was hosting a breakfast seminar for 25 genetics experts at Downing
Street. He said the White Paper, presented by Health Secretary John Reid, would
set out how the Government would invest in genetic science and make sure it was
used to the best advantage for the NHS.

    The White Paper is designed to help the Government keep pace with
extraordinary advances when ministers fear being "left trailing". They are
keenly aware that scientific developments such as techniques to identify whether
embryos are healthy have sparked public concern that they could pave the way for
"designer babies" and a genetic "super-class".

    But ministers believe latest advances could help cure up to a third of
life-threatening diseases including heart disease and cancer and want Britain to
be at the forefront of the revolution. The White Paper sets out plans to spend
£50 million upgrading laboratories, recruiting more geneticists, cutting genetic
testing times and improving public awareness.

    It is intended to ensure Britain stays at the forefront of the gene therapy,
which involves replacing faulty genes which cause illnesses such as cystic
fibrosis with a perfect version.

    The techniques have so far been used in only a handful of cases, largely
restricted to conditions present at birth.

    Many experts believe that by 2015 the principle could be helping to treat a
third of lifethreatening diseases, including heart disease and almost all
cancers, which are caused by faults in or damage to DNA.

    The paper is expected to clarify the law involving "designer babies". It
also contains a provision to make "stealing" DNA an offence and to require the
consent of both parents to genetic testing of children. There will be safeguards
to ensure insurers and employers do not discriminate against those whose genetic
makeup indicates potential health problems.

    London's leading genetics institutions and hospitals welcomed the White
Paper, saying that it could save hundreds of lives every year.

    In particular, they praised the new funding for genetic tests to help
identify 100,000 sufferers from familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH), inherited
high blood cholesterol. Male sufferers have 10 times the average risk of early
heart attack.

    The Institute for Child Health and Great Ormond Street Hospital for Sick
Children, University College London and its Hospital, the Royal FreeUCL Medical
School, St George's Medical School and Imperial College made a joint statement
as members of the London IDEAS genetic knowledge park. "This is just the sort of
practical project, based on the new genetic understanding, that will bring real
health benefits to patients in the UK and genuine savings for the NHS," said
London IDEAS chief executive and FH expert, Professor Steve Humphries. "By early
treatment we could prevent hundreds of heart attack events a year."

    Designer baby rules set out

    THE PAPER reasserts the authority of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology
Authority (HFEA) to rule on the issues surrounding so-called "designer babies".

    In fact, the main issue is when it is permissible for a couple to select an
embryo they believe will cure another sibling of a genetic disease.

    The determination to legislate follows the case of the Hashmi family, who
wanted to select an embryo for another child in order to get a perfect tissue
match to obtain stem cells that would cure their son Zain of the rare blood
disorder thalassaemia.

    The HFEA gave permission, on the grounds that there were no other suitable
donors, and no other means of treatment.

    But the High Court ruled in favour of an antiabortion group which claimed
that the HFEA had no legal authority in the case.

    The Court of Appeal overturned that decision this year.

    However, it has also been highlighted by the case of British-born Jamie
Whitaker, whose parents were forced to have IVF treatment in the US because the
rules here forbade the selection of an embryo in his particular case.

    Jamie was genetically matched while still an IVF embryo to his four-year-old
brother Charlie, who suffers from Diamond Blackfan anaemia. This dramatically
increases the risk of cancer and treatment includes painful injections every
night.

    As with thalassaemia, the new treatment involves taking stem cells from the
umbilical blood of a sibling with the right immunity genes. Unlike thalassaemia,
however, Diamond Blackfan is not necessarily hereditary. It may occur randomly,
and the family fell on the wrong side of the current rules that guide the HFEA
in its decisions.

    Curing fatal diseases

    TREATMENTS for diseases with a genetic element are being developed - among
them killers such as heart disease and prostate, breast and bowel cancers.

    Other treatments are being researched for diseases including muscular
dystrophy and a wide range of rare congenital conditions.

    One of these, "baby in a bubble" syndrome, results from a genetic mutation
that knocks out a vital part of the immune system.

    Research was set back last year by two cases in which children contracted
leukaemia while under treatment.

    Nevertheless, Great Ormond Street hospital said today it remained "excited
about the techniques", adding: "Although we only treat children with gene
therapy who have no suitable bone marrow donors, it is already an important
extra weapon."

    Creating an underclass

    IT IS currently illegal for insurers or employers to use DNA tests as part
of their selection process either for cover or for a job.

    This ban runs out in 2006.

    There are fears that if it expires without any further provision, a "genetic
underclass" could be created - those who are uninsurable or unemployable because
of their genetic makeup.

    Faulty genes are behind many of the most commonly fatal or debilitating
diseases, combining with lifestyle and environment to increase risk dramatically
above average. The likelihood of developing heart disease, cancers, high blood
pressure and a whole range of other conditions could in theory be tested.

    The cost of testing, currently prohibitively expensive, is likely to drop
significantly as technology brings about a single genome-wide test that could be
used routinely in a GP's surgery, and certainly by large corporations.

    Theft of DNA samples THE theft of DNA will be made an offence.

    This is partly intended to prevent a sample being obtained without the
consent of both parents from a child whose parentage is at issue.

    At present, fathers who suspect that a child is not theirs can take a sample
of DNA - which could be something as innocuous as saliva - without the consent
of the child's mother. The practice is frowned upon, but is not yet illegal.

    It would also protect the medical secrets of celebrities, perceived as being
under threat from increasingly sophisticated genetic tests. These could make a
moistening of saliva on a stolen napkin ever more revealing about parentage or
personality traits.

    Removing a used napkin for this purpose without consent would become an
offence.


GRAPHIC: GENETIC MATCH: CHARLIE WHITAKER CRADLES HIS NEW BROTHER WHO WAS
ARTIFICIALLY CONCEIVED IN THE US

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2003


                             630 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2003 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             May 15, 2003, Thursday

SECTION: M HEALTH; Pg. 32,33

LENGTH: 1398 words

HEADLINE: BREATHE A SIGH OF RELIEF;
 ONE IN EIGHT CHILDREN NOW HAVE ASTHMA, BUT DOCTORS ARE CONFIDENT THE

BYLINE: PAT HAGAN

HIGHLIGHT:
RECOVERY: Taking supplements has helped Lynn

BODY:


    NEARLY everyone knows Paula Radcliffe is the fastest female marathon runner
in the world. But few realise that she suffers from asthma.

    Her refusal to be beaten by her illness is matched by the dogged
determination of scientists to find an asthma cure.

    Although it remains one of the most common conditions in Britain - affecting
an estimated eight million people - medics have made great strides in recent
years in understanding the disease.

    Ten years ago, doctors were baffled by what was behind the asthma epidemic
sweeping Britain. Today, it's known that a complex mixture of genes,
environment, diet and lifestyle dictates who gets it - and how badly.

    With vaccines being developed, new drugs in the pipeline and more being
learned about the role of diet, there is now genuine hope that future
generations need not suffer in the same way as today's asthma victims.

    "I think this could be the most important decade so far for asthma because
we could have some fundamental advances," says Professor Martyn Partridge, chief
medical adviser to the National Asthma Campaign.

    "We'll also have a better understanding of how to use medications we already
have and a clearer idea of how to prevent the onset of asthma."

    So what developments are likely to affect treatment in the future?

    VACCINES

    Scientists at the National Heart and Lung Institute in London are pioneering
a prototype vaccine against cat allergies, which trigger attacks in over half
the UK's 1.5 million children with asthma.

    It works by desensitising the body to the effects of cat allergens. The
experimental jab is made from peptides extracted from the main cat allergen, but
it's hoped it could eventually be applied to other allergens, including pollen
and dust mites. Around 60 patients have so far been immunised, with promising
results.

    A similar treatment called immunotherapy is already used in a few cases, for
example against grass pollen allergy. But it requires a long course of
injections and uses a high dose of allergen that can be unsafe.

    SKIN PATCHES

    The world's first skin patch for asthma is already in use in Japan and could
be available in the UK in the next few years.

    Tiny crystals containing anti-asthma drugs dissolve slowly, releasing steady
amounts of medicine into the body. The big advantage is that this constant
supply stops the highs and lows you get with oral medicines and reduces the risk
of night-time attacks, especially in children. LUNG PROBES

    Canadian doctors are in the early stages of testing a drug-free treatment
called bronchial thermoplasty. Tiny probes are placed inside the lungs to emit
radio waves. These heat up the surrounding muscles that are responsible for the
symptoms of asthma, providing relief from wheezing and shortness of breath.

    In an asthma attack the smooth muscles that line the inside of the lungs
constrict, narrowing the airways. But the heat from the tiny transmitters
relaxes these muscles, making it easier to breathe.

    DRUG TESTERS

    Another new device recently approved for use in the UK can test a patient's
breath to see if asthma drugs are working properly. When GPs prescribe drugs to
reduce lung inflammation, there's no way of knowing if they have got the dose
right.

    If they haven't the patient's asthma may get worse before it gets better.
The new device, called the NIOX system, measures nitric oxide in the breath. The
higher the nitric oxide, the worse the inflammation. The instant readings mean
the dose can be increased, easing the patient's suffering.

    BETTER DRUGS

    Although inhaling steroid drugs works well for some patients, only about 20
per cent actually reaches the inner lining of the lungs, where asthma causes
inflammation. The rest either ends up in the mouth or in the blood stream, where
they can cause side effects. But British researchers have discovered that using
bigger drug particles gives more chance of treating the affected parts. Tests
showed larger particles attached themselves to the inflamed areas of the lung,
while smaller ones often passed straight through and into the bloodstream. The
findings could mean patients need only one-tenth of the dose they currently
inhale.

    EATING FISH

    One of the most exciting areas of asthma research in recent years has
involved diet. For example, Britain's fish consumption has slumped in the last
30 years while asthma has risen and some scientists believe there may be a link.
Cambridge University researchers recently found regularly eating oily fish
protects against asthma as healthy omega-3 fatty acids appear to ward off lung
inflammation. However, you should eat only one portion a week as it can contain
harmful dioxins.

    GENE THERAPY

    Up to 40 per cent of asthma cases may be due to a gene which scientists have
named ADAM33. Carriers of the gene are much more at risk of the disease. But
scientists are now exploring ways of replacing defective genes with healthy
genes to see if they can one day 'cure' those with very severe asthma. The work
is still at an early stage.

    VITAMIN INTAKE

    Pregnant women who eat food rich in vitamin E, such as vegetable oils, leafy
green vegetables and nuts, may be able to prevent their children getting asthma.
Studies at Aberdeen University show it can make infants less sensitive to common
allergens like pollen and dust mites. Other studies show school kids who eat
apples, oranges and kiwi suffer less wheezing because the antioxidants help
fight off inflammatory lung disease.

    LOSING WEIGHT

    Evidence exists that the obesity epidemic is linked with asthma and some
doctors now believe changing unhealthy diets could cut the number of new cases.
A British study of 15,000 youngsters found the heaviest children were most at
risk. It remains unclear though, which comes first - whether asthmatic children
get fat because they can't exercise, or those already overweight develop
respiratory problems as a result of their obesity.

    ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES

    Once scorned by mainstream medicine, evidence'Diet got rid of my asthma'

    Lynn Ferguson was diagnosed with asthma in her early 30s and put on a daily
regime of drugs to control it.

    "My doctor gave me two inhalers - a preventer and a reliever - antihistamine
tablets and a steroid nasal spray, told me there was no cure and said I should
follow advice to keep it under control," says Lynn, 42, from near Warrington in
Cheshire.

    But last summer Lynn read about the potential health benefits of
antioxidants and essential fatty acids. She began taking supplements containing
isoflavones and green-lipped mussel as well as a daily dose of cod liver oil.

    After three months she noticed a dramatic improvement. Lynn went from taking
inhaled steroids twice a day to not needing them at all - apart from one
occasion earlier this year when she developed a chest infection.

    "I'm now almost cured with just occasional wheezing attacks," says Lynn, who
is a trained chiropodist but now spends her time running a website for 1st
Vitality, which promotes the use of supplements in asthma.

    "I will still follow my doctor's advice and use conventional medicine to
treat my asthma but only when I need to, like when I get a chest infection." is
mounting that alternative remedies can have an impact in controlling asthma.
Yoga is helpful, particularly a form known as Sahaja, which involves long
periods of meditation. Research in Australia last year showed it resulted in
fewer attacks and made sufferers more tolerant to usual triggers, probably by
reducing stress hormones.

    DUST BUSTING

    A study by the University of Strathclyde has shown that, for about pounds
500, most homes could be free of the dust and allergens that trigger asthma. At
68 homes they steamcleaned carpets, put in protective bedding and fitted special
fans - called mechanical heat-recovery ventilation fans - to suck out damp,
polluted air and replace it with drier fresh air. The volunteers cut their
asthma-related visits to the GP by over 60 per cent and significantly reduced
their use of prescription drugs.

    GETTING HELP

    National Asthma Campaign Helpline 0845 701 0203; www.asthma.org.uk

    British Wheel of Yoga, 25 Jermyn Street, Sleaford, Lincs NG34 7RU Tel: 01529
306 851 www.bwy.org.uk

    Ist Vitality (supplements for asthma) www.1stvitality.co.uk/ contact.htm
Tel: 01928 797 044

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2003


                             640 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2003 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             April 21, 2003, Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 138 words

HEADLINE: DIABETES 'CURE FIND'

BODY:


    HOPES for diabetics were raised yesterday after scientists announced they
had cured mice of the disease.

    Researchers used gene therapy to enable the livers of the affected mice to
generate insulin.

    Insulin is the hormone which limit blood sugar levels and helps glucose
enter cells to fuel them.

    Diabetes occurs when the body does not produce enough insulin or it does not
respond to the hormone normally.

    In the tests, a virus was used to carry a gene in the mouse liver cells
which made them into insulin generating cells.

    The gene partially corrected the condition but when a chemical was
introduced to encourage growth in the cells, the mice were completely cured for
four months.

    Professor Lawrence Chan, of the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston,
Texas, said: "It's a proof of principle."

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2003


                             642 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2003 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            April 17, 2003, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 41

LENGTH: 981 words

HEADLINE: DR MIRIAM STOPPARD'S HEALTH FOCUS TODAY: PARKINSON'S DISEASE, PART 2

BYLINE: MIRIAM STOPPARD

HIGHLIGHT:
BATTLE: Ex-world heavweight boxing champion; Muhammad Ali now has Parkinson's

BODY:


    A MULTITUDE of treatments is available to help people with Parkinson's lead
what, in many cases, can be a normal life.

    There are also many services at your disposal, so find out about them.

    One of the most promising new approaches is deep brain stimulation, as
Miriam explains.

    Keep up the fight..

    THE best treatment for most people with Parkinson's is still drug therapy,
but in recent years there has been renewed interest in surgical techniques.

    Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a form of surgery used to treat some of the
symptoms of Parkinson's.

    During this procedure a wire is implanted into one of three target sites in
the brain.

    The implantation is done in most centres under local anaesthetic with the
patient awake.

    The wire is then connected to a small unit, an Implantable Pulse Generator
(IPG), which is fixed under the skin in the chest, rather like a pacemaker,
often with only a local anaesthetic.

    When the stimulator is switched on, electrical signals are sent to the brain
to stop or reduce the Parkinson's symptoms.

    DBS is a safe long-term treatment with good results - at present the battery
in the IPG usually lasts for about four to five years,

    There are other treatments which give long-term support in everyday life.

    Physiotherapy

    THERE are several ways a physiotherapist can give help people with
Parkinson's:

    STRETCHES to strengthen muscles and joints.

    WORKING to improve or maintain muscle strength.

    TEACHING techniques that help to make some movements more automatic.

    HELPING to maintain independence in daily life.

    HELPING to prevent circulatory problems.

    MAINTAINING or improving effective breathing.

    Occupational therapy

    THIS helps with:

    PERSONAL care - getting dressed, cleaning teeth, shopping, washing, bathing.

    PRODUCTIVITY - paid or unpaid work and housework.

    LEISURE - sports, hobbies and social life.

    LATEST RESEARCH PACKS A PUNCH

    AS well as continuing development of new drugs for Parkinson's, there are
other areas where research is under way.

    Gene therapy

    GENE therapy is a new approach to treating medical conditions, which can be
described as the use of genes as drugs.

    It works by introducing normal genes into people with certain disorders, to
overcome the effects of faulty genes that may have a part to play in the
development of the condition.

    Gene therapy can also be used to treat disorders where the genetic cause
isn't known, such as Parkinson's.

    HOW can therapeutic genes be delivered into the brains of people with
Parkinson's?

    TO transfer therapeutic genetic material into the brains of sufferers,
researchers are using a carrier virus called adenovirus. Viruses are the
smallest known type of infectious agents and, if harmless, can also be used as
carriers of genes around the body to a particular place.

    Before they can be used as carriers, the ability of the virus to cause
infection must be stopped, so they can carry the therapeutic materials around
the body safely.

    WHO will be suitable for gene therapy?

    Initially, gene therapy won't be suitable for everyone.

    It will be used to treat people who have had Parkinson's for several years
and whose symptoms aren't well controlled using currently available medications.

    Stem cell research

    STEM cell research uses cells from an embryo, implanting them in the brain
to replace dopamine cells that have died, thereby reversing the progress of
Parkinson's.

    Despite setbacks in recent surgical trials, it's still one of the approaches
that continues to offer early evidence and real hope of a breakthrough in
treatment for Parkinson's in the longer term.

    Brain growth factor

    A PIONEERING new surgical treatment for Parkinson's, using a nerve growth
factor, GDNF, has markedly improved symptoms in all five people with Parkinson's
who took part in a pilot study at Bristol.

    The operation begins with the implantation of a thin plastic tube into part
of the brain known as the putamen.

    The tube is linked to a pump placed in the patient's abdomen, which each day
delivers GDNF

    into the brain. All five of the study's patients showed improvements in
their symptoms after the operation.

    Indeed, the team who performed the surgery and monitored the patients were
surprised how quickly the patients responded.

    They had expected to wait months or even years to see any effect, but two
patients responded within a month.

    So the outlook is really promising.

    Parkinson's Disease Society, 215 Vauxhall Bridge Road, London SW1V 1EJ. For
an information pack tel: 020 7931 8080 or to speak to a specialist nurse, tel:
0808 800 0303. Website www.parkinsons.org.uk.

    FOR further reading, Family Health Guide, by Dr Miriam Stoppard, is
available from Mirror Direct on 0870 07 03 200, price pounds 22.50 including
postage and packing.

    FACTS OF THE CASE

    1 Will I die from Parkinson's?

    PARKINSON'S by itself doesn't cause people to die.

    With the treatment now available to treat Parkinson's, life expectancy is
fairly normal and none of the drugs that are used for Parkinson's have any
serious side effects that could cause death.

    2 Is Parkinson's inherited?

    THERE'S no conclusive evidence that Parkinson's is a hereditary condition
which can be passed on within families.

    It's rare to find more than one person in a family who has Parkinson's.

    3 How is Parkinson's diagnosed?

    IT isn't easy to diagnose Parkinson's as there are no special tests.

    Diagnosis is usually based on medical history and an examination by a
doctor.

    4 Can complementary therapies help?

    THERE'S very little scientific evidence about their benefits for

    people with Parkinson's.

    However, many people with Parkinson's find some of them helpful for postural
control, fitness, relaxation, social intervention and personal development.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2003


                             648 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 April 4, 2003

SECTION: Pg. 46

LENGTH: 1161 words

HEADLINE: Britain's red brigade;
Investors keep faith with the companies that have never made any profits

BYLINE: Dominic Prince

BODY:


    THEY must be Britain's most optimistic investors, the shareholders in
Telewest, the cable TV company whose shares have slumped from more than £5 to
less than 3p.

    They have seen their company lurch from one crisis to another and devour en
route £4 billion of shareholder funds. Now the shareholders, following yet
another refinancing, are about to be wiped out.

    As one Telewest adviser pointed out, there are maybe some tax advantages for
some shareholders in losing lots of money but there are unlikely to be £4
billion worth of advantages.

    For Telewest shareholders, the seats at Arsenal Football Club that the
company still maintains may seem like an extravagance, but then if you've lost
more than £4 billion what is the point of scrimping on the odd bit of
hospitality?

    So what is the attraction with loss-making companies?

    Although one of the biggest, Telewest is by no means the only corporate
horror story.

    Remarkably, there are nearly 300 quoted companies that have never produced a
profit.

    While a good proportion of those are internet-related, there are others
where reality appears to have devoured expectation years ago. Is it a case of
one being born every minute?

    Take, for instance, Dublin-based Alltracel Pharmaceuticals which raised
£300,000 on the Alternative Investment Market in order, among other things, to
manufacture and distribute cotton-wool stoppings for pulled teeth.

    Incorporated in 1963, it has never made a penny despite trying very hard
indeed.

    But Alltracel is by no means the worst offender. Aberdeen Football Club was
incorporated as long ago as 1903 and has not managed to produce a profit since
joining the Stock Exchange in 2000, or indeed before that.

    However, both companies are tiny in comparison with Telewest, one of those
rare loss-making companies that joined the ranks of the FTSE 100 index, if only
for a short while, and then left it pretty promptly after it became apparent
that there was little prospect of it ever making any money.

    Things at Telewest may well be improving but it is a long, long way from
producing a profit. However, digging holes in the ground, as Telewest does, is
an almost certain way of losing money.

    The shareholders in Colt Telecom must be a pretty patient lot, too, because
despite being in the FTSE 250, it also has never produced a profit. Indeed, Colt
has so far chalked up losses of more than £660 million. But this is nothing in
comparison with British Sky Broadcasting.

    Rupert Murdoch's baby has hardly been a star performer and although more
than seven million homes are now able to receive Sky, to date the company has
lost more than £2 billion. It seems that putting satellites into space is nearly
as costly as digging up the roads.

    But there is one company that dwarfs all others in its ability to lose
money. It may one day make a profit but in the interim it is burdened with
losses of more than £18 billion. Top of the list of loss-makers is Vodafone, and
it has probably never dug a hole since its formation in the early 1980s.

    Ironically, at the height of the dot com boom, Vodafone was the largest
company in Europe.

    So why do institutions and individuals stick with companies that are
seemingly such basket cases - why bother?

    Algy Cluff, former owner of The Spectator and now chairman of AIM-listed
Cluff Mining, thinks he knows. It is all about having faith in the management.
Cluff Mining has not made a profit since its formation in 1996.

    It has just devoured money.

    Cluff agrees that this is the case but says: "This is money that we put into
the ground to find gold and platinum, money subscribed by shareholders for
drilling programmes. We work on long lead times and we are into discovery, not
acquisition." Investing in these companies is rather like investing in a
racehorse. They keep eating money and depreciating in value but if you hit the
jackpot and the nag wins the Derby, you'll be in for a very big pay day indeed.

    The difference is that rather than gambling millions on the parentage of a
horse and the ability of a trainer to get the thing to run like the clappers,
you are gambling millions on the ability and integrity of management. Not always
a wise move.

    There are some companies where management undoubtedly lives high on the hog
in the knowledge that shareholders will continue to stump up and throw good
money after bad.

    But former finance director of SelecTV and now media dealmaker Ian Buckley
says: "There is a logic to investing in these outfits but you have to have your
ear very much to the ground. HIT Entertainment is a good example. It lost money
for years and years and then along came Bob the Builder and, whoosh, it has paid
back in spades. That would have been a fantastic investment."

    Patrick Evershed at New Star Asset Management concurs with this view: "I
often have a minute exposure to loss-making companies because I hope to see the
share price rise exceptionally sharply. It is all a matter of risk and reward.
The potential has to be very exceptional."

    One of Evershed's better investments in this category was also a media
outfit, lossmaking outdoor advertising company MAI Group.

    "Over 30 years ago, I invested in Mills & Allen when it was in a hopeless
mess and losing money. I could see it had a lot of potential and very good
management. I made hundreds of times my money," he says.

    "I also invest in drug companies for the same reason. For example, I have a
small holding in Oxford Biomedica, where the capitalisation is a mere £17
million. This company could be worth £1 billion or more. It is engaged in
developing gene therapies. If any of these therapies were to be taken up by a
major drugs company, it could earn £100 million or more in royalties every year.

    EVERSHED adds: "This could give the company a market capitalisation of £1
billion or more, a significant uplift from the present valuation. I am also
invested in GW Pharmaceuticals, which is close to a deal for a treatment for
multiple sclerosis. Here again the royalties could be large in relation to the
present market cap."

    Bob the Builder, gene therapies and gold in the ground can change the
fortunes of a company overnight but, for the most part, loss-making companies
will remain just that.

    Philip Beresford, wealth watcher and compiler of the Sunday Times Rich List
says: "Clearly in many of these cases, it represents extreme optimism taking
precedent over cold logic, which is not usually a happy or a profitable route
for investors to follow, even more so in these troubled times. The people who
invest in these companies are either very naive or mad or both."

    Bear trader Simon Cawkwell (aka Evil Knievil) is for once optimistic. "These
companies that continue to lose money are doomed. The ones that pay dividends
and make real profits will be seen in a more favourable light in future.

    They should all be re-rated."


GRAPHIC: MISSES AND A HIT: DERBY SPONSOR VODAFONE TOPS THE LOSS-MAKERS WHILE
ABERDEEN FC HAS YET TO MAKE A PROFIT, BUT BOB THE BUILDER DUG UP RICHES FOR HIT

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2003


                             659 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2003 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                           February 28, 2003, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 120 words

HEADLINE: PARTY FOR DNA 50TH BIRTHDAY

HIGHLIGHT:
FIND: Double helix

BODY:


    THE two scientists who discovered DNA will today meet for a pint in the pub
where they announced their findings 50 years ago.

    Francis Crick and James Watson have invited other academics to the Eagle in
Cambridge to mark the anniversary.

    Mr Watson, 75, said: "We made the discovery of the century, that was pretty
clear.

    "We made it and I guess time has justified people paying all this respect to
me in spite of my bad manners."

    Prof Andrew Lever, medical studies chief at Cambridge University, will host
the get-together to discuss gene therapy which could offer a cure for a host of
diseases.

    Nobel prize winners Crick and Watson identified the double helix model of
DNA while studying genes.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2003


                             664 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                February 4, 2003

SECTION: Pg. 18

LENGTH: 608 words

HEADLINE: Our award helps high school to specialise in science;
Winners reveal how they have used their Evening Standard prize money

BYLINE: Tim Miles

BODY:


    YOUNG scientists of the future are finding inspiration thanks to the Evening
Standard London School Awards.

    As a result of being among the winners last year, Preston Manor High School
in Brent was chosen by ministers to become one of Britain's first four
specialist science colleges, with extra Government cash for new facilities.

    It was also picked to pilot the unique Inspire experiment, funded by drugs
giant GlaxoSmithKline. The project puts scientific researchers into the
classroom in the hope that more teenagers will be inspired to continue science
studies into the sixth form and at university. Now scientist Dr Neil Mellor
divides his time between research into gene therapy at London's Imperial
College, and teaching fifth-formers.

    Head teacher Andrea Berkeley said: "The children understand they have a real
scientist in front of them, who can take them beyond the limits of the
curriculum."

    Our awards celebrate the achievements of London's best state schools, and
Preston Manor was one of four winners last year.

    Michael Faraday Primary School in Southwark won for its outstanding
achievement in difficult circumstances, fighting the impact of poverty and
deprivation - as did Preston Manor. The Grey Coat Hospital School inWestminster,
and St Barnabas and St Philip's CE Primary in Kensington received awards for
academic excellence.

    Tomorrow we will announce this year's winners, in the fifth year of the
awards. They will share a £20,000 prize, with the primary schools each receiving
£3,000 and the secondaries £7,000, reflecting their larger pupil numbers.

    Each winner is chosen from a shortlist compiled by the Government's
education watchdog, Ofsted. The full list of excellent schools is published in
next week's annual report by chief schools inspector David Bell. In choosing
each winner, we are guided by what inspection reports say about the quality of
teaching at the school, as well as the most recent test and exam results.

    Education Secretary Charles Clarke today gave his backing to our awards.

    He said: "The use to which Preston Manor High School and all of last year's
winners have put their prize money illustrates the benefits of giving schools
freedom to use cash in the way they want to. The London School Awards do more
than celebrate the very best in schools throughout the capital. They encourage
all schools to do better. The Evening Standard can be proud of the role it
plays.

    "These awards allow us to salute those pupils and schools which in the past
have not had sufficient credit for the work they do."

    Ms Berkeley said Preston Manor put its prize towards the £50,000 in
sponsorship needed to back its bid for specialist college status, under which
schools receive £500,000 from the Government over four years to develop their
specialist subject.

    OUR other school award winners last year have also put the prize money to
work for the benefit of their pupils:

    i At Grey Coat Hospital School the staff, parents and children voted to fund
new outside seating areas in the cramped grounds. "We didn't have any proper
accommodation for the girls at lunchtime when the weather is nice," said head
teacher Rachel Allard.

    i Every Michael Faraday Primary pupil was asked to suggest what to buy and
the result is a new computer suite. "We felt it was brilliant that a school like
ours was recognised as doing a good job," said head teacher Karen Fowler.

    i St Barnabas and St Philip's CE School head Stelle Beavers said: "It was
decided that buying books for the school library was the best way to give all
the children access to their reward."


GRAPHIC: APPLIANCE OF SCIENCE: DR NEIL MELLOR OF IMPERIAL COLLEGE, WITH PRESTON
MANOR HIGH SCHOOL PUPILS

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2003


                             685 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2002 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            October 4, 2002, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 72 words

HEADLINE: GENE BOY CELL SCARE

BODY:


    A CHILD believed cured of bubble boy syndrome by gene therapy has developed
a disease similar to leukaemia.

    Now some gene trials on US children have stopped. But doctors at Great
Ormond Street Hospital in London said their studies would continue.

    The boy, three, is one of three in France with successful cell implants for
immunodeficiency. Without them, victims can live only in sterile bubbles to
prevent infection.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             686 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2002 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            October 4, 2002, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 136 words

HEADLINE: PLEASE BE GENE-ROUS

BYLINE: Nick Henegan

HIGHLIGHT:
BIRTHDAY BOY: Rhys celebrates with mum Marie and Bob the Builder

BODY:


    THE mother of a toddler saved by revolutionary gene therapy last night urged
the UK to dress down to change lives.

    Marie Evans said cash raised by today's Jeans for Genes Day will help dozens
of children like her son Rhys.

    The brave lad started life in a sterile bubble after being born without an
immune system.

    But Rhys, who celebrated his second birthday this week, is now free thanks
to gene therapy in April.

    Marie, 31, of Caerphilly, south Wales, said: "Rhys can't stop smiling. The
treatment wouldn't have been possible without public money."

    Her plea came on the day a child who was given the same treatment in France
developed leukaemia.

    The Paris trial has now been suspended while doctors investigate possible
side effects.

    Marie said: "We feel for the family in France."

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             687 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                October 3, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 2

LENGTH: 52 words

HEADLINE: Cancer fear on gene therapy

BODY:


    A PIONEERING gene treatment trial at Great Ormond Street Hospital is to be
reviewed after a child having similar therapy in France developed leukaemia.

    The French trial has been halted. The Health Department said the UK trial,
involving two children, can continue but only under close monitoring.


LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             692 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2002 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            August 1, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: M HEALTH; Pg. 31,32,33

LENGTH: 2170 words

HEADLINE: M HEALTH: DYING FOR A MIRACLE;
 NICKY IS 28 AND HAS CYSTIC FIBROSIS. SHE SPENDS SIX HOURS A DAY TAKING
MEDICATION TO PROTECT HER LUNGS. AS DOCTORS RACE TO FIND A CURE, NICKY BATTLES
DAILY WITH HER CONDITION KNOWING THAT SHE MAY ONLY HAVE FIVE YEARS TO LIVE...

BYLINE: Hilary Freeman

BODY:


    NICKY West is remarkably calm about the condition which is slowly killing
her.

    "If you saw me on the street on a good day, you'd think I was a perfectly
normal, attractive and outgoing young woman.

    "You wouldn't be able to tell I take 50 tablets every day, spend three hours
undergoing treatment each morning and often find it hard to walk up a flight of
stairs. You certainly wouldn't realise that I'm dying.

    "But the harsh reality is this - short of a medical miracle, I will almost
certainly die within the next five years. I will never grow old. It's unlikely I
will even make it to my mid-30s."

    Nicky lives in Wimbledon, South-West London, with her long-term partner
Mark.

    Cystic fibrosis (CF) is genetic and attacks the lungs and digestive system,
clogging them with a thick mucous which makes it difficult to breathe and
digest.

    Doctors have identified the CF gene and need just five years and pounds
15million to find a cure. And this week Tesco has launched a fund raising
campaign - see how you can help opposite. An average day for Nicky starts at
5.30am when her boyfriend Mark gets up for work.

    She says: "I wake up and talk to him for an hour and then I go back to
sleep. I wake up properly at 8.30am and use my nebuliser for 10 minutes to open
my airways. It is by the window with a tube leading outside so no one else
inhales the antibiotic fumes. "Then I inhale steroids to help with my wheezing,
before starting my physiotherapy. I do deep breathing exercises.

    I follow this with huffing, manoeuvring my body into different positions to
bring up the mucous. "Exhausted, I use my nebuliser to inhale antibiotics for
another 15 minutes. After a break for breakfast, I take 20 tablets, a mix of
enzymes, antibiotics, vitamins, liver and lung medication. Then it's back on the
nebuliser to inhale a drug which breaks down mucous in my lungs. "I shower and
dress, then use the nebuliser again.

    A grand total of three hours. Then every afternoon at 3.30pm I do it all
over again. That's why I can no longer work - treating my CF has become a
full-time job. "The rest of my day has to be carefully timetabled around my
treatments. On Mondays I do my weekly shop, on Tuesdays I have Italian lessons
and on Fridays, singing lessons.

    And if I have time, I'll do voluntary work for the CF Trust. "It's important
to me to get out as much as I can but it's exhausting. "Mark comes home at 6pm
and we spend the evening together. If I'm up to it, I'll cook us a meal, nothing
too spicy because it hurts my stomach. Like any other couple, we'll chat or
watch TV. "We don't talk about the fact I'm going to die. I'm not entirely sure
if he's really accepted it. It must have been hard to choose to be with someone
he won't grow old with. "Early in our relationship, I said if you can't cope,
get out now.

    He decided to stay. He's watched me decline and I hope he'll still be
therewhen I need 24-hour care. Every six weeks, I take intravenous (IV)
antibiotics. This means going into hospital to have a line inserted in my arm.
I've had this so many times my veins are starting to get blocked. And the
antibiotics are so powerful they can cause deafness or kidney disease. "My life
hasn't always been like this. Unusually, I wasn't diagnosed with CF until I was
six years old. My mother knew something wasn't right when I was a baby because I
kept throwing up my milk, but the doctors just treated her like a neurotic,
first-time mother. It was only after years of repeated hospital visits that an
astute doctor suspected CF.

    "I was too young to understand and my parents didn't treat me any
differently. In retrospect, I don't think they knew how serious it was. All I
knew was that suddenly I had to sprinkle a bitter, chemical-tasting powder all
over my food. I now know it was an enzyme supplement. People with CF can't
absorb fats so don't get the nutrients they need. "When I was 11, my GP sent me
to hospital and the CF specialist said I had lung damage. I was given IV
antibiotics and taught how to give myself physiotherapy. "It was a huge shock
suddenly to need daily treatment but I was lucky - 62 per cent of CF sufferers
die before adulthood but I was still relatively healthy into my teens.

    "Amazingly, I excelled at sports and became captain of the netball and
tennis teams. I was 18 before I needed another course of IV antibiotics. "I
never hid my CF from my friends or classmates. Being open helped me cope. I
can't remember any cruel comments, maybe because I was so well and didn't have
to miss school. At about 13 I found a tiny science book in my local library. I
took it home and sat on my bed reading it. I didn't understand all the jargon
but I could tell that CF was very serious. "But I felt oddly calm - it didn't
seem to relate to my experience then. I was a mild CF and couldn'timagine
becoming really ill. But I discovered that, in addition to lung and stomach
problems, people with CF commonly get diabetes, arthritis, gallstones and liver
disease.

    It was upsetting but I never thought 'why me'. Having CF was all I knew. "I
learned that CF is genetic and that both my parents must have carried the gene,
giving any children a one in four chance of developing the disease. My younger
sister was fortunate and didn't get it. But I honestly never once felt anger.
The gene for CF had not yet been identified and they had no way of knowing.THE
most difficult thing to accept was that I would never get old. "The book told me
the average life expectancy for CF sufferers who make it to adulthood was only
22 (it's now 31 because of medical advances). "Still, at 13, that seemed like a
long time away. "I did well at school and was accepted at Brighton University to
read Biomedical Sciences. I had a great time, going out with my friends, dancing
and staying up late.

    But like many CF sufferers experiencing their first time away from home, I
didn't look after myself properly, missing physio sessions, and I ended up
needing to go into hospital for two weeks. "My lecturers were very understanding
and when my course syllabus covered CF, they got me to talk to the other
students about it. "I never had any trouble telling people about my CF.
Swallowing 15 tablets at once with a meal became my party trick. I never had any
trouble making friends or attracting men. As far as I'm aware, nobody ever broke
up with me because of my illness, though I can't be totally sure. "At 21, I
graduated and got a job as a headhunter for a City recruitment firm.

    I loved it, but it was hectic and involved lots of socialising and late
nights. I had to give myself more and more IV antibiotic treatments, at
increasingly frequent intervals. "One day my doctor told me to quit. Carry on,
he said, and you won't be here much longer. I was 25.

    My office held a fantastic party, inviting all my clients and colleagues. I
had a whale of a time but it was tinged with sadness. I knew I'd probably never
workagain. I sank into a deep depression. Stuck at home, with nothing to do but
medicate myself, I grew bored and felt worthless. I needed goals. I forced
myself to the CF trust and asked if I could do voluntary work. Having a purpose
pulled me out of my depression. "Soon I started an Italian course and singing
lessons, thinking it would be good for my lungs. To my surprise, I discovered I
had a powerful voice and a real talent for blues and jazz.

    Singing makes me feel elated - it's the best therapy. "Over the past few
years my condition has steadily deteriorated. My lung function is now only 24
per cent - it's up to 80 per cent for most people. "Each new symptom begins as a
shock; soon it becomes normality. I cough every five minutes, a deep, chesty
cough which brings up mucous. I've been stopped in the street by people telling
me to give up smoking. "I have had painful gallstones and some arthritic pains
in my joints, plus stomach pains when I eat fatty food.

    I now have liver disease, which means I can't drink and have to take
medication. I also suffer from pleurisy, a painful inflammation of the lung
lining caused by infection. There are four different bacteria in my lungs and I
worry I'll become resistant to the antibiotics. "I haven't had an uninterrupted
night's sleep for 10 years. Every few hours, I wake up to cough.Sometimes, my
lungs spontaneously bleed. I'll feel a gurgling in my chest, then I'll start
coughing up blood. It tastes metallic and it stains my teeth. It's very
frightening. I worry I'll lose so much blood that I'll pass out and die. It can
happen. "My weight is a real problem. Because I don't absorb food properly, I
have weighed as little as seven and a half stone, underweight for my 5ft
7inheight.

    I have to eat double the normal amount. I supplement my regular meals with
high calorie, nutrient-packed shakes and chocolate biscuits. "When I get a lung
infection I have no appetite and have to force the food down. The doctors are
talking about fitting me with a gastric tube. For now, I'm fighting it. If I
accept the tube I lose a little more of my independence and become a little
closer to death. "Ironically, I get lots of compliments about how 'lovely and
slim' I am. If only people knew. But I care about my appearance and take time to
make myself look good when I go out. Why should I look like an ill person? But
not looking ill has its problems. I can't walk far so have a disabled badge for
my car and I get dirty looks. "Mark is wonderful.

    We met through work. He's a City trader and we've been together for four
years. I told him I had CF on day one. I'd had to cancel our first date because
I was too ill, so when we met up two weeks later, in a City bar, I felt I had to
explain.

    I'VE never hidden my condition from any boyfriend. But it didn't seem to
faze Mark at all. "In fact, I later discovered that he went away and read up on
CF. "Mark is so caring - the more ill I become, the better he gets. I do all my
physio in front of him. I met a guy whose wife made him go into the other room
to huff. Mark just accepts it as part of my illness, part of me. The CF doesn't
affect our love life, which is great. It's the only time I'm energetic! "I'm not
scared of death. I've accepted it will happen but I don't want to die - not yet.
I don't feel I've done enough. "Oddly, I don't really think of myself as ill.
It's only when I go into hospital and see other people with CF that I realise
how sick I am. The medical research is very exciting.

    If I'm lucky they'll find a cure before it's too late. "Until then, my only
hope is a lung transplant. I'm getting to the point where I will need one. But
50 per cent of people on the list die before an organ becomes available. That's
why it's so important people carry donor cards. Of those who have the operation,
25 per cent don't make it through and 50 per cent die when their bodies reject
the new lung. I don't feel ready to gamble. "If I could have just one day
without CF, I'd do things most people take for granted. I'd go for a long walk,
play a game of tennis, then go out to the pub and on to a club for a good dance.
I miss nightlife - most places are too smokyfor me now. And I dream of having
children but it wouldn't be fair. "When I get low I just tell myself how much
I've achieved: I've been to university, had a great job, can sing and have met
the man of my dreams. "Lots of healthy people don't have those things.

    I certainly don't regret being born but, now they've identified the gene
involved, I wouldn't criticise anybody who decided to abort a CF baby. I firmly
believe CF should be routinely checked for in pregnancy."Most people I've met
with CF are jovial and love life - it's the way you survive. I want to cram in
as much as I can and I want to help other people with CF. In six months I could
be on my deathbed. "So I don't save my favourite perfume for a special day. I
use it every day."

    What is cystic fibrosis?

    CYSTIC fibrosis is the UK's most common life-threatening inherited disease,
affecting more than 7,500 babies, children and young adults. The disease attacks
the lungs and digestive system, clogging them with a thick, sticky mucous which
makes it difficult to breathe and digest food. Every week, three young people
die of CF, usually as a result of lung damage. Life expectancy is just 31.

    The defective gene that causes CF was discovered in 1989. One person in 25
carries it - more than 2.3 million people in the UK. If both parents carry the
gene, there's a one in four chance their child will have it. There is presently
no cure. For patients with severe lung damage, a lung transplant is the only
option. But 50 per cent die on the waiting list before a lung becomes available.

    Scientists are researching gene therapy, which involves replacing the faulty
CF gene with a healthy copy and hope to find a cure or effective therapy in the
next five to 10 years. For more information, gene tests or how to make a
donation, call the CF Trust on 020 8464 7211.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2002


                             697 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2002 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            July 17, 2002, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 353 words

HEADLINE: TV DINNER AND DOLLY HEAD 50 INVENTIONS

BYLINE: Steve Mccomish

HIGHLIGHT:
QUICK: TV dinner

BODY:


    TV dinners, the internet and Dolly the sheep have been included in a Top 50
of inventions that changed the world.

    The convenient meal, created in 1954 from surplus turkey, is joined by TV
remote controls in the list compiled by scientists for the Golden Jubilee.

    The Jet Age to Genome exhibition will be held at the Thinktank centre in
Birmingham from Saturday. The Top 50 are:

    1952: First fare-paying passengers in jet airliner

    1953: Cinemascope

    1954: TV dinner

    1955: Non-stick saucepan

    1956: TV remote control

    1957: Animal in space

    1958: Ultrasonic image of unborn child

    1959: First Mini

    1960: Implanted pacemaker

    1961: The Pill

    1962: TV satellite

    1963: Cassette tape and portable music machines

    1964: Home dialysis

    1965: Packet switching - essential for the internet

    1966: Weather satellite

    1967: Breathalyser

    1968: Supersonic airliner (Soviet T-144)

    1969: First man on Moon

    1970: First watches with LCD displays

    1971: CAT scan

    1972: Pocket calculator

    1973: Cars with air bags

    1974: Barcodes

    1975: Home computer

    1976: VHS and Betamax

    1977: Space shuttle launch

    1978: Birth of Louise Brown, conceived by IVF

    1979: Graphical-user interface for computers

    1980: Ghetto blaster and Sony Walkman

    1981: Compact discs

    1982: Video keyhole surgery

    1983: Synthetic insulin

    1984: DNA fingerprint

    1985: First registered dotcom

    1986: Laptop computer

    1987: Prozac

    1988: First internet worm

    1989: First machine controlled over the net (toaster)

    1990: Gene therapy (on a girl of four)

    1991: First internet browser

    1992: Mobile text message

    1993: Global positioning satellites

    1994: GM tomatoes

    1995: First computer generated film (Toy Story)

    1996: Deep field photos show universe 10 billion years ago

    1997: Dolly the sheep cloned from an adult cell

    1998: International space station

    1999: First electronic, reusable paper

    2000: Gene removal to allow pig organs to be used by humans in future

    2001: Bionic eye, microchips in damaged retinas

    2002: Iris security scanner

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2002


                             709 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2002 MGN Ltd.
                                 Sunday Mirror

                              May 26, 2002, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 153 words

HEADLINE: 'CURE' FOR SKIN AGONY

BYLINE: Nicola Pay

HIGHLIGHT:
DREAM: Alex Hood

BODY:


    A LITTLE girl whose life has been blighted by an agonising skin condition
known as butterfly syndrome has been given new hope of a cure.

    Alex Hood, 13, could be one of the first to benefit from revolutionary gene
therapy designed to treat victims of epidermolysis bullosa. The devastating
disease causes sufferers to break out in excruciating blisters at the slightest
irritation of their skin.

    Now scientists in Italy believe they have discovered how to correct the
faulty gene responsible, and believe there could be a cure within two years.

    Researcher Dr Michele De Luca has perfected a technique that involves taking
skin cells from patients and growing new tissue that can then be grafted back
on.

    Alex's father Robin, from Kirkcudbright in Scotland, said: "I have promised
my daughter that one day we will walk barefoot in the sand and at last we have
real hope our dream will come true."

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2002


                             712 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2002 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             May 9, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: M HEALTH; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 781 words

HEADLINE: I LOST HEALTHY WOMB TO BEAT CANCER GENE;
 KATHY TIER HAD WATCHED HER MOTHER DIE FROM OVARIAN CANCER. SO WHEN SHE LEARNT
THAT SHE SHARED THE SAME HIGH-RISK GENE, SHE TOOK DRAMATIC ACTION TO HEAD OFF
THE DISEASE. BY JILL PALMER

BYLINE: Jill Palmer

HIGHLIGHT:
FAMILY IN FEAR: Cathy with her daughters Chloe and Jo

BODY:


    IT was the result Kathy Tier was expecting, yet dreading. The 39-year-old
mother of two clasped husband Paul's hand as they were given the devastating
news.

    She had the faulty breast and ovarian cancer gene - and with it a high risk
of developing the disease that had killed her mum.

    For the next five years it was "like having a time-bomb ticking inside me"
as she lived in fear of cancer.

    Kathy knew the annual screening and close monitoring she was receiving could
only detect the disease early, not prevent it.

    So last year she had her womb, ovaries and cervix removed in a bid to stop
the cancer before it started.

    And now she is considering a mastectomy to avoid breast cancer.

    "I didn't realise how frightened I was of the cancer until I'd had the
hysterectomy," says Kathy, from Southampton. "The relief was tremendous.

    "I'd had a time-bomb ticking away inside me, waiting to explode. Suddenly it
had gone. It was a huge weight off my mind.

    "When the fear of breast cancer is greater than my fear of mastectomy I will
have that operation also."

    Kathy has a family history of cancer. Her granny died of it at 63 in 1966
and her mum's sister Susan was diagnosed with breast cancer aged just 25 in 1972
and endured a double mastectomy. Thankfully, she is still alive and well.

    Kathy's mother Janet was found to have ovarian cancer in her 50s.
Tragically, it had already spread and she died three years later in 1997. "Mum
had medical training and realised there was probably a predisposition towards
breast and ovarian cancer in the family," says Kathy.

    "I am her only daughter and she encouraged me to go for a blood test."

    She went to her GP, who fast-tracked her to the family genetics clinic in
Southampton.

    Kathy and her mother were both found to have the BRCA2 gene, one of the main
breast/ovarian cancer genes. It meant she faced an 80 per cent risk of
developing the disease, compared to the average of one in 12.

    "I received excellent counselling at all stages, and even after I'd had the
blood test I was told I did not have to know the results," says Kathy.

    "But if there was something, then I wanted to know about it.

    "The genetics nurse came to our home to give us the results and made sure
Paul was there with me and the children were in bed.

    "It wasn't really a shock. I am a fatalist and I suspected that the test
would be positive, that I would have the gene. But until that moment there was
always a glimmer of hope.

    "It was like a door slamming when I was told. That was it. Final.

    "But I was grateful to find out, as it gave me the chance to make
well-informed decisions about the future."

    For the next five years Kathy had annual blood tests, mammograms, MRI breast
scans, and internal ultrasound scans to check her ovaries.

    She says: "I have always felt more in control of the breast cancer, because
mammography is very good and I can check my breasts myself. But the screening
for ovarian cancer is not so exact. And there are no symptoms.

    "My mum's cancer had spread before it was diagnosed, and despite a
hysterectomy and chemotherapy it was too late to save her.

    "The last six months of her life were really awful. Thankfully, she had
strong pain relief, but she had a really bloated abdomen and was throwing up
four or five times a night.

    "I kept thinking of what she went through and how terrible it was watching
her suffer like that. I did not want the same for myself or my two daughters."
After more counselling with genetics expert Dr Diana Eccles and long discussions
with Paul, Kathy decided to have a hysterectomy.

    "I was really scared of the surgery, but felt this was the best way of
dealing with the risk," she says.

    "Now I feel I can get on with my life. As I get older the risk of breast
cancer naturally increases, and with my predisposition as well I will certainly
consider having a mastectomy."

    Kathy's biggest concern now is for her daughters, Chloe, 10, and Jo, eight.
There is a 50-50 chance they will inherit the BRCA2 gene from her.

    "They will be tested when they are 18," says Kathy. "But I hope that by then
genetics research will have come so far forward that it will be possible to
treat them with gene therapy and so prevent the cancer in a much less dramatic
way than I have done.

    "That is why more research is needed - to help my daughters and other people
like them in the future."

    -This weekend, Kathy is taking part in the Cancer Research UK Golden Jubilee
Torch Relay, during which the Millennium beacon flame will be carried from Great
Yarmouth in Norfolk to London, where it will be used in the Jubilee
celebrations.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2002


                             729 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2002 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            April 4, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 97 words

HEADLINE: OUR BOY GENE-IUS;
 DOCTORS GIVE 'BUBBLE' TOT HIS LIFE BACK

BYLINE: Brendon Williams

BODY:


    A LITTLE boy who was destined to spend his life trapped inside a sterile
"bubble" has been freed from his plastic prison - by a medical breakthrough.

    Cardiff toddler Rhys Evans, aged 18 months, was cut off from the outside
world after being born with no immune system.

    He couldn't play with other children in case he caught an infection. But now
he can live like any other boy after being apparently cured by doctors using
ground-breaking gene therapy treatment.

    Dad Mark Evans, 40, said yesterday: "We're over the moon and really proud to
have our son back."

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2002


                             730 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2002 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            April 4, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: PLAY DAY FOR RHYS;
 FUN TIME FOR TODDLER WHO DEFEATED DEADLY ILLNESS

BYLINE: Brendon Williams

HIGHLIGHT:
HOLE LOT OF FUN: Rhys playing in a park yesterday; OVERJOYED: Dad and mum with
little Rhys; WORRY: The youngster when he was poorly; HI KID:; Brave Rhys makes
friends with a goat

BODY:


    THE look on little Rhys Evans' face says it all.

    Just a few months ago the 18-month-old toddler had to live in a bubble - a
germ -free room where only his family could visit him under strict medical
control.

    His rare condition left him with no immune system. He couldn't play with
other children or even run around outside in case he picked up a potentially
lethal infection.

    But now - after revolutionary gene therapy at London's Great Ormond Street
Hospital - Rhys has got his life back.

    He can finally play like a normal youngster after becoming, it's believed,
the first British tot to be cured of Severe Combined Immunodeficiency Disorder
(SCID).

    Overjoyed dad Mark Evans, 40, from Cardiff, said yesterday: "We're over the
moon and really proud and happy to have our son back.

    "If you'd seen how bad he was - he was skin and bone, too weak to hold his
head up. Now there's no stopping him."

    Mum Marie and dad Mark - who gave up his gas company job to care for Rhys -
feared their son could never mix with other kids.

    But Mark added: "He's making up for the time that he's lost and we can't do
enough for him."

    The delighted parents joined doctors at Great Ormond Street at a news
conference yesterday.

    Although it is still too early to tell whether he has been completely cured,
Rhys has shown remarkable recovery. He was born with no defence against
infection and had to live in a sterile room.

    Antibiotics failed to clear up frequent chest infections and he was admitted
to hospital with pneumonia and placed on a ventilator.

    He went on the programme last summer and by Christmas was improving rapidly.

    Mum Marie, a teacher, said the family was "devastated" when they first
learned of his condition. "But now we live at home like a normal family," she
said.

    "He's been to the park to play in the sand and get into mischief."

    The couple have even taken Rhys to Tenerife on holiday.

    Dr Adrian Thrasher, who led the gene therapy team, said the outcome was
"really excellent".

    Without treatment, a baby born with SCID faces death within the first couple
of years.

    A Great Ormond Street spokesman said: "For the first time in his little
life, he was allowed to start mixing with other children and playing outdoors.
He has even just been on his first holiday."

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2002


                             731 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2002 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            April 4, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 451 words

HEADLINE: THE BOY IN THE BUBBLE 'CURED';
 GENE THERAPY LIFELINE TO RHYS

BYLINE: Stephen Moyes

HIGHLIGHT:
OUR MIRACLE: Marie and Mark play with Rhys; ON THE <MEND: Rhys; Evans enjoys
getting to grips with the outside world in a park yesterday;; FRAIL: Rhys before
his treatment

BODY:


    TODDLER Rhys Evans, born without an immune system, can play with other
children for the first time thanks to a revolutionary gene therapy.

    The 18-month-old boy was forced to start life cocooned in sterile conditions
24 -hours a day, effectively living in a bubble.

    He was cut off from the outside world and even his parents Mark and Marie
had to be disinfected to cut the risk of passing on any infection.

    Now Rhys is home after becoming the first child in the UK to have successful
gene therapy.

    His teacher mum Marie, 31, said: "We see him now, playing with other
children, and it's amazing.

    "Since they cracked the genetic code and found the gene, they can work
miracles.

    "Now we live at home like a normal family. He's been to the park to play in
the sand and get into mischief, and we never thought that was going to happen."

    Dad Mark, 40, who quit work to care for Rhys, added: "He was skin and bone,
too weak to hold his head up. Now there's no stopping him.

    "He's making up for the lost time and we can't do enough for him."

    Rhys was born unable to fight off illness. Once the immunity he acquired
from his mother wore off, antibiotics failed to clear up his recurring chest
infections and he was hospitalised with pneumonia.

    Marie was restricted to making fortnightly visits from the family home in
Cardiff to her son who was confined to Great Ormond Street Hospital in London.

    Rhys's condition deteriorated. He was placed on a ventilator and diagnosed
with the rare and usually fatal Severe Combined Immunodeficiency Disorder. As
hopes faded, Mark and Marie were offered the gene therapy which began last
summer.

    Within months Rhys was playing with toys and in recent weeks he has mixed
with other children, played outdoors and been on a family holiday to Tenerife.

    Dr Adrian Thrasher, who led the gene team, warned it was too early to say
Rhys was cured, said: "We're very excited by this. He was incredibly sick with a
nasty pneumonia, a life threatening infection.

    "After his gene therapy, he was running around at home. He's a normal little
boy now."

    He said Rhys's progress would be monitored long term to compare it with
conventional bone marrow transplants. Only a third of SCID sufferers find a
well-matched donor for a transplant.

    A second child given the same gene therapy treatment at Great Ormond Street
about 12 weeks ago is said to be doing well.

    Without treatment, a baby born with SCID faces death within the first couple
of years.

    Great Ormond Street's gene therapy laboratory was opened last year. It was
funded by the pounds 12million Jeans for Genes charity appeal for genetic
research which was launched in 1996.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2002


                             732 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 April 3, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 1;4

LENGTH: 615 words

HEADLINE: DOCTORS CURE BOY IN BUBBLE;
Gene treatment at Great Ormond Street restores child's immune system

BYLINE: Indira Das Gupta

BODY:


    PIONEERING gene therapy at London's Great Ormond Street Hospital appears to
have cured a "bubble baby" born with no defence against infection.

    The hospital revealed today that Rhys Evans, aged 18 months, was born with
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency Disorder (SCID). Children with the condition
have to be kept in completely sterile conditions - hence the term "baby in a
bubble". Without treatment, such babies face death within a couple of years.

    Last summer, Rhys's parents Mark and Marie, from Cardiff, put him on the
therapy programme, and after intensive treatment he was already showing huge
signs of improvement by Christmas.

    Today, a Great Ormond Street spokesman said: "In February, Rhys's blood
results had made enormous progress and were almost normal. For the first time in
his little life, he was allowed to start mixing with other children and playing
outdoors, and he has even just been on his first family holiday."

    Mr Evans, 40, who gave up his job with a gas company to care for Rhys and
cope with his own depression and anxiety, said: "We're over the moon and really
proud to have our son back, really happy. If you'd seen how bad he was, he was
skin and bone, too weak to hold his head up. Now there's no stopping him."

    Rhys is the first baby in the UK to benefit from the work taking place at
Great Ormond Street and the Institute of Child Health, its research partner.

    Traditionally, SCID is treated by bone marrow transplants to provide missing
immune cells which, in a healthy child, Rhys Evans, playing today in a park in
London. Prior to his treatment at Great Ormond Street mingling with other
children would have been out of the question because of his medical condition
are made from precursor stem cells in the bone marrow. The procedure has a high
success rate when there is a matched brother or sister donor, and is modestly
successful when the donor is a parent.

    Nevertheless, only a third of children with SCID can be matched with a
really good donor. The gene therapy technique being pioneered at Great Ormond
Street is aimed at fixing the genetic fault that prevents an SCID child from
producing immune system cells.

    During the procedure, bone marrow is removed from the patient and treated
with a virus which carries the correct gene into the stem cells. The corrected
bone marrow is then infused into the child and allowed to generate immune cells
which pass into the blood.

    Mrs Evans, 31, a teacher, said she and her husband were "devastated" when
they learned of Rhys's condition. Before his treatment he was cut off from the
outside world in a super-clinical room where he could only be visited under
strict supervision.

    "Now we live at home like a normal family," said Mrs Evans. "He's been to
the park to play in the sand and get into mischief, and we never thought that
was going to happen."

    Doctors at Great Ormond Street are also looking at another immune system
genetic disorder, 95 Chronic Granulomatous Disease (CGD) which stops white blood
cells destroying bacteria and fungi which invade the body.

    Gene therapy for the condition involves inserting the gene in a sample of
bone marrow removed from the patient. All the rest of the bone marrow has to be
destroyed by chemotherapy before the corrected sample is replaced.

    The new "Jeans for Genes" gene therapy laboratory at Great Ormond Street
opened last year.

    Jeans for Genes is a charity initiative that has raised more than GBP
12million for research into children's diseases since its launch in 1996. This
year on 4 October, thousands of people across the UK will wear jeans to work or
school and donate GBP 1 each to the appeal.


LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2002


                             743 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                               February 13, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 6;7

LENGTH: 1550 words

HEADLINE: The girl who knows her only hope is a new heart;
As Great Ormond Street reaches its 150th anniversary, a look at today's brave
young patients

BYLINE: Claire Hu;Zoe Morris;Bel Mooney

BODY:


    ANDREA BARRETT is facing an agonising fight for survival.

    She desperately needs a new heart and has been at Great Ormond Street for
three weeks, waiting for the transplant operation which will save her life.

    Andrea, seven, is being kept alive through a cocktail of drugs and the skill
of her doctors.

    Her story reflects the amazing work that is done at the hospital, which will
celebrate its 150th anniversary tomorrow.

    Andrea, a pretty and bright little girl from Stansted, and her parents
Brigitte and John have displayed remarkable courage while they wait for news of
a donor. They have been waiting for two months.

    Mrs Barrett, 38, said: "Andrea was very short of breath and couldn't walk
very far before she was admitted. She is now on medication to keep her going
while we wait for a heart transplant. We are on the edge all the time. I keep
waiting for phone calls with news of a donor but they never come.

    There are just not that many around."

    Andrea - who suffers from cardio myopathy, or disease of the heart muscle -
was admitted to the David Waterston Ward after she became seriously ill.

    Her need is so urgent, staff at Great Ormond Street are now ringing round
other hospitals asking to be contacted when a suitable donor becomes available.
Mrs Barrett carries around a bleeper so she can be alerted the instant there is
news.

    Despite the anguish of seeing her daughter ill, Mrs Barrett is still
determined that Andrea will enjoy life to the full.

    Andrea, who always seems to have a smile on her face, spends her time on the
ward chatting to new friends, drawing and making beaded necklaces. "It's better
here than at home because here they have got all the medicines to make me feel
better," she said.

    Mrs Barrett, who has two other children, aged four and six, said: "We know
the long-term chances are not good without a transplant, but we try to stay
positive. There is no point in dwelling on the doom and gloom because we don't
know how much time we have got with her."

    She was full of praise for the hospital, particularly the way it had kept
the family and Andrea well informed about her condition.

    "I think this is a wonderful hospital," said Mrs Barrett. "Great Ormond
Street has given us so much support and always kept us informed. The doctors are
a bit divided over whether Andrea should go home in between waiting for a
transplant. Her health is very fragile, all it takes is a little stress for her
heart to fail. I haven't dared to ask the question of how long we have got
without a transplant but I think it is a few months."

    Andrea has come to terms with her illness with remarkable ease.

    Mrs Barrett said: "She knows she needs a new heart and she knows the
operation is dangerous.

    Children are surprisingly open minded, they don't have this taboo that
grownups do about talking about things like death. They accept things as they
are."

    Great Ormond Street and Newcastle are the only two hospitals in Britain to
carry out heart transplant operations on children.

    The London institution has been leading the world in the treatment of sick
children right from the start of its 150-year history.

    Even from its humble beginnings, in the converted library of a doctor living
at number 49 Great Ormond Street, it was innovative.

    When Dr Charles West took the first 10 young patients into his home in 1852,
the accepted thinking was that the best place for a sick child was with its
mother - a view endorsed at the time by Florence Nightingale.

    However Dr West, appalled by the fact that half of recorded deaths in the
capital at the time were among people under 15, persisted and went on to
establish the first children's hospital in the English-speaking world. By 1865 a
variety of ailments were being treated, including TB, rheumatism and heart
disease. Diagnosis and treatment were limited in the early years, but a
prevailing ethos of putting children first was instilled which is still the
pride of Great Ormond Street today.

    The motto of the hospital remains "the child first and always".

    There was a garden, and play was considered an essential part of the healing
process. Dr West also encouraged his staff to talk to and play with the
children.

    The first purpose-built hospital on the street was completed in 1857 -
coinciding with the retirement of Dr West. By the end of the 19th century, it
had 200 beds as well as another 60 for convalescence in Highgate.

    The hospital has had the backing of the great and the good, including Queen
Victoria, former neighbour Charles Dickens and J M Barrie who donated the
royalties from Peter Pan.

    Now it treats around 99,000 children a year and is at the forefront of areas
including gene therapy, heart surgery and bone marrow transplants.

    Children are referred from all over the country and overseas to benefit from
the expertise of more than 300 doctors carrying out upwards of 13,000 operations
a year. It has the widest range of paediatric specialists under one roof and
more than 12 per cent of the UK's paediatric nurses have been trained there.

    Why I love this fantastic hospital and its staff, by Bel Mooney

    WRITER and broadcaster Bel Mooney, 55, and husband Jonathan Dimbleby first
went to Great Ormond Street with daughter Kitty in May 1980. Kitty, then aged
eight months, needed major surgery for Hirschprung's Disease, a bowel condition.

    "IT WAS a terribly scary time, but all the way through that first year of
Kitty's life, Jonathan and I were overwhelmed by how wonderful and dedicated the
staff were.

    "I think special people are drawn to work with sick children, that there's a
special level of care and kindness. I can see now the nurse who brought Kitty
back to me after her surgery. I can see her washing this tiny baby, as tenderly
as I might have washed her myself.

    "Kitty was in and out of the hospital for the next 13 years.

    When she was 12, she had a sudden emergency operation - another deeply
frightening time.

    I sat outside. My knees were wobbly with terror. When the surgeon came out,
he approached me just to pat me and soothe me.

    "As a parent one knew staff were looking after our child as well as anyone
could, and that Great Ormond Street was a hospital of great excellence, that
children were coming from all over the world for treatment.

    There was something profoundly reassuring about that.

    "Throughout Kitty's treatment I felt somewhere in that building people were
working hard, and one day might find what caused her disease. I knew we wouldn't
benefit, but someone would. Of course some children wouldn't recover. It could
be a very sad place. My chief memories are of unbelievable courage of parents,
and exceptional spirit on the part of the staff.

    "Kitty is now 22 and at university. She still needs treatment and had an
operation before Christmas. She's had fantastic care throughout her life, all on
the NHS, but we'll always have a particular place in our hearts for Great Ormond
Street."

    GEORGE NEWMAN, aged two, underwent a seven-hour operation to remove a brain
tumour at the hospital in October.

    He now attends the Lion Ward for fortnightly sessions of chemotherapy to
ensure the cancer does not return.

    His outlook is good and his parents, Helen and George Newman, are looking
forward to the future. Mrs Newman said: "As far as we are concerned the tumour
is gone. The best way to treat it was radical surgery.

    We have had lots of support from friends but our life will never be the same
again.

    "It would have been a lot harder to cope with if it weren't for this
hospital. It is a wonderful place in terms of the support the staff give you.

    They don't just look after the child, they look after the whole family. The
size of the tumour for someone his age was quite uncommon.

    Surgery was really the only option."

    GHISY KANEFU, 17, was rushed to the hospital a week ago with a high
temperature after falling ill from an infection. It is believed Ghisy, from
Tottenham, caught the infection from the kidney dialysis equipment she uses for
10 hours every night.

    Ghisy, who is studying A Levels and hopes to become a media lawyer, said: "I
hope I can go in a few days. Having to use a dialysis machine is no problem.

    It means I can go out until one am and then I have an excuse to lie in until
11am because I am stuck on the machine!"

    The teenager has been treated with antibiotics on the Victoria renal ward.

    She added: "The nurses are really nice here, you can have a laugh with them.

    Anyway, they are going to kill me unless I say they are nice!"

    HARRY Pointer suffers from a skin condition so rare there have only been a
handful of cases at Great Ormond Street. He has been on the Cohen ward for five
weeks, treated for Kasabach-Merritt Syndrome, a form of birthmark that increases
in size and can affect his blood supply, potentially leading to clotting. His
mother Kerry Humphreys, 21, took twomonthold Harry to his GP when his foot
swelled to the size of a balloon. He is being treated with steroids and
chemotherapy and doctors hope to stop the birthmark on his leg growing and
blocking his blood supply. Miss Humphreys said: "He has spent most of his life
in hospital.

    They are brilliant here."


GRAPHIC: REASSURED: BEL AND DAUGHTER; KITTY FRAGILE: ANDREA BARRETT, SEVEN, WHO
DESPERATELY NEEDS A HEART TRANSPLANT, IN GREAT ORMOND STREET'S DAVID WATERSTON
WARD; DRASTIC SURGERY: GEORGE NEWMAN; RARE CONDITION: HARRY POINTER WITH HIS
MOTHER KERRY HUMPHREYS

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2002


                             753 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2002 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                           January 29, 2002, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 58 words

HEADLINE: GENE HOPE FOR INFERTILE

BODY:


    GENE therapy has been used successfully for the first time to treat
infertility, researchers revealed yesterday.

    Scientists in Japan used the therapy to correct a defect in infertile male
mice with the help of IVF treatment.

    Scientists believe the technique offers hope in the future for infertile men
who cannot be treated at present.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             754 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                January 28, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1785 words

HEADLINE: Some things the NHS does great;
The NHS has been in the dock for the past week, since the Evening Standard
revealed the experience of 94-year-old Rose Addis at Whittington Hospital, and
other horror stories followed. But not everything about our health system is
going wrong. Many thousands of staff and hundreds of hospitals do a marvellous
job for us. Here are a few examples of the NHS's achievements, to set against
the nightmares

BYLINE: Jo Revill;Zoe Morris;Maxine Frith;Laura Smith

BODY:


    THE political battle over the National Health Service is the general
election debate that never happened.

    William Hague picked the euro as his main fight. But now the new
Conservative leader, Iain Duncan Smith, has shown he is determined to scrap with
the Prime Minister on his own chosen ground - public services.

    Last week IDS took up the case of Rose Addis, first highlighted by the
Evening Standard, and found himself accused by Labour of being overwhelmingly
negative about the NHS; of ignoring the millions of patients who had experienced
good treatment; and of ignoring the very real developments in specialist care.
As the Standard has repeatedly emphasised, we agree with Tony Blair; although it
would be foolish to believe that everything is right with the NHS, not
everything is wrong. It is a slight on the hundreds of thousands employed at
hospitals throughout Britain to suggest otherwise.

    Here we pick out six areas where improvements are being made across
hospitals in London. The extra GBP 21billion that has gone into the NHS since
Labour came to power in 1997 has undoubtedly allowed specialists to bring about
important changes, particularly in the way drugs are prescribed.

    After last week's gloomy news we can justly point to some astonishing work
in London hospitals.

    Professor Kypros Nicolaides is giving blood transfusions to unborn babies at
King's College Hospital, a technique not available when Labour first came to
power.

    The Royal Marsden is now administering a drug which will prevent cancer
patients from having their limbs amputated. At Great Ormond Street, advances in
genetic research mean that more children than ever are being diagnosed quickly
with conditions that can be treated.

    Much of the work is funded by pharmaceutical companies or charities, rather
than the Government. It is still difficult for scientists to get long-term
funding from the Medical Research Council. The public also takes the view that
scientific advances happen anyway and the best thing a politician can do is to
leave them alone to get on with it.

    But there are successes within the mainstream NHS. London's air ambulance is
a shining example. Statistics also prove that despite the wellpublicised
hitches, emergency care is improving every year.

    But the gateway to the NHS, through its casualty doors, appears to be
shabbier than ever, and the one area the Government has to focus on is A&E
admissions. Without genuine changes in casualty departments, no one is going to
believe the NHS is on the mend.

    Foetal medicine and fertility

    EVERY year hundreds of babies are given the best chance of survival by
pioneering doctors who operate on them while they are still in the womb - and
thousands of couples are given help to conceive.

    The Foetal Medicine Unit at University College Hospital has been leading the
world in its field since it was set up by Professor Charles Rodeck in 1989.

    Every week women who have been warned their unborn child has little chance
of survival are referred to the unit.

    Professor Rodeck has pioneered a method of giving blood transfusions to
anaemic unborn babies by passing a needle through the womb and into the
umbilical cord. Similar techniques are used to drain the fluid from around the
lungs of unborn children.

    Professor Kypros Nicolaides, who carries out similar work at King's College
Hospital, has earned the reputation as a "miracle worker" for his treatment of
unborn babies, and attracts doctors from around the world keen to train with
him.

    He is researching a unique method of detecting Down's Syndrome during
pregnancy using ultrasound and blood tests, and is also pioneering ways of
detecting problems including pre-eclampsia prematurity and difficult labour.

    London is also home to some of the country's leading fertility experts.

    Stroke and heart disease

    THE stroke unit at Northwick Park Hospital in Harrow is among the best in
the country, according to the Stroke Association.

    It is at the forefront of a multidisciplinary approach to help patients
return to a normal life.

    Doctors, nurses, physiotherapists, speech therapists and other professionals
provide intensive rehabilitation for stroke victims.

    An audit of the unit, to be published soon, is expected to show improvements
in survival rates and the extent to which people recover.

    Dr David Cohen, who runs the unit, said: "We focus on getting people to help
themselves.

    Our patients don't sit around in dressing gowns. We encourage them to wash
and dress themselves each day.

    It may take them 90 minutes to do it, but it is part of the recovery.

    "It's brilliant when you put in all the work and effort and see somebody who
came into the unit paralysed and very ill, walk out the door and be able to go
home."

    The Government has pledged to reduce deaths from heart disease and strokes
by 40 per cent by 2010.

    Charing Cross Hospital in Hammersmith was among the first in the country to
introduce Rapid Access Chest Pain Clinics. People going to their GP with chest
pains are referred, assessed and diagnosed by the clinics, all in the same day.

    Cancer

    SOME of the most groundbreaking treatments in the battle against cancer are
being trialled at hospitals in the capital.

    At the Royal Marsden Hospital in Chelsea, a revolutionary new drug has been
tested on patients who previously faced the prospect of losing a limb to stop
the cancer spreading.

    Doctors there - the only ones in the country, and one of just three teams in
the world licensed to use TNF alpha - have seen impressive results.

    Blood supply to a limb is cut off to protect the body from the drug, which
destroys vessels carrying blood to cancerous tumours.

    This allows 10 times the normal dose to be injected into the bloodstream of
the limb without harming the rest of the body.

    Within weeks of treatment, tumours the size of grapefruits and even
footballs virtually disappeared in each of the 12 patients given the drug.

    Peter Barry, clinical research fellow in surgical oncology, said: "Such
doses would normally kill a patient if carried to major organs."

    Professors at Hammersmith Hospital and Imperial College have developed
pioneering tests for liver cancer in which micro-bubbles of gas are injected
into the bloodstream, enabling doctors to diagnose tumours with ultrasound
equipment.

    Experts at the Hammersmith have also launched the first human trials in the
UK of gene therapy, using genetically engineered viruses to detect and attack
deadly cancers.

    Helicopter Emergency Service

    THE paramedics and specialist trauma doctors attached to London's Helicopter
Emergency Medical Service (HEMS) come to the aid of more than 1,000 victims of
serious accidents a year in the capital.

    The team, based at the Royal London Hospital in Whitechapel, can get to
major incidents within the M25 in an average of 14 minutes.

    The specialist trauma doctors can administer drugs, insert a tube to help a
patient breathe and even perform openheart surgery. The service can fly victims
to the nearest specialist hospital to give them the best chance of survival.

    High-profile success stories include Stephen Niland, whose life was saved
when Dr Heather Clark performed openheart surgery on the floor of the pub where
he had been stabbed.

    Last year a 15-yearold girl sustained a fractured skull, brain haemorrhage
and a stroke down her right side that left her paralysed. Within 40 minutes of a
999 call, HEMS doctors had stabilised her, put her on a mobile life-support
machine and airlifted her to the Royal London.

    The teenager spent three weeks in a coma in intensive care. She was expected
to be unconscious for at least six months but was discharged from the hospital
two months after the accident. She is now studying for GCSEs.

    The HEMS team also respond to 999 calls in a fast-response car three nights
a week, and when the helicopter is not available.

    Children's services

    GREAT Ormond Street Hospital, which celebrates its 150th anniversary on
Valentine's Day, still enjoys a unique place in the hearts of the public and the
thousands of patients who have been treated on its wards, as well as its status
as a world-class institution.

    The hospital has the largest paediatric intensive care and surgical unit in
Europe and is one of only four research institutions in Britain to receive a top
rating from the Higher Education Funding Council.

    It trains 25 per cent of Britain's paediatric nurses and treats nearly
100,000 patients every year. Its surgeons carry out 13,000 operations annually
and foreign governments frequently send seriously ill children there for
treatment.

    Pioneering gene therapy now being trialled by Dr Adrian Thrasher could give
hope to children who are born without immune systems and face certain death.

    The therapy involves genetically altering the bone marrow and could be a
successful alternative to bone marrow transplants, which require an exact match
and often do not work. Scientists are due to announce preliminary results of the
trials on a group of children next month and are already predicting that the
outcomes will be "exciting".

    Midwifery

    MIDWIFE Becky Reid may not have hit the headlines for her pioneering work,
but for pregnant women on the North Peckham estate, she offers a lifeline.

    As one of seven midwives at the Albany Midwifery Practice, she helps provide
onetoone care to women from pregnancy through to motherhood.

    "It's very interesting to look after women who maybe have not had a lot of
choice in their lives," she said. "They appreciate the continuity of having the
same midwife throughout."

    Located in a health centre on the estate where Damilola Taylor was murdered,
the practice is contracted by King's College Hospital NHS Trust to care for
about 200 women, many of whom are refugees and asylum seekers. All are referred
by their GP.

    By allocating one midwife to each woman and specialising in home visits, the
practice is able to reach out to women from deprived backgrounds whose needs are
often poorly met. A study of the practice showed that nine in 10 pregnant women
who attend the practice had the same midwife from pregnancy to childbirth.

    Cathy Warwick, head of the practice, said: "The level of support means that
many choose to breast-feed and to have home births in an area where few would
normally feel the confidence to make those choices." The midwives are
self-employed which, says Ms Warwick, "allows them to determine the details of
their working lives", but at the same time guarantees them regular work with the
same women.

    Additional reporting


GRAPHIC: PROFESSOR KYPROS NICOLAIDES: TREATS UNBORN BABIES THERAPY AT NORTHWICK
PARK HOSPITAL IN HARROW PETER BARRY AT THE ROYAL MARSDEN IN CHELSEA FLYING
DOCTORS: PARAMEDICS BASED AT THE ROYAL LONDON HOSPITAL IN WHITECHAPEL CAN REACH
MAJOR INCIDENTS WITHIN THE M25 IN 14 MINUTES DR ADRIAN THRASHER FROM GREAT
ORMOND STREET MIDWIFE BECKY REID, RIGHT, AT WORK IN PECKHAM

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             765 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2001 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                          November 29, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 43

LENGTH: 1132 words

HEADLINE: DR MIRIAM STOPPARD'S HEALTH FOCUS: TODAY: HIV/AIDS - WHY YOU'RE SAFE
TO SHED A TEAR

BYLINE: Miriam Stoppard

HIGHLIGHT:
AIDS VICTIM: Mercury

BODY:


    AIDS stands for "acquired immune deficiency syndrome. It is caused by the
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).

    While HIV is infectious, it isn't as contagious as some other viruses, such
as the common cold or influenza.

    It cannot, for example, be caught simply by touching and normal social
contact, and isn't spread by coughs and sneezes. It's usually transmitted by the
"mixing of body fluids" - mainly blood, semen and vaginal secretions.

    The most common route of transmission is through sexual intercourse but,
rarely, it may also be passed on via blood transfusions and the sharing of
needles by intravenous drug users.

    The virus is found in saliva and tears, but not in sufficient numbers to be
infectious. HIV affects everyone, both heterosexuals and homosexuals. There are
two types of HIV, types one and two. Infection with either can lead to Aids,
although HIV-2 seems to be a less aggressive form of the virus.

    As a disease, Aids weakens the body's natural immune system to such an
extent that it's unable to fight off infections or control cancerous growths,
and death from Aids - as in the case of pop star Freddie Mercury in 1991 - is
usually from an overwhelming infection or rampant cancer.

    You CAN'T get Aids through:

    Kissing, touching, hugging or shaking hands.

    Sharing crockery and cutlery.

    Coughing or sneezing.

    Contact with toilet seats.

    Insect or animal bites.

    Swimming pools.

    Eating food prepared by someone with HIV.

    Symptoms of Aids

    Marked weight loss over a relatively short period.

    Enlarged glands.

    Infections such as pneumonia, oral thrush, her pes simplex infections or
shingles.

    Dementia-like symptoms when the brain is affected.

    Cancers, such as Kaposi's sarcoma and lymphoma.

    How can I tell if I am HIV positive?

    THE body's response to infection with HIV is to produce antibodies, though
they may take up to three months to appear. You'd only be identified as HIV
positive when antibodies are detected in your blood.

    For that reason, if you take an Aids test too soon after possible exposure,
it can be negative. It's better to take a test about six months after you
suspect infection may have taken place.

    An HIV-positive person doesn't necessarily have Aids. That may take up to
ten years to develop, during which time he or she may remain well. It's
therefore possible for people to be unaware they're HIV positive and to pass on
the virus unknowingly.

    How do I prevent it?

    THE main route of HIV infection is through sex. It may be passed through
both vaginal and anal intercourse.

    Sexual transmission may be prevented, by the use of good-quality condoms.
Spermicides kill the Aids virus, so they must always be used.

    THEORETICALLY, sexual intercourse with only one infected individual is
enough to pass on the HIV virus. As it's impossible to tell whether an
individual is HIV positive from their appearance, precautions must be used with
all new sexual partners.

    INTRAVENOUS drug- users can pass on the virus by sharing needles and
syringes, so always avoid sharing needles.

    HIV has also been transmitted through infected blood products, though much
less commonly now; the major group to be infected in this way were
haemophiliacs. However, all blood products are now screened for HIV in developed
countries.

    ABOUT one in four HIV-positive mothers may transmit HIV to her baby during
pregnancy and birth, but thankfully not all these babies get Aids.

    Women and HIV

    WOMEN need to be assertive to protect themselves from HIV. Safe sex should
be compulsory for everyone until you're able to confirm that your partner is HIV
negative.

    As it can take up to three months to produce antibodies, it's best to
practise safe sex until this window of infection is passed, and it should only
be relaxed if there's no other potential high-risk activity such as intravenous
drug use or unprotected intercourse with another person.

    Testing for HIV

    THE usual test for HIV infection involves analysing a blood sample for signs
of HIV antibodies produced by the body to fight off the HIV infection.

    The presence of antibodies in your blood therefore indicates that you have
been infected with the virus. This is why anyone whose blood tests positive for
HIV antibodies is said to be HIV positive.

    The HIV virus incubates for several months before becoming active, so
there's a gap between exposure to the virus and identification that infection
has developed. That's the reason why an Aids test can be negative if you take it
too soon after exposure.

    You can get the test from any NHS sexual health clinic who will be listed in
your Yellow Pages, or call The National Aids Helpline free on 0800-567 123 to
find your nearest clinic.

    What is the treatment?

    FOLLOWING a diagnosis of HIV, treatment begins to try to slow down the rate
of viral replication. Various drugs are prescribed to achieve this aim, and
different combinations are being researched and developed all the time.

    THESE treatments aren't without side effects, but they do seem to be getting
better and better at controlling the rate of HIV multiplication in the body.
With some, patients can live several years longer - success depending on a
person's individual response.

    TREATMENT of opportunistic infections depends on the bacterium or virus.
High -dose antibiotics and antiviral drugs are often given routinely to prevent
an infection from taking hold.

    Can HIV/Aids be cured?

    NOT yet. Although the progression of HIV infection to Aids may be slowed
down, there's still no cure for Aids, nor is there a vaccine to prevent
infection with HIV.

    The problem is compounded because HIV attacks the immune system - the route
by which the body is usually able to fight infection and cancers.

    HIV-1 and 2 also seem to consist of various sub-types which makes the
likelihood of finding a universal vaccine remote.

    HIV can fight cancer

    CANCER patients are to be injected with the Aids virus as part of a new gene
therapy trial. HIV's ability to evade our immune defences makes it ideal for
carrying new genes. The virus will have been modified to make it harmless.

    Many illnesses, including cancer, are the result of a malfunctioning gene.
Scientists believe they can replace this gene with a healthy one but need a
carrier to transport the gene.

    Viruses are ideal. A gene is "spliced" into a virus, then you infect a
patient and countless copies of that missing gene will be created.

    Normally our bodies would destroy a virus. Modified HIV, however, can avoid
immune attack for a considerable time.

    FOR further reading, Sex Ed, by Dr Miriam Stoppard, is available from Mirror
Direct on 0870 07 03 200, price pounds 5.99 including postage and packing.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2001


                             776 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                               September 25, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 20

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: 'GM bone marrow' trial for children

BYLINE: Geraint Smith

BODY:


    DOCTORS in London are to begin trials of pioneering gene therapy that could
include genetically modifying children's bone marrow to combat rare inherited
conditions.

    At Britain's first gene therapy laboratory, launched today at the capital's
Institute for Child Health, doctors are to research treatments based on the
latest knowledge of the human genome.

    The institute's first task will be to test treatments for children with one
of two rare conditions. In one, "baby in the bubble syndrome" - known as SCID -
an infant has no normal immunity to any infection. Children must live their
lives in sterile environments, breathing only filtered air, and with constant
medical attention.

    The other, called chronic granulomatous disease, leaves the child open to
infection from fungi because specialist white blood cells produced in the bone
marrow do not work.

    "Some of these patients can be cured by bone marrow transplantation, but in
many cases there are no suitable donors," said one of the laboratory's team, Dr
Adrian Thrasher, at Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital, with which the
institute is working in close partnership.

    "Through gene therapy, the children's own bone marrow will be genetically
modified before being infused into the patient. It is hoped that this will give
these children a fully working immune system.

    "We hope that these two trials are only the beginning of our gene therapy.

    Gene therapy is about turning understanding into real cures for real
children.

    The trials will be the first in the world to use the combination of gene
therapy and mild bone marrow conditioning in children. The gene therapy facility
and these specific clinical trials are funded through proceeds from the Jeans
for Genes Campaign, a fundraising initiative by five partner charities, led by
Great Ormond Street Hospital Children's Charity.

    Gene therapy works by genetically modifying cells to correct inherited
faults, then putting the modified cells in the body. One method of doing this is
to "infect" the body with a virus which has also been modified, so that instead
of carrying the virus's own genetic material, it carries the genetically
modified cells to those parts of the body that need it.

    "Diseases of the immune system are one hopeful area for gene therapy,
because after many years of intensive research we now have the techniques to
genetically modify the appropriate cells," said Dr Thrasher.


LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2001


                             791 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2001 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             July 16, 2001, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 1285 words

HEADLINE: YOUR PROBLEMS: MIRIAM STOPPARD'S ADVICE COLUMN

BYLINE: Miriam Stoppard

BODY:


    Daughter detests the way she looks

    LETTER OF THE DAY

    MY 13-year-old daughter keeps saying, "How can I like myself mum, when I
don't like the way I look?"

    I've tried convincing her that she's lovely and it seems to me that if she
could like the way she looks, she'd like herself as a person. But she can't
change herself and neither can I. How do I help her? I feel helpless.

    ANY person builds up a picture of themselves and their self-worth from
several points of view, depending on where they are and who they're with.

    It's easy to feel high self-worth around friends who think you're "awesome"
and lower self-worth around parents who think you're "lazy" and "irresponsible".
The lowest level of self-worth could be around strangers who could think, "I'm a
total dork".

    By and large, it appears that parenting styles have the greatest affect on a
child's self-worth and self-esteem. And while parents continue to be important
during the teenage years, the opinion of peers comes to play an increasingly
crucial role.

    As with your daughter a key factor affecting self-esteem in the early
teenage years is physical appearance. For young people in it's body-image
satisfaction that brings most self-esteem. The views of parents, academic
achievement and sporting success also contribute.

    In early adolescence girls have much higher levels of dissatisfaction with
their bodies than boys.

    Girls are more dependent on peer-approval at this stage in their lives, and
more sensitive to the opinions of their friends. So it would only have taken one
snide remark from a friend for your daughter to feel condemned to ugliness.
Self-esteem doesn't remain constant during childhood and adolescence. A range of
factors affect self-esteem, depending on things such as success in school, the
approval of friends, family circumstances and so on.

    Researchers can identify a group of teenagers with consistently high self
-esteem, another showing rising levels of self-esteem between the ages of 12 and
16, a group showing consistently low self-esteem, and a fourth group whose
self-worth actually declines during adolescence.

    It strikes me that your daughter might fall into either of the last two
groups. In which case you could get her to do some simple exercises to make her
feel better about herself.

    Together you could write a list of all her good points. Then you could pick
out some of her talents, be they academic, sporting or social and work to
improve them. You need a systematic approach aimed at gradually giving her a
greater sense of self-worth and higher self-esteem.

    Scared to tell him how I feel

    MY lover has a brilliant mind and is great company.

    Though I'm 40 and ten years older than he is, we slowly slid into a physical
relationship which we agreed would be fun with no strings attached.

    He's the best lover I've ever had and the problem is that I have fallen
deeply in love with him.

    He has no idea, but I go to sleep and wake up thinking of him. I want to be
with him forever. But if I tell him, he'll run. Help.

    IF he's as intelligent as you say, it's likely that he's already cottoned on
to how strongly you feel about him.

    If this were so and he was planning to run a mile to avoid commitment, he'd
be heading out of town by now.

    Many relationships begin life with "no strings" attached and often grow into
much more. The age gap isn't an insuperable problem if you love each other.

    Traditionally men have inclined towards younger women but there's no written
rule which requires this and, as women tend to outlive men, there are advantages
for both sexes in revising the custom.

    As you're getting along like a house on fire, now isn't the time to damp
down the blaze.

    Try and make the most of the time you share and hopefully this will sow the
seeds for the permanent relationship you want.

    I HAVE bad breath and would like to know if there is an appliance that would
test for it? I saw one advertised in a magazine but it was cheap and surely it
can't test for bad breath, so is it worth it?

    I GET a lot of letters about halitosis and it clearly makes people anxious.
None of us like to think that people will turn heads away in disgust when we
talk.

    I haven't come across the product you describe or seen any clinical data
about it but your dentist may be in a better position to make recommendations.

    Bad breath is normally due to one of two things - poor hygiene and eating
foods that smell. The first can be cured by brushing your teeth every time you
eat. Bad breath can curse people who eat garlic, onions, cabbage, horseradish,
eggs, broccoli, sprouts, fish, red meat, peppers or those who smoke and drink
alcohol and coffee.

    But it can also occur even if your diet doesn't include the above foods, for
the basic causes are always present in your mouth: when food decomposes evil
smelling putrefaction gives off sulphide gas (the gas in bad eggs!).

    There's a machine that measures the amount of sulphide gas on your breath
but access to it is only through your dentist. I devoted a Health Focus to bad
breath and will send you a copy which has tips on keeping your breath sweet.I'M
15, though I look much older. The problem is, I do a lot of baby-sitting and one
of the dads has been coming on to me. He's young (32) and good looking and we've
done some passionate kissing while his wife was upstairs but I know it's got to
stop.

    The thing is, he's really determined. He's got my mobile phone number and he
keeps ringing me begging me to meet him. I'd like to but I know we'll end up
having sex and it'll all get really intense. How do I say no?

    VIT'S no good blaming this man alone. You're as much at fault as he is. You
know very well you're under age and legal sex is out of the question. I expect
it makes you feel very desirable and powerful to have him running after you but
you'll never be more to him than an easy lay.

    What you've both done already is inexcusable and I'm only relieved things
haven't gone any further. Before you know it, you could be pregnant or
responsible for wrecking the lives of his wife and children.

    So far you've been sending out mixed messages and now you have to say No.
Tell him if he persists you'll alert your parents and then his wife. It goes
without saying that your baby-sitting days for this family are over.

    HEALTH NEWS

    MILK IT

    BABIES who are given solids too early may be more likely to suffer from
heart disease and diabetes later in life.

    Researchers in Dundee found that breast milk protects against high
cholesterol and high blood-sugar levels.

    Studies showed that those given solids before 15 weeks had higher than
average levels of cholesterol and blood sugar and were more likely to suffer
from vasoconstriction, when blood vessels fail to open efficiently.

    If a bottle-fed baby is given solids within a few weeks, the effect on the
circulatory system is like trying to draw treacle through a straw.

    FIRST AIDS

    CANCER patients are to be injected with the Aids virus as part of a new gene
therapy trial.

    HIV's ability to evade our immune defences makes it ideal for carrying new
genes. The virus will have been modified to make it harmless.

    Many illnesses, including cancer, are the result of a malfunctioning gene.

    Scientists believe they can replace this gene with a healthy one but need a
carrier to transport the gene. Viruses are ideal.

    A gene is "spliced" into a virus, then you infect a patient and countless
copies of that missing gene will be created.

    Normally our bodies would destroy a virus. Modified HIV, however, can avoid
immune attack for a considerable amount of time.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2001


                             792 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2001 MGN Ltd.
                                 Sunday Mirror

                              July 8, 2001, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 211 words

HEADLINE: MUM'S GENE LINK TO INFERTILITY IN SONS

BYLINE: Sharon Collins

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS have discovered a gene which they believe causes male infertility
and is passed on by mothers to sons.

    The finding is being hailed as a major boost in the search for a treatment
for the condition.

    The gene, called ZNF214, is to blame for low sperm counts in a small
percentage of men.

    There is also believed to be another yet-undiscovered gene which is
responsible for male fertility problems, and which passes from father to son.

    In around half of the 27,000 couples who have IVF treatment in Britain each
year, the fertility problem lies with the man. The researchers hope that an
understanding of how ZNF214 affects sperm production could lead to new
treatments.

    They are testing human testicle cells to find out what role the faulty gene
plays in lowering a man's sperm count. Until now low sperm counts have been
labelled by doctors as "unexplained infertility".

    The research was carried out by Dutch scientist Dr Judith Gianotten, who
revealed the findings at a conference of fertility experts in Switzerland last
week.

    Dr Ceinwen Gearon, director of the Lister Hospital's IVF laboratory in
London, said: "This moves us closer to the development of gene therapy - where
faulty genes are replaced with healthy ones".

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2001


                             798 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2001 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            June 27, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 99 words

HEADLINE: PROSTATE DRUG TEST

BODY:


    TRIALS on a new treatment for prostate cancer are to be held in Britain,
scientists revealed yesterday.

    The tests will show whether genetic engineering could make tumours
susceptible to an anti-cancer drug.

    If it works, the therapy could eradicate currently incurable forms of the
disease.

    Dr Nick James, of the Cancer Research Campaign, said: "We're optimistic that
gene therapy will fulfil its enormous potential by saving many lives."

    Prostate cancer kills half the 20,000 men it affects in the UK each year.

    New cases are expected to soar by 47 per cent by 2021.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2001


                             799 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2001 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            June 27, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 95 words

HEADLINE: CURE HOPE FOR MALE CANCER

BODY:


    A REVOLUTIONARY treatment for prostate cancer is to be tested on patients in
Britain, scientists announced yesterday.

    Genetic therapy will be used to see if it allows anti-cancer drugs to kill
off prostate tumours.

    If successful, it could boost hopes of eradicating all prostate cancers
which are at present incurable.

    There are more than 20,000 cases a year in Britain and more than half of
those men die from the disease.

    Dr Nick James, leading the study at Birmingham University, said: "This could
mean a fresh approach to treating the disease."

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2001


                             800 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 June 26, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 443 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy hope in prostate cancer fight

BYLINE: Geraint Smith

BODY:



    BRITAIN's first clinical trial of gene therapy for prostate cancer, the
disease forecast to become the biggest killer of men, is being launched today.

    The trial, a collaboration between The Cancer Research Campaign and
pharmaceutical company Cobra will test whether genetic engineering can turn
prostate cancers into targets for anticancer drugs.

    Scientists are hopeful the study will lead to treatments for prostate
cancers that are currently incurable, such as those resistant to radiotherapy.

    Professor Gordon McVie, director general of the Cancer Research Campaign,
said: "Gene therapy has the potential to become one of the most exciting
technologies available to cancer specialists. For the first time in the UK, this
trial will determine whether it can be made to work for prostate cancer in the
here and now."

    The charity is due to make the announcement during the Third Global
Conference for Cancer Organi-sations in Brighton today.

    Researchers are to recruit up to 30 men with prostate cancer onto the
initial phase of the trial, although more will join if the first phase is
successful.

    Dr Nick James, who is coordinating the trial, said: "We're keen that men
with early-stage prostate cancer should put themselves forward for the trial,
which could open up an entirely fresh approach to treating the disease. If the
research is successful, it should help us

    tackle some of the most stubborn, radiotherapy-resistant forms of the
disease. We're optimistic that gene therapy will fulfil its enormous potential
by saving the lives of many patients."

    Unlike normal chemotherapy, gene therapy can be targeted on a tumour,
avoiding damage to healthy tissues. The treatments use "prodrugs", which are
usually harmless, but are converted to toxic forms in the presence of a chemical
trigger. By genetically engineering cancer cells with the trigger, doctors can
mark out tumours for attack.

    The trial, which will take place in two stages, will test whether this
approach works.

    In the first stage, researchers will check whether they can put a chemical
trigger into cancer cells without causing toxic side-effects. They will inject
the prostate gland of each patient with a genetically engineered virus carrying
a gene called nitroreductase, which produces a protein molecule with powerful
prodrug activating properties.

    If the genetic engineering is successful, the researchers will then test
whether the drug selectively attacks the cancer cells.

    They will inject each patient with a prodrug called CB1954 and test whether
it is able to tackle prostate tumours, and leave normal tissues unharmed.


LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2001


                             806 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2001 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            May 23, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 143 words

HEADLINE: POLIO VIRUS KILLS CANCER

BYLINE: Amanda Murphy

BODY:


    DEADLY polio cells could cure brain cancer in just five years' time,
scientists in the US revealed yesterday.

    Studies carried out in Duke University North Carolina, showed that the polio
virus homes in on cancers in the brain and kills them.

    The project has been tested on animals and experts believe that it may bring
a new treatment for brain cancer patients.

    Cancer researcher Brad Timms said: "The project is one of a number in gene
therapy experiments in the fight against cancer.

    "It is early days yet, but there is still hope. Brain cancer is relatively
rare, so research will be on going for a few years to come."

    But the treatment could not be used in initial research as there was a fear
that patients would get infected with polio.

    Scientists have now worked out a way to prevent the infection of the deadly
disease.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2001


                             807 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2001 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                                  May 11, 2001

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 337 words

HEADLINE: THE GM BABIES;
 STORM OVER CHILDREN WITH GENES FROM THREE PARENTS

BYLINE: Steve Atkinson

BODY:


    THE world's first genetically modified babies have been born after secret
experiments that would be banned in Britain, it was revealed yesterday.

    The 30 children are "healthy" and "doing fine" - but at least two toddlers
have genes from THREE parents, said scientists in America.

    The announcement is certain to start heated debate on the morality of the
issue, especially as the technique used is illegal in many countries including
the UK.

    Women with fertility problems had their chances of conceiving boosted by
injecting their eggs with genetic material from donor eggs before they were
fertilised.

    Now DNA testing has shown that two one-year-olds have genes from both their
"mothers" as well as the fathers.

    Experts stressed that they will pass on their extra genes to their own
children when they grow up.

    Writing in the journal Human Reproduction, the researchers said it was the
first time scientists have altered the genes that humans pass on to their
offspring.

    Fertility expert Lord Winston, of Hammersmith Hospital, London, was stunned
at the news of the experiments at the Institute for Reproductive Medicine of St
Barnabas, New Jersey.

    He said: "I am very surprised that it was even carried out at this stage. It
would certainly not be allowed in Britain."

    John Smeaton, national director of the Society for the Protection of Unborn
Children, described it as a "worrying step".

    He said: "One has tremendous sympathy for couples who suffer infertility
problems.

    "But this seems to be a further illustration of the fact that the whole
process of in vitro fertilisation leads to babies being regarded as objects on a
production line.

    "It is a further and very worrying step down the wrong road for humanity."
Professor Joe Cummins, of Western Ontario university in Canada, said: "Now is
not the time to bring in human germline gene therapy through the back door."

    A spokesman at the American lab institute said the researchers were not
available for comment.

GRAPHIC: FEARS: Tests worry experts

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2001


                             811 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2001 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             May 5, 2001, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 337 words

HEADLINE: THE GM BABIES;
 STORM OVER CHILDREN WITH GENES FROM THREE PARENTS

BYLINE: STEVE ATKINSON

HIGHLIGHT:
FEARS: Tests worry experts

BODY:


    THE world's first genetically modified babies have been born after secret
experiments that would be banned in Britain, it was revealed yesterday.

    The 30 children are "healthy" and "doing fine" - but at least two toddlers
have genes from THREE parents, said scientists in America.

    The announcement is certain to start heated debate on the morality of the
issue, especially as the technique used is illegal in many countries including
the UK.

    Women with fertility problems had their chances of conceiving boosted by
injecting their eggs with genetic material from donor eggs before they were
fertilised.

    Now DNA testing has shown that two one-year-olds have genes from both their
"mothers" as well as the fathers.

    Experts stressed that they will pass on their extra genes to their own
children when they grow up.

    Writing in the journal Human Reproduction, the researchers said it was the
first time scientists have altered the genes that humans pass on to their
offspring.

    Fertility expert Lord Winston, of Hammersmith Hospital, London, was stunned
at the news of the experiments at the Institute for Reproductive Medicine of St
Barnabas, New Jersey.

    He said: "I am very surprised that it was even carried out at this stage. It
would certainly not be allowed in Britain."

    John Smeaton, national director of the Society for the Protection of Unborn
Children, described it as a "worrying step".

    He said: "One has tremendous sympathy for couples who suffer infertility
problems.

    "But this seems to be a further illustration of the fact that the whole
process of in vitro fertilisation leads to babies being regarded as objects on a
production line.

    "It is a further and very worrying step down the wrong road for humanity."
Professor Joe Cummins, of Western Ontario university in Canada, said: "Now is
not the time to bring in human germline gene therapy through the back door."

    A spokesman at the American lab institute said the researchers were not
available for comment.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2003


                             841 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2001 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                           February 27, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: Scots Edition; NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 73 words

HEADLINE: CANCER PILL HOPE HIGH

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS have moved closer to developing a pill to cure cancer.

    They discovered that feeding gene material to mice eradicated tumours.

    Now the American boffins have hailed it as a major breakthrough in the
battle against one of mankind's biggest killers.

    Last night Professor Carlo Croce of Thomas Jefferson University in
Philadelphia said: "For the first time we have been able to stop cancer using
gene therapy."

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2005


                             876 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                               November 17, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 2

LENGTH: 185 words

HEADLINE: PM pledges his support for embryo research

BYLINE: Jo Revill

BODY:


    TONY BLAIR gave his backing today to embryo research, arguing that the
controversial technique could help scientists find cures for common diseases.

    He went on to warn of the dangers of slipping into "anti-science" attitudes
which could rob Britain of the benefits of cutting-edge research.

    Stem cell research, which uses human embryos to generate cells for the
design of drugs and gene therapies, is supported by ministers who believe it
could lead to treatments for conditions such as Parkinson's disease.

    Mr Blair said that people had to recognise that in controversial areas there
could be "more than one morally acceptable outcome". He added: "We must all
recognise that when stem cell research has huge potential to improve the lives
of those suffering from disease, there are strong ethical arguments in favour."

    He also gave his backing to research into genetically modified foods, but
acknowledged "legitimate concerns".

    Addressing the European Bioscience Conference, Mr Blair said he would not
tolerate "intimidation" by protesters who tried to wreck research projects.


LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2000


                             879 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2000 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                           November 9, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: 1 Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 38,39

LENGTH: 1888 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH ZONE: AGEING: HAVE THESE MEN FOUND THE KEY TO.. ETERNAL YOUTH?

BYLINE: LUCY ELKINS

HIGHLIGHT:
Picture: MARTIN GILFEATHER; Picture: STEVE NICHOLSON; Picture: TOM BUIST

BODY:


    TEAMS of scientists around the world are involved in the race against time -
they are searching for the answer to eternal youth.

    They are looking at everything from stimulating the brain to produce healthy
cells to finding nutrients that could slow down the body's natural ageing
process.

    You might think that banishing wrinkles and finding cures to age-related
diseases is just a dream. But it's a reality we could see realised within a few
years. Here in Britain three doctors are leading the field of gerontology - the
scientific study of ageing. Dr Marios Kyriazis, a gerontologist at the Longevity
Society in Northampton, and Dr David Weeks, a neuropsychologist at the Royal
Edinburgh Hospital, are both investigating exactly how certain foods affect the
rate at which our cells age.

    And Dr Alexander Burkle and his team at Newcastle University are just years
away from developing a pill to stop the ageing progress.

    They share their findings and explain what we can all do to hold back the
years.

    DR DAVID WEEKS

    is head of The Old Age Psychology department at the Royal Edinburgh
Hospital. After 12 years' research, he believes eating lots of different
proteins holds back the ageing process

    SO what is the ultimate age-defying diet? Dr Weeks says we must take care to
ensure we get enough of the eight essential amino acids (listed below). These
'essential' proteins cannot be made by the body so it is vital we get them from
our diet.

    HIS FINDINGS

    DR Weeks is convinced that eating a wide range of proteins is the key to
maintaining a youthful body.

    He is adamant that we need to regularly eat the eight essential amino acids
which help produce cells and keep them in good condition.

    "The body cannot make these so we need to get them from our diet," he says.
"Each one plays a role in the front-line battle to repair the wear and tear that
our cells endure as we age."

    Dr Weeks has been investigating the habits of the "superyoung". He's
examined 3,500 people who are over 30 but who look and feel younger. He's
investigated their lifestyles, especially their diet.

    Consuming a wide range of proteins to hold back the clock is one of his most
significant discoveries.

    "The answer according to my research is that about four ounces a day is the
right amount - the equivalent to say a chicken breast or a tuna sandwich. And a
good mixture of protein is the key, without relying too much on meat as the
source," he says.

    Just over half the people Dr Weeks studied were vegetarians, although they
seemed to enjoy no significant benefits over meat eaters.

    "None of the non-meat eaters aged at a significantly slower rate, what seems
to work best is to eat meat once or twice a week."

    Dr Weeks is about to study people who are suffering with senile dementia to
see if the lack of protein or some other dietary factor is the cause of their
condition.

    "It's probable that the affected cells of people with dementia aren't dead
but are in a sleeping state. It may be that a protein diet could be a factor in
triggering them awake."

    Dr Weeks believes few people are aware of how much protein there is in the
food they eat.

    "People don't realise that foods such as kale, cauliflower and walnuts are
all great protein sources.

    "Tuna, salmon and trout, are 45 per cent protein. In spinach there is 49 per
cent and even melons are 10 per cent protein.

    "Then there are things like seeds, pulses and soya which are between 28 and
35 per cent protein."

    Diet that the Doc orders

    Day one: Main meal of fish. A handful of nuts - eat these every other day.
Walnuts and almonds are particularly good, but avoid salted peanuts which are
high in fat. Milk and yoghurt - these should be eaten every day as they are high
in essential amino acids.

    Day two: Main meal of meat, plus milk and yoghurt.

    Day three: Vegetarian main meal. Try pulses such as kidney beans, lentils,
and soya beans or soya mince - these should be eaten twice a week. Nuts, milk
and yoghurt.

    Day four: Main meal of fish. During the day try and eat two eggs - you
should eat two eggs a week - milk and yoghurt.

    Day five: Main meal of meat, plus nuts, milk and yoghurt.

    Day six: Vegetarian main meal, milk and yoghurt.

    Day seven: Main meal of fish. Nuts, milk and yoghurt.

    IN addition, you should try to eat at least five portions of fruit and
vegetables a day including plenty of cauliflower, spinach, melon and kale which
are rich in protein.

    Eat these 8 key proteins

    Amino Acids

    Leucine: One of the general building-block proteins which helps our body
repair cells. It is found in walnuts, eggs, beef and wheat flour.

    Lysine: Helps tissue repair especially in the production of collagen which
is vital for keeping skin supple and wrinkle free. Found in lamb, milk, fish and
poultry.

    Isoleucine: Helps build muscle. Found in yoghurt, yeast, hazelnuts and eggs.

    Methionine: Works both as an anti-oxidant and helps break down fats and form
the blood protein. Found in beans, lentils, liver and wheat flour.

    Phenylalanine: Helps with the mental processes, regulates appetite and
hormone production. Found in egg white, spinach, peas and chocolate.

    Threonine: Aids recovery from illness. Found in fish, meat, milk and wheat
flour.

    Trytophan: Helps stabilise mood and is necessary for good sleep patterns.
Found in brown rice, dates, lamb, beef, soya and beer.

    Valine: Aids the work of Isoleucine and luecine. Found in yeast milk, eggs
and wheat flour.

    DR MARIOS KYRIAZIS

    is a clinical gerontologist at the Longevity Society in Northampton. He has
studied ageing for for 10 years and says we should cut back on sugar and do mind
exercises to help us stay young

    FINDINGS

    HE SAYS that research now proves there is no reason why someone should get
less alert as they age. Keeping your mind stimulated with simple mind games
helps fight off physical effects of ageing too.

    Setting tests for your brain will stop the mental effects of ageing such as
slower responses and dulled memory. It's vital to keep variety in your life to
ensure that you work all the regions of your brain - even altering where you buy
your groceries can help.

    A youthful mind has the added benefit of helping the body's ability to fight
disease. This is because when the brain is alert it produces more hormones and
other substances which boost immunity.

    Preventing illness helps to hold back ageing. Any illness, from 'flu to
cancer, increases demands on the body to repair and replace damaged and diseased
cells.

    "We used to think that as we grew old our brain cells died and could never
reproduce, hence fading memories," says Dr Kyriazis. "But new research this year
has found brain cells can continue to reproduce."

    But, he says, new brain cells can't work alone. "They need to connect with
the other cells before they contribute to keep your thought processes in the
peak they were in your youth."

    Brain cells behave as part of a network, but until a new cell has
communicated with other cells it won't act as part of the network team.

    Expanding the network boosts your brain power, and you can stimulate new
cells to take part by using different areas of your mind so you get the
different cells to spark off each other.

    "Think of a new brain cell like a newcomer to a party. That newcomer makes
no progress if he or she doesn't mingle with other guests: it's the same with
these cells."

    He has found that a change of routine can keep your mind youthful. He says:
"You need variety in life to make the brain work in different ways and to
stimulate different cells to work in different areas, so you have to set
yourself little tests.

    "My patients have benefited from playing mind games once a week. For
example, they might think of five different uses for an everyday object such as
glass.

    "Reading something on a subject you know nothing about can also boost your
brain, as can any variation to your routine - travelling to new places is
brilliant."

    Dr Kyriazis, author of The Anti-Ageing Plan, also warns that sugar speeds up
ageing.

    Some symptoms of ageing such as weaker muscles, slowed liver function,
memory loss and wrinkles, are due to a process called glycosylation. This
happens when glucose molecules attach themselves to proteins that make up
tissues in the muscles, organs and collagen in the skin and damage them.

    Dr Kyriazis says avoiding excess sugar is simple. "The amount of sugar each
body can handle varies but there are rules that ensure you don't have excess.
Don't add sugar to tea or coffee and don't snack on sweets or biscuits."

    DR ALEXANDER BURKLE

    is a senior lecturer in gerontology at Newcastle University, and leads a
team researching cell renewal. He says we should eat antioxidant- rich fruit and
veg five times a day

    FINDINGS

    THE team's research backs up the theory that antioxidant vitamins A, C and E
in fruit and vegetables help delay the physical effects of ageing.

    Dr Burkle hopes that once they discover why our cells show signs of wear and
tear, they will be able to develop a pill or gene therapy to prevent our bodies
from ageing.

    Sagging skin, weaker muscles and failing health occur as the quality of our
new cells deteriorates. Dr Burkle's team are trying to identify what triggers
the repair process and to find a way of producing youthful cells throughout our
lifetimes.

    One of the main problems is that the DNA in our cells breaks down because of
ultraviolet light, mild doses of naturally occurring radiation, and even normal
bodily functions such as breathing. This means that we start to produce faulty
cells.

    "Every cell uses oxygen in chemical reactions," says Dr Burkle. "But these
reactions produce by-products known as free radicals which react with DNA,
contributing to its breakdown and speeding up the ageing process."

    That's not to say that exercising and getting out of breath will speed up
ageing just because we breathe faster. When we exercise the free radicals that
are produced are quickly converted into a substance called ATP, which our
muscles need to function. Exercise actually plays a part in keeping us youthful.
But once the damage is done, as yet there is no way to turn back the clock.

    "Our DNA contains all the information that we need to make another cell,"
says Dr Burkle. "Once DNA becomes faulty it starts to reproduce other faulty
cells. Our skin starts to sag and wrinkle and our internal organs don't work as
well as they once did."

    Dr Burkle's team are trying to pinpoint the natural enzyme in the body which
helps trigger cell repair. They want to see if it's possible to copy this enzyme
so that the production of faulty, ageing cells can be stopped. "Thirty years
from now there may be an anti-aging pill," says Dr Burkle.

    "It's what we call trying to increase the 'health span'. This line of
investigation is in its infancy but we'll see breakthroughs in years rather than
hundreds of years."

    So what should the rest of us do in the meantime? Dr Burkle advises against
swallowing handfuls of pills.

    "Research shows that taking super-doses of antioxidants has no benefits over
eating a diet rich in fruit and vegetables. I'd advise eating five portions of
fruit and vegetables a day."

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2005


                             887 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2000 MGN Ltd.
                                 Sunday Mirror

                            October 8, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 56, 57

LENGTH: 747 words

HEADLINE: YOUR HEALTH : NINE SISTERS WHO LIVE IN FEAR;
 WILL BREAST CANCER TIMEBOMB THAT KILLED MUM CLAIM THEM?

BYLINE: Christine Challand

BODY:


    THEY are a close-knit family of nine sisters - and they share a deadly fear.

    When their mother Kathleen Purdy died of breast cancer six years ago at the
age of 64, they had to face the terrifying fact that they may all have inherited
the abnormal gene which makes women more susceptible to the killer disease.

    Two of the sisters have already been diagnosed with breast cancer.

    And this week, as one of them began chemotherapy, her seven healthy sisters
were waiting to undergo genetic testing.

    "It's a devastating time for all of us," said Jean Brooks, 53, a housewife
from Lincoln who was diagnosed only a month ago.

    "I am still trying to come to terms with it and I still don't know how I am
going to cope.

    "I have just started the first of five chemotherapy treatments and I may
have to have a mastectomy.

    "When the tests confirmed I had cancer I thought, 'What else could God send
me?' My mum had died of breast cancer and my sister Pat had also been diagnosed
and had her second mastectomy four years ago.

    "The thought of any more of my sisters going through this is
heartbreaking.""

    Between five and 10 per cent of the population inherit genes which give them
a high risk of being affected by cancer, and genetic testing is the only way
that Jean's other sisters will know if they too are at risk.

    Specialists at Lincoln County Hospital, where Jean and her sister Pat Smith,
52, have undergone treatment, are now planning to use a gene therapy technique
to find out if the other sisters could develop the cancer.

    They will be able to build up a genetic picture of the family by taking
blood from Pat, who has survived cancer, and one of the healthy sisters.

    Pat, who also lives in Lincoln near five of her sisters - Jackie Walker, 47,
Angela Horsewood, 38, Julie Crosbie, 36, Diane Bates, 39, and Wendy Copeland, 49
- was told by her doctor that the only reason she survived was because of the
early detection of a lump in her left breast.

    "It could have been too late for me if I hadn't found the lump when I did,""
she said. "I have always been very breast-aware and was examining myself when I
found it in 1991. I was devastated when the tests confirmed cancer.

    "I had a mastectomy and my life got back to normal until four years later
when a mammogram detected small cancerous lumps in my right breast.

    "It was a very worrying time but I had a second mastectomy and it's behind
me now.

    "I accept it, what else can I do? I have to carry on with my life as
normal.""

    Jackie Walker, like all of her sisters, including Sheila Phillips, 41, from
Oxford, and Ellen Clayton, 54, who lives in Canada, has had around six
mammograms over the last 10 years to check for cancer.

    She had said she is even contemplating surgery, despite the facts that so
far the tests have given her a clean bill of health.

    "I value my life,"" she said. "What's the point in just sitting here and
waiting for it to be my turn if I can have both of my breasts removed and
significantly reduce my chance of developing the disease? It's difficult to see
what my sisters are going through and it's worrying to know it could happen to
me."

    Jenny Hinchcliffe, a Macmillan breast care nurse specialist at Lincoln
County Hospital said the sisters' story highlighted the importance of breast
awareness.

    She urged women to examine themselves and take part in the national breast
-screening programme.

    "Breast cancer mortality rates are reducing, partly due to the national
breast -screening programme and improved treatment," she said. One of the key
factors in the increased survival rate is early diagnosis.

    In the last 20 years, deaths from breast cancer, which affects one in 10
women in the UK, have fallen by five per cent - down from 13,344 in 1980 to
12,677 last year.

    In fact new figures show that lung cancer has now overtaken breast cancer as
the most dangerous form of the disease for British women.

    But women are warned that these figures are no reason to be complacent.
October is National Breast Cancer Awareness Month in which breast cancer
charities have joined together to increase the public's knowledge and
understanding of the disease.

    The campaign is being spearheaded by Cherie Blair, Liz Hurley and TV news
girl Kirsty Young.

    One of the fund-raising drives is a Web auction of pink leather cushions
which have all been signed by celebrities. Bids can be made on the Internet at
www. lastminute.com

GRAPHIC: ANGELA HORSEWOOD; JULIE CROSBY; ELLEN CLAYTON; SHEILA PHILLIPS;; DIANE
BATES; WENDY COPELAND; DEVASTATED: Jean Brooks (left) and Pat Smith; (right),
who have already been diagnosed, with their healthy sister Jackie; Walker. Their
mother (inset) Kathleen Purdy died from breast cancer six years ago

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2000


                             888 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2000 MGN Ltd.
                                 Sunday Mirror

                            October 8, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: 1 Edition; FEATURES; Pg. 56,57

LENGTH: 747 words

HEADLINE: YOUR HEALTH : NINE SISTERS WHO LIVE IN FEAR;
 WILL BREAST CANCER TIMEBOMB THAT KILLED MUM CLAIM THEM?

BYLINE: CHRISTINE CHALLAND

HIGHLIGHT:
ANGELA HORSEWOOD; JULIE CROSBY; ELLEN CLAYTON; SHEILA PHILLIPS; DIANE BATES;
WENDY COPELAND; DEVASTATED: Jean Brooks (left) and Pat Smith (right), who have
already been diagnosed, with their healthy sister Jackie Walker. Their mother
(inset) Kathleen Purdy died from breast cancer six years ago

BODY:


    THEY are a close-knit family of nine sisters - and they share a deadly fear.

    When their mother Kathleen Purdy died of breast cancer six years ago at the
age of 64, they had to face the terrifying fact that they may all have inherited
the abnormal gene which makes women more susceptible to the killer disease.

    Two of the sisters have already been diagnosed with breast cancer.

    And this week, as one of them began chemotherapy, her seven healthy sisters
were waiting to undergo genetic testing.

    "It's a devastating time for all of us," said Jean Brooks, 53, a housewife
from Lincoln who was diagnosed only a month ago.

    "I am still trying to come to terms with it and I still don't know how I am
going to cope.

    "I have just started the first of five chemotherapy treatments and I may
have to have a mastectomy.

    "When the tests confirmed I had cancer I thought, 'What else could God send
me?' My mum had died of breast cancer and my sister Pat had also been diagnosed
and had her second mastectomy four years ago.

    "The thought of any more of my sisters going through this is
heartbreaking.""

    Between five and 10 per cent of the population inherit genes which give them
a high risk of being affected by cancer, and genetic testing is the only way
that Jean's other sisters will know if they too are at risk.

    Specialists at Lincoln County Hospital, where Jean and her sister Pat Smith,
52, have undergone treatment, are now planning to use a gene therapy technique
to find out if the other sisters could develop the cancer.

    They will be able to build up a genetic picture of the family by taking
blood from Pat, who has survived cancer, and one of the healthy sisters.

    Pat, who also lives in Lincoln near five of her sisters - Jackie Walker, 47,
Angela Horsewood, 38, Julie Crosbie, 36, Diane Bates, 39, and Wendy Copeland, 49
- was told by her doctor that the only reason she survived was because of the
early detection of a lump in her left breast.

    "It could have been too late for me if I hadn't found the lump when I did,""
she said. "I have always been very breast-aware and was examining myself when I
found it in 1991. I was devastated when the tests confirmed cancer.

    "I had a mastectomy and my life got back to normal until four years later
when a mammogram detected small cancerous lumps in my right breast.

    "It was a very worrying time but I had a second mastectomy and it's behind
me now.

    "I accept it, what else can I do? I have to carry on with my life as
normal.""

    Jackie Walker, like all of her sisters, including Sheila Phillips, 41, from
Oxford, and Ellen Clayton, 54, who lives in Canada, has had around six
mammograms over the last 10 years to check for cancer.

    She had said she is even contemplating surgery, despite the facts that so
far the tests have given her a clean bill of health.

    "I value my life,"" she said. "What's the point in just sitting here and
waiting for it to be my turn if I can have both of my breasts removed and
significantly reduce my chance of developing the disease? It's difficult to see
what my sisters are going through and it's worrying to know it could happen to
me."

    Jenny Hinchcliffe, a Macmillan breast care nurse specialist at Lincoln
County Hospital said the sisters' story highlighted the importance of breast
awareness.

    She urged women to examine themselves and take part in the national
breast-screening programme.

    "Breast cancer mortality rates are reducing, partly due to the national
breast-screening programme and improved treatment," she said. One of the key
factors in the increased survival rate is early diagnosis.

    In the last 20 years, deaths from breast cancer, which affects one in 10
women in the UK, have fallen by five per cent - down from 13,344 in 1980 to
12,677 last year.

    In fact new figures show that lung cancer has now overtaken breast cancer as
the most dangerous form of the disease for British women.

    But women are warned that these figures are no reason to be complacent.
October is National Breast Cancer Awareness Month in which breast cancer
charities have joined together to increase the public's knowledge and
understanding of the disease.

    The campaign is being spearheaded by Cherie Blair, Liz Hurley and TV news
girl Kirsty Young.

    One of the fund-raising drives is a Web auction of pink leather cushions
which have all been signed by celebrities. Bids can be made on the Internet at
www. lastminute.com

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2005


                             890 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                October 3, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 41

LENGTH: 163 words

HEADLINE: ML boffins to join US on genes

BODY:


    BOFFINS at King's College, London, are to link up with scientists in San
Francisco to develop and commercialise their groundbreaking work into gene
therapy, writes Malcolm Withers.

    The King's College researchers operate under the wing of Cobra Therapeutics,
a wholly owned subsidiary of biotech group ML Laboratories.

    They have discovered a process under which genes can generate proteins such
as antibodies. These could lead to the commercial production of therapeutic
proteins.

    The Americans, who are based at Coulter Pharmaceutical, a Nasdaq-listed
company, are to pay Cobra a signature fee of £1 million and further milestone
payments depending on the commercialisation and development of the King's
College research.

    Costs will be shared, with Coulter taking responsibility for
commercialisation in the US and Japan and Cobra for all other countries.

    Income will be shared equally.

    ML Laboratories' shares today advanced by 31/2p to 130p.


LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2000


                             892 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                               September 27, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 217 words

HEADLINE: Shorter wait times for cancer patients

BYLINE: Jo Revill

BODY:


    CANCER patients will be able to start treatment within a month of diagnosis,
under a programme being unveiled today by Health Secretary Alan Milburn.

    If the Government succeeds in recruiting 1,000 more specialists over six
years, delays in having surgery or beginning drug treatment - which cause great
anxiety among patients and their relatives - would be significantly reduced.

    A new national cancer institute will be set up as a "clearing house",
directing the focus of research money from various charities and government
bodies.

    The need for an institute was outlined recently by an all-party committee
which said that a national body could target the areas of highest priority such
as genetic therapy.

    Details of the plan will be included in Mr Milburn's Labour Party conference
speech today and he will also say that an extra £20 million is to be spent
supporting research - a figure included in his NHS Plan in July.

    Mr Milburn said today: "Waiting times for cancer services must be cut."

    However, the £20 million is less than cancer charities had hoped for.

    Sir Paul Nurse, director general of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, said:
"We believe a further £200 million is needed year on year if we are to make a
significant impact on the cancer problem."


LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2000


                             893 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                               September 27, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 26

LENGTH: 79 words

BODY:


    "OLYMPIC athletes are already eight to 10 steps ahead of the tests for
illegal substances, and, unless something spectacular happens in the next
decade, those who use drugs will continue by far to outrun them. There is just
too much money involved. And any tests will be a moot point when we have genetic
therapies 10 to 12 years from now. I can't even conceptualise a test to detect
that."

    - Charles Yesalis, epidemiologist at Pennsylvania State University.


LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2000


                             895 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2000 MGN Ltd.
                                 Sunday Mirror

                           September 17, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 445 words

HEADLINE: BREAST CANCER AWARENESS: THE GENETICIST'S STORY - 'GENE THERAPY MIGHT
HELP ONE DAY, BUT PREVENTION IS WHAT WE ARE CONCERNED WITH';
 PROFESSOR JOHN BURN, HEAD OF A CANCER GENETICS NETWORK, SHEDS LIGHT ON THE
IMPORTANCE OF GENE RESEARCH IN HELPING THOSE MOST AT RISK

BYLINE: John Burn

BODY:


    Of the 35,000 women who are struck down by breast cancer every year, around
2,000 of them will get the disease because they inherited a faulty breast cancer
gene.

    Six years ago these women were given a lifeline when geneticists finally
located the rogue gene BRCA1, followed by a second gene, BRCA2 a year later.
Recently they found a third, named P53.

    And with the arrival of family genetics clinics throughout Britain, more and
more families with a history of breast cancer among relatives are being tested
to see who might have inherited the faulty gene.

    "These genes normally suppress tumours but when they are faulty, do just the
opposite," explains Professor John Burn, head of the Imperial Cancer Research
Fund's Clinical Cancer Genetics Network. "If you think of a gene as a book, then
the faulty gene is a spelling mistake. Not everybody who inherits this spelling
mistake will automatically develop breast cancer, although a high number, around
85 per cent, will. They then have a one-in-two chance of passing it on to their
daughters - and sons who can act as carriers. We don't want to be fatalistic. We
want to use the genetic knowledge effectively and set up a prevention programme
so that those who have inherited the gene can be helped, hopefully, before the
cancer develops."

    Women who have had three relatives with breast cancer (spread over two
generations) would be considered to have a high risk of inheriting a faulty
gene. GPs can refer anyone with a family history of breast cancer to one of 25
family genetic centres for testing. If your GP doesn't offer this service - ask
for it. "Preventative mastectomy, possibly followed by reconstructive surgery,
is a good option for some women found to be carrying the gene," says Prof Burn.
"We can also give a Rolls-Royce surveillance programme. We are currently testing
MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) technology which we hope will be more effective
than mammography in picking up the earliest tumours. But what is really needed
are methods of prevention. It's what the families want. Simple, inexpensive
prevention drugs like Tamoxifen, that can be used on people with a genetic risk,
before the cancer happens."

    Gene therapy might help one day, he says. "Although getting it into every
cell in the breast would be an enormous challenge."

    Meanwhile, genetic testing is not only identifying women at high risk, it is
also helping dispel fear of cancer among relatives. "The ripple effect of cancer
in the family, is huge. Being able to reassure people that they have no more
risk of getting cancer than the general population is just another benefit of
genetic research."

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2000


                             900 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                August 24, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 53

LENGTH: 593 words

HEADLINE: Theatre shows power in human-rights drama

BYLINE: Rachel Halliburton

BODY:


    THIS year's season at the Traverse has done more than any other venue to
prove theatre's explosive powers, writes Rachel Halliburton. In the first two
weeks, Kay Adshead's Bogus Woman - which transfers to the Bush in February -
shocked and moved audiences with its well-researched portrayal of the human
rights abuses frequently suffered by asylum seekers in Britain.

    Actress Noma Dumezweni played an African journalist whose devastating
account of how her family and baby were massacred by the military was greeted
with sneering cynicism and ridicule by English immigration officers.

    This drama was one of the plethora of good-quality plays for women this
year, which have included Liz Lochead's ball-breaking Medea, Kate Atkinson's
sprawling but enjoyable Abandonment, Thembi Mtshali's much-feted A Woman in
Waiting and Jules Leyser's snappy and enjoyable All Words for Sex.

    Zinnie Harris, too, has revealed herself as a promising newcomer with
Further Than the Furthest Thing (coming to the National Theatre in October),
which transports the audience to the remote Atlantic island of Tristan da Cunha,
where the islanders are locked into an idyllic time warp, their language soaked
in the simplicity and immediacy intrinsic to an oral culture.

    Niki Turner's shimmering set evokes the pleasures of living close to the
elements, pleasures which are denied the islanders when a volcano explodes, and
they are evacuated by the British. Harris needs to develop her dramatic ideas
more thoroughly, but she has an interesting path ahead of her.

    The only bad news for women this year comes from the dank corner of the
festival where comedian Brendon Burns performs. Lines like "Congratulations, you
are the star of my next 10 w*nks" start off offensive and become progressively
tedious. Burns has a great get-out clause - he is launching an assault on
woolly-minded liberals and their hypocrisies. But his pornfuelled "look I'm Mr
Shocking" routine fails to convince, and ends up as a yawn-fest.

    Burns attacked, among others, surrealist comedians, two of whom are storming
this year's Pleasance with AutoBoosh. Julian Barratt is a tall, dark genius,
with a repertoire of maniacal twitches and a jazz obsession, while Noel Fielding
is his charming, lampshade-haired counterpart.

    While not as well-structured as last year's show, this fantasy-fuelled tale
of the pair's holiday to a cottage where the butler keeps his voice in a jar
demonstrates the visual and linguistic inventiveness that has become their
trademark.

    Those keen not to come back down to earth would do well to stop off at The
Donkey Show, where a sequin-shuddering Seventies soundtrack sets off a
cross-dressing version of Shakespeare's Midsummer Night's Dream. Not much
Shakespeare, but lots of fun.

    Science has provided a balance to fantasy at several venues this year,
including Tom McGrath's intelligent play about gene therapy and cancer cure,
Safe Delivery. The acting was flawed, but as science provokes new definitions of
morality, this is a detailed and unpatronising demonstration of how powerfully
human such a technical play can be.

    A Large Attendance in the Ante-Chamber is a one-man show about the first
eugenicist, Francis Galton, which plays wittily with levels of theatrical
reality. Its mad inventiveness sums up the spirit of a Fringe that is never
afraid to take a gamble, and should be given as much credit for its stink bombs
as for its stunning new inventions.

    lThe Edinburgh Fringe runs until Monday. Details 0131 226 5257.


GRAPHIC: QUALITYPLAYS: NOMA DUMEZWENI, ABOVE, AND, RIGHT, JULESLEYSER

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2000


                             901 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2000 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                           August 17, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 1001 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH ZONE: GENE DREAMS;
 JILL PALMER'S MEDICAL CASEBOOK: HOPE FOR VICTIMS OF RARE DNA DISORDERS

BYLINE: Jill Palmer

BODY:


    THE announcement this summer that the "code of life" had been cracked was
rightly hailed as one of the major scientific breakthroughs in the history of
mankind.

    But mapping the entire human genome - the sequence of DNA that is the
blueprint for every individual - is not simply an intellectual exercise. Its
applications within medicine will be almost limitless. Knowing our genetic make-
up will allow doctors to tackle the root causes of illness. If a gene is faulty
it can be repaired.

    If it's missing it can be replaced. There is a long way to go before gene
therapy becomes routinely available. But for sufferers of genetically determined
illnesses everywhere it will mean, at last, the chance of a cure. Six-year-old
Courteney Pearson and 47-year-old Liz Spour were both born withgenetic
disorders. Their illnesses and stories are both very different yet gene therapy
would provide more effective treatment - even a cure for both.

    COURTENEYPearson was born with a rare inherited illness which was slowly
poisoning her body. She was two weeks old when she was diagnosed with propionic
acidaemia, a condition in which vital enzymes, produced mainly in the liver, are
missing.

    This leads to a build-up of toxins which poison the brain, causing brain
damage or death by the age of seven. Courteney owes her life to an amazing
piggy-back liver transplant when she was 22 months old. She became the first
person in the world to have the pioneering surgery to beat an incurable
metabolic disorder.

    But although the intricate 10- hour operation cured the condition and saved
her life, it condemned Courteney to a lifetime of immuno-suppressant drugs. Now,
five years later, she still needs five drugs a day to ensure she does not reject
her new liver. Gene therapy could release her from that lifelong medication.

    It was this that convinced liver transplant surgeon NigelHeaton to remove
only 70 per cent of Courteney's own liver and replace it with a healthy donor
liver. He left nearly athird of her own defective liver behind in the hope that
one day gene therapy could correct it.

    This was much more difficult than a whole transplant, due to the problems of
joining veins and arteries to two different livers. But it has been a total
success. "Courteney is fantastically well now," says her mother Amanda, from
Dover, Kent. "If she hadn't had the transplant she would be brain-damaged or
dead by now.

    "Yet she can look forward to her seventh birthday next month, and in five
years time there is every chance that there will be an injection available which
will provide the enzymes she needs to correct her own liver." Since Courteney's
world- beating liver swap, Nigel Heaton has carried out six similar piggy-back
transplants on children with different metabolic disorders at King's College
Hospital in South London, the only unit in the UK using the technique.

    "Leaving part of the patient'sown liver behind makes them suitable for
genetherapy when it becomes available," says Mr Heaton. "Although it's still
deficient in the enzyme, the donor liver provides sufficient of that to allow
the child to live a normal life. However they have to take immuno-suppressant
drugs for life, which is not ideal for a child. "Once gene therapy is perfected
we will be able to correct the defect in the child's own liver, wind down the
immunosuppressant drugs so the donor liver dies, and then the original liver
will regenerate and take over.

    "With the recent advances in understanding the human genome, we're moving
closer to the time this will happen."AGENEwhich causes a disfiguring hereditary
disease has been identified thanks to Liz Spour and her family. The discovery
opens the way to the development of new treatments. And Liz is now pinning her
hopes on future gene therapy which could eventually wipe out the condition. Liz,
47, from Newcastle, suffers from cylindromatosis, atype of skin tumour which
occurs mainly on the scalp.

    Liz's late grandmother was a sufferer, as are her mother Doris, brother
Glenn, sister Julie, and daughter Fiona. And there is a chance that Fiona's
18-month -old daughter, Emma, will also be affected. The tumours, which are
itchy and painful, start to appear in the teens and twenties and increase in
size and number throughout life.

    They can frequently become infected and ulcerated, resulting in severe
disfigurement and discomfort. There is no treatment or cure for the terrible
condition which affects generations of the same family The only relief is to
surgically remove the scalp and reconstruct it using skin grafts, although the
hair never regrows and sufferers have to wear a wig.

    It is a distressing operation which Doris has already endured and which Liz
is set to undergo later this year. "It is an awful illness," said Liz. "The
tumours start off the size of a pinhead and can grow to half the size of a
golfball. "The pain is horrendous and the itching unbearable. Brushing and
washing your hair isterrible. And it's very disfiguring. "Even having your scalp
removed isn't a permanent cure but it gives some years of release." It was Liz's
determination to find out the cause of the devastating disease that persuaded
her to approach Prof John Burn at Newcastle's Institute for Human Genetics.

    By taking blood from all members of her family he was able to pinpoint the
genetic mutation which caused the condition. Now scientists have identified the
malfunctioning CYLD gene which, when working normally, prevents the cylindroma
tumours from forming. "This is quite a remarkable case.

    It is rare that a study of this nature is prompted by patients themselves,"
says Prof Burn. "Liz Spour came into my office and asked if I would investigate
why more than four generations of her family had suffered from this disease.
"Shortly afterwards I was to be found in her front room taking blood samples
from her entire family. "It is through research that started with these samples
that the gene was identified."

GRAPHIC: Picture: Chris Grieve; CODE CURE: The gene breakthrough could help;
Courteney (left) and Liz and Doris; Picture: WILL WALKER

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2000


                             905 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                August 11, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1063 words

HEADLINE: 'Why I see no earthly reason for fish genes in our tomatoes'

BYLINE: Helen Browning

BODY:


    Yesterday Victor Sebestyen explained why he is happy to eat GM food.

    Today HELEN BROWNING, an organic farmer and chairman of the Soil
Association, explains why she thinks we must remain wary

    VICTOR SEBESTYEN may well be happy to eat GM food. Indeed, on his trip to
America (arranged by the US embassy), he may have had little choice, since an
estimated 80 per cent of the food in the supermarkets is genetically modified -
though because so little of it is adequately labelled, consumers may be ignorant
of the fact.

    Mr Sebestyen may relish, say, genetically modified fruit and veg - which,
for the convenience of retailers often has an alarmingly extended shelf life -
but most Britons feel very differently about it. Not, however, because we are
gullible, hysterical or ignorant of the beneficent effects of science as applied
to agriculture.

    The real credulity in this debate is that of men like Mr Sebestyen, who
accept any technological development as progress because some scientists say so.
The truth is that scientists differ markedly on this subject as any other and
the larger truth is that there is an extraordinary amount that we do not know
about the immediate effects of GM technology on human health and the environment
- still more about its long-term consequences.

    Unlike human gene therapy, we have not given serious thought to the ethical
implications of tinkering with the genetic composition of the foods we eat, but
what we do know suggests that the potential benefits it offers are outweighed by
the harm it may cause.

    As for those benefits - are we to take the word of global conglomerates like
Monsanto - which has prudently given itself a new corporate name lately - that
the only way we can achieve desirable ends like drought-resistant crops is by
the genetic modification of cereals? I think not. This is not just an academic
debate; it is driven by the commercial interests of the huge corporations which
develop and market GM products, corporations which, incidentally, exercise
considerable influence on US administrations, and on the party of George Bush.

    There has been relatively little work on the possible risks that GM foods
pose to human health. This is largely because of the flawed assumption that the
modified maize and soya crops currently in our food chain are "substantially
equivalent" to their conventional counterparts.

    Yet given the imprecise nature of current GM procedures and our
still-embryonic knowledge of how genes work together, the development of new GM
strains may well result in the inadvertent production of allergens or toxic
compounds. Of course, the biotech companies screen their products for
abnormalities - but what of the subtle changes in organisms that may slip
through the safeguards in the rush to develop new products? As one scientist at
the University of California, Professor Patrick Brown, has pointed out: "It is
clear that the safety of one GMO (genetically modified organism) is in no way
predictive of the safety of another. In many respects, the claim of safety by
association is no more valid than the claim that the safety of aspirin predicts
the safety of all other drugs."

    Some aspects of GM technology are instinctively repellent. The insertion of
animal genes into plants is one development which most of us find worrying - and
the possibility that those animal genes might one day include human ones is not
technologically farfetched. As Victor Sebestyen points out, the only licensed
product at present that crosses animal and plant life is a tomato which contains
fish genes, but once we accept the principle that scientific ends justify any
means, we are open to precisely such a development.

    WHAT about the moral argument for GM products - that they might feed the
world's poor? Of course, drought-resistant crops would assist farmers in
developing countries. But this fixation with producing new strains of seeds
ignores the fact that the real problems in the developing world are not to do
with flaws in the genetic makeup of the crops people grow, but with more
fundamental evils.

    Aid agencies say that the problem of feeding the hungry is to do with access
to land, an overemphasis on export-driven cash crops (rather than those people
grow to feed themselves), local storage and, crucially, distribution and
political instability.

    These are problems which cannot be remedied by biotechnology. In fact, poor
peoples' dependency may well be aggravated by the GM companies, which may try to
create a market by subsidising their seeds and chemicals in the same way that
food companies "gave" baby-milk powder to African mothers.

    For our environment, GM technology is malign. The example of the US, with
its bleak, extended monocultures and dearth of ecological diversity, is
especially depressing. Genetically modified products intensify the concentration
on single crops, and in some cases, they are bred to allow complete control of
weeds using herbicides to which the crops are resistant.

    The elimination of weeds and insects may be useful to farmers but have a
catastrophic effect further up the food chain on native birds and mammals whose
populations have already been drastically diminished by existing intensive
farming methods.

    And what about cross-fertilisation between GM and non-GM crops? It is
accepted by the Government that it will be impossible to maintain the completely
GM-free status of many crops if commercial planting is allowed - the debate at
present is about how much contamination should be permitted.

    Organic farmers, with their commitment to stay GM-free, will be especially
hard-hit. And it is organic and traditional farmers, with their diverse system
of cropping, which provide the best context for the preservation of our wildlife
and its habitats.

    Underlying all of this is a more fundamental argument. Agricultural
development, the breeding of better organisms, does not stand or fall by the
advance in genetic engineering using recombinant DNA. It has been, and can be,
achieved by other means that are less invasive, less damaging to our
environment, less dismissive of the barrier between species and less
technologically fixated.

    Achieving a properly sustainable food chain and delivering health through
nutrition are great goals - and we don't need GM technology to get there.


LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2000


                             909 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                August 10, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 41

LENGTH: 105 words

HEADLINE: Oxford Bio's £8.5m raiser

BODY:


    OXFORD Biomedica has raised £8.5 million from institutional investors to
develop its gene therapy technology in the wake of excitement generated by the
decoding of the human genome.

    The money was raised through a placing of 14.6 million new shares and will
be used to set up a new gene discovery division.

    Oxford Biomedica is run by the husband and wife scientific team of
Professors Alan and Susan Kingsman.

    The company is focusing on genes that are directly involved in diseases
including cancer and neurodegenerative illnesses.

    The new division will incorporate its knowledge-based system Smartonics.


LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2000


                             914 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2000 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            June 28, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 853 words

HEADLINE: PURE GENEIUS;
 HOW HUMAN DNA CODE MAP COULD CURE THE STARS

BYLINE: Barbara Davies

BODY:


    THE cracking of the DNA code to human life will not only spark medical
breakthroughs, it could also correct gene disorders. And that has to be great
news for today's disaster-prone celebrities.

    For years, these hapless individuals have been afflicted by a rash of image
disorders. But now ... Bernard Manning could get a "clean-up gene" and become
funny. Stan Collymore could get an "equality gene" and strike out for women
instead of at them. And Margaret Thatcher could ... sorry, we've strayed into
heart transplants here.

    BARBARA DAVIES takes a light-hearted look at how adding or subtracting
certain genes might set a few celebs straight.

    GREG RUSEDSKI - FOREHAND GENE

    HOWEVER hard he tries and trains, Rusedski just can't come up with a
consistent forehand.

    The British tennis hopeful's humiliating Wimbledon defeat at the genetically
superior hands of American Vince Spadea on Monday was the final straw.

    It's so obviously in the genes - something needs to be done now.

    LIAM GALLAGHER - PATIENCE GENE

    NO MORE Mancunian madness. Spill his drink? Don't worry, I can get another.
Take his photo? I don't think your flash went off - want to take another - come
'ere, I'll put me arm round you.

    Chat up his woman? Sorry, mate. You probably didn't realise. She's with me.
No harm done.

    CHRIS EVANS -

    GINGER GENE

    WITHOUT playground taunts about his carrot top, life might have been easier
on the motormouth - no ginger, no whinger. Heaven.

    Instead of Ginger Productions, we could have had strawberry blonde studios.

    ELIZABETH HURLEY -

    MODESTY GENE

    ONE treatment and Liz remembers to finish dressing before she leaves the
house.

    Two and she arrives at a premiere in an outfit that the strictest Muslim
would describe as over-dressed.

    Three - and she stays at home to let someone else have their share of the
limelight.

    WILLIAM HAGUE -

    BALDY GENE

    THE follicly-challenged Tory leader might now be PM if only he'd had a dose
of the gene that gave his arch-opponent such a fine curly crop.

    Then there's the how-to-dress-down without looking like a mid-life crisis on
legs gene, a romance gene to end his dependence on spin doctresses, the sexy
voice gene to stop him sounding like a sick farm animal, the hunk gene ...

    JANET STREET PORTER - FASHION-SENSE GENE

    SCIENTISTS may now discover just what goes wrong when the outspoken
television personality and newspaper editor opens her wardrobe each morning.

    A quick tweak with the colour co-ordination gene, an in-built fear of
clashing patterns and we may all be queuing round the block for her charity
cast-offs.

    BILL CLINTON -

    HONESTY GENE

    "READ my lips": Thanks to the code, Bill - and politicians everywhere -
could be genetically banned from telling lies.

    This could be the toughest challenge to the gene genies, but imagine the
results.

    Compelled to tell the truth, how could any mere mortal stay in office more
than a morning? Only if they were pumped full of morality and virtue DNA too.

    MONICA LEWINSKY - WHO ATE ALL THE PIES? GENE

    WITH the help of the DNA bible, Monica's yo-yo dieting days could be a thing
of the past.

    No need to abandon incriminating stained blue dresses in a forgotten heap at
the bottom of your wardrobe when you put on weight then? No doubt Bill's already
bankrolling the research.

    RONNIE CORBETT - HEIGHT GENE

    THE pint-sized comic could have been a giant of a man with a deep throaty
laugh to match. But without his diminutive demeanour, what would there have been
to laugh at?

    ROD STEWART - ADDICTION TO BLONDES GENE

    THE rock star - whose latest blonde Penny Lancaster looks very much like the
last blonde and the one before that - might finally settle down if he could have
that addiction to bleached clones surgically removed.

    After all, his other half in this world may really be a five-foot-nothing
brunette weighing in at more pounds than his earnings per second.

    NEIL HAMILTON -

    GREED GENE

    BROWN envelopes would no longer have an irresistible attraction to the
disgraced ex-MP. In our Brave New World, Hamilton donates half his Parliamentary
wages into a fund for the international fight against political corruption.

    While they are at it, they could give wife Christine a calming earth-mother
gene.

    ENGLAND FOOTBALL TEAM - PASSING THE BALL GENE

    TOO late for Euro 2000, but if scientists can produce the gene in bulk,
there might still be time to fix them before the World Cup.

    A tiny sample from French wonder Zinedine Zidane should see us through the
next 100 years or so.

    PHIL NEVILLE - LAST-MINUTE IRRATIONAL TACKLE GENE

    HAD Phil's parents been able to remove this one, England could now be
bracing itself for the semi-finals of Euro 2000.

    PRINCE PHILIP - TACT GENE

    IMAGINE a world where you could rely on the Prince to offer a compliment
here, a charming aside there, and keep his size 10s closer to the ground than
his mouth.

    A spot of gene therapy could turn His Royal Highness into one of Britain's
best diplomats.

    On the other hand, this is science, not magic.

GRAPHIC: FOREHAND GENE Greg Rusedski; HEIGHT GENE Ronnie Corbett; HONESTY; GENE
Bill Clinton; GINGER GENE Chris Evans; BALDY GENE William Hague

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2000


                             922 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2000 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             June 27, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6, 7

LENGTH: 945 words

HEADLINE: WE'VE CRACKED THE CODE OF LIFE: THE END OF CANCER? - THE FUTURE;
 FEARS OF BIG RISE IN ABORTIONS DOCTORS CAN KILL OFF BAD GENES ODISEASE SPOTTED
IN EMBRYOS GENETIC VACCINES TO HELP ILL

BYLINE: Jill Palmer And Lucy Rock

BODY:


    CRACKING the human genetic code lays the foundation of a whole new future
world of hi-tech medicine.

    It is this "book of life" which could cure many human diseases, provide new
more effective tailor-made drugs, and vastly improved diagnostic tests - opening
a new chapter in life.

    But it also ignites a massive ethical and moral debate.

    Some fear a Brave New World emerging where there will be a "genetic
underclass" and mothers will abort "flawed" unborn babies.

    This future world is not that far away. Just decades perhaps.

    Research is already underway using the genes identified in the genome
project to develop answers to diseases which afflict millions.

    The first real results should be seen by around 2010. Doctors will
eventually be able to predict a patient's future from a tiny speck of their
genetic material.

    Faulty genes can cause conditions such as diabetes and cystic fibrosis.

    Areas where massive steps forward are already being made include:

    CANCER TREATMENT

    This will be transformed in 20 years time according to Prof Mike Stratton,
head of cancer genetics at the Sanger Centre and the man who discovered one of
the breast cancer genes.

    Tens of thousands of genes are involved in the 200 different types of
carcinomas.

    But by identifying which genes go wrong to cause which cancers could result
in a new generation of therapies which would target the individual abnormal
genes.

    People react to drugs differently and the gene map will help doctors predict
which cancer victims will be vulnerable to which medicines, allowing them to
tailor remedies for individual patients.

    It will be possible to discover the biological mechanisms by which tumours
develop and eventually prevent them.

    Engineered genes may one day be used as a vaccine.

    Even sooner three promising gene therapy trials are about to start in which,
hopefully, the injected gene will damage the harmful cancer cells leaving
healthy cells alone or make abnormal genes commit suicide.

    CYSTIC FIBROSIS

    This is another condition where such therapy is a major hope for the future.
Screening for the most common life-threatening genetic illness in the country
affecting 6,000 people is already available.

    However, there is no treatment and the only benefit is to offer abortion.
The problem gene reduces the amount of water in the lining of the lungs which
causes a build up of infection-prone mucus.

    Researchers are trying to get "good" genes through the mucus barrier,
carried via a fine vapour of synthetic fat droplets.

    Early results from spraying gene-enhanced fat into the nose and the lungs
are promising but the effects only last for a short time.

    HAEMOPHILIA

    About 10,000 men in Britain are hit by this inherited disease.

    Sufferers have to regularly inject a protein called Factor IX which is
essential to make blood clot. A fault in their genes should produce Factor IX.

    US researchers gave the engineered gene to haemophiliac dogs who were cured.

    Three humans were given very low doses and - unexpectedly - the implanted
gene began producing enough of the missing Factor IX to allow them to cut down
on their injections.

    Theoretically, inherited conditions such as these could be wiped out by
finding an abnormal gene and correcting it in embryos.

    The defect would then not be transferred to the next generation.

    HEART DISEASE

    Genes are also involved in the more common diseases such as heart disease.

    One single variation in a gene that codes for cholesterol, for instance,
results in an increased risk of heart disease.

    Genetic testing is already available for inherited breast and ovarian
cancer, cystic fibrosis and down's syndrome.

    In future tests are certain to be available more widely to assess people for
their susceptibility to heart disease, cancers, and alzheimers.

    AND THE FEARS..

    But while these advances bring hope for millions, there are others deeply
concerned at where this genetic engineering will take us.

    On the downside some fear that people with genetic flaws could be denied
insurance or entry to schools or jobs

    Currently, the Association of British Insurers guidelines state that members
should not ask potential clients to take genetic tests.

    But as yet genetic tests remain rare and this could change as they become
more readily available.

    Childbearing decisions may become based on genetic information with mating
banned for those with "bad" genes.

    Screening could become more widespread with the ability to test unborn
babies in the womb.

    But until treatments are actually developed the only point of that would be
abortion.

    Eventually gene therapy may be able to cure conditions before the baby is
born by inserting healthy genes to correct the abnormal ones.

    The far-off future could be even more daunting.

    By the next century some sci-fi experts are predicting that the human form
will be completely different.

    If we can genetically modify crops why not genetically change ourselves?

    We might have extra arms and legs, even wings so that we can fly.

    When gene therapy is perfected we may be able to apply it to enhance our
physical appearance - make us taller, have a bigger bust, a shorter nose.

    We could possibly even choose different colour eyes or hair.

    Experts may be able to store our "book of life" on a chip and blast it into
space so that in years to come it can be used to produce our clone.

    It may all seem far fetched but as Dr John Sulston, head of the British side
of the Human Genome Project admitted: "We are progressing at a scale that is
beyond what most people dreamed of."

GRAPHIC: HOPE.. for knocking out cancer cells; HOPE..for better diabetic
treatment; HOPE.. for haemophilia sufferers

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2000


                             923 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2000 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             June 27, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6, 7

LENGTH: 571 words

HEADLINE: WE'VE CRACKED THE CODE OF LIFE: WILL WE ALL BENEFIT FROM THIS?

BYLINE: Professor Roland Wolf / Doctor Peter Saunders

BODY:


    YES - Professor Roland Wolf of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund reveals
huge opportunities of the breakthrough

    THIS is going to be looked at in history as one of the greatest scientific
achievements.

    It is the essence of mankind and as long as man exists it will be used.

    Its impact easily ranks alongside understanding the structure of DNA. There
is no area where this will not have a profound impact.

    The benefits are mindblowing. New treatments for diseases branded incurable,
inherited diseases potentially wiped out, drugs tailormade for the individual.

    With medical advances there are economic ones. Millions of pounds will be
saved every year by the simple fact that the guesswork will be taken out of drug
administration.

    Every year thousands of people are harmed by the drugs they take.

    The age of the personalised pill is so nearly here. Not only will people
need less time in hospital, fewer will be admitted in the first place because
they will not have adverse reactions to the drugs they are given.

    Better still, in many cases drugs will no longer be needed - genes will be
identified that determine susceptibility to disease.

    Medicine will become infinitely more sophisticated.

    There can be no dispute that knowing the sequence of the human genes is one
of the most significant breakthroughs.

    Medicine is being revolutionised. Our make-up, which has deluded us until
now, is being laid bare before our eyes.

    And with this comes the ability to predict. In turn this brings countless
benefits - the ability to diagnose disease early on, to understand the causes
and the invention of new treatments.

    NO - Christian Medical Fellowship General Secretary Doctor Peter Saunders
warns of ethical dangers we now face

    IN many ways the advances have been overplayed.

    More than 30 major gene companies were launched in the past eight years and
several thousand people have received gene therapy.

    Very few have been helped.

    We may have a blueprint now but need to work out what these genes do and
treatments will be based on that. There is a long way to go.

    My main concern is how this information is going to be used in the meantime.
The general public has been led to believe it will be used for repairing damaged
genes.

    There have been small advances of this kind, for example treating the
condition seen in the "Boy in the Bubble" case - severe combined immune
deficiency. But we are still in the very early stages.

    I'm concerned the information will instead be employed to search out and
destroy impaired individuals in the womb or at the embryo stage. Genetic
selection is already taking place in the UK.

    So far the major impact of pre-natal screening has been on Down's Syndrome
children, whose numbers have fallen dramatically because they are being aborted.

    There is now a policy to identify and destroy individuals with a much
broader range of genetic disorders.

    I'm also concerned about commercial exploitation of patented genes. I don't
believe genes should be patented as inventions.

    From a Christian perspective they are a divine creation. Even from a non
-Christian viewpoint, it is nonsense to say genes have been invented or created
rather than simply discovered.

    There is also the danger genetic information could be used to discriminate
against people with special needs, for example by employers and insurance firms.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2000


                             924 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2000 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             June 27, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4, 5

LENGTH: 1108 words

HEADLINE: WE'VE CRACKED THE CODE OF LIFE: WHAT THE PROJECT MEANS FOR US

BYLINE: Jill Palmer Medical Correspondent And Lucy Rock

BODY:


    CRACKING the DNA code has been described as the biggest breakthrough since
man walked on the moon - the beginning of a scientific revolution that will
dramatically change our lives.

    But what does it all mean and how will it affect us?

    We cut through the scientific jargon to explain.

    Q: What is the human genome and what is the project?

    A: If you put all the chromosomes in each cell together you get a complete
list of the coded instructions needed to make a person - the human genome.

    The human genome project is an international effort to identify and map the
100,000 genes and their positions on individual chromosomes to crack this
genetic code of a human being.

    The project involves scientists from 16 centres in six countries - the USA,
UK, Japan, France, Germany and China - costing more than pounds 2 billion.

    Q: What is a cell?

    A: Cells are the basic structural unit of the body. The body contains 100
trillion of them.

    Inside each one is a nucleus, which is the cell's control centre and is
packed with things called chromosomes.

    Q: What is a chromosome?

    A: Chromosomes are threadlike structures within the nucleus. Each contains a
long strand of DNA.

    There are 46 chromosomes in each cell, 23 inherited from mum and 23 from
dad.

    Q: What are DNA and genes?

    A: DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is a hereditary substance. It is a long
threadlike molecule made up of two intertwined strands.

    Genes are segments of DNA. They carry the genetic code which passes on
hereditary characteristics such as blue eyes or blond hair.

    Q: Do our genes make each individual unique?

    A: Yes but a lot of us is shared too. Humans are 99.8 per cent similar.

    But of the three billion letters in the genetic code about three million are
different in each person, making each human being unique.

    Q: How do scientists read DNA?

    A: DNA code is spelled out by four chemicals known by the letters A, C, G
and T.

    The sequence of these letters holds the code - just as the order of the
letters on this page makes words which mean something.

    Q: How difficult is this?

    A: There are three billion letters in the DNA code in every cell in your
body - and as we said before, there are 100 trillion cells in the body. If all
the DNA in the human body was put end to end it would reach to the sun and back
600 times.

    The code would fill two hundred 500- page phone directories and would take
20 years to read aloud.

    Q: Whose genes are being studied?

    A: A huge number of people from different ethnic groups anonymously donated
DNA.

    Samples were chosen from among them - but the identies of the people they
come from are not known to them or the scientists.

    Q: Why bother?

    A: Having a catalogue of all human genes will help us better understand and
possibly treat many inherited diseases and other human illnesses such as heart
disease, diabetes and even cancer.

    It will be of use in all sorts of fields including the prevention, diagnosis
and treatment of diseases.

    Scientists believe it is fundamental to the progress of medical research
throughout the world.

    It provides the basic set of inherited instructions for the development and
functioning of a human being and this knowledge is likely to transform medical
care in the 21st century.

    Q: Does this mean a future without diseases?

    A: No. The genome map may well help tackle any inherited disease but it will
not make us immune to viral and bacterial disease. Also lifestyle and
environment affect our health.

    Q: Is the project finished?

    A: Far from it. The first draft of the genetic "book" is complete but there
is still more work to be done.

    New technologies are being developed which will fill in the gaps and the
final edition, containing the entire DNA sequence, should be ready by 2003.

    Q: Who owns the book of humankind?

    A: All the information from the project is on the internet, where it is
freely available to scientists and the public every night.

    Q: Isn't that a bit dangerous?

    A: It could be. Scientists are racing ahead of governments. But the Human
Genetics Commission has been set up by the British government to regulate the
use of genetics and control how the information can be used.

    Q: What is the nightmare scenario?

    A: Genetic engineering. In theory babies could be genetically engineered.
Their genetic material could be changed to make perfect babies.

    Impure genes and "people" could be weeded out and destroyed and those whose
genes are not perfect would not be allowed to have children.

    It is more likely that insurance companies could insist on genetic profiling
and refuse to insure people whose genes make it likely they will become ill.

    Q: How could the decoding of the human genome change our lives?

    A: Within a decade you may be able to go to your GP, give a small blood
sample and be told exactly what is wrong with you.

    By checking your genetic code - your personal version of the human genome -
the doctor would also be able to predict what diseases you are likely to
develop.

    Q: What else will be possible?

    A: The possibilities for health and medicine are staggering.

    Gene therapy is a potential way of treating genetic disease that aims to
tackle the root cause. If a gene is missing it aims to provide one. If a gene is
faulty it aims to correct it. Scientists will be able to take a sample of
patients' DNA, rearrange it in the laboratory and then put it back.

    Haemophilia and cystic fibrosis are two of the most common inherited
idseases which could eventually be treated and cured by gene therapy.

    Q: What about cancer?

    A: Genes play a major part in the development of cancer.

    Throughout life cells are exposed to chemicals, radiation and viruses which
all produce subtle differences in the cells.

    Occasionally these changes are sufficient to cause the cells to become
cancerous.

    By comparing the DNA sequence in healthy cells to cancer ones scientists
will be able to find which cells are related to which cancers.

    Eventually this will lead to finding the causes and enable doctors to
predict which types of cancer will be vulnerable to which drugs.

    Professor Mike Stratton, head of cancer genetics at the Sanger Centre,
predicts that in 20 years the human genome project will have transformed cancer
treatment.

    Q: Does this mean we can live for ever?

    A: No. There will almost certainly be a time when we can manipulate the
ageing genes to some degree but the main benefits will be in the treatment and
prevention of illnesses.

    People will not suddenly be living for 1,000 years.

GRAPHIC: CODE: Chromoseomes; THE BOOK OF LIFE...STEP BY STEP: Scientists broke
the genetic code by cloning fragments of DNA and using computer analysis to work
out the sequences. A DNA map was then built up which yesterday was hailed by
experts as the most important scientific advance in human history

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2000


                             932 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2000 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            June 22, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: LEADER; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1068 words

HEADLINE: LOCKED IN BATTLE FOR KEY TO LIFE;
 AS THE GENOME RIDDLE FINALLY UNRAVELS

BYLINE: Kevin Toolis

BODY:


    WHY do some people die of cancer while others smoke 60-a-day and survive
into their nineties?

    Why do heart attacks run in some families? Is there a gay gene? Can you
actually stop the ageing process?

    Until now the answers to those questions have been a mystery.

    But sometime this week scientists in America and Britain will announce that
they have finally decoded the human genome.

    And in that book of life we will eventually unravel the answers to all those
questions - and possibly find a solution to every human disease.

    Decoding the human genome is the greatest scientific achievement of our time
and will lay the foundations of a whole new branch of medicine.

    Essentially, by producing a complete map of a 'typical' set of human genes
scientists will be able to isolate rogue genes by comparing one against the
other.

    It's a noble endeavour - but has turned into an old-fashioned war between
two brilliant men.

    One, Craig Venter, 54, is a swashbuckling American with a fondness for gold
Rolex watches.

    The other is John Sulston, 57, a quiet British scientist who drives a second
-hand car and wears battered leather sandals.

    It has also become a battle between American big business, who want to make
stupendous profits, and a British charity, the Wellcome Trust, which believes
the data in the human book of life should belong to mankind.

    VENTER says he wants to be the Bill Gates of a new biotechnology revolution,
biology's first billionaire.

    Sulston, on the other hand, doubts that American drug companies are entitled
to hold patents on what is essentially the essence of humankind.

    "I believe that our basic information, our 'software', should be free and
open for everyone to play with, to compete with, to try and make products from,"
says Sulston, who is head of the Wellcome Trust's Sanger Centre, near Cambridge

    "I do not believe it should be under the control of one person. But that is
what Craig Venter and his company Celera are trying to do."

    Venter denies he wants a monopoly on the human genome, but admits he has
already filed patents on over 6,500 human genes and that his company plans to
sell the data for profit.

    "I have been a thorn in their side for some time because I keep coming up
with breakthroughs," he says. "It's much easier to demonise us than justify the
hundreds of millions of dollars they have wasted."

    It is, say his detractors, like taking out a patent on the human liver. Both
men desperately want to win the race. The victor is almost certain to be awarded
a Nobel Prize.

    No one doubts that decoding the human genome is the beginning of a
scientific revolution that will dramatically change our lives.

    Within a decade you may be able to go to your GP, give a small blood sample,
and be told exactly what is wrong with you.

    And by checking your genetic code - your personal version of the human
genome - the doctor will also be able to predict fairly easily how old you will
be when you die and what disease is likely to kill you.

    What those doctors will be doing is reading off the genetic code hidden
inside every cell of the human body. In every one of the 100 trillion cells that
make up the human body there are 46 chromosomes, 23 from your father and 23 from
your mother.

    Those chromosomes are made up of DNA, a long molecule of deoxyribonucleic
acid.

    The DNA itself is composed of four other chemicals or "bases": adenine (A),
thymine (T), guanine (G) and cytosine (C).

    And it is these bases that are the alphabet of life on the planet Earth.
Every living thing - from bacteria and plants, to tigers, to chimps, to humans -
is at its DNA heart just a string of C's,T's, A's and G's.

    There are 3.5 billion bases in the human genome and when it is finally
decoded it will read like an immense single sentence:
ccacatgatatctatccaacccatgtccccacatgatatctatccaacccatgtccccacatgata
tctatccaacccatgtcc... and so on until it would fill 500,000 pages of a telephone
directory, 750 megabytes of data that will fit on a single DVD disc.

    Hidden away in this bewildering alphabet soup are a 100,000 genes and it is
the mix of these in the fertilised human egg that create the unique individual
human being we become.

    They determine the shape and colour of your eyes, your height, your ability
to absorb cholesterol, your sexual orientation and your susceptibility to
disease.

    And it is combinations of these genes that determine if you are gay,
athletic, musically talented, or a manic depressive. Some researchers say your
genes will even determine your criminal record.

    By decoding the human genome scientists will be able to identify the
locations of all of these genes and try and understand how they interact.

    The human genome is the set of instructions for the very elaborate machines
we call human beings. And once you have that set of instructions in your hand
it's a lot easier to work out where things go wrong.

    SCIENTISTS have already identified 289 diseases that are directly related to
errors in the normal genetic code.

    In one of the most devastating is Huntingdon's Chorea which researchers now
know is caused by a tiny part of code being mistakenly copied too many times.

    In later life the faulty gene affects muscle proteins in the brain, the
victim loses control of their limbs, and eventually dies.

    In the future, medical researchers will be able to target specific diseases
such as Huntingdon's with individual tailor-made drugs.

    Gene therapies will be developed that may, from a single injection, cure
diseases like diabetes or prevent AIDS by blocking the way the virus enters
human cells.

    Not all of the benefits will be positive, however. In America some companies
are already demanding genetic testing before granting medical insurance.

    In other instances, we will be able to test human embryos for genetic
conditions like cystic fibrosis - and discard those we consider inferior.

    Ronald Reagan had, by anyone's standards, a productive life but inherited
Alzheimer's from his family.

    Would we abort a future Ronald Reagan just because he had Alzheimer's in his
genes?

    Soon either Venter or Sulston will have unlocked the key to mankind's
future, a mighty chain of letters etched onto a DVD disc.

    There will be a moral as well as medical maze to unravel - but it will truly
be a new chapter in the human story.

GRAPHIC: DR JOHN SULSTON, DR CRAIG VENTER

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2000


                             933 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2000 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            June 21, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1068 words

HEADLINE: LOCKED IN BATTLE FOR KEY TO LIFE: DR CRAIG VENTER V DR JOHN SULSTON;
 AS THE GENOME RIDDLE FINALLY UNRAVELS

BYLINE: Kevin Toolis

BODY:


    WHY do some people die of cancer while others smoke 60-a-day and survive
into their nineties?

    Why do heart attacks run in some families? Is there a gay gene? Can you
actually stop the ageing process?

    Until now the answers to those questions have been a mystery.

    But sometime this week scientists in America and Britain will announce that
they have finally decoded the human genome.

    And in that book of life we will eventually unravel the answers to all those
questions - and possibly find a solution to every human disease.

    Decoding the human genome is the greatest scientific achievement of our time
and will lay the foundations of a whole new branch of medicine.

    Essentially, by producing a complete map of a 'typical' set of human genes
scientists will be able to isolate rogue genes by comparing one against the
other.

    It's a noble endeavour - but has turned into an old-fashioned war between
two brilliant men.

    One, Craig Venter, 54, is a swashbuckling American with a fondness for gold
Rolex watches.

    The other is John Sulston, 57, a quiet British scientist who drives a second
-hand car and wears battered leather sandals.

    It has also become a battle between American big business, who want to make
stupendous profits, and a British charity, the Wellcome Trust, which believes
the data in the human book of life should belong to mankind.

    VENTER says he wants to be the Bill Gates of a new biotechnology revolution,
biology's first billionaire.

    Sulston, on the other hand, doubts that American drug companies are entitled
to hold patents on what is essentially the essence of humankind.

    "I believe that our basic information, our 'software', should be free and
open for everyone to play with, to compete with, to try and make products from,"
says Sulston, who is head of the Wellcome Trust's Sanger Centre, near Cambridge

    "I do not believe it should be under the control of one person. But that is
what Craig Venter and his company Celera are trying to do."

    Venter denies he wants a monopoly on the human genome, but admits he has
already filed patents on over 6,500 human genes and that his company plans to
sell the data for profit.

    "I have been a thorn in their side for some time because I keep coming up
with breakthroughs," he says. "It's much easier to demonise us than justify the
hundreds of millions of dollars they have wasted."

    It is, say his detractors, like taking out a patent on the human liver. Both
men desperately want to win the race. The victor is almost certain to be awarded
a Nobel Prize.

    No one doubts that decoding the human genome is the beginning of a
scientific revolution that will dramatically change our lives.

    Within a decade you may be able to go to your GP, give a small blood sample,
and be told exactly what is wrong with you.

    And by checking your genetic code - your personal version of the human
genome - the doctor will also be able to predict fairly easily how old you will
be when you die and what disease is likely to kill you.

    What those doctors will be doing is reading off the genetic code hidden
inside every cell of the human body. In every one of the 100 trillion cells that
make up the human body there are 46 chromosomes, 23 from your father and 23 from
your mother.

    Those chromosomes are made up of DNA, a long molecule of deoxyribonucleic
acid.

    The DNA itself is composed of four other chemicals or "bases": adenine (A),
thymine (T), guanine (G) and cytosine (C).

    And it is these bases that are the alphabet of life on the planet Earth.
Every living thing - from bacteria and plants, to tigers, to chimps, to humans -
is at its DNA heart just a string of C's,T's, A's and G's.

    There are 3.5 billion bases in the human genome and when it is finally
decoded it will read like an immense single sentence:
ccacatgatatctatccaacccatgtccccacatgatatctatccaacccatgtccccacatgata
tctatccaacccatgtcc... and so on until it would fill 500,000 pages of a telephone
directory, 750 megabytes of data that will fit on a single DVD disc.

    Hidden away in this bewildering alphabet soup are a 100,000 genes and it is
the mix of these in the fertilised human egg that create the unique individual
human being we become.

    They determine the shape and colour of your eyes, your height, your ability
to absorb cholesterol, your sexual orientation and your susceptibility to
disease.

    And it is combinations of these genes that determine if you are gay,
athletic, musically talented, or a manic depressive. Some researchers say your
genes will even determine your criminal record.

    By decoding the human genome scientists will be able to identify the
locations of all of these genes and try and understand how they interact.

    The human genome is the set of instructions for the very elaborate machines
we call human beings. And once you have that set of instructions in your hand
it's a lot easier to work out where things go wrong.

    SCIENTISTS have already identified 289 diseases that are directly related to
errors in the normal genetic code.

    In one of the most devastating is Huntingdon's Chorea which researchers now
know is caused by a tiny part of code being mistakenly copied too many times.

    In later life the faulty gene affects muscle proteins in the brain, the
victim loses control of their limbs, and eventually dies.

    In the future, medical researchers will be able to target specific diseases
such as Huntingdon's with individual tailor-made drugs.

    Gene therapies will be developed that may, from a single injection, cure
diseases like diabetes or prevent AIDS by blocking the way the virus enters
human cells.

    Not all of the benefits will be positive, however. In America some companies
are already demanding genetic testing before granting medical insurance.

    In other instances, we will be able to test human embryos for genetic
conditions like cystic fibrosis - and discard those we consider inferior.

    Ronald Reagan had, by anyone's standards, a productive life but inherited
Alzheimer's from his family.

    Would we abort a future Ronald Reagan just because he had Alzheimer's in his
genes?

    Soon either Venter or Sulston will have unlocked the key to mankind's
future, a mighty chain of letters etched onto a DVD disc.

    There will be a moral as well as medical maze to unravel - but it will truly
be a new chapter in the human story.

GRAPHIC: HEIGHT; GENDER; AGEING; STRENGTH; METABOLISM; STAMINA; EYE COLOUR;;
HAIR LOSS; CHOLESTEROL LEVELS; ATHLETICISM; HEART DISEASE; DIABETES;;
ALZHEIMER'S; DEPRESSION; EYESIGHT

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2000


                             937 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2000 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             June 8, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 263 words

HEADLINE: THE FUTURE IS FERTILE

BYLINE: Sara Nuwar

BODY:


    DOCTORS have made a number of amazing scientific breakthroughs in recent
years.

    These advances have not only put mothers' minds at ease but they've given
more women than ever the chance to have children.

    Scientists recently carried out the first ovary graft.

    This technology could be used to give women made infertile through cancer
treatments the ability to conceive.

    It may also lead to women being able to "bank" their healthy ovaries so that
they can give birth later in life.

    Italian doctors are working on a way of increasing the odds for older woman
trying to conceive using IVF treatment.

    These developments in fertilisation technology may give more woman in their
40s the chance to become pregnant.

    By screening the implanted eggs, doctors hope to avoid miscarriages or
chromosome abnormalities which are more common in older mothers.

    Foetal heart monitors are also being worked on to alert doctors and midwives
to fluctuations in the baby's heart beat.

    These machines could cut the number of stillborn children born each year.

    Foetal gene therapy offers hope to thousands of children who suffer from a
hereditary disorder called severe combined immune deficiency.

    Recently, doctors in the US were responsible for the first baby to be born
from its dead father's sperm.

    And advances in medical imaging have made it possible to diagnose defects
such as undeveloped organs in babies.

    Within the next two years, doctors hope to be able to perform corrective
surgery using "donated" tissues on babies still in the womb.

GRAPHIC: SKELETON: Baby's bones on scanner

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2000


                             940 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                  May 10, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 52

LENGTH: 588 words

BYLINE: Lachlan Colquhoun

BODY:


    SHARES in Japanese mobile phone operator NTT Docomo slumped 5% today as the
market showed disapproval at the e 5 billion (£8.47 billion) the company will
pay for 15% of Holland's KPN Mobile.

    Docomo shares, which fell more than 4% yesterday as the deal was announced,
were down another 5.1% at 190,000 yen today amid a sharply lower Tokyo share
market. KPN shares lost 6.8% in Dutch trading yesterday.

    Analysts say that although the KPN move is strategically positive for Docomo
there are concerns at the high price.

    While the KPN move paves the way for a joint bid for British operator Orange
and the potential for third-generation licences throughout Europe, Docomo shares
are also caught in a profit-taking spiral.

    With investors still wary of any upcoming rise in US interest rates, the
benchmark Nikkei 225 was down 143.07 at 17,701.47 at the close. The falls this
week have erased gains so far this year, with the Nikkei now trading below its
level at 1 January.

    Underlining the trend, figures out today show that foreign investors, the
driving force behind the market rally last year, turned net sellers in April
with selling outweighing buying by US$ 7.7 billion.

    Among other active stocks today, overnight losses on Nasdaq prompted more
falls for hi-tech counters, with internet leader Softbank off 6.4% and the
battered Hikari Tsushin down another 10% at 11,770, bringing to 95% its demise
since mid-February. Broking houses were also in retreat, hurt by fears for their
earnings as a result of the recent share slide.

    The rally among biotech shares continued, however, with Takara Shuzo moving
up 2.5% on news of a gene therapy alliance with Nexell Therapeutics of the US.
Hong Kong shares were also sharply lower for MARKET the second day running, the
blue-chip Hang Seng down 250.51 to 14,526.39 shortly before the mid-session
break as investors pondered the interest rate climate.

    Symbolic of the market's recent demise, heavyweight Hutchison Whampoa, which
climbed to a high of HK$ 153.50 recently, fell through the HK$ 100 level today,
losing 2.2% to HK$ 99.25. Brokers said weakness in telecoms shares in European
trading yesterday was having a knock-on effect.

    Former monopoly Telstra continued to be under pressure in Sydney, the shares
posting a fresh 18-month low, falling 13 cents to A$ 6.57, despite a forecast by
the company of double-digit profit growth this year.

    With the market's All Ordinaries index down 30.50 to 3024.10, other tel-cos
were also in retreat, Cable & Wireless Optus down 5%. Last night's Australian
budget, while raising questions over the Government's budget surplus
projections, had little impact on the market, with investors more focused on US
interest rates. In company news, troubled conglomerate Pacific Dunlop announced
the US$ 368 million sale of its batteries unit to Exide of the US, news which
helped the shares add 14 cents to A$ 1.57.

    Elsewhere, most regional bourses moved lower, with Thailand making the
biggest move as the SET lost 1.8%, or 6.40 points, to 351.37. Singapore's
Straits Times fell 32.49 to 2056.99, Taiwan's Composite was down 24.72 to
8611.12, and Jakarta's Composite lost 2.55 to 545.11.

    Malaysia's Composite was off 2.80 to 924.90, while Korea's Kospi bucked the
trend, adding 1.58 to 762.43.

    REPORT from LACHLAN COLQUHOUN in Hong Kong lPrices and indices in this
section are supplied from various sources and calculated at different times and
may not always match those listed in the tables.


LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2000


                             948 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 March 29, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1252 words

HEADLINE: Da importance of not being earnest

BYLINE: Allison Pearson

BODY:


    Da importance of not being earnest OVER the past few weeks I have been
trying to get an interview with the great Ali G or even - at a pinch - with his
creator, Sacha Baron Cohen. Dream on, honey. There's more chance of securing a
dinner date with Camilla Parker Bowles and the Sultan of Brunei.

    Like many other fearless social satirists, Mista G seems reluctant to expose
himself to the kind of impertinent questions he himself puts to all those
trusting ladies and gentlemen. Ali G is now more remote than the Queen Mother
and twice as famous.

    Still, we don't bear grudges in this column and we are dying to see his new
series, Da Ali G Show, which starts this Friday on Channel 4. Last time he
appeared on our screens, the homeboy wannabe was accused of racism. What was a
Cambridge-educated Jewish boy doing dressed up in dat kit and using dat accent,
if not poking fun at black culture?

    His humourless accusers just didn't get the joke. When Ali G asked a film
censor why he was trying to ban A Chocolate Orange, it was the man's response we
were laughing at. Ali G exposed a simple and uncomfortable truth: British people
used to defer to authority and experience, now we defer to yoof and stupidity.

    Just switch on the TV at any hour of the day or night and see what my BBC
producer friend calls the New Crapocracy - the aristocracy of twentysomething
presenters who know nothing and flaunt their ignorance like a flag. (Those of us
who tuned in to BBC1's Eclipse coverage last summer only to find Gaby Roslin and
Jeremy from Airport improvising a reaction to Boris Yeltsin's resignation are
still taking medication.) Most of Ali G's victims could tell pretty quickly that
the lad interviewing them was a cheery moron who knew appallingly little about
their subject. Did they send him away with the polite, yet firm, suggestion that
he might like to go and avail himself of one of our splendid public libraries?
They did not. They sat bearing his lunacy with patience, courtesy and no little
fear - the fear of offending the spirit of the age by condescending to the badly
educated.

    There has always been a strong anti-intellectual streak in British life and,
for the most part, it has been a healthy thing. Keeping pretentiousness at bay
and wisely steering clear of dangerous abstractions. But, like all antidotes, if
administered in too strong a dose, it can hit you like a poison. The rubbishing
of knowledge is now a national sickness and it's catching. Not long ago, the
(very clever) Robbie Coltrane turned on Oxbridge graduates. "People who can't
dance," he sneered. And he's right, of course.

    Alan Turing, who cracked the Enigma code, thus helping to save his country
from Nazism; Crick and Watson who discovered DNA and opened up the hope of gene
therapies to benefit all mankind - these are precisely the sort of brainy dudes
who would never have cut it on the dance floor.

    Sacha Baron Cohen also went to Cambridge. I'm not sure if he can dance, but
he sure as hell can make us laugh and wonder why that laugh seems to hit home so
hard. Britain has a serious case of the Emperor's new Reeboks right now.

    And it took Ali G, a man wearing them, to expose it.

    The cable man cometh again

    JUST another Monday morning in a peaceful London street. A dawn chorus of
car alarms and the constipated groaning of a bulldozer clawing up the Tarmac
with the traditional descant of drills. Yes, it's another cable company at work.

    10am: Our taps run dry. Wander out and tell man in a hole that he must have
bust our pipe. For a geezer who is sitting in the middle of a geyser, he
registers this news with admirable surprise. "All right, love, it'll be fixed in
two hours." Three hours later, I speak to another man down the hole.

    "It'll be fixed in an hour." I explain that I have a baby in the house and
we need water urgently.

    Back indoors, I phone the council. Chap is sympathetic, but nothing he can
do. Councils have no redress against companies digging up streets. He can't be
serious? "They're meant to give us notice of their intention to dig up the
highway so we can co-ordinate it with other works, but in 90 per cent of the
cases they pretend it is an emergency." The council thought of taking one cable
company to court. And? "It didn't look good to be not for progress."

    3pm: I ring the marketing director of Level 3, the telecoms company which is
wrecking my life. I tell him - correction, I shout at him - that his men, who
have been digging up our road for the past week, have cut off my water.

    Says he'll look into it.

    4.30pm: Man from Thames Water pitches up. Tell him men down hole are fixing
pipe. He laughs.

    When might we have some water?

    He shrugs. "Soon as I can get a gang here."

    10.30pm: Generator powering an arc light over pavement which is being
attacked by pickaxes.

    Generator sounds like a giant snoring: only sleeping that is going on in an
angry neighbourhood.

    Thames Water man says this is his fourth job today repairing pipes damaged
by stupid cable companies.

    2am: No good. Man says trouble started when Level 3 contractors tried to
mend pipe and forced huge amount of muck down it instead.

    Now muck has travelled into house and got stuck. Anyway, Thames Water's
jurisdiction ends at our boundary wall, so they're off.

    Tuesday 7.30am: Drills screeching into pavement. Not a drop of water.

    Children starting to smell. Might have to wash hair in Evian like Kim
Basinger.

    Spend day on phone yelling at Thames Water recorded message and "soothing"
Roger Whittaker-type music. Operator perks up when I say magic words: columnist
on London Evening Standard. Thames Water calls in subcontractors to do inside
plumbing. Lone plumber arrives at teatime. Better Half has to get into hole in
street, turn tap and shout.

    Pipe explodes. Muck all over children's toys in the cellar. Putrid
grey-brown liquid coming out of taps. Plumber regrets can't help us with blocked
toilet. That would take him over the £100 limit allowed by Thames Water.

    "Anyway," he adds, "they might say it was blocked before and you just wanted
to get it repaired."

    Two-and-a-half days without sanitation or running water. And all this so we
can watch nude badminton on the Fantasy Channel at 3am.

    I hope that our mayoral candidates will be turning their attention to the
cable companies before they render our streets wholly impassable and give our
children cholera. Steve Norris has already suggested heavy fines. I was thinking
more along the lines of capital punishment.

    YOUR normal reaction on hearing of a 34-year-old who has won an Oscar for
his first film should be a desire to disembowel him over a roaring fire. Sam
Mendes, however, deserves our gratitude both for his talent and for introducing
a new word to the language: Donmar n. 1 a uniquely reliable form of live drama.
("Christ, we're not going to the theatre, are we?" "No, we're going to the
Donmar.") Under Mendes's guidance, the tiny Donmar Warehouse has contained
multitudes. Everyone remembers Nicole Kidman, starkers in The Blue Room, but I
can't think of a bad evening spent there. Even those experiencing symptoms of
advanced dramataphobia - terror of being shouted at by actors, breaking out in a
cold sweat during any entertainment which doesn't feature Cameron Diaz and a car
chase - can be taken to the Donmar in absolute safety.

    Let's hope Sam Mendes sticks with it. The movies may want him, but the
theatre needs him.


LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2000


                             956 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2000 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            March 8, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1270 words

HEADLINE: I'LL END THE SCANDAL OF BRITAIN'S LAD DADS;
 YVETTE COOPER, PUBLIC HEALTH MINISTER, ON HER CARE REVOLUTION

BYLINE: Oonagh Blackman

BODY:


    IN A bid to cut Britain's shocking numbers of under-age pregnancies, Public
Health Minister Yvette Cooper is declaring war on teenage boys.

    The youngsters will be targeted in a national blitz on teenage pregnancies
to be spearheaded by a football or showbiz celebrity.

    In an exclusive interview Tony Blair's youngest minister - and at 30 already
tipped as a future Prime Minister - told The Mirror: "Teenagers often say they
don't realise how easy it is to get pregnant and how hard it is to be a parent.

    "One of the most important things will be to focus on teenage boys because
they are half the problem and half the solution.

    "It is the girls who are mostly left holding the baby - and we have to look
at ways of making boys recognise the consequences.

    "The boys have got to start facing up to responsibilities."

    A network of 150 co-ordinators is being set up in each health authority to
advise teenagers on prevention and on how to cope with pregnancy.

    Ms Cooper, who praised Coronation Street for its controversial storyline on
pregnant 13-year-old Sarah-Louise Platt, also wants to get teenage mums back to
school by offering them child care support.

    Ms Cooper said yesterday: "It's a brave storyline. We didn't know until this
week who the father was - and that is very true for a lot of young girls.

    "In the end teenagers will make their own choices, so there is no point in
the Government moralising.

    "But at least we can make sure these youngsters have advice and support.

    "It has been made clear to the co-ordinators they must focus on boys as much
as girls. They need to be aware it is their responsibility too.

    "Once girls become pregnant they are more likely to be stuck in poverty or
living on a low income for a very long time, and that's not good for them or for
their children.

    "We have to try and get some of these girls back into education by offering
help with child care, so they do not go back into this cycle of dependency and
social exclusion."

    This is not about a nanny state, she said.

    "It it totally unacceptable that Britain has the highest rate of under-age
pregnancies in Europe."

    MS Cooper, the mother of an eight-month-old daughter, was moved by the
plight of a schoolgirl mum in her own constituency who has a two-year-old
daughter.

    "She kept asking me questions about how I was getting on bringing up a baby
and doing my job, and it was only later I realised she was looking after a baby
herself."

    The high-flying young minister is one half of Labour's "golden couple" after
her marriage to Chancellor Gordon Brown's chief advisor, Ed Balls.

    Their 1998 wedding was packed with New Labour glitterati including
controversial Paymaster General Geoffrey Robinson.

    Her meteoric career - she only became an MP three years ago - has led to
speculation she will one day be Prime Minister.

    Aides say the extremely bright, Oxford-educated minister has mastered her
ever -widening brief with astonishing speed.

    From her spacious, modern cream-coloured office in Whitehall, Ms Cooper is
now handling some of Tony Blair's most important projects.

    She has responsibility for the new high-profile crusade against cancer and
heart disease, Britain's two biggest killers, as well as tackling smoking,
health inequalities, poor diet in deprived communities and teenage pregnancies.

    Ms Cooper also has responsibility for government policy on gene therapy,
nutrition, maternity, vaccination programmes and women's health.

    She has already had to sweep away one Whitehall tradition to find time to be
with her baby daughter, Meriel. She returned to work only a few weeks after the
baby was born. "I no longer deal with my ministerial Red Box in the evening,"
she said.

    "It's a long tradition in Whitehall for ministers to deal with all their
paperwork at the end of the day, but as a young mum I had to change things.

    "When we come down to London from my constituency in Yorkshire after the
weekend, Ed and I have a bag of nappies and toys while other ministers are
sitting with their Red Boxes.

    "I agree with child-care support and maternity leave - but it's a
complicated thing for MPs because no one can go to the Commons and vote on your
behalf.

    "It's an odd job and there are no easy answers, but people have to be able
to have a family life outside work and that goes for politicians too. I don't
bring my daughter to the office every day, but I make as much time as possible
to be with her and pop home between votes."

    Despite long hours and the pressures of being Minister and mum, Ms Cooper
has avoided falling victim again to an illness that devastated her life for a
year.

    She had been working in America on Bill Clinton's healthcare campaign in
1992 and was struck down by a severe bout of flu .

    She was diagnosed with ME, chronic fatigue syndrome, and spent a year at
home, unable to do anything except sleep and watch afternoon soap operas.

    It is a stark contrast to her present, dynamic lifestyle and, by a strange
twist, ME is now part of her ministerial brief.

    "It was an awful time," said said. "I watched a lot of Richard and Judy and
that's about it.

    "It was a really low period, but I have no symptoms now and I'm just glad I
have the energy to do what I do. Like lots of parents of young children I don't
get as much sleep as I'd like.

    "ME is now part of my responsibilities, so it's really helpful that it's an
issue I have a personal interest in.

    "The Chief Medical Officer is working on a report and I am looking forward
to reading it so we can try to do something about the problem."

    While her 32-year-old husband, also an Oxford graduate, is putting the
finishing touches to the Chancellor's next Budget, his wife is busy spending
Treasury cash on a health revolution.

    She said: "We need to start in the poorest areas. It will be a kind of
redistribution of health. What we have at the moment is health inequality.

    "Cancer care is a lottery. And if you are a factory worker in the north west
you have a much higher chance of having heart disease than if you are a lawyer
in the Home Counties.

    "Heart disease is one of the biggest symbols of inequality and we are going
to target deprived areas first."

    SHE is keen to list projects that will immediately affect ordinary people.

    These include:

    -THE SureStart Plus scheme with 150 co-ordinators to cut teenage
pregnancies.

    -"FIVE-A-DAY" fresh fruit and veg campaign with pilot projects to send
mobile vans to deprived estates to promote healthy eating in poor communities.

    -FREE nicotine patches from April for people on income support who want to
give up smoking, plus anti-smoking co-ordinators to give advice and support.

    -CHEST pain clinics for rapid diagnosis and treatment to prevent heart
disease. The 50 clinics will be set up over the next 12 months starting in
deprived areas.

    -700 defibrillator heart machines to be installed at airports, stations and
shopping centres.

    Ms Cooper said: "Inequalities in health are a central issue. It is something
that drives everything I do.

    "We want to try and prevent illness, rather than just trying to cure people.
Often, things that contribute to ill health are low incomes, unemployment, poor
housing and smoking.

    "But I don't think it's my role to tell people what's good for them - my
role is to make sure people get the support and the services they need.

    "Trying to make sure everyone has an equal chance to be healthy is very
ambitious, I know, but it has to be to make a difference."

    o.blackman@mirror.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2000


                             958 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 March 7, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 48

LENGTH: 605 words

HEADLINE: Return to quality has old favourites shining;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: Malcolm Withers

BODY:


    THERE WAS more evidence of the much-vaunted return to quality today, with
some traditional blue-chips that actually have earnings enjoying a run.

    Not that the powerful top 10 Footsie stocks, which between them share 42% of
the FT-SE 100 market capitalisation, entirely let them off the hook.

    Their influence still conspired to leave the index lower ahead of the
biggest-ever shake-up of the corporate elite that was once the FT-SE 100.

    Kingston Communications today replaced NatWest in the Footsie and eight
further changes, most of them in favour of hi-tech newcomers, are on the cards
tomorrow.

    The market had already anticipated the Kingston move and driven the shares
to a new high of 1592p yesterday, and they today fell 35p to 1557p.

    The quarterly review of the FT-SE indices will take place tomorrow with
decisions based on market capitalisations dictated by closing prices tonight.

    The changes will come into effect on 20 March. The tracker fund managers
will be on the sidelines, waiting to show their investors just how deft they are
in making changes to their portfolios.

    Fighting to get in among the blue-chips are C&W Communications, Freeserve,
Psion, Thus, Baltimore Technologies, Nycomed Amersham, Celltech and Emap.

    Nycomed soared to a new peak of 730p, up 28 3/4p, but the others were marked
down as the market attempted to induce a degree of reality to valuations.

    Casualties are likely to include a roll call of once-traditional British
industry names such as Wolseley, Imperial Tobacco, Thames Water, Scottish &
Newcastle, Whitbread, Hanson, Allied Domecq, ABF, Alliance & Leicester and
Corus. In some cases, there were last-ditch attempts to rescue the market
capitalisation, but not enough to put them out of the relegation zone as they
awaited tomorrow's decisions with some dread. PowerGen, at number nine in the
list of dropouts headed the fallers with a 42 3/4p slide to 387p after US
utility Edison International, which owns two power stations in Britain, put out
a profits warning that partly blamed its British generators.

    There will also be changes to the other indices, including the FT-SE 250,
which some analysts believe now represents true value for the pension plans of
the future.

    Cambridge Antibody, one of the biotech favourites of yesteryear, took the
opportunity ahead of tomorrow's decision to make a £100 million placing and open
offer to expand and accelerate its research and development activities.

    The shares shot up 637 1/2p, or 15%, to 4775p. Oxford Glycoscience, which is
also expecting promotion, added 25p to a new high of 3022 1/2p.

    BTG rose 112 1/2p, or 8%, to 1510p on a deal with US-based Avigen to develop
its gene therapy. Xenova announced significant trials for its drug to fight
cancer patients' resistance to normal treatments along with some good milestone
payments, and the shares gained 12 1/2p to a record 435p.

    Overnight gloom in New York provoked a sense of reality into the London
market, which had closed last night at its best level for some weeks. The
Footsie fell 22.7 points to 6545.1.

    The Deutsche Bank-Dresdner Bank mega-merger sent a frisson through the
British banking sector, Barclays adding 14p to 1528p, Bank of Scotland lifting
7p to 579p and Abbey National gaining 16p to 665p.

    Telecoms were disconnected by competition worries. BT fell 29p to 1259p and
Voda-fone shed 8p to 391p.

    lPrices and indices in this section are supplied from various sources and
calculated at different times and may not always match those listed in the
tables. Ofex prices relate to the previous close.


LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2000


                             959 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 March 7, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 48

LENGTH: 570 words

HEADLINE: Kingston leads way in big Footsie shake-up;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: Malcolm Withers

BODY:


    AHEAD of the biggest ever shake-up of the corporate elite that was once the
FT-SE 100, Kingston Communications today replaced NatWest in the Footsie. Eight
further changes, most of them in favour of hi-tech newcomers, are on the cards
tomorrow.

    However, the market had already anticipated such a move, having driven
Kingston's share price to a new high of 1592p yesterday, and the shares reacted
with a 42p fall to 1550p. The quarterly review of the FT-SE indices will take
place tomorrow with decisions based on market capitalisations dictated by
closing prices tonight. The changes will come into effect on 20 March. On the
sidelines will be the tracker fund managers waiting to show their investors just
how deft they are in making changes to their portfolios.

    Fighting to get in among the blue-chips are C&W Communications, Freeserve,
Psion, Thus, Baltimore Technologies, Nycomed Amersham, Celltech and Emap.

    Nycomed soared to a new peak of 723 1/2p, up 22 1/4p, but the others were
marked down as the market attempted to induce a degree of reality to valuations.

    Casualties are likely to include a roll call of once-traditional British
industry names such as Wolseley, Imperial Tobacco, Thames Water, Scottish &
Newcastle, Whitbread, Hanson, Allied Domecq, ABF, Alliance & Leicester, PowerGen
and Corus, which mostly remained stationary at their overnight levels as they
awaited tomorrow's decisions with some dread.

    There will also be changes to the other indices, including the FT-SE 250,
which some analysts believe now represents true value for the pension plans of
the future.

    Leading the charge was Cambridge Antibody, one of the biotech favourites of
yesteryear, which took the opportunity ahead of tomorrow's decision to make a
£100 million placing and open offer to expand and accelerate its research and
development activities. The shares shot up 837 1/2p, or 20%, to 4975p. Oxford
Glyco-science, which is also expecting promotion, added 17 1/2p to a new high of
3015p.

    BTG rose 127 1/2p, or 9%, to 1525p on a deal with US-based Avigen to develop
its unique gene therapy. Xenova announced significant trials for its drug to
fight cancer patients' resistance to normal treatments along with some good
milestone payments that led the shares up 40p to a record 462 1/2p.

    Overnight gloom in New York provoked a sense of reality into the London
market, which had closed last night at its best level for some weeks. British
markets would do well to heed the "casino mentality" warning from US Securities
and Exchange Commission watchdog Arthur Levitt. The Foot-sie fell 31 points to
6536.8.

    The Deutsche Bank-Dresdner Bank mega-merger sent a frisson through the
British banking sector, Barclays adding 17p to 1531p, Bank of Scotland lifting
5p to 577p and Abbey National gaining 16p to 665p.

    Telecoms were disconnected by competition worries. BT fell 29p to 1259p and
Vodafone was a loser for the first time this month with an 8p drop to 391p. The
cost of going online in Britain is set to tumble as more communications groups
offer free and unlimited internet access.

    The latest is NTL, which came hard on the heels of Alta Vista to announce
cheaper links.

    lPrices and indices in this section are supplied from various sources and
calculated at different times and may not always match those listed in the
tables. Ofex prices relate to the previous close.


LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2000


                             960 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 March 7, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 48

LENGTH: 600 words

HEADLINE: Return to quality has old favourites shining;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: Malcolm Withers

BODY:


    HOPES of the Footsie escaping from the influence of the Big Ten stocks that
share 42% of the FT-SE 100 market capitalisation still looked slim as they
collectively slipped back today. There was, however, some evidence of a return
to quality, with some traditional blue-chips that produce earnings enjoying a
run ahead of the biggest-ever shake-up of the corporate elite that was once the
FT-SE 100.

    Kingston Communications today replaced NatWest in the Footsie and eight
further changes, most of them in favour of hi-tech newcomers, are on the cards
tomorrow.

    T h e m a r k e t h a d already anticipated the Kingston move and driven the
shares to a new high of 1592p yesterday. Today, they fell 12p to 1580p.

    The quarterly review of the FT-SE indices will take place tomorrow with
decisions based on market capitalisations dictated by closing prices tonight.

    The changes will come into effect on 20 March. Tracker fund managers will be
on the sidelines, waiting to show their investors just how deft they are in
making changes to their portfolios.

    Fighting to get in among the blue-chips are C&W Communications, Freeserve,
Psion, Thus, Baltimore Technologies, Nycomed Amersham, Celltech and Emap.

    Nycomed soared to a new peak of 727p, up 25 3/4p, but the others were marked
down as the market attempted to induce a degree of reality to valuations.

    Casualties are likely to include a roll call of once-traditional British
industry names such as Wolseley, Imperial Tobacco, Thames Water, Scottish &
Newcastle, Whitbread, Hanson, Allied Domecq, ABF, Alliance & Leicester and
Corus. In some cases, there were last-ditch attempts to rescue the market
capitalisation, but not enough to put them out of the relegation zone.

    PowerGen, at number nine in the list of dropouts headed the fallers with a
49 1/4p slide to 380 1/2p after US utility Edison International, which owns two
power stations in Britain, put out a profits warning that partly blamed its
British generators.

    There will also be changes to the other indices, including the FT-SE 250,
which some analysts believe now represents true value for the pension plans of
the future.

    Cambridge Antibody, one of the biotech favourites of yesteryear, took the
opportunity ahead of tomorrow's decision to make a £100 million placing and open
offer to expand and accelerate its research and development activities.

    The shares shot up 637 1/2p, or 15%, to 4775p.

    Oxford Glycoscience, which is also expecting promotion, added 25p to a new
high of 3022 1/2p.

    BTG rose 112 1/2p, or 8%, to 1510p on a deal with US-based Avigen to develop
its gene therapy. Xenova announced significant trials for its drug to fight
cancer patients' resistance to normal treatments along with some good milestone
payments, and the shares gained 12 1/2p to a record 435p.

    Overnight gloom in New York provoked a sense of reality in the London
market, which had closed last night at its best for some weeks. The Footsie fell
58 points at one stage before a modest rally left it astray by 31.8 points at
6536.0.

    The Deutsche Bank-Dresdner Bank mega-merger sent a frisson through the
British banking sector, Barclays adding 5p to 1519p, Bank of Scotland lifting 7p
to 579p and Abbey National gaining 10p to 659p. Telecoms were disconnected by
competition worries. BT fell 35p to 1253p and Vodafone shed 12 1/4p to 386 3/4p.

    Prices and indices in this section are supplied from various sources and
calculated at different times and may not always match those listed in the
tables. Ofex prices relate to the previous close.


LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2000


                             961 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                 March 7, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 48

LENGTH: 592 words

HEADLINE: No escape for Footsie as big 10 lose ground;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: Malcolm Withers

BODY:


    HOPES of the Footsie escaping from the influence of the Big 10 stocks, which
share 42% of the FT-SE 100 market capitalisation, still looked slim as they
collectively slipped back today. There was, however, some evidence of a return
to quality with some traditional blue-chips enjoying a run ahead of the
biggest-ever shake-up of the corporate elite that was once the FT-SE 100.

    Kingston Communications today replaced NatWest in the Footsie and eight
further changes, most of them in favour of hi-tech newcomers, are on the cards
tomorrow. The market had anticipated the Kingston move and driven the shares to
a new high of 1592p yesterday. Today, they fell 12p to 1580p.

    The quarterly review of the FT-SE indices will take place tomorrow with
decisions based on market capitalisations. The changes will come into effect on
20 March.

    Fighting to get in among the blue-chips are C&W Communications, Freeserve,
Psion, Thus, Baltimore Technologies, Nycomed Amersham, Celltech and Emap.

    Nycomed soared to a new peak of 727p, up 25 3/4p and C&W added 22p at 1192p
but the others were marked down as the market attempted to induce a degree of
reality to valuations.

    Casualties are likely to include once-traditional British industry and
commerce names such as Wolseley, Imperial Tobacco, Thames Water, Scottish &
Newcastle, Whitbread, Hanson, Allied Domecq, ABF, Alliance & Leicester and
Corus. In some cases, there were last-ditch attempts to rescue the market
capitalisation, but not enough to put them out of the relegation zone.

    PowerGen, at number nine in the list of dropouts, headed the fallers with a
49 3/4p slide to 380p after US utility Edison International, which owns two
power stations in Britain, put out a profits warning that partly blamed its
British generators.

    There will also be changes to the other indices, including the FT-SE 250,
which some analysts believe now represents true value for pension plans.

    Cambridge Antibody, one of the biotech favourites of yesteryear, took the
opportunity ahead of tomorrow's decision to make a £100 million placing and open
offer to expand its research and development activities. The shares shot up 1037
1/2p, or 25%, to 5175p.

    Oxford Glycoscience, which is also expecting promotion, added 60p to a new
high of 3057 1/2p.

    BTG rose 90p, or 6%, to 1487 1/2p on a deal with US-based Avigen to develop
its gene therapy. Xenova announced significant trials for its drug to fight
cancer patients' resistance to normal treatments along with some good milestone
payments, and the shares gained 20p to a record 442 1/2p.

    New York invoked a sense of reality in the London market, which had closed
last night at its best for some weeks, as it suffered a series of further
setbacks from its opening today. The Footsie responded by shadowing the Dow
downwards with a fall of 100.3 to 6467.5.

    The Deutsche Bank-Dresdner Bank mega-merger sent a frisson through the
British banking sector, Barclays adding 1p to 1515p, Bank of Scotland lifting 2p
to 574p and Abbey National gaining 6p to 655p.

    Telecoms were disconnected by competition worries. BT fell 102p to 1186p and
Vodafone shed 11p to 388 1/2p.

    Prices and indices in this section are supplied from various sources and
calculated at different times and may not always match those listed in the
tables. Ofex prices relate to the previous close.

    WALL STREET divided after US watchdog Arthur Levitt warned that a "casino
mentality" was threatening market stability. The Dow plunged 323.89 to 9846.61.


LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2000


                             975 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                February 2, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 40

LENGTH: 76 words

HEADLINE: Cancer trials cheer Oxford

BODY:


    ANTICANCER gene therapy specialist Oxford Biomedica reports favourable
pre-clinical results in its treatment for tumours in the latest issue of the
specialist scientific publication Gene Therapy.

    The treatment also reduced side effects. The anticancer gene that Oxford is
currently using is also present in a product in phase one and two clinical
trials for the treatment of breast cancer.

    Oxford shares added 4p to 72 1/2p on the news.


LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2000


                             977 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2000 MGN Ltd.
                                 Sunday Mirror

                            January 30, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 26, 27

LENGTH: 1208 words

HEADLINE: AT LAST THERE'S REAL HOPE THAT ONE DAY OUR LITTLE GIRL WILL NO LONGER
HAVE TO LIVE EVERY DAY IN AGONY;
 BLAIRS BACK PARENT'S CAMPAIGN TO FIND CURE FOR ALEX'S SKIN TORMENT

BYLINE: Jill Todd

BODY:


    ALEX Hood is not yet 11 but in her short life she has endured more than
100,000 blisters which cover her body from head to toe.

    They are agonising wounds which tear and flare up at the slightest touch, so
her parents Virginia and Robin have never been able to cuddle her.

    Alex suffers from epidermolysis bullosa, or EB, and until last year doctors
thought it would be 30 years before a cure was found.

    But thanks to the perseverance of Robin and the support of Tony and Cherie
Blair, scientists now believe they are within three years of finding a cure.

    Robin, from Castle Douglas, Kirkcudbrightshire, wrote to the Prime Minister
and his wife asking for help in highlighting EB. "I got 10 rejections but I
wouldn't give up," he says. "The 11th letter worked."

    Last April he and Alex were invited to meet the couple at Downing Street.
"They were both incredibly kind and very moved by Alex's story and the effects
of EB on other sufferers," says Robin.

    "They invited us back to Downing Street in October, and Mr Blair has also
arranged for a lunch with Donald Dewar and leading Scottish businessmen to raise
funds.

    "He has also persuaded the Scottish Office to give us a donation of pounds
138,000, and Cherie has agreed to pose for a bust that we can auction."

    Now Robin is hoping for similar success with President Bill Clinton and his
wife Hillary. He has already sent them a staggering 1,000 letters each.

    "I've explained I breed chocolate labradors, and Alex and I have kept a six
-month-old puppy called Dash for the President. Alex thought it would be a great
companion for his chocolate labrador Buddy. I want Alex to present it to him. I
shan't give up until he agrees to see us.".

    With their hopes of a cure raised, Robin says he now dreams of the day he
can pick up his daughter and swing her around the garden. "And I've told Alex I
want to walk hand in hand with her, barefoot on a beach."

    Every morning Alex wakes up in agony from the 30 or 40 blisters which have
formed overnight. She cannot get dressed or washed without skin peeling off.

    And she is also at risk of developing skin cancer.

    Robin says: "I promised Alex I would do everything in my power to find a
cure and give her back her childhood before it was too late. But I knew I faced
a race against time. I've read too many obituaries dedicated to EB children who
haven't lived beyond the age of 12."

    Alex is just one of 5,000 EB victims in Britain and half a million
worldwide.

    Robin's crusade to find a cure has helped the charity DEBRA - Dystrophic
Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association - raise millions of pounds for
research.

    "We're nearly there," says Robin, 43. "Scientists have now identified the
seven genes that cause EB. We're now looking to gene therapy to help heal the
skin. We're only pounds 5 million away from finding a cure."

    But while there is now real hope for EB sufferers, Robin has paid a high
price for his efforts.

    His obsession has cost him his marriage to Virginia, his friends and his
business. His efforts to remain positive and enthusiastic have often left him
physically and mentally exhausted. Even now, Robin's eyes fill with tears as he
recalls the moment he learned his beautiful daughter suffered from EB.

    "I was the first person to hold her after she was born. She was perfect -
and so wanted. We already had Robin, her brother, who was eight, and Alex
completed our family. Virginia and I were thrilled.

    THE next day I arrived at the hospital and saw Virginia looking distraught.
She lifted the end of Alex's blanket and I saw that whole chunks of skin had
come away from her feet. It was horrifying.

    "Two weeks later a dermatologist confirmed that Alex had EB and that the
condition was potentially fatal. Virginia and I were shocked to discover we were
both carriers of the gene. Believe me, that's a very difficult thing for parents
to live with.

    "But Alex was still our gorgeous baby. We were shown how to bandage her
blisters each day, and how to pick her up causing as little pain as possible."

    Virginia and Robin experienced mixed emotions as Alex learned to crawl, then
walk. "We were thrilled to see her take her first steps but went through agony
each time she fell as it meant more blisters."

    Alex was nearly three when Robin nearly died in a car crash. After he
recovered, compensation allowed him to take six months off his work as a
sporting agent.

    He decided, with Virginia's backing, to give the time to DEBRA. "You raise
the money - I'll keep Alex alive," Virginia said.

    "I acquired tunnel vision," admits Robin. "Nothing else mattered except
saving Alex's life."

    His tireless fundraising efforts began to take a toll on his marriage. He
was often away for days at a time and Virginia felt increasingly unhappy left
alone to cope with the children. The marriage finally broke down when Alex was
six.

    Virginia, 47, took the children to live near her parents in Leamington Spa,
Warwickshire.

    "I was heartbroken," admits Robin. "Virginia is a wonderful woman. But we're
still extremely close and see each other often. We still cry on each other's
shoulders."

    Virginia has the harrowing task of dressing Alex's blisters each morning
before she sets off for school with a carer, and again each evening when she
returns.

    Alex has to sleep wrapped in cotton wool bandages in an air conditioned
room. In a few weeks time she faces the first of several operations to stretch
her oesophagus which has narrowed due to the condition. Eighteen months ago she
had an operation to separate her fingers which had "webbed" as the skin fused
together.

    Alex's immense courage throughout continues to spur Robin on.

    "Two years ago I ran the London Marathon pushing Alex in a padded
supermarket trolley to raise funds," he says. "Three quarters of the way round
the heavens opened. Alex looked wet, anaemic and very miserable so I stopped
running and asked her if she wanted to stop.

    "She said, 'No, Daddy, we're trying to raise money to save my life'."

    Close to a breakthrough

    EB is a family of genetic conditions that can leave skin and some internal
linings, such as the throat, mouth and vagina, so fragile that they can blister
and tear at a touch.

    There are three main types - simplex, dystrophic and the most severe,
junctional, which can be fatal in infancy.

    EB affects the production of the proteins that act as the "glue" that holds
the connective tissues together. The skin is under constant attack.

    Some sufferers have a higher than normal pre-disposition to skin cancer.

    "The amount of money raised over the last few years has fast- tracked
research into EB and gene therapy. We are now close to the final
hurdle,"explains John Dart, Director of the EB charity DEBRA.

    Dermatologist and EB expert Professor Robin Eady of St John's Institute of
Dermatology at St Thomas's Hospital in London, says: "I think that one day we
will have something like a gene cream which will restore normal function to the
skin."

    If you would like to make a donation to DEBRA contact the charity at: Debra
House, Wellington Business Park, Crowthorne, Berks, RG45 6 LS. Or visit its
website: www.debra.org.uk

GRAPHIC: COURAGE: Alex with Cherie Blair (above) and with her mother; Virginia
and father Robin (right) Pictures: JEREMY WILLIAMS

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2000


                             984 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                         The Evening Standard (London)

                                January 7, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 43

LENGTH: 76 words

HEADLINE: Oxford finds cancer therapy

BODY:


    PROFESSOR Susan Kingsman, of AIM-listed Oxford Biomedica, told an
international conference on gene therapy today that the British biotech group
had achieved a breakthrough in cancer therapy that may be particularly useful in
the treatment of prostate cancer.

    She said research had shown that viruses used to carry beneficial genes into
patients' cells were "useful for cancer therapy", and that a series of new
products could now be developed.


LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2000


                             985 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2000 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            January 4, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12, 13

LENGTH: 1667 words

HEADLINE: HAVE A NICE DNA

BYLINE: Clare Raymond And Sue Malins

BODY:


    SCIENCE is set to transform our lives in the 21st century. Yesterday we
looked at how our homes might change. Today CLARE RAYMOND and SUE MALINS look
forward to startling developments in health and sex.

    IT'S January 2, 2030, and you're woken by your alarm clock with the words:
"Good morning, it's 7am."

    You stare, bleary-eyed, at the little box for a few seconds and it tells
you: "Blood pressure normal. But you are dehydrated."

    You slope off to the bathroom and before the toilet has finished flushing,
its sensors have completed a urine test.

    The results are sent to your GP via the Internet and if anything worrying
shows up - a spot of blood or defective DNA - you will receive a warning.

    As you clean your teeth, the brush checks for signs of gum disease and
measures your bone density.

    This hi-tech glimpse into the future might sound far-fetched today but for
our children and grandchildren, it will be part of everyday life.

    In the last 100 years, we have made remarkable advances in the world of
medicine. And within the next 50 years doctors will be able to rebuild our
bodies in a way unimaginable today.

    With people living longer than ever before, our health service will have to
adjust to cope with an ageing population.

    Some scientists predict that by 2100, our descendants could live to be 200
years old. But the future isn't without risk.

    As populations soar, powerful new mutant bacteria will emerge that can't be
treated with antibiotics.

    But advances in microchip technology and molecular chemistry mean we are
better equipped than ever before to protect our health.

    Within a few decades, technologists predict they will create germ-size
robots called nanomachines that will swim through the bloodstream, taking
continuous readings in different parts of the body, monitoring cholesterol and
measuring blood sugar, hormone levels and immune system activity.

    The tiny machines - like something from the Sixties sci-fi movie Fantastic
Voyage - will scour the arteries and clean plaque build-up, mop up cancer cells,
and zap blood clots.

    Meanwhile, hospitals will be using a new weapon against infectious diseases.
Tiny sensors will screen people for any infectious diseases as they walk through
the hospital entrance.

    "Sensors will also be located in sinks for staff and visitors who are
required to wash their hands before and after going into a patients' room," says
Dr Charles Wilson of the Institute for the Future in California.

    "Any carrier will be swept with a hand-held biosensor, which identifies the
specific organism."

    As part of the admission process, patients will be implanted with a tiny
chip which will provide results of 40 or more lab tests. Hospital gowns or vests
with embedded sensors will continuously monitor patients.

    We could also see the first successful transplant of organs from animals to
humans by the end of the decade.

    British firm Imutran is testing the safety of pig-to-human transplants, and
to begin with these "xenotransplants" will be used as a temporary measure for
patients awaiting a human organ.

    Doctors are already learning how to reverse paralysis. In 25 years, they may
eliminate it entirely.

    And by the year 2020 the ability to replace parts of the human brain may lie
within our grasp.

    Diabetics will have a glucose monitoring sensor implanted under the skin and
an internal insulin reservoir that automatically adjusts doses.

    Genetic testing and gene manipulation could also transform medicine. Mapping
of the human's 140,000 genes in the next two to three years could lead to rapid
advances in treating heart disease, cancer, Alzheimer's and even Aids.

    BY 2025 doctors will be correcting defective genes, making illnesses like
sickle-cell anaemia a thing of the past.

    Your genetic profile will be recorded on a chip which will determine your
level of risk for a particular disease and you'll get customised prescriptions,
made to your own specifications.

    On a more personal note, you can look forward to the best sex of your life
in the new century.

    As more and more couples turn to the test tube to combat infertility, sex
will become more about recreation than procreation.

    The development of virtual reality technology will mean you won't even need
a partner.

    By 2020 anyone who feels the urge will be able to wear a special body suit
fitted with position and movement sensors to get their thrills.

    A helmet-mounted display will shut out the real world and project images of
a virtual bedroom - or wherever else you fancy doing it.

    Every sexual fantasy will be fulfilled. Your virtual body can embrace
someone else's on a virtual bed, on a virtual beach or where else you like.

    Future generations will be largely conceived in laboratories - and
"designer" babies will have hand-picked genes.

    "People will be able to choose eye colour, hair colour, body weight, even
personality to a certain degree by 2020," says Professor Michi Kaku, of the City
University of New York.

    "It will be an area of enormous ethical debate."

    Some scientists believe it will be possible to clone human beings by 2025.

    Dr Jane Rogers is project manager for the Sanger Centre at the Wellcome
Trust Human Genome Project in Cambridge which is funding research to provide a
complete map of all the genes on the human chromosome.

    She says that in four years' time, this revolutionary research will reveal
the building blocks for a complete understanding of genetic make-up.

    IT COULD mean the human race evolving into two separate species, with only
the rich being able to afford access to the technology to buy superior genes.

    Zoologist and expert on human sexual behaviour Dr Robin Baker believes birth
control in 2050 will mean teenagers being routinely sterilised. Their eggs and
sperm will be banked first and kept until needed.

    "In future, sex is going to be almost entirely recreational and reproduction
almost entirely clinical," he says.

    Drug companies will turn from contraception to conception to help older
women have babies, while ageing men will have libido and sex-performance
boosters at their disposal.

    By the year 2025, at least 20 per cent of the world's population will be
aged 60 or older. As a result, there will be a greater demand for treatments for
age-related illnesses like Alzheimer's.

    But what about cures for the illnesses that already exist?

    Colds are considered incurable because it would take too long to come up
with a vaccine for every strain.

    But scientists in Belgium who have already developed a flu vaccine believe
that by 2025 children will be given a universal cold vaccine.

    A cure for cancer is almost certainly not going to be found in the next
decade because every type of cancer is different, but a blood test could alert
doctors to cancers before they become malignant.

    Experts believe that within the next 25 years new drugs will be able to
treat most cancers - and maybe even cure some of them.

    In fact, there are so many drugs in development that researchers are
struggling to test them all.

    How your body could be repaired in the future

    HAIR

    TODAY: Transplants, hair plugs and scalp grafts.

    TOMORROW: There will be more permanent approaches, perhaps by stimulating
follicles with growth proteins.

    HEART

    TODAY: Bypasses and transplants are carried out to keep blood flowing to the
heart muscle. Doctors are beginning to use gene therapy to grow new blood
vessels.

    TOMORROW: Functional patches of heart muscle will be grown or existing heart
-muscle cells will be coaxed to repair themselves by new procedures.

    ORGANS

    TODAY: Small slivers of liver tissue can be grown in the lab from one of the
many types of liver cells, but they are not yet ready for transplant.

    TOMORROW: Heart, liver and kidneys will be grown from stem cells in a test
tube and transplanted into the body.

    NERVES

    TODAY: Can be grown in the lab from pig cells and synthetic-polymer matrix.

    TOMORROW: Regenerated from stems or cells in the body.

    PENIS

    TODAY: Penile implants and medication can be used to help men maintain
erections. Surgery to re-attach a severed penis is possible and skin grafts are
used to recover urinary, but not sexual, function if the penis is not recovered.

    TOMORROW: Genetically engineered tissue will be grown in the lab and
attached to the body for final growth to form a fully functional penis.

    BONES

    TODAY: Bone growth factors can now be injected into jaw and other fracture
areas. Researchers can also grow cartilage in the lab in thin sheets, but as yet
it's too weak to be functional in the body.

    TOMORROW: The body will be coaxed to grow bone and cartilage on
biodegradable scaffolds which will be infused with a mix of stem cells and
growth factors.

    EYES & EARS

    TODAY: laser surgery or implants can correct near and farsightedness.

    Cochlear implants replace damaged inner ear.

    TOMORROW: permanent lens implants will correct vision while leaving the
cornea in tact.

    Ear implants will be adjusted to pick up a wider range of frequencies at
longer distances.

    BREASTS

    TODAY: Breasts are reconstructed with saline sacs or with living tissue,
using fat and muscle from the back, buttocks or abdomen.

    TOMORROW: Breasts may be grown in the lab from a patient's own fat cells and
infused back through keyhole slits in the chest.

    LIMBS

    TODAY: Prosthetics wired to peripheral nervous system.

    TOMORROW: Prosthetics wired directly to motor portions of the brain to
improve control and simulate the sensations of touch and pain.

    BLOOD VESSELS

    TODAY: Grown in the lab from pig cells and synthetic-polymer matrix.

    TOMORROW: Grown in the lab from stem or precursor cells to avoid rejection
by the immune system.

    SKIN

    TODAY: Sheets grown in the lab from human and synthetic-polymer matrix.

    TOMORROW: Grown by the body from stem or precursor cells and growth factor.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2000


                             986 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 2000 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            January 4, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12, 13

LENGTH: 1667 words

HEADLINE: HAVE A NICE DNA

BYLINE: Clare Raymond And Sue Malins

BODY:


    SCIENCE is set to transform our lives in the 21st century. Yesterday we
looked at how our homes might change. Today CLARE RAYMOND and SUE MALINS look
forward to startling developments in health and sex.

    IT'S January 2, 2030, and you're woken by your alarm clock with the words:
"Good morning, it's 7am."

    You stare, bleary-eyed, at the little box for a few seconds and it tells
you: "Blood pressure normal. But you are dehydrated."

    You slope off to the bathroom and before the toilet has finished flushing,
its sensors have completed a urine test.

    The results are sent to your GP via the Internet and if anything worrying
shows up - a spot of blood or defective DNA - you will receive a warning.

    As you clean your teeth, the brush checks for signs of gum disease and
measures your bone density.

    This hi-tech glimpse into the future might sound far-fetched today but for
our children and grandchildren, it will be part of everyday life.

    In the last 100 years, we have made remarkable advances in the world of
medicine. And within the next 50 years doctors will be able to rebuild our
bodies in a way unimaginable today.

    With people living longer than ever before, our health service will have to
adjust to cope with an ageing population.

    Some scientists predict that by 2100, our descendants could live to be 200
years old. But the future isn't without risk.

    As populations soar, powerful new mutant bacteria will emerge that can't be
treated with antibiotics.

    But advances in microchip technology and molecular chemistry mean we are
better equipped than ever before to protect our health.

    Within a few decades, technologists predict they will create germ-size
robots called nanomachines that will swim through the bloodstream, taking
continuous readings in different parts of the body, monitoring cholesterol and
measuring blood sugar, hormone levels and immune system activity.

    The tiny machines - like something from the Sixties sci-fi movie Fantastic
Voyage - will scour the arteries and clean plaque build-up, mop up cancer cells,
and zap blood clots.

    Meanwhile, hospitals will be using a new weapon against infectious diseases.
Tiny sensors will screen people for any infectious diseases as they walk through
the hospital entrance.

    "Sensors will also be located in sinks for staff and visitors who are
required to wash their hands before and after going into a patients' room," says
Dr Charles Wilson of the Institute for the Future in California.

    "Any carrier will be swept with a hand-held biosensor, which identifies the
specific organism."

    As part of the admission process, patients will be implanted with a tiny
chip which will provide results of 40 or more lab tests. Hospital gowns or vests
with embedded sensors will continuously monitor patients.

    We could also see the first successful transplant of organs from animals to
humans by the end of the decade.

    British firm Imutran is testing the safety of pig-to-human transplants, and
to begin with these "xenotransplants" will be used as a temporary measure for
patients awaiting a human organ.

    Doctors are already learning how to reverse paralysis. In 25 years, they may
eliminate it entirely.

    And by the year 2020 the ability to replace parts of the human brain may lie
within our grasp.

    Diabetics will have a glucose monitoring sensor implanted under the skin and
an internal insulin reservoir that automatically adjusts doses.

    Genetic testing and gene manipulation could also transform medicine. Mapping
of the human's 140,000 genes in the next two to three years could lead to rapid
advances in treating heart disease, cancer, Alzheimer's and even Aids.

    BY 2025 doctors will be correcting defective genes, making illnesses like
sickle-cell anaemia a thing of the past.

    Your genetic profile will be recorded on a chip which will determine your
level of risk for a particular disease and you'll get customised prescriptions,
made to your own specifications.

    On a more personal note, you can look forward to the best sex of your life
in the new century.

    As more and more couples turn to the test tube to combat infertility, sex
will become more about recreation than procreation.

    The development of virtual reality technology will mean you won't even need
a partner.

    By 2020 anyone who feels the urge will be able to wear a special body suit
fitted with position and movement sensors to get their thrills.

    A helmet-mounted display will shut out the real world and project images of
a virtual bedroom - or wherever else you fancy doing it.

    Every sexual fantasy will be fulfilled. Your virtual body can embrace
someone else's on a virtual bed, on a virtual beach or where else you like.

    Future generations will be largely conceived in laboratories - and
"designer" babies will have hand-picked genes.

    "People will be able to choose eye colour, hair colour, body weight, even
personality to a certain degree by 2020," says Professor Michi Kaku, of the City
University of New York.

    "It will be an area of enormous ethical debate."

    Some scientists believe it will be possible to clone human beings by 2025.

    Dr Jane Rogers is project manager for the Sanger Centre at the Wellcome
Trust Human Genome Project in Cambridge which is funding research to provide a
complete map of all the genes on the human chromosome.

    She says that in four years' time, this revolutionary research will reveal
the building blocks for a complete understanding of genetic make-up.

    IT COULD mean the human race evolving into two separate species, with only
the rich being able to afford access to the technology to buy superior genes.

    Zoologist and expert on human sexual behaviour Dr Robin Baker believes birth
control in 2050 will mean teenagers being routinely sterilised. Their eggs and
sperm will be banked first and kept until needed.

    "In future, sex is going to be almost entirely recreational and reproduction
almost entirely clinical," he says.

    Drug companies will turn from contraception to conception to help older
women have babies, while ageing men will have libido and sex-performance
boosters at their disposal.

    By the year 2025, at least 20 per cent of the world's population will be
aged 60 or older. As a result, there will be a greater demand for treatments for
age-related illnesses like Alzheimer's.

    But what about cures for the illnesses that already exist?

    Colds are considered incurable because it would take too long to come up
with a vaccine for every strain.

    But scientists in Belgium who have already developed a flu vaccine believe
that by 2025 children will be given a universal cold vaccine.

    A cure for cancer is almost certainly not going to be found in the next
decade because every type of cancer is different, but a blood test could alert
doctors to cancers before they become malignant.

    Experts believe that within the next 25 years new drugs will be able to
treat most cancers - and maybe even cure some of them.

    In fact, there are so many drugs in development that researchers are
struggling to test them all.

    How your body could be repaired in the future

    HAIR

    TODAY: Transplants, hair plugs and scalp grafts.

    TOMORROW: There will be more permanent approaches, perhaps by stimulating
follicles with growth proteins.

    HEART

    TODAY: Bypasses and transplants are carried out to keep blood flowing to the
heart muscle. Doctors are beginning to use gene therapy to grow new blood
vessels.

    TOMORROW: Functional patches of heart muscle will be grown or existing heart
-muscle cells will be coaxed to repair themselves by new procedures.

    ORGANS

    TODAY: Small slivers of liver tissue can be grown in the lab from one of the
many types of liver cells, but they are not yet ready for transplant.

    TOMORROW: Heart, liver and kidneys will be grown from stem cells in a test
tube and transplanted into the body.

    NERVES

    TODAY: Can be grown in the lab from pig cells and synthetic-polymer matrix.

    TOMORROW: Regenerated from stems or cells in the body.

    PENIS

    TODAY: Penile implants and medication can be used to help men maintain
erections. Surgery to re-attach a severed penis is possible and skin grafts are
used to recover urinary, but not sexual, function if the penis is not recovered.

    TOMORROW: Genetically engineered tissue will be grown in the lab and
attached to the body for final growth to form a fully functional penis.

    BONES

    TODAY: Bone growth factors can now be injected into jaw and other fracture
areas. Researchers can also grow cartilage in the lab in thin sheets, but as yet
it's too weak to be functional in the body.

    TOMORROW: The body will be coaxed to grow bone and cartilage on
biodegradable scaffolds which will be infused with a mix of stem cells and
growth factors.

    EYES & EARS

    TODAY: laser surgery or implants can correct near and farsightedness.

    Cochlear implants replace damaged inner ear.

    TOMORROW: permanent lens implants will correct vision while leaving the
cornea in tact.

    Ear implants will be adjusted to pick up a wider range of frequencies at
longer distances.

    BREASTS

    TODAY: Breasts are reconstructed with saline sacs or with living tissue,
using fat and muscle from the back, buttocks or abdomen.

    TOMORROW: Breasts may be grown in the lab from a patient's own fat cells and
infused back through keyhole slits in the chest.

    LIMBS

    TODAY: Prosthetics wired to peripheral nervous system.

    TOMORROW: Prosthetics wired directly to motor portions of the brain to
improve control and simulate the sensations of touch and pain.

    BLOOD VESSELS

    TODAY: Grown in the lab from pig cells and synthetic-polymer matrix.

    TOMORROW: Grown in the lab from stem or precursor cells to avoid rejection
by the immune system.

    SKIN

    TODAY: Sheets grown in the lab from human and synthetic-polymer matrix.

    TOMORROW: Grown by the body from stem or precursor cells and growth factor.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2000
