
                             801 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    APRIL 14, 1994, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 2734 words

HEADLINE: AIDS Virus Just as Mysterious 10 Years After Its Discovery

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

BODY:

    When President Ronald Reagan's health chief announced in a blaze of
publicity 10 years ago that an American team of scientists had finally isolated
the AIDS virus, a 30-year-old San Francisco artist named Rob Anderson hardly
paused at the news.

   It was April 23, 1984, and Anderson was busy painting, gardening, cooking and
-- as he conceded with a rueful grin recently -- occasionally, and only
occasionally, visiting the city's gay bathhouses.

   ''I guess I thought, 'Oh, well, they finally found what's causing the
disease,' but I really didn't feel frightened for myself,'' Anderson recalled.
''I wasn't sick, and I didn't expect to get sick.''

   Some of his friends already were ill, and some were dying. But what Anderson
didn't know then was that he too was infected with the AIDS virus, which had
just been isolated -- and that the infection had occurred before 1979.

   Today, at age 40, Anderson represents one of the most tantalizing mysteries
in the global AIDS epidemic, for although his white blood cells have carried
HIV, the human immunodeficiency virus, for some 15 years, he remains free of
disease. An occasional cold or a touch of flu may hit him, but he shakes them
off, and his immune system is intact.

   If scientists can find out why people like Anderson have been able to resist
HIV, that discovery could bring them much closer to understanding the virus'
attack strategy and the body's complex defense mechanisms.

   But after 10 years of basic discoveries offset by major practical
frustrations, that understanding remains a long way off. Only the continuing
worldwide advance of the epidemic is certain.

   ''We've come a long way in the past 10 years,'' says Dr. Paul Volberding, a
University of California at San Francisco cancer specialist and a pioneer in
AIDS care. ''But we have an even longer way to go.''

   There are no cures yet, no vaccines, and none are likely in the near future,
researchers agree. Even the anti-viral drugs such as AZT once thought so
promising have been largely disappointing over the long term.  They may delay
the onset of severe illness for some, but they do not prolong life.

   Meanwhile, the AIDS toll keeps mounting:

   * More than 15 million people worldwide have been infected by HIV, and more
than 3 million have AIDS itself, according to the most recent estimates by the
World Health Organization. Africa is ravaged, and the pandemic is sweeping
through Asia so fast that no one can count its victims.

   * Between 800,000 and 1 million Americans are now infected by HIV. More than
363,000 AIDS cases have been reported since the disease first surfaced in June
1981, and at least 250,000 men, women and children have died, the federal
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports.

   * Also, the epidemic's demographics are changing. In Africa, far more women
than men are being infected. In the United States, although the numbers are
still small, the rate of heterosexual transmission is increasing faster than any
other category. And AIDS is spreading among injection-drug users while
needle-exchange programs languish in many urban centers.

   Amid all this, more than 200 new drugs, drug combinations and potential
vaccines are undergoing clinical trials at medical centers nationwide. A few
will surely be helpful in fighting the opportunistic infections that strike
people whose immune systems are severely damaged by HIV.

   Some, such as genetically engineered protease inhibitors, may prevent
invading viruses from replicating and thereby reduce their numbers in infected
patients. A drug that could diminish the viral load could significantly slow its
spread through the body and even lower the risk of infecting others, researchers
hope.

   Among the vaccines now being tested for safety, few seem highly promising.
Some seek to prevent HIV infection from the beginning, the way the polio vaccine
blocks that virus from infecting. Others seek to boost weakened immune systems
and enable them to resist new infections, but large-scale tests of their
effectiveness have not even begun.

   ''There's no quick fix out there, and while there's a lot of hope, there's
also bound to be a lot of ups and downs,'' said Dr. Dani Bolognesi of Duke
University, a leading AIDS vaccine specialist. ''We've got to understand that
this virus is still a hell of a lot smarter than we are. I think there's steady
progress, though, so we shouldn't panic and feel that things are hopeless.''

   DECADE OF MIXED RESULTS

   Indeed, the entire decade past has indeed seen its ups and downs.

   President Reagan's secretary of health and human services, Margaret Heckler,
stood before reporters in Washington 10 years ago to declare triumphantly, ''The
arrow aimed at the disease AIDS has hit the target.'' She promised a vaccine
''ready for testing'' in two years.

   On that occasion, it was announced that Dr. Robert Gallo, the brilliant
virologist at the National Cancer Institute, had isolated the virus that would
later be called HIV. It was the basic cause of AIDS.

   Still to come were bitter fights for priority credit between Gallo and Dr.
Luc Montagnier of the Pasteur Institute in Paris, who had described the
isolation of a similar virus a year earlier. The battles would involve patent
rights to the blood test that reveals HIV infection and, ultimately, a
settlement between officials of the French and American governments.

   These days Gallo recalls the decade sorrowfully.

   ''Like everyone else,'' he says, ''I thought in the early days the problem of
AIDS was not going to prove as difficult as it has turned out.  After those
first heady years of discovery, I know I underestimated the efficiency of the
virus in causing this terrible disease.''

   Nonetheless, he says, 10 years of research has resulted in important
fundamental progress.

   ''We know now how the virus is transmitted; we know how it replicates; we
know a lot about pathogenesis -- the mechanisms the virus uses to cause
disease,'' he notes.

   Now, Gallo says, he and others at his huge laboratory in Bethesda, Md., are
pursuing every hopeful lead that emerges. Like researchers everywhere, for
example, they are seeking new drugs that might attack those portions of the AIDS
virus that do not vary and that are ''conserved.''

   With leading specialists in gene therapy, they are seeking ways to protect
immune system cells by barring the virus from access to essential enzymes that
the invading microbes require in order to multiply.

   'MUCH LESS DESPAIR'

   ''Today,'' says Gallo, ''I feel much less of the despair that has been so
prevalent lately among so many of us trying new ways to defeat the virus.''

   Similarly, Volberding, who leads clinical researchers and patient-care teams
at San Francisco General Hospital, is not pessimistic, even though he has seen
the advances and bitter setbacks of the fight against AIDS.

   The UCSF physician has witnessed step-by-step progress in developing some
therapies that alleviate the symptoms of opportunistic infections. And he has
faced the desperation of patients who have mobilized their own ''buyers' clubs''
to acquire promising but unproven drugs from abroad.

   Even so, he notes that despite the shortcomings of AZT and the toxic effects
it induces at high doses over long periods, the drug dramatically reduces the
transmission of HIV from infected pregnant women to their unborn infants.

   That result, reported only a month ago, ''represents a real breakthrough in
preventing pediatric AIDS,'' said Volberding, who is not one to use the word
''breakthrough'' lightly.

   During all these years, a major influence in the fight has been the most
deeply concerned group of all: the people who call themselves ''the AIDS
community.'' This group has spread its fervor to country after country.

   Its militancy was at first inspired by award-winning gay playwright Larry
Kramer, whom many call ''God's angry man.'' Outraged by the low level of
government commitment to fighting the epidemic, Kramer founded the
headline-grabbing AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power, known as ACT-UP, and
co-founded the Gay Men's Health Crisis in New York.

   ACT-UP members picketed, disrupted traffic, staged parades with members in
blood-spattered cadaver costumes and shouted down speakers at international
scientific meetings. They pressed constantly for more research funds, for better
care of patients and against job and insurance discrimination.

   Unwilling to accept the slow pace of drug discovery, they demanded immediate
access to anything that seemed promising. Many of their tactics -- like the 1981
mass blockade of the Golden Gate Bridge -- infuriated ordinary citizens,
politicians and scientists.

   But their unremitting pressure resulted in increased levels of government
financing for AIDS. And as their knowledge and sophistication grew, they
demanded and won a place at government conferences, where they joined scientists
and administrators to help decide the directions that AIDS research and drug
testing should take.

   Community-based clinical trials of drugs are widespread today, due in no
small part to the militancy of the AIDS community and the vigorous support of
physicians who care for them.

   Kramer's rage and his capacity for invective remain undiminished, although
his influence has abated. To him the National Institutes of Health is still a
''cesspool,'' and AIDS budgets are still so inadequate that they represent
''genocide, pure and simple.''

   ''But AIDS activism is now exhausted,'' Kramer said. ''We had a good, long
run, but it's all very dispiriting today.''

   Replacing the tactics of militant street theater is a new kind of pressure
brought by activists who have become widely knowledgeable about the epidemic.

   Typical of the new AIDS activists are members of San Francisco's Project
Inform, who are highly sophisticated about experimental treatments and the
arcana of immunology and molecular biology. Founded and led by Martin Delaney, a
former management consultant, Project Inform's members have recruited some of
the most powerful AIDS research leaders in the country to join them in a variety
of projects.

   NEW APPROACHES

   One, for example, is a continuing series of think tank sessions at which the
scientists and Project Inform jointly recommend new scientific approaches aimed
at restoring the severely damaged immune systems of patients with the most
advanced cases of HIV.

   Whether or not the conferences create a successful near-term research agenda,
the link between militants -- many of whom are HIV-infected themselves -- and
the nation's leading researchers marks a major departure from the past, when the
priorities of the two camps were most often far apart.

   Those early days of the epidemic saw costly political battles over money as
well as research priorities. During the epidemic's first year, for example, the
Reagan administration and Congress provided $ 8 million for AIDS research,
treatment and prevention campaigns. Federal appropriations the following year
reached $ 44 million; a year later, they totaled $ 104 million.

   Finally, in 1988, AIDS appropriations passed $ 1 billion, and for the fiscal
year that begins this October, the total will reach nearly $ 7 billion,
including $ 1.6 billion for research, $ 3.4 billion for treatment, $ 623 million
for prevention and $ 1.3 billion for disability payments and housing assistance.

   With so few successful treatments, however, many AIDS specialists argue that
funds allocated for prevention programs remain woefully inadequate and should be
a far higher priority.

   Says Dr. James Curran, AIDS chief at the Centers for Disease Control, who has
been battling the epidemic since the first reports of a strange new disease
emerged in 1981: ''The epidemic has gone far beyond what we predicted 10 years
ago, and it's going to get worse. We're all disappointed that we don't yet have
any technological solutions, so what remains for us now is the need for much
stronger prevention efforts.

   ''We need consistent messages directed at both homosexual and heterosexual
audiences,'' he added. ''We need prevention services for men and women who are
already infected, and who are in a position to spread their infection. We need
prevention messages for young gay men, for substance abusers, for high-risk
people. They are urgent and critical.''

   The scientists agree, but in their laboratories they also say that only by
continuing to pursue fundamental research will they eventually find the paths to
cures and vaccines.

   ''There is no doubt in the minds of every scientist I know that solutions
will eventually be found, although the road will be a long and difficult one,''
says Dr. Mathilda Krim, who left her own work in cell genetics and virology to
co-found the New York-based American Foundation for AIDS Research (AmFAR). Much
of that organization's $ 25 million budget supports promising research by
scientists venturing onto untried paths.

   NO EASY SOLUTIONS

   ''There are no easy solutions,'' Krim says. ''Even today, we have to go back
to the drawing board as the basic research continues.''

   For that kind of research, the lives of men like Rob Anderson take on a
special meaning. His story and medical history are followed closely in the AIDS
office of San Francisco's Public Health Department by Dr. Susan Buchbinder and
her colleagues.

   Anderson is one of more than 6,700 gay men who volunteered to give blood for
a special hepatitis study sponsored by the health department during 1978 and
1980. Their blood was frozen, and when the AIDS epidemic began they formed the
''City Clinic Cohort,'' whose members -- many of whom have since died -- have
provided invaluable information ever since.

   Buchbinder found 593 men in the cohort whose frozen samples of blood
indicated that they had been infected with HIV almost since the study began.
And for 42 of them, including Anderson, analysis continues to show that their
immune systems have have remained virtually undamaged all this time, with little
loss of the protective cells that help prevent the outbreak of infectious
diseases.

   Buchbinder terms these men ''healthy long-term positives'' and strongly
suspects that some unknown genetic factor interacting with their immune systems
is responsible for their undiminished resistance to disease. Others believe that
they may have been infected by a weakened variant of the virus or that their
immune system cells hold an undefined resistant factor.

   Those are questions that only continued basic research can answer. It also
may answer other questions: Why, for example, do 12 percent of infected people
develop full-blown AIDS within five years, while half may stay healthy for 10
years?

   UNANSWERED QUESTIONS

   There are additional puzzles as well. A study of prostitutes in Kenya has
shown that many regularly engage in highly unsafe and unprotected sex with their
clients but remain free of any sign of HIV infection. They too are under study.

   The answer to such questions could clearly point toward new directions in
vaccine development and new strategies for drug therapy, Buchbinder and many
other scientists are convinced.

   Meanwhile, Rob Anderson continues to give samples of his blood and undergoes
tissue sampling four times a year for Buchbinder's project. It's his way, he
says, of contributing something beyond militancy in memory of his friends who
have died.

   In the back room of his tranquil apartment below Potrero Hill, Anderson
paints striking compositions of the human body that he calls
''autobiographical.'' The studies, he says, ''are a way to deal with my personal
struggles -- with the emotional obstacles I encounter in making progress through
a difficult world.''

   Robinson meditates daily, exercises, does yoga regularly and eats healthy
foods. But he hasn't joined a support group -- ''and I don't have a guru or
anything like that,'' he says.

   ''Part of staying healthy,'' he insists, ''is not to deny what's happened,
but to keep your life in a proper, positive perspective. I try to come to terms
with AIDS because it's something I can't forget about; I'm certainly not in
denial.

   ''I pay attention to all the reports of scientific progress, but I don't
obsess about them. In fact,'' he says, ''I don't really think that any of the
new drugs the scientists develop will prove to be a cure. People can do a lot
more for themselves on a holistic level than by waiting for some miracle cure.''


GRAPHIC: CHART,FEDERAL SPENDING ON HIV, AIDS , CHRONICLE GRAPHIC

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1994


                             802 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    April 14, 1994, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 187 words

HEADLINE: Missing gene linked to many cancers

BYLINE: Doug Levy

BODY:

    Scientists have found a gene they believe is responsible for allowing cancer
cells to grow - holding out promise for prevention and treatment of a number of
different cancers.

   "It is involved in . . . a dozen or so cancers, and probably more," says
Alexander Kamb, Myriad Genetics Inc., Salt Lake City, in this week's Science.

   The researchers say the gene, known as p16, is involved in formation of lung,
breast, bone, skin, bladder, kidney, ovarian and blood cancers.

   They think it may be more significant than p53, a gene already implicated in
colon, breast, liver and other cancers.

   The p16 protein works as a brake that halts cell replication, says Mark
Skolnick, University of Utah Medical Center.

   "We found that in approximately half of the tumor cells we examined, both
copies of (p16) gene were deleted, meaning that this protein and its braking
function were absent," says Skolnick.

   The finding might lead to:

   -- Gene therapy, in which corrected copies of the gene are inserted into
patients with the mutation.

   -- Targeted drugs that replace the protein missing in people with the mutant
gene.


                             803 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 12, 1994 Tuesday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. B-7

LENGTH: 707 words

HEADLINE: Why U.S. medical centers are in peril;
Research funding has never been more tenuous.

BYLINE: GERARD N. BURROW, BURROW is dean of the Yale University School of
Medicine in New Haven, Conn.

BODY:

   With apologies to Charles Dickens, these are the best of times and the worst
of times for academic health centers. More students than ever wish to become
doctors, and superb future physicians are entering medical school.

   Concurrently, biomedical science has never been more exciting.

   Advances in cellular and molecular biology are causing a revolution in
clinical medicine.

   The transfer of knowledge from the laboratory bench to the clinical bedside
has never been more vigorous. However, the global changes envisioned in health
care reform put the fragile infrastructure of academic medicine that supports
medical education and research at great risk.

   Research funding has never been more tenuous, and talented investigators find
themselves scrambling to keep their research programs together. Why should
academic medicine be at risk in a system of health reform that would cap
physicians' fees and reduce Medicare spending? The reason lies in the United
States' unique support structure for medical education and research.

   Historically, research-intensive universities with medical schools and their
"teaching hospitals" have developed a symbiotic relationship which has allowed
basic scientists and clinicians to collaborate closely. Therefore, a significant
reduction in reimbursement to physicians or hospitals will indirectly affect
research by reducing its support and scope and will affect clinical education by
limiting support for programs that tuition or research grants do not cover. In a
time of national constraint, one may legitimately ask why academic medical
centers should be protected above other priorities.

   The answer lies in our nation's approach to medical education and research,
which has resulted in American investigators being awarded the majority of
recent Nobel prizes in medicine. More important, because of this approach,
genetically engineered proteins are improving the quality of life for people who
suffer from diabetes mellitus and severe anemia.

   Patients who receive transplanted hearts, lungs and livers are surviving
because of increasing knowledge about the body's immune responses.

   Gene therapy is just beginning to open up new vistas. Advances in diagnostic
imaging allow us to probe the human body noninvasively.

   Hip and knee prostheses are increasing the quality of many lives. A
compelling case can be made to preserve and foster the academic medical centers.

   But preservation depends on a support infrastructure that has evolved over
time and is extremely fragile. For example, as dean of Yale School of Medicine,
I preside over an almost $400 million budget, of which 93 percent comes from
either research grants awarded by federal agencies, private foundations and
corporations or clinical income generated by the faculty.

   The latter funds are used to cross-subsidize the school's educational and
research missions.

   Of the remaining 7 percent, much of the revenue is allocated for student
financial aid.

   Yale, like many other private medical schools, virtually is totally dependent
on outside funding. Currently, in some institutes of the National Institutes of
Health, only 12 percent or 13 percent of research proposals are being funded.

   Talented scientists for the first time in their careers are finding
themselves unfunded.

   In the highly competitive areas of science, missing one or two grant cycles
may place them so far behind that they may never catch up. Simultaneously, with
the increase in managed care and decrease in clinical income, the ability of
universities and medical schools to cross-subsidize educational and research
missions becomes increasingly limited. Neither the Clinton administration nor
Congress would want to see academic medicine wither in the United States, even
with health care system problems that must be fixed.

   During this period of change, the danger lies in having the academic medical
support infrastructure damaged, even briefly, and then requiring years to
recover. In the United States, the highest quality of health care in the world
is available, and academic medical centers with comprehensive physician
training, biomedical research and clinical care programs have been largely
responsible for that quality.

   We do need to change the bath water but must keep the baby!

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             804 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

               April 10, 1994, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: SUNDAY NEWS; THE WEEK THAT WAS; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 657 words

HEADLINE: THE HIGHLIGHTS

SOURCE: SETH PERLMAN; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   Blackmun Retirement

   Creates Court Vacancy

   White House officials began reviewing about a dozen possible candidates for
President Clinton's second appointment to the Supreme Court after Justice Harry
A. Blackmun announced Wednesday that he would retire this summer.

   Administration officials have made no secret that retiring Senate Democratic
leader George J. Mitchell of Maine is high on the list to succeed the
85-year-old Blackmun. Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt also is on the list,
although he said he wasn't interested. White House officials said there were
other names on the list, and no decision has been made.

   First Lady Dodges Boos

   To Root for Her Cubs

   First lady and lifelong Cubs fan Hillary Rodham Clinton was in Chicago to
toss out the first ball for opening day at Wrigley Field. She was cheered, but
she heard a loud round of boos.

   But she did not pay any attention to the boos, reported "Mr. Cub" Ernie
Banks. "Negativity is all around us and you have to be tough to deal with it,"
Banks said. Overhead, a light airplane appeared towing a 150-foot banner that
proclaimed "Hillary, U have the right to remain silent." The advertising firm
that provided the plane refused to say who hired it.

   Public Housing Sweeps

   OK Under Clinton Plan

   President Clinton ordered development of a national plan to allow legal
sweeps for weapons in public housing. His order came after a federal judge in
Chicago ruled certain searches by the Chicago Housing Authority are
unconstitutional.

   "We must not allow criminals to find shelter in the public housing community
they terrorize," Clinton said.

   Attorney General Janet Reno and Housing and Urban Development Secretary Henry
G. Cisneros are to "develop promptly a search policy for public housing that is
both constitutionally permissible and effective," the president said.

   U.S. District Judge Wayne R. Andersen stood firm in barring building-wide
sweeps for guns in CHA developments.

   Better Treatment Seen

   Through AIDS Finding

   Researchers have found that the AIDS virus directly causes cancer, and the
discovery offers a possibility of better treatment for both diseases. It also
raises doubts about the safety of some new forms of gene therapy.

   The results, announced Friday, could lead to safer ways to treat certain
forms of cancer in AIDS victims, said the study's authors, University of
California at San Francisco Drs. Michael McGrath and Bruce Shiramizu.

   Most researchers thought cancers took advantage of AIDS' weakening of the
immune system, rather than being caused by the virus.  But the study found that
when the AIDS virus inserted its genetic material into a cell's DNA, it
apparently switched on a cancer-causing gene.

   U.S. Prepares Public

   For Troops in Bosnia

   White House officials have started preparing Americans for the dispatch of
U.S. troops to Bosnia should the warring parties reach a peace settlement.

   The process began Thursday, when National Security Adviser Anthony Lake,
speaking at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, said U.S. ground forces sent
to enforce a Bosnian peace agreement "will go in strong" and "will establish a
commanding presence."

   While a peace accord is far from inevitable, administration officials want to
spell out the aims, conditions and risks of sending ground troops to Bosnia.

   Westerners to Leave

   Violence-Torn Rwanda

   Officials of Western nations said they were trying to arrange the evacuation
of their citizens from the African nation of Rwanda, where violence has plunged
the country into chaos.

   The Rwandan president was killed in a plane crash that also took the life of
the president of neighboring Burundi. The Rwandan government said a plane was
shot down by unidentified rebel attackers.

   None of the 255 Americans in Rwanda had been hurt as of Friday.  There were
plans to evacuate all but a few American diplomats, but fighting between
government and rebel forces made it difficult.

GRAPHIC: State Rep. Vickie Moseley (D-Springfield) works at her desk on the
House floor while her son Patrick, 2, offers his assistance during Wednesday's
legislative session in Springfield. Hillary Rodham Clinton

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1994


                             805 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      April 8, 1994, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 384 words

HEADLINE: AIDS virus causes cancer, study finds; gene therapy  questioned

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   SAN FRANCISCO -- Researchers have found that the AIDS virus directly
 causes cancer, and the discovery offers a possibility of better treatment
 for cancer and AIDS. It also raises doubts about the safety of some new
 forms of gene therapy.

   The results, to be announced today, could lead to safer ways to treat
 certain forms of cancer in AIDS victims, said the study's authors,
 University of California at San Francisco Drs. Michael McGrath and Bruce
 Shiramizu.

   "This is the first direct evidence that we have a human virus causing
 cancer through some mechanism -- not just indirectly by immunosuppression,"
 Dr. McGrath said.

   Cancers, including lymphoma and Kaposi's sarcoma, have long been
 associated with AIDS. But most researchers have thought the cancers were
 opportunistic, taking advantage of AIDS' weakening of the immune system
 rather than being caused by the AIDS virus itself.

   But the study found that when the AIDS virus inserted its genetic material
 into a cell's DNA, it apparently switched on a nearby cancer-causing gene,
 starting up a less common variety of lymphoma called non-B-cell lymphoma.

   The scientists spent two years reviewing 30 lymphoma cases and found four
 in which the AIDS virus inserted itself into the same spot in a cell's DNA.
 Dr. McGrath said the researchers now have additional examples and estimated
 that up to a third of non-B-cell lymphomas in AIDS patients show similar
 results.

   A report on the study is to be published April 15 in Cancer Research, the
 journal of the American Association for Cancer Research.

   Dr. William A. Blattner of the National Cancer Institute hailed the
 finding as an important step in understanding how a retrovirus, a class of
 viruses that includes the AIDS virus, can cause cancer.

   "This has been seen in animal retrovirus, but it's the first example of an
 insertional retroviral situation in man," he said.

   But the study also casts a cloud over the goal of creating an AIDS vaccine
 from a form of the live human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The study's
 authors and other scientists fear such a vaccine could trigger cancer genes
 while halting AIDS. More broadly, the study raises questions about the use
 of any retrovirus in a vaccine.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1994


                             806 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      April 8, 1994, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 493 words

HEADLINE: AIDS virus seen triggering some types of cancer

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   SAN FRANCISCO -- Scientists have long thought that the AIDS virus causes
 cancer indirectly, by weakening the immune system. But a new study suggests
 it can also cause cancer directly, by switching on cancer genes in the cells
 it invades.

   The finding could lead to better treatment for both AIDS and cancer. But
 it also raises doubts about the safety of some forms of gene therapy and
 casts a cloud over scientists' goal of creating an AIDS vaccine.

   AIDS has been associated with certain types of cancer, including lymphoma
 and Kaposi's sarcoma, that most researchers believe take advantage of the
 weakening of the immune system.

   But in a study being released today, researchers at the University of
 California at San Francisco found that when the AIDS virus inserts its
 genetic material into a cell's DNA, it can apparently activate a nearby
 cancer-causing gene.

   That gene then starts up a less common variety of lymphoma, non-B-cell
 lymphoma, though the exact mechanism remains a mystery, say Drs. Michael
 McGrath and Bruce Shiramizu.

   "This is the first direct evidence that we have a human virus causing
 cancer through some mechanism -- not just indirectly by immunosuppression,"
 Dr. McGrath says.

   The scientists spent two years reviewing 30 lymphoma cases and found four
 in which the AIDS virus inserted itself into the same spot in a cell's DNA.
 Dr. McGrath says the researchers now have additional examples, and they
 estimated that up to a third of all cases of non-B-cell lymphoma in AIDS
 patients may be directly caused by the virus.

   The study is to be published April 15 in Cancer Research, the journal of
 the American Association for Cancer Research.

   Dr. William A. Blattner, chief of the viral epidemiology branch of the
 National Cancer Institute, calls the finding an important step in
 understanding how a retrovirus -- the class of virus that includes the AIDS
 virus -- can cause cancer.

   "This has been seen in animal retrovirus, but it's the first example of an
 insertional retroviral situation in man," he says.

   Dr. Dawn Willis, a virologist and scientific program director for the
 American Cancer Society, calls the study "a very exciting finding."

   She says the link between AIDS and cancer was always considered indirect
 because no one had ever found the AIDS virus in a cancer cell before. The
 discovery could suggest research in tracing the role of viruses in other
 cancers.

   "It definitely leads us in some directions," Dr. Shiramizu says.
 "Lymphomas, Hodgkin's disease -- right now we don't know what's causing
 them."

   Now that researchers know where to look for viruses, further discoveries
 are possible, he says.

   But the study also casts a cloud over the goal of creating a live-virus
 AIDS vaccine. The study's authors and other scientists fear such a vaccine
 could trigger cancer genes while halting AIDS.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1994


                             807 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      April 8, 1994, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 602 words

HEADLINE: AIDS virus tied to a type of cancer;
Report details 'oncogene' action

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    The virus that causes AIDS also may cause cancer of the immune system by
invading the DNA of blood cells and switching on dormant cancer genes,
California scientists are reporting today.

   If confirmed, the report would be the first evidence that viruses can cause
cancer in humans by turning on so-called "oncogenes" in cells - a mechanism
known in animals for several decades but only suspected to occur in humans.
Viruses have been implicated or suspected in other human cancers, but how they
cause the tumors is not known.

   The findings by researchers at the University of California adds to safety
concerns about the use of certain viruses in human gene therapy, said federal
officials.  Moreover, the report suggests a need for caution in research on
potential AIDS vaccines that use weakened but living versions of human
immunodeficiency virus, or HIV.

   Since the AIDS epidemic began more than a decade ago, a variety of cancers
have been associated with HIV infection, which weakens the immune system and
allows malignancies to develop. But never before have scientists reported
evidence that the virus itself directly causes cancer.

   "This is something that's been looked for for decades, and to find this
example in humans is pretty exciting, if it holds up in other laboratories,"
said Dr. William Blattner, chief of viral epidemiology at the National Cancer
Institute. "It may provide a more fundamental insight into cancer causation."

   The report being published in today's issue of the journal Cancer Research
comes from Dr. Michael McGrath, an associate professor of laboratory medicine,
and Dr. Bruce Shiramizu, assistant professor of pediatrics, at San Francisco
General Hospital, affiliated with the University of California in San Franciso.

   After studying tissue samples from 30 HIV-infected patients who developed
lymphoma, a malignancy of immune cells in the blood and lymph systems, the
researchers detected HIV genetic material in cancer cells in four of the
samples, said McGrath.

   On closer scrutiny, said McGrath in a telephone interview, the researchers
found that the AIDS virus had inserted its genetic material very close to a
known "proto-oncogene" - a normally harmless gene that can become a cancer gene
when activated by a retrovirus.

   Retroviruses, a class to which HIV belongs, do not contain DNA, the molecule
of heredity. When they infect a host, they invade the nucleus of cells and
insert their genetic material, RNA, among the host's genes. Then the cell's
duplicating machinery turns out new retrovirus along with whatever proteins it
normally produces.

   The proto-oncogene is called c-fes, which McGrath said has not been
implicated in lymphomas previously, but has been found in other human cancers.

   The researchers have found three more similar lymphoma cases since they
submitted the journal report, McGrath said.  The lymphomas are not the most
common type, which affect immune B-cells, but McGrath did not estimate how
frequently the virus might cause lymphoma in infected patients.

   However, McGrath said the discovery of the retrovirus next to a cancer gene
fulfills concerns that scientists have long had about using retroviruses as
vehicles to carry healthy genes into the cells of patients with genetic
conditions.

   Nelson Wivel, head of the federal Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee that
approves gene therapy experiments, said, "This is a new finding, and documents
something we have been concerned about as a potential problem of using
retroviral vectors."

   He added that no cancers have occurred in any gene therapy experiments to
date.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Dr. Michael McGrath and fellow researchers found HIV material in
cancer cells. / AP PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1994


                             808 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                April 8, 1994, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 460 words

HEADLINE: Pair Seek To Patent 'Designer' Sperm Cells

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   Two U.S. scientists have applied for a European patent for genetically
engineered "designer sperm" that would allow a man to pass down only "healthy"
genes to his children, a British magazine reported Thursday.

   New Scientist magazine said the patent application had provoked outrage and
concern on both sides of the Atlantic as it raised the specter of eugenics --
using science to "improve" the human race to some subjective standard.

   It quoted an official at the European Patent Office as saying this was the
first attempt to patent a technique for human germ-line therapy -- treatment to
pass down altered genetic traits for generations.

   Most gene therapy now being tested concentrates on changing genes only in
individual patients to cure them of diseases; the patient would not be able to
pass on the altered genes.

   But Ralph Brinster and Jim Zimmerman of the University of Pennsylvania's
veterinary school want to patent a process to genetically modify the cells that
become sperm, the report said.

   In experiments with mice, the two Americans removed the spermatogonia, the
primitive cells that evolve into sperm, altered them and then replaced them in
the testes.

   "The patient can then father progeny free from the worry that he would pass
on a genetic disease to his progeny," the magazine quoted them as saying in the
patent application.

   The University of Pennsylvania's patent agent, Richard Chinn, said a U.S.
patent application was filed shortly before Brinster made a speech on the topic
before a Nobel symposium in Stockholm, in December, 1991. The research was
supported by federal grants, and federal policy encourages patent applications
for such research to preserve intellectual property rights, Chinn said.

   He said he could not confirm that a European patent was applied for but said
the British magazine article appeared based on publication of the U.S.
application in Europe under the Patent Cooperation Treaty, which protects patent
rights in Europe.

   In a 1993 article in the International Journal of Developmental Biology,
based on the Stockholm lecture, Brinster describes the technology as the product
of three decades of research that accelerated in the late 1980s. "During the
past five years (the technology) has made possible the creation of virtually any
genetic change in mice, and ultimately in other species," Brinster said.

   Christian Gugerell, director of the European Patent Office in Munich,
revealed the patent application at a London conference.

   "It's the first in Europe and probably in the world," he told the magazine.
"We will have to decide if it's ethical or not to grant this patent. My first
reaction would be that it would be highly doubtful whether something like this
could be patented."

GRAPHIC: Reuters

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1994


                             809 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                April 8, 1994, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 448 words

HEADLINE: Study Finds AIDS Virus A Direct Cause of Cancer

SOURCE: BEN MARGOT; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BYLINE: By Richard Cole

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   Researchers have found that the AIDS virus directly causes cancer, and the
discovery offers a possibility of better treatment for both diseases. It also
raises doubts about the safety of some new forms of gene therapy.

   The results, being announced today, could lead to safer ways to treat certain
cancers in AIDS victims, said the study's authors, doctors Michael McGrath and
Bruce Shiramizu of the University of California at San Francisco.

   "This is the first direct evidence that we have a human virus causing cancer
through some mechanism -- not just indirectly by immunosuppression," McGrath
said.

   Cancers, including lymphoma and Kaposi's sarcoma, have long been associated
with AIDS. But most researchers have thought the cancers were opportunistic,
taking advantage of AIDS' weakening of the immune system rather than being
caused by the virus itself.

   The study, however, found that when HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, inserted
its genetic material into a cell's DNA, it apparently switched on a nearby
cancer-causing gene, starting up a less common variety of lymphoma called
non-B-cell lymphoma.

   The scientists spent two years reviewing 30 lymphoma cases and found four in
which HIV inserted itself into the same spot in a cell's DNA. McGrath said the
researchers now have additional examples, and estimated that up to a third of
non-B-cell lymphomas in AIDS patients show similar results.

   The study is to be published in Cancer Research, the journal of the American
Association for Cancer Research.

   Dr. William A. Blattner, chief of the viral epidemiology branch of the
National Cancer Institute, hailed the finding as an important step in
understanding how a retrovirus, the class of virus that includes HIV, can cause
cancer.

   "This has been seen in animal retrovirus, but it's the first example of an
insertional retroviral situation in man," he said.

   Dr. Dawn Willis, a virologist and scientific program director for the
American Cancer Society, called it "a very exciting finding."

   She said the link between AIDS and cancer was always considered indirect
because no one had ever found HIV in a cancer cell before. The discovery could
suggest research in tracing the role of viruses in other cancers.

   But it also casts a cloud over the goal of creating an AIDS vaccine from a
form of live HIV. The study authors and other scientists fear such a vaccine
could trigger cancer genes while halting AIDS.

   More broadly, the study raises questions about the use of any retrovirus in a
vaccine, as well as their increasing role in the new field of gene therapy.

   "Hooking up a gene to a retrovirus and infecting human cells might risk
cancer," McGrath said.

GRAPHIC: Dr. Michael McGrath and a partner have found the first evidence that
the AIDS virus directly causes cancer. ; Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1994


                             810 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                     April 8, 1994, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1036 words

HEADLINE: AIDS research takes off in Houston, Galveston area

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   Seven years ago, AIDS research in Houston was at a
standstill.

   A $ 5.8 million federal five-year AIDS drug testing grant to
the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center lapsed with the
closing of the Institute for Immunological Disorders, the nation's
first AIDS hospital located here.

   No institution in Houston was willing to take it over.  The
dearth of activity continued until at least 1992, when Houston
Clinical Research Network listed only 12 local drug studies in its
directory of such efforts.

   But that has changed in recent years with AIDS research
programs and studies cropping up in Houston and Galveston.

   ""There are big differences around here as of late,'' said
Chris Jimmerson, who heads the Research Network, a nonprofit
community group that coordinates drug studies here.

   ""I think it has happened because of the sheer need,'' he
said.  ""We have the sixth largest patient population in the United
States. ''

   He remembers how disappointing it was in 1992 to find so
few drug studies in Houston.

   That was the same time that the federal government refused
to fund a local proposal to set up a clinical studies program here,
casting cold water on efforts to increase AIDS work.

   But the past two years have seen a dramatic increase in
activity.  The 1994 AIDS trial directory for Houston lists 44
trials, said Jimmerson, and 12 of them are being carried out by his
group.

   In 1992, Dr. Richard Pollard received federal funding for a
drug studies program at the University of Texas Medical Branch in
Galveston, and he finds the numbers of patients and studies
increasing there as well.

   He too remembers attitudes that made his work difficult.

   ""Some people were concerned about being identified with
being a place of clinical expertise in this area,'' he said.  ""I
was told, "You can't go out and attract every AIDS patient from all
over Texas.  We can't afford it. ' ''

   Today, his clinic, the only AIDS drug center (officially
known as a clinical trials unit) funded by the National Institutes
of Health between St. Louis and Denver, is a proud stop on any tour
of UTMB.

   But even more important, it is a symbol that AIDS research
as a whole seems to be gaining prominence in the Houston-Galveston
area.

   In addition, Pollard himself has gained national prominence
and will head the National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases' adult AIDS immunology committee starting in January.

   Dr. William T. Shearer, a professor at Baylor College of
Medicine and head of a federally funded pediatric AIDS clinical
trial unit here, heads a similar committee for children.

   In addition, Dr.Janis Butel, chief of virology at Baylor,
recently received a grant to set up a Center for AIDS Research.  It
will specialize in basic research into stopping the AIDS virus.

   All of these recent happenings may serve to give Houston
more prominence in the AIDS field, said Jimmerson.

   ""I think that more and more people are becoming interested
in HIV infection, including the basic scientists,'' said Shearer.

   Butel's grant promises to draw even more AIDS research money
to Houston scientists searching for a solution to the disease, said
Shearer.

   ""I do see more research going on here,'' he said.  ""This is
becoming a dynamic center that is widely recognized. ''

   One of the official comments on the Butel project -- of
which Shearer is a co-director -- was that Houston has a
well-established network of clinical grants, Shearer said.  The
federal officials who evaluated the Houston proposal felt that the
Center for AIDS Research would fit in well and draw even more such
research into the Texas Medical Center.

   The center will support basic research, said Butel.  She
credited the support of many local groups, including the Veterans
Administration Medical Center, the University of Texas School of
Public Health, the Houston Independent School District and the
Montrose Clinic with supporting her application for the center.

   ""I hope what we will do here will benefit the whole medical
center and the Houston community,'' she said

   Pollard views his Galveston clinic as a state resource.

   ""Our clinic group has been willing to take care of everyone
who gets here,'' he said.

   ""We are going to continue to do that. ''

   That includes people from Harris County who want to enroll
in trials of various drugs.  ""We have an obligation to let people
know that we are around,'' he said.

   That obligation also extends to developing new ways to treat
the disease, he said.

   The current drugs -- AZT, ddI or ddC -- appear to be
effective for only a short period of time, he said.  Now the
challenge is to attack the human immunodeficiency virus at
different stages in its life cycle or to stimulate the body itself
to fight off the infection, Pollard said.

   His unit has 12 federally funded studies under way,
evaluating the best way to stop the virus and to treat the
infections and cancers it causes.  He is also overseeing six studies
funded by drug companies.

   Shearer's unit is also participating in a variety of drug
studies and is even considering an attempt at gene therapy to stop
the virus in its tracks.

   The approach has appeal to patient advocates who have
evaluated it at the federal level, he said.  ""They can't stand this
inch-at-a-time approach. ''

   Those in the AIDS community warn that the one factor needed
to cement the new flurry of interest in AIDS research is a single
leader in the field of treating adults in Houston.  That person has
yet to be found, one said.

   But recently, a consortium headed by the Harris County
Hospital District's Thomas Street Clinic applied to the federal
government for funding for patient-related research involving new
drugs and new approaches to treatment.

   UT, Baylor, the hospital district and Houston Clinical
Research network all signed on, and the project, which would
coordinate research in the Thomas Street Clinic and private
doctors' offices, is awaiting word from the federal government.

   It came about because people started talking to each other
and working in unison, said Jimmerson.  ""The neat thing is the
cooperative effort. ''

GRAPHIC: Mugs: 1.Richard Pollard (p. 16); 2. William T.Shearer (p. 16)

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1994


                             811 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                     April 8, 1994, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1036 words

HEADLINE: AIDS research takes off in Houston, Galveston area

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   Seven years ago, AIDS research in Houston was at a
standstill.

   A $ 5.8 million federal five-year AIDS drug testing grant to
the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center lapsed with the
closing of the Institute for Immunological Disorders, the nation's
first AIDS hospital located here.

   No institution in Houston was willing to take it over.  The
dearth of activity continued until at least 1992, when Houston
Clinical Research Network listed only 12 local drug studies in its
directory of such efforts.

   But that has changed in recent years with AIDS research
programs and studies cropping up in Houston and Galveston.

   ""There are big differences around here as of late,'' said
Chris Jimmerson, who heads the Research Network, a nonprofit
community group that coordinates drug studies here.

   ""I think it has happened because of the sheer need,'' he
said.  ""We have the sixth largest patient population in the United
States. ''

   He remembers how disappointing it was in 1992 to find so
few drug studies in Houston.

   That was the same time that the federal government refused
to fund a local proposal to set up a clinical studies program here,
casting cold water on efforts to increase AIDS work.

   But the past two years have seen a dramatic increase in
activity.  The 1994 AIDS trial directory for Houston lists 44
trials, said Jimmerson, and 12 of them are being carried out by his
group.

   In 1992, Dr. Richard Pollard received federal funding for a
drug studies program at the University of Texas Medical Branch in
Galveston, and he finds the numbers of patients and studies
increasing there as well.

   He too remembers attitudes that made his work difficult.

   ""Some people were concerned about being identified with
being a place of clinical expertise in this area,'' he said.  ""I
was told, "You can't go out and attract every AIDS patient from all
over Texas.  We can't afford it. ' ''

   Today, his clinic, the only AIDS drug center (officially
known as a clinical trials unit) funded by the National Institutes
of Health between St. Louis and Denver, is a proud stop on any tour
of UTMB.

   But even more important, it is a symbol that AIDS research
as a whole seems to be gaining prominence in the Houston-Galveston
area.

   In addition, Pollard himself has gained national prominence
and will head the National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases' adult AIDS immunology committee starting in January.

   Dr. William T. Shearer, a professor at Baylor College of
Medicine and head of a federally funded pediatric AIDS clinical
trial unit here, heads a similar committee for children.

   In addition, Dr.Janis Butel, chief of virology at Baylor,
recently received a grant to set up a Center for AIDS Research.  It
will specialize in basic research into stopping the AIDS virus.

   All of these recent happenings may serve to give Houston
more prominence in the AIDS field, said Jimmerson.

   ""I think that more and more people are becoming interested
in HIV infection, including the basic scientists,'' said Shearer.

   Butel's grant promises to draw even more AIDS research money
to Houston scientists searching for a solution to the disease, said
Shearer.

   ""I do see more research going on here,'' he said.  ""This is
becoming a dynamic center that is widely recognized. ''

   One of the official comments on the Butel project -- of
which Shearer is a co-director -- was that Houston has a
well-established network of clinical grants, Shearer said.  The
federal officials who evaluated the Houston proposal felt that the
Center for AIDS Research would fit in well and draw even more such
research into the Texas Medical Center.

   The center will support basic research, said Butel.  She
credited the support of many local groups, including the Veterans
Administration Medical Center, the University of Texas School of
Public Health, the Houston Independent School District and the
Montrose Clinic with supporting her application for the center.

   ""I hope what we will do here will benefit the whole medical
center and the Houston community,'' she said

   Pollard views his Galveston clinic as a state resource.

   ""Our clinic group has been willing to take care of everyone
who gets here,'' he said.

   ""We are going to continue to do that. ''

   That includes people from Harris County who want to enroll
in trials of various drugs.  ""We have an obligation to let people
know that we are around,'' he said.

   That obligation also extends to developing new ways to treat
the disease, he said.

   The current drugs -- AZT, ddI or ddC -- appear to be
effective for only a short period of time, he said.  Now the
challenge is to attack the human immunodeficiency virus at
different stages in its life cycle or to stimulate the body itself
to fight off the infection, Pollard said.

   His unit has 12 federally funded studies under way,
evaluating the best way to stop the virus and to treat the
infections and cancers it causes.  He is also overseeing six studies
funded by drug companies.

   Shearer's unit is also participating in a variety of drug
studies and is even considering an attempt at gene therapy to stop
the virus in its tracks.

   The approach has appeal to patient advocates who have
evaluated it at the federal level, he said.  ""They can't stand this
inch-at-a-time approach. ''

   Those in the AIDS community warn that the one factor needed
to cement the new flurry of interest in AIDS research is a single
leader in the field of treating adults in Houston.  That person has
yet to be found, one said.

   But recently, a consortium headed by the Harris County
Hospital District's Thomas Street Clinic applied to the federal
government for funding for patient-related research involving new
drugs and new approaches to treatment.

   UT, Baylor, the hospital district and Houston Clinical
Research network all signed on, and the project, which would
coordinate research in the Thomas Street Clinic and private
doctors' offices, is awaiting word from the federal government.

   It came about because people started talking to each other
and working in unison, said Jimmerson.  ""The neat thing is the
cooperative effort. ''

GRAPHIC: Mugs: 1.Richard Pollard (p. 16); 2. William T.Shearer (p. 16)

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1994


                             812 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  April 8, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A;  Page 13;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 657 words

HEADLINE: AIDS Virus May Directly Cause a Cancer of the Immune System

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   Researchers in San Francisco say the AIDS virus may directly cause a cancer
of the immune system by inserting itself into a cell's DNA and switching on a
dormant cancer gene.

   Doctors have thought that these cancers in people with AIDS were always
caused by the suppression of the immune system by H.I.V., the virus that causes
AIDS.

    In a paper being published today in the journal Cancer Research, Dr. Michael
McGrath and his colleagues at the University of California at San Francisco
report that lymphomas, cancers of immune system cells, found in four AIDS
patients appeared to have been caused directly by the virus. Dr. McGrath said he
had examined 30 patients with unusual lymphomas in which H.I.V. was present. He
said that since he submitted his paper in December, he had studied 10 more
patients and found three in which the virus was near the same cancer gene.

Significance Played Down

    Dr. McGrath said in a telephone interview that although his evidence was not
ironclad, the data suggested that the virus caused the cancers.

   Even if the link is proved, other scientists said, the cancers caused
directly by the virus appeared to be so rare that they would have virtually no
significance in the overall devastation caused by AIDS.

   Dr. Carlo Croce, an expert on lymphomas and director of the cancer center at
Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia, said the finding might be
interesting to researchers because only animal cancers had been proved to result
from the direct integration of a virus into a cell's genetic material.

   But he said the clinical significance was likely to be minimal. People with
AIDS have about a 30 percent chance of getting lymphomas, and, in virtually all
of these cancers, H.I.V. is not in the DNA of the cancer cells, he said. The
lymphomas arise because the virus suppresses the immune system.

   Bernard Poiesz, an expert on cancer and AIDS at the State University of New
York Health Science Center at Syracuse, said that "from a scientific viewpoint,
it would be very interesting that this could occur." But, he said, from a
clinical viewpoint, "it would be just another of the many things that can happen
to an H.I.V.-infected individual and can lead to their clinical deterioration."

   He added that cancer caused by the direct insertion of H.I.V. into a cell's
DNA "is infrequent and not of any particular cause for alarm."

   H.I.V. is a retrovirus, a type of virus that normally inserts itself into a
cell's DNA. But for the most part it inserts itself randomly in the DNA.

   Dr. McGrath said this made it all the more striking that the virus inserted
itself in almost exactly the same spot in lymphomas in four patients. In each
case the virus was close to a dormant cancer gene. "The odds are millions to
one" against that happening by chance, he said. Instead, he proposed, the virus
may have been attracted to that area and may have activated the cancer gene.

   In fact, retroviruses can cause cancer in birds by inserting themselves near
dormant cancer genes, and researchers have speculated that the same sort of
thing could happen with humans. In fact, when scientists began using
retroviruses to insert foreign genes into patients' cells for gene therapy, they
were greatly concerned that the viruses might elicit cancers. But with gene
therapy so far, "that has not happened in any animal controls or in any human
experiment," Dr. Poiesz said.

More Experiments Urged

    Dr. Croce and Dr. Poiesz said Dr. McGrath's finding cried out for further
experiment. For example, Dr. Croce said, researchers should establish firmer
evidence that the insertion caused the cancers. He said the presence of the
virus might have been just a coincidence that had nothing to do with lymphomas.

   Dr. Poiesz said it would be important to see if the H.I.V. strains from the
four patients were more likely to insert themselves close to the cancer gene
than other strains.

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1994


                             813 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1994 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                              April 8, 1994 Friday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: GRAPHICS; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 84 words

HEADLINE: KEY FINDINGS

BODY:

   Friday, April 8, 1994 KEY FINDINGS

   VIRUS BLAMED:  In two years of examining 30 non-B-cell lymphoma cases in AIDS
patients, investigators found four in which the virus directly  inserted itself
into the cancer cell's DNA.

   BROAD EFFECT:  Based on the data, researchers say as many as a third of
non-B-cell lymphomas in AIDS patients  may be directly caused by the virus.
QUESTIONS:  The link raises questions  about future AIDS vaccines that use the
live virus, and for gene therapy  employing retroviruses.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             814 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       April 8, 1994 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 374 words

HEADLINE: CANCER AND AIDS LINK IS FOUND THE VIRUS THAT CAUSES AIDS WAS FOUND TO
CAUSE CANCER AS WELL.

BYLINE: Richard Cole, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   Researchers have found that the virus that causes AIDS also directly causes
cancer, and the discovery offers a possibility of better treatment for both
diseases. It also raises doubts about the safety of some new forms of gene
therapy.

   The results, to be formally announced today, could lead to safer ways to
treat certain forms of cancer in AIDS patients, said the study's authors,
Michael McGrath and Bruce Shiramizu of the University of California at San
Francisco.

   "This is the first direct evidence that we have a human virus causing cancer
through some mechanism - not just indirectly by immunosuppression," McGrath
said.

   Cancers, including lymphoma and Kaposi's sarcoma, have long been associated
with acquired immune deficiency syndrome. Most researchers have thought the
cancers were opportunistic, taking advantage of AIDS' weakening of the immune
system rather than being caused by HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.

   The study, however, found that when HIV inserted its genetic material into a
cell's DNA, it apparently switched on a nearby cancer-causing gene, starting up
a variety of lymphoma called non-B-cell lymphoma.

   The scientists spent two years reviewing 30 lymphoma cases, and found four in
which HIV inserted itself into the same spot in a cell's DNA. McGrath said the
researchers now have additional examples, and estimated that up to a third of
non-B-cell lymphomas in AIDS patients show similar results.

   The study is to be published next Friday in the journal Cancer Research.

   Dawn Willis, a virologist and scientific program director for the American
Cancer Society, called the study "a very exciting finding."

   She said the link between AIDS and cancer was always considered indirect
because no one had ever found HIV in a cancer cell before. The discovery could
suggest research in tracing the role of viruses in other cancers.

   Shiramizu agreed.

   "It definitely leads us in some directions," he said. "Lymphomas, Hodgkin's
disease - right now we don't know what's causing them."

   But the study also casts a cloud over the goal of creating an AIDS vaccine
from a form of the HIV virus. The study authors and other scientists fear such a
vaccine could trigger cancer genes while halting AIDS.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             815 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       April 8, 1994 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 953 words

HEADLINE: PENN'S BID FOR A PATENT MAY SPUR GENETIC DEBATE

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER, Inquirer staff writer Mark Jaffe
contributed to this article.

BODY:

   The University of Pennsylvania has applied to patent a technique to
genetically alter sperm cells in animals so traits passed down from one
generation to the next could be changed.

   Although the application focuses on experiments with animals, it suggests
that the technique might be used in humans as well.

   The patent application, reported yesterday by The New Scientist, a British
journal, raises fundamental issues that have been debated for years but that
have always seemed too theoretical to be taken seriously.

   Now, the debate may begin in earnest.

   Critics contend that so-called germ-line gene therapy, which would alter the
DNA in nascent sperm cells, raises the specter of eugenics - using science to
create a superior human race.

   They fear that parents could use the technique for frivolous purposes, like
determining a child's eye color, or for other ends, such as screening out
children who might be homosexual.

   But others think the technique might work medical miracles, allowing
families plagued by catastrophic genetic illnesses - such as hemophilia, sickle
cell anemia, or cystic fibrosis - to be rid of them once and for all.

   Attacking such diseases through genetic engineering of sperm cells might also
be more efficient - and save more money - than the gene therapy techniques now
being developed, which would change the genes in individuals but not in
succeeding generations.

   "For many years, a lot of people . . . thought that modifying germ lines was
unethical," said Arthur Kaplan, a medical ethicist at the University of
Minnesota. "From my own point of view, that doesn't make sense. If you can get
rid of diseases, why wouldn't you do it?"

   The patent application, filed with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office on
Dec. 6, 1991, seeks to patent a technique developed by Dr. Ralph Brinster, a
world-renowned researcher at the Penn veterinary school.

   He has devised a way to remove primitive sperm cells, known as spermatogonia,
from mice, genetically modify the cells and then return them to the animals'
testes.

   Although the patent application seeks to use the technique in animals, it
makes passing reference to the fact that the same procedure might be used in
humans.

   It is the reference to humans that has provoked concern on both sides of the
Atlantic as scientists grapple with the far-reaching implications.

   The head of the European Patent Office in Munich told The New Scientist that
the patent application raised serious ethical issues.

   The journal quoted Christian Gugerell as saying it was "highly doubtful" that
his agency could approve the patent.

   Gugerell revealed the existence of the patent application at a recent meeting
in London, the journal said.

   Officials of the U.S. patent office could not be reached for comment
yesterday.

   But Nelson Wivel, director of the Office of Recombinant DNA Activities at the
National Institutes of Health, said the agency's advisory committee, which must
approve experimental gene therapy treatments in humans, "will not even review"
germ-line therapy at the present time.

   He said scientists have not yet perfected ways of targeting genes at specific
places on chromosomes. Such imprecision could lead to calamitous mistakes. For
instance, a gene that is necessary for normal development might be turned off,
or a gene that can cause certain types of cancers might be turned on.

   But Wivel, who reviewed Penn's patent application yesterday, said the
document focuses largely on animals - primarily mice - rather than people. He
said the reference to the potential use in humans appeared to reflect the
university's desire to cover all its legal bases.

   "If you read the patent, it's not as daunting as it might seem," Wivel said.
"The document is simply a lawyer doing his or her job."

   Penn officials refused to make a copy of the patent application available,
saying it was proprietary information. Under an international patent treaty,
such applications fall in the public domain 18 months after they are filed.

   Brinster, who gained international note in 1982 when he genetically
engineered a giant mouse, seemed taken aback by all the fuss yesterday. "I
thought my patent application would be recognized as just an exploration of
basic science," he said.

   Brinster emphasized that he did not believe germ-line gene therapy was
technically feasible in humans at present, "nor should it be considered now."

   He said when the technology is perfected, its use in humans should be decided
by the federal government only after considerable public debate.

   "There should be a lively debate. The public should be thinking about it. But
I'm not the person to be at the center of the debate," Brinster said.

   He said he had no strong views about the ethics of altering human sperm
cells. "I'm just one person," he said. "I'd have to hear everybody else's view
about it."

   Brinster, a professor of reproductive physiology who holds the Richard King
Mellon chair at the Penn vet school, was one of the first scientists to develop
transgenic mice, which carry some human genes.

   In his pathbreaking experiments, he transplanted genes for human growth
hormone into the fertilized egg of a mouse. The egg was inserted into the
reproductive tract of a female mouse and she gave birth to a mouse twice the
size of a normal mouse.

   In recent years, Brinster has turned his attention to the spermatogonia of
male mice. These primitive cells are fascinating because they keep duplicating
themselves and they can develop into any type of cell in the body.

   Brinster, who is a member of the National Academy of Sciences, said his
research was aimed at learning how these cells eventually differentiate.

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAM;

DIAGRAM (1)
1. Fixing Defects in Sperm (The Philadelphia Inquirer, B.F. BINIK)

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             816 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     APRIL 8, 1994, FRIDAY, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A3

LENGTH: 163 words

HEADLINE: ALTERED-SPERM PATENT REQUEST SPURS OUTRAGE

BYLINE: REUTERS NEWS SERVICE

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:


   Two U.S. scientists have applied for a European patent for genetically
engineered ''designer sperm'' that would allow a father to pass down only
''healthy'' genes to his children, a British magazine reported yesterday.

   The New Scientist magazine said the patent application had provoked outrage
and concern on both sides of the Atlantic as it raised the specter of eugenics
-- using science to ''improve'' the human race to some subjective standard.

   Most gene therapy now being tested concentrates on changing genes only in
individual patients to cure them of diseases and the patient would not be able
to pass on the altered genes.

   But Ralph Brinster and Jim Zimmerman of the University of Pennsylvania's
veterinary school wanted to patent a process to genetically modify the cells
that become sperm, the New Scientist said.

   It said they removed the spermatogonia, the primitive cells that evolve into
sperm, altered them and then replaced them in the testes.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1994


                             817 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     APRIL 8, 1994, FRIDAY, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A3

LENGTH: 461 words

HEADLINE: AIDS VIRUS FOUND TO CAUSE CANCER

BYLINE: RICHARD COLE, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:


   Researchers have found that the AIDS virus directly causes cancer, and the
discovery offers a possibility of better treatment for both diseases. It also
raises doubts about the safety of some new forms of gene therapy.

   The results, being announced today, could lead to safer ways to treat certain
forms of cancer in AIDS victims, said the study's authors, Drs. Michael McGrath
and Bruce Shiramizu of the University of California at San Francisco.

   ''This is the first direct evidence that we have a human virus causing cancer
through some mechanism -- not just indirectly by immunosuppression,'' McGrath
said.

   Cancers, including lymphoma and kaposi's sarcoma, have long been associated
with AIDS. But most researchers have thought the cancers were opportunistic,
taking advantage of AIDS' weakening of the immune system rather than being
caused by the virus itself.

   The study, however, found that when the AIDS virus inserted its genetic
material into a cell's DNA it apparently switched on a nearby cancer-causing
gene, starting up a less common variety of lymphoma called non-B-cell lymphoma.

   The scientists spent two years reviewing 30 lymphoma cases, and found four in
which the AIDS virus inserted itself into the same spot in a cell's DNA. McGrath
said the researchers now have additional examples, and estimated that up to a
third of non-B-cell lymphomas in AIDS patients show similar results.

   The study is to be published April 15 in Cancer Research, the journal of the
American Association for Cancer Research.

   Dr. William A. Blattner, chief of the viral epidemiology branch of the
National Cancer Institute, hailed the finding as an important step in
understanding how a retrovirus, the class of virus that includes the AIDS virus,
can cause cancer.

   ''This has been seen in animal retrovirus, but it's the first example of an
insertional retroviral situation in man,'' he said.

   Dr. Dawn Willis, a virologist and scientific program director for the
American Cancer Society, called the study ''a very exciting finding.''

   She said the link between AIDS and cancer was always considered indirect
because no one had ever found HIV, the AIDS virus, in a cancer cell before. The
discovery could suggest research in tracing the role of viruses in other
cancers.

   Shiramizu agreed.

   ''It definitely leads us in some directions,'' he said. ''Lymphomas,
Hodgkin's disease -- right now we don't know what's causing them.'' Now that
researchers know where to look for viruses, further discoveries are possible, he
said.

   But the study also casts a cloud over the goal of creating an AIDS vaccine
from a form of the live HIV virus. The study authors and other scientists fear
such a vaccine could trigger cancer genes while halting AIDS.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1994


                             818 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       April 8, 1994 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 383 words

HEADLINE: AIDS SAID TO CAUSE CANCER

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   Researchers have found that the AIDS virus directly causes cancer, and the
discovery offers a possibility of better treatment for both diseases. It also
raises doubts about the safety of some new forms of gene therapy.

   The results, being announced today, could lead to safer ways to treat certain
forms of cancer in AIDS victims, said the study's authors, University of
California at San Francisco Drs. Michael McGrath and Bruce Shiramizu.

   "This is the first direct evidence that we have a human virus causing cancer
through some mechanism - not just indirectly by immunosuppression," McGrath
said.

   Cancers, including lymphoma and kaposi's sarcoma, have long been associated
with AIDS. But most researchers have thought the cancers were opportunistic,
taking advantage of AIDS' weakening of the immune system rather than being
caused by the virus itself.

   The study, however, found that when the AIDS virus inserted its genetic
material into a cell's DNA it apparently switched on a nearby cancer-causing
gene, starting up a less common variety of lymphoma called non-B-cell lymphoma.

   The scientists spent two years reviewing 30 lymphoma cases, and found four in
which the AIDS virus inserted itself into the same spot in a cell's DNA.
McGrath said the researchers now have additional examples, and that up to a
third of non-B-cell lymphomas in AIDS patients show similar results.

   The study is to be published April 15 in Cancer Research, the journal of the
American Association for Cancer Research.

   Dr. William A. Blattner, chief of the viral epidemiology branch of the
National Cancer Institute, hailed the finding as an important step in
understanding how a retrovirus, the class of virus that includes AIDS, can cause
cancer.

   "This has been seen in animal retrovirus, but it's the first example ... in
man," he said.

   But the study also casts a cloud over the goal of creating an AIDS vaccine
from the live virus. The study authors and other scientists fear such a vaccine
could trigger cancer genes while halting AIDS.

   More broadly, the study raises questions about the use of any retrovirus in a
vaccine, as well as their increasing role in the new field of gene therapy.
Retroviruses can be used to carry a gene into an organ to correct its
functioning.

GRAPHIC: Photo by AP:; Dr. Michael McGrath, director of the AIDS Immunobilogy
Research Lab, takes a break at his lab at San Francisco General Hospital.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1994


                             819 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                      APRIL 8, 1994, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 562 words

HEADLINE: AIDS Virus Itself Found to Produce Some Cancers
 Lymphomas had been attributed to damage to immun

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

BODY:

    Researchers investigating cancer in AIDS patients have discovered that the
AIDS virus can apparently trigger some tumors directly -- a finding the
scientists say may offer new approaches to therapy while posing problems for
experiments in gene therapy.

   The two most common malignancies that strike people with AIDS are the skin
lesions called Kaposi's sarcoma and various lymphomas, which are cancers of the
lymph glands. AIDS specialists have always assumed they develop because HIV,
that the virus that causes AIDS, damages the immune system so badly that the
patients are unable to fight off any potentially fatal cancers that develop.

   Now, however, scientists at the University of California in San Francisco
have found molecular evidence in a group of AIDS patients with one specific type
of lymphoma that the virus can insert itself into the genetic machinery of their
immune system cells and activate cancer-causing genes known as oncogenes.

   The finding was reported yesterday by Dr. Michael McGrath and Dr. Bruce
Shiramizu of UCSF, who conduct their research at San Francisco General Hospital.
A detailed description of their discovery will be published in the April 15
issue of of the journal Cancer Research.

   EFFECT ON IMMUNE SYSTEM

   McGrath explained that in studying tissue samples from 30 AIDS patients
stricken with malignancies called non-B-cell lymphomas, he and Shiramizu found
clusters of mixed tumor cells in seven of the patients in which, evidence
showed, the AIDS virus had inserted its own genetic material directly into the
immune system cells that became malignant.

   By examining the molecular structure of the genes in those cells, the
scientists found that the viral genes had attached themselves to DNA in the
infected cells, at sites directly adjoining sequences that are known to be
specific cancer-causing oncogenes. The viruses had, in effect, switched on the
oncogenes so that they transformed the affected cells into rapidly spreading
malignancies, the scientists now believe.

   McGrath's scientific career began with basic research in the unique viruses
that directly cause white-cell cancers in chickens. These viruses, known as
retroviruses because their genetic material works differently from more
conventional viruses, are in the same broad class as HIV, which is also a
retrovirus.

   McGrath said yesterday that the team's discovery is the first direct evidence
indicating how a retrovirus causing human disease may also cause cancer. He and
Shiramizu see both positive and negative implications from their research, he
said.

   PROS AND CONS

   The potential benefits are twofold: It could encourage researchers to look
for viruses that may cause Hodgkin's disease and other lymphomas that strike
more than 53,000 Americans each year. And it could also lead to new therapies,
if scientists can develop antibodies or other techniques to home in on the
cancer-causing machinery of the viral genes.

   But retroviruses are also being used today in experiments at gene therapy,
where researchers alter the organisms to convey desired genes into the cells of
patients with diseases such as malignant melanoma and hereditary enzyme
deficiencies.

   The possibility that the genes of retroviruses can in fact set off cancers,
McGrath said, would raise serious concerns about using the viruses as carriers
in any kind of gene therapy.


LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1994


                             820 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1994 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          April 8, 1994 Friday, FIRST

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 657 words

HEADLINE: AIDS VIRUS IS THE DIRECT CAUSE OF CERTAIN CANCERS, STUDY FINDS

BYLINE: By RICHARD COLE Associated Press writer

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   Researchers have found that the AIDS virus directly causes certain cancers,
and the discovery offers a possibility of better treatment for both diseases. It
also raises doubts about the safety of some new forms of gene therapy.

   The results, being announced today, could lead to safer ways to treat certain
forms of cancer in AIDS victims, said the study's authors, Drs.  Michael McGrath
and Bruce Shiramizu of the University of California at San Francisco.

   "This is the first direct evidence that we have a human virus causing cancer
through some mechanism - not just indirectly by immunosuppression," McGrath
said.

   Cancers, including lymphoma and Kaposi's sarcoma, have long been associated
with AIDS. But most researchers have thought the cancers are opportunistic,
taking advantage of AIDS' weakening of the immune system rather than being
caused by the virus itself.

   The study, however, found that when the AIDS virus inserted its genetic
material into a cell's DNA it apparently switched on a nearby cancer-causing
gene, starting up a less common variety of lymphoma called non-B-cell lymphoma.

   The scientists spent two years reviewing 30 lymphoma cases, and found four in
which the AIDS virus inserted itself into the same spot in a cell's DNA.
McGrath said the researchers now have additional examples, and estimated that up
to a third of non-B-cell lymphomas in AIDS patients show similar results.

   The study is to be published April 15 in Cancer Research, the journal of the
American Association for Cancer Research.

   Dr. William Blattner, chief of the viral epidemiology branch of the National
Cancer Institute, hailed the finding as an important step in understanding how a
retrovirus, the class of virus that includes the AIDS virus, can cause cancer.

   "This has been seen in animal retrovirus, but it's the first example of an
insertional retroviral situation in man," he said.

   Dr. Dawn Willis, a virologist and scientific program director for the
American Cancer Society, called the study "a very exciting finding."

   She said the link between AIDS and cancer was always considered indirect
because no one had ever found HIV, the AIDS virus, in a cancer cell before.  The
discovery could suggest research in tracing the role of viruses in other
cancers.

   Shiramizu agreed.

   "It definitely leads us in some directions," he said. "Lymphomas, Hodgkin's
disease - right now we don't know what's causing them." Now that researchers
know where to look for viruses, further discoveries are possible, he said.

   But the study also casts a cloud over the goal of creating an AIDS vaccine
from a form of the live AIDS virus. The study authors and other scientists fear
such a vaccine could trigger cancer genes while halting AIDS.

   More broadly, the study raises questions about the use of any retrovirus in a
vaccine, as well as their increasing role in the new field of gene therapy.
Retroviruses can be used to carry a gene into an organ to correct its
functioning.

   "This causes a lot of concern over the use of retroviruses for anything - for
vaccines or even gene therapy," McGrath said. "Hooking up a gene to a retrovirus
and then infecting human cells might risk cancer."

   Shiramizu emphasized that the study doesn't show the AIDS virus' exact role
in causing cancer. Until that is determined, he said, long-range questions are
still speculative.

   Blattner agreed the implications for a future AIDS vaccine are worrisome.

   "If this insertion was to take place, understanding the mechanism would be
very important in considering a future vaccine," he said.

   Dr. Irving Chen, director of the University of California at Los Angeles AIDS
Institute, called the study very important if confirmed.

   But he said it is important to know how often the virus-caused cancer occurs,
and how long it takes to develop. That could determine whether a future AIDS
vaccine is worth the cancer risk.

GRAPHIC: The research of Dr. Michael McGrath, director of the AIDS Immunobiology
Research Lab, hs found the first proof that AIDS directly causes cancer.  AP
PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1994


                             821 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1994 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          April 8, 1994 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 546 words

HEADLINE: AIDS VIRUS IS THE DIRECT CAUSE OF CERTAIN CANCERS, STUDY FINDS

BYLINE: By RICHARD COLE Associated Press writer

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   Researchers have found that the AIDS virus directly causes certain cancers,
and the discovery offers a possibility of better treatment for both diseases. It
also raises doubts about the safety of some new forms of gene therapy.

   The results, being announced today, could lead to safer ways to treat certain
forms of cancer in AIDS victims, said the study's authors, Drs.  Michael McGrath
and Bruce Shiramizu of the University of California at San Francisco.

   "This is the first direct evidence that we have a human virus causing cancer
through some mechanism - not just indirectly by immunosuppression," McGrath
said.

   Cancers, including lymphoma and Kaposi's sarcoma, have long been associated
with AIDS. But most researchers have thought the cancers are opportunistic,
taking advantage of AIDS' weakening of the immune system rather than being
caused by the virus itself.

   The study, however, found that when the AIDS virus inserted its genetic
material into a cell's DNA it apparently switched on a nearby cancer-causing
gene, starting up a less common variety of lymphoma called non-B-cell lymphoma.

   The scientists spent two years reviewing 30 lymphoma cases, and found four in
which the AIDS virus inserted itself into the same spot in a cell's DNA.
McGrath said the researchers now have additional examples, and estimated that up
to a third of non-B-cell lymphomas in AIDS patients show similar results.

   The study is to be published April 15 in Cancer Research, the journal of the
American Assocition for Cancer Reserch.

   Dr. William Blattner, chief of the viral epidemiology branch of the National
Cancer Institute, hailed the finding as an important step in understanding how a
retrovirus, the class of virus that includes the AIDS virus, can cause cancer.

   "This has been seen in animal retrovirus, but it's the first example of an
insertional retroviral situation in man," he said.

   Dr. Dawn Willis, a virologist and scientific program director for the
American Cancer Society, called the study "a very exciting finding."

   She said the link between AIDS and cancer was always considered indirect
because no one had ever found HIV, the AIDS virus, in a cancer cell before.  The
discovery could suggest research in tracing the role of viruses in other
cancers.

   Shiramizu agreed.

   "It definitely leads us in some directions," he said. "Lymphomas, Hodgkin's
disease - right now we don't know what's causing them." Now that researchers
know where to look for viruses, further discoveries are possible, he said.

   But the study also casts a cloud over the goal of creating an AIDS vaccine
from a form of the live AIDS virus. The study authors and other scientists fear
such a vaccine could trigger cancer genes while halting AIDS.

   More broadly, the study raises questions about the use of any retrovirus in a
vaccine, as well as their increasing role in the new field of gene therapy,"
McGrath said. "Hooking up a gene to a retrovirus and then infecting human cells
might risk cancer.

   Shirmizu emphasized tht the study doesn't show the AIDS virus' exact role in
causing cancer. Until that is determined, he said, long-range questions are
still specultive.

   Blattner agreed the implications for a future AIDS vaccine are worrisome.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1994


                             822 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      April 8, 1994, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE D1

LENGTH: 583 words

HEADLINE: Biotech Executives Find Wealth in Their Genes

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Kathleen Day, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The quest to understand the basics of life has given several local
businessmen the basics for the good life: money.

   On paper, anyway.

   Six executives at four local biotechnology companies have made the annual
list of the Top 100 "Molecular Millionaires," to be published next week by
Genetic Engineering News, a widely read publication in the biotechnology
industry.

   They are:


   # At Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg: M. James Barrett, founder,
chairman and chief executive, with $ 4.6 million of company stock and stock
options.


   # At Human Genome Sciences Inc. in Rockville: Craig Venter, founder, $ 11.5
million; Craig Rosen, vice president of research and development, $ 2.2 million.


   # At Life Technologies Inc. in Gaithersburg: Frederick Adler, director and
investor, $ 13.3 million.


   # At MedImmune Inc. of Gaithersburg: Wayne Hockmeyer, chairman and chief
executive, $ 3.6 million; Franklin Top, executive vice president and medical
director, $ 2.3 million.

   To compile the list, New York City-based Genetic Engineering News calculated
the value of stock holdings and stock options of top shareholders in publicly
traded biotech firms. For that reason, the wealth listed for the executives is
"paper" wealth, not cash in hand, said Genetic Engineering News publisher Mary
Ann Liebert.

   Still, she said, the list indicates the value the investment community places
on these fledgling companies and the technology they are creating.

   Providing scientists and top executives with equity holdings is the only way
to attract top-flight people to fledgling firms, which stand a high risk of
failure, said Wallace H. Steinberg, chairman of Healthcare Investment Corp. of
Metro Park, N.J., the largest venture capital fund specializing in health care
and the group that founded and provided the initial funding for Human Genome
Science, Genetic Therapy and Medimmune.

   "You want to make sure executives have an incentive to share in the reward if
the company is successful," he said.

   But ask these so-called millionaires if they have struck it rich and they are
likely to say their wealth is not as great -- or readily available -- as it
might seem. "It's all paper," said Barrett of Genetic Therapy. "It's not all it
seems to be."

   He said that it's hard to sell shares if you are a major executive at a
biotech firm because that can worry outside investors and depress the price of
the stock. And he noted that selling the stock means paying taxes on the
proceeds, which reduces the value of the holdings.

   Biotech stocks, many of which are traded for less than $ 10, are sensitive to
any sort of news and notoriously prone to sharp drops -- and increases. The
value of anyone's holdings can change dramatically overnight.

   "The issue is how you get major people to give up jobs in major firms and
take the risk of coming to an always-on-the-edge-of-survival biotech company,"
Barrett said. "The way you do that in this country is to give these people the
opportunity for a substantial net worth if the company is successful."

   The top of Genetic Engineering News's list is Cyril H. Beck, a director of
Ivax Corp. of Miami, with $ 91.9 million in shares. At the bottom is John
Tallman, a scientist at Neurogen Corp. in Branford, Conn., with $ 1 million in
shares. More than half the companies associated with the names on the list are
based in California, the No. 1 home of the biotech industry, with industry
leader Genentech Inc. of south San Francisco among them.



GRAPHIC: CHART, A STAKE IN SUCCESS, TWP

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1994


                             823 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                     April 7, 1994, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 494 words

HEADLINE: 'DESIGNER SPERM' PATENT SOUGHT;
 HEALTHY-GENE TECHNIQUE PROMPTS FEARS OF EUGENICS

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

    Two U.S. scientists have applied for a European patent for genetically
engineered "designer sperm" that would allow a father to pass down only
"healthy" genes to his children, a British magazine reported today.

   The magazine New Scientist said the patent application had provoked outrage
and concern on both sides of the Atlantic as it raised the specter of eugenics
-- using science to "improve" the human race to some subjective standard.

   It quoted an official at the European Patent Office as saying this was the
first attempt to patent a technique for human germ-line therapy -- treatment to
pass down altered genetic traits for generations.

   Most gene therapy now being tested concentrates on changing genes only in
individual patients to cure them of diseases, and the patient would not be able
to pass on the altered genes.

   But Ralph Brinster and Jim Zimmerman of the University of Pennsylvania's
veterinary school wanted to patent a process to genetically modify the cells
that become sperm, the magazine said.

   It said they removed the spermatogonium, the primitive cells that evolve into
sperm, altered them and then replaced them in the testes.

   "The patient can then father progeny free from the worry that he would pass
on a genetic disease to his progeny," it quoted them as saying in the patent
application.

   They had tested their technique on mice but said it would work equally well
in humans.

   "I'm shocked at (the university's) willingness to see the human application
of this technology," said Doris Zallen, a member of the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, which evaluates proposals for gene-therapy experiments in the United
States.

   "The consensus around the globe is that it's far too risky a technology to
even consider at this juncture," said Nelson Wivel of the Office of Recombinant
DNA Activities at the U.S. National Institutes of Health.

   Christian Gugerell, director of the European Patent Office in Munich,
Germany, revealed the patent application at a conference in London.

   "It's the first in Europe and probably in the world," he said. "We will have
to decide if it's ethical or not to grant this patent. My first reaction would
be that it would be highly doubtful whether something like this could be
patented."

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 1994


                             824 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     April 6, 1994, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 43

LENGTH: 89 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY;
WHO'S WHAT WHERE

BODY:

    Henry J. Esber, vice president, Biodevelopment Laboratories, Cambridge; W.
Bradford Smith, vice president, Focal Inc., Cambridge; Yvonne Price, director,
customer service, National Medical Electronics, Marshfield; Christoph Michael
Adams, vice president, Transkaryotic Therapies, Cambridge; Michael L. Feldstein,
associate director, Biostatistics and Epidemiology Group, Abt Associates Inc.,
Cambridge; John S. McBride, Jack B. Jiangh, vice presidents, Scott Siegel,
director, anti-infective research, Phytera Inc., Worcester.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1994


                             825 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1994 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         April 6, 1994 Wednesday, THIRD
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 2130 words

HEADLINE: PROSTATE CANCER

BYLINE: By JOHN POPE Staff writer

BODY:

   Charles Hill, a bouncy man who seems blessed with perpetual good humor,
didn't think he had a thing to worry about when he showed up for his regular
physical exam last fall. He felt fine.

   The doctor went through the usual routine: heart and lungs, various
neurological checks, all the while asking the usual questions about medical
history.

   Then the dreaded rectal exam, the pants-down examination of the prostate
that's an important part of any checkup for every man over 40. Hill is 55.

   The prostate is a walnut-size gland at the base of the bladder. Hill thought
he had nothing to worry about: He felt fine, and the men in his family had not
suffered from prostate problems.

   In his brief exploration, the doctor didn't like what his gloved finger
found. Instead of feeling the way it should, like the muscle at the base of the
thumb, Hill's prostate felt hard.

   Then the physician ran a blood test to determine the level of a protein that
can be a warning sign of prostate cancer. In a healthy man, the concentration
should be minuscule - 1 billionth to 4 billionths of a gram per milliliter of
blood. Hill's was 10. The doctor ran a second test. It came up 9.5.

   Then two of three needle biopsies came up positive. It was, Hill said, a
sobering moment.

   "That was the visit in the doctor's office where you hear cancer, and it
means you," he said.

   At that moment, Hill became one of 165,000 American men who received
prostate-cancer diagnoses last year - nearly as high as the number of
breast-cancer diagnoses in 1993. The lifetime odds that a man will develop
prostate cancer are 1 in 8 - the same lifelong risk of breast cancer that a
woman faces.

   Despite these data, prostate-cancer awareness among men lags far behind
breast-cancer consciousness among women - a factor that may help explain why
many men don't think about being checked for the disease until it has spread and
is incurable.

   The difference, doctors say, may lie in the difference between men and women.

   Because women have been brought up hearing that they need to see doctors
regularly for pelvic examinations and Pap smears, not to mention prenatal
checkups, they are more predisposed to seeing physicians, said Dr. Raju Thomas,
interim urology chairman at Tulane University Medical Center.

   "Men, on the other hand, see their doctors for a broken bone or if something
is wrong, usually only with problems in the heart or lung or colon," he said.
"So when a man is usually healthy at the age of 50, the attitude is, 'Why should
I go? I feel fine.' This is a national problem."

   And when they get together, "men don't talk about their illnesses the way
women do," said Dr. Troy G. Scroggins Jr., a radiation oncologist at Ochsner
Clinic.

   Especially not prostate cancer. Because the prostate is in an especially
delicate part of the body and is closely related to sexual potency - it
manufactures the liquid that helps transport sperm - it has been a subject
guaranteed to make men cross their legs and squirm, said Dr. Jonathan Epstein,
an associate professor of urology and pathology at Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions in Baltimore.

   That attitude may be changing, if only because the population is aging - this
is a disease of older men - and because Americans have become more aware of
notable prostate-cancer patients - and victims.

   Within the past year, the disease has killed such celebrities as Don Ameche,
Bill Bixby, Frank Zappa and Telly Savalas. Sen. Bob Dole of Kansas, who went
public with his 1991 diagnosis, set up a prostate screening at the 1992
Republican National Convention and serves on the board of US TOO, a nationwide
network of prostate-cancer support groups.

   Because of all this attention, doctors say they believe more men are showing
up for prostate examinations. As a result, more diagnoses are being made
earlier, when the disease is more easily treated, doctors said. But, they said,
the response has been nothing to approach the flood of women who underwent
breast examinations after Betty Ford's and Happy Rockefeller's mastectomies in
the mid-1970s.

   Perhaps one reason is that, unlike breast lumps, a man can't feel anything
wrong with his prostate, and symptoms may not show up for years.

   "You just don't know it," Hill said.

   After checking with several other physicians, Hill underwent a radical
prostatectomy in January. The prostate was removed; Thomas, who performed the
surgery, said cancer hadn't moved beyond that gland. No follow-up treatment is
scheduled.

   Hill is back on his job as a biologist for the federal Minerals Management
Service, and he is singing baritone once more in the Mardi Gras Chorus, a
50-member barbershop chorale.

   But he isn't doing much heavy lifting yet, and the two classic side effects
of prostate removal, incontinence and impotence, linger. There are occasional
small bouts of urinary incontinence, he said, and he isn't sure yet about the
amount of sexual function he will regain.

   Generally, urological experts said, as many as five months may be needed to
see which side effects remain permanent.

   So far, Hill seems to be taking it in stride, saying those aspects of his
life seem to pale in comparison with his battle against cancer.

   "Having erections before the surgery was much more important than it is now,"
he said.

   The procedure Hill underwent - removal of the prostate - has become an
increasingly common treatment for early-stage cancer of this gland. The cure
rate at this point is more than 90 percent.

   But surgery - even an operation designed to save the nerves that control
erections - raises the possibility of such side effects as impotence and
incontinence.

   With that in mind, and with more sophisticated diagnostic tools that
physicians can use to examine the cancer and get a better idea of its danger,
some doctors are trying an approach that has become known as "watchful waiting."

   Prostate cancer in younger men tends to grow quickly; it's much slower in
older men. So doctors weigh the age and health of the patient against the
maturity of the tumor to see if they can delay surgery to keep from disrupting
patients' lives, said Dr. Jerry Sullivan, urology chairman at Louisiana State
University Medical Center.

   A recent study in which Epstein participated showed that 16 percent of the
cancers found in removed prostates were insignificant - tumors so small that
they could have been monitored for a year or so with no harm.

   Such patience is common in Europe, Epstein said, but he and Sullivan doubted
this would be popular in America.

   "A lot (of Americans) can't bear that there's a cancer growing inside them,"
Epstein said. "Many would prefer to have it out; I would say the same thing if
it were me."

   But this operation is not tried if cancer has spread beyond the prostate.  In
such situations, cure is not possible.

   However, Johns Hopkins researchers are experimenting with gene therapy for
such patients. In this procedure, the immune system would be stimulated to
attack tumor cells.

   Other methods of treatment for cancer that has not spread include:

   Radiation, which, Scroggins said, can shrink cancer but not cure.

   Implantation of radioactive seeds in the prostate to kill cancer cells for as
long as a year.

   A combination of hormones and drugs to keep down testosterone, which promotes
cancer-cell growth.

   Immunotherapy, which is used with chemotherapy to build the immune system.

   Cryosurgery, in which cancerous tissue is frozen and killed with liquid
nitrogen. This technique is performed in a few hospitals, including Meadowcrest
Hospital in Gretna.

   Each carries risks of impotence and incontinence. The likelihood of each
varies with the technique and depends on such factors as the patient's age and
the stage, size and location of the tumor, said Dr. Barry Bodie, a urologist at
Ochsner Clinic.

   However, doctors said, a wide range of devices and techniques has let about
95 percent of prostate-cancer patients become sexually active once more. The
continence rate is more than 92 percent.

   In discussing the future of prostate-cancer treatment, physicians spoke of
fine-tuning the diagnostic techniques already available, such as the PSA test
and rectal ultrasounds.

   They also discussed cryosurgery. Since no trial is being conducted to measure
its results against the outcomes of other procedures, there will be no way to
gauge its effectiveness anytime soon, said Dr. Stephen F. Bardot, head of
urologic oncology at Ochsner Clinic.

   Radiation is being refined to shield healthy tissues and step up the dose
aimed at cancerous tissue, Scroggins said. It isn't a cure, but it shrinks the
cancer and can keep it in check for a year or so.

   However, Bodie said, some studies show that radiation can make the cancer
worse.

   There is also the possibility of doing nothing, even if the cancer has not
spread beyond the prostate.

   This option is a high one among older men, in whom prostate cancer is viewed
as a natural part of aging. From age 75 on, the percentage of men with prostate
cancer at a certain age matches that age.

   In advancing the argument for inaction, some doctors have said that prostate
cancer grows so slowly that the patient will succumb to other causes. Indeed,
physicians have pointed out, many prostate cancers are discovered only during
autopsies.

   In view of these factors, Epstein said, many physicians need to feel sure the
treatments will help their patients live at least 10 more years.

   "In my opinion, over the age of 70, you do get diminishing returns," he said.
"But if you tell a 74-year-old man, 'We think we'll just follow the cancer,' a
lot will get very irate and say that's age discrimination."

   ================================================================

   #ART:

   Q & A:

   WHAT IS THE PROSTATE? WHAT DOES IT DO?

   A walnut-shaped gland beneath the bladder that encircles

   the uretha.  It secretes a fluid that helps transport sperm.

   ----------------------------------------------------------------

   HOW COMMON IS PROSTATE CANCER:

   It's the most common cancer in men, and it kills more

   men than any other type of cancer except that of the lung.

   ----------------------------------------------------------------

   WHAT CAN I DO TO AVOID PROSTATE CANCER?

   Nothing. A low-fat diet is believed to help. Risk increases

   with age. Black men are at greater risk than white men.

   ----------------------------------------------------------------

   CAN I CUT MY CHANCES OF PROSTATE CANCER?

   A nationwide trial is under way to determine whether the

   drug finasteride can prevent it. It is open to men 55 and

   older who do not have prostate cancer, serious illness or

   urinary problems. Ochsner Cancer Institute is the area

   coordinator. Call 842-4115.

   ----------------------------------------------------------------

   HOW CAN I DETECT IF SOMETHING'S WRONG?

   Early prostate cancer has no symptoms. That's why checkups

   and blood tests for a telltale cancer detector are important.

   When symptoms arise they include pain in the upper thigh,

   lower back and pelvis, and urinary problems.

   ----------------------------------------------------------------

   WHAT DOES A BLOOD TEST DO?

   It looks for a particular protein manufactured in the

   prostate. Ordinarily very little gets into the blood. If

   the level is high something may be wrong in the prostate --

   perhaps a tumor.

   ----------------------------------------------------------------

   ARE THERE SUPPORT GROUPS FOR CANCER PATIENTS?

   Tulane University Medical Center has a chapter of USTOO,

   a support group for all prostate-cancer patients - not

   just those at Tulane and their families and friends,

   call 588-5800.  For support groups elsewhere, call

   1-800-82-USTOO.

   ----------------------------------------------------------------

   WHERE CAN I GO FOR MORE INFORMATION?

   Your doctor or the American Cancer Society (1-800-ACS-2345)

   or the National Cancer Institute (1-800-4-CANCER).

   ----------------------------------------------------------------

   SOURCE: AMERICAN CANCER SOCIETY

   NATIONAL CANCER INSTITUTE

   THE HARPER COLLINS MEDICAL DICTIONARY

   STAFF RESEARCH

   Bladder

   Abdominal wall

   Ejaculatory duct

   Rectum

   Scrotum

   Penis

   VIEW FULL-TEXT ON MICROFILM.

   STAFF GRAPHIC BY ANGELA HILL

   -------------------------------------

   THE NUMBERS

   1 IN 8 - Chances of contracting prostate cancer in a lifetime

   38,000 - Number of deaths expected this year in the U.S.

   78% - Five-year survival rate for all patients with

    prostate cancer.

   40 - Age to add a rectal exam to annual physical

   GRAPHIC

CORRECTION:
The Times-Picayune reported incorrectly Wednesday that radiation therapy is not
a cure for prostate cancer.

   Radiation - via direct beam or the implantation of radioactive seeds - can,
indeed, cure a patient in cases where the disease has not moved beyond the
prostate, said Dr. Troy G. Scroggins Jr., a radiation oncologist at Ochsner
Clinic.

   PUBLISHED: Friday, April 8, 1994

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 1994


                             826 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                   April 5, 1994 Tuesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SCI; Pg. 2F

LENGTH: 787 words

HEADLINE: MOM'S A FUND-RAISER TO HELP HER SON

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT Free Press Medical Writer

BODY:

   Even a fighter like Jacklinn Brayan has days of disappointment. A fund-raiser
she poured hours into generates only a few hundred dollars. A newspaper decides
not to write the story she'd lobbied for.

   Or her son, Logan, 13, a sixth-grader at Grand Blanc Middle School, shows
signs of the inevitable muscle deterioration that comes with Duchenne muscular
dystropy.

   The genetic disease causes progressive muscle deterioration. It occurs almost
exclusively in boys, in about 1 in each 4,000 births. Most die by their early
20s of breathing problems from weak chest muscles. There is no cure.

   Brayan typifies a legion of crusaders working diligently to support
experimental treatments that insurance may not cover and mainstream health
charities do not fund.

   On April 21, Logan will fly to Memphis for a procedure that involves
injections of muscle cells donated by his cousin, Jarad Becker, 14, of Burton.

   The treatment, which has federal approval as a research technique, is called
myoblast transfer therapy. First, Logan will get the injections in muscles below
his waist. If that works, he'll go back within nine months for a second round of
injections in his upper body.

   The Muscular Dystrophy Association considers the treatment unproven and
ill-advised, says Leon Charash, a Cornell medical school pediatric neurologist
who chairs MDA's medical advisory committee.

   "There is enormous uncertainty on the part of the scientific community
whether this has validity," Charash says.

   "It's entirely possible" doctors will have an effective gene therapy
treatment in "the next few years," he says. Boys getting myoblast transfer
therapy may develop scar tissue from injections that would rule them out for
other treatments, he says.

   But Brayan and Dr. Peter Law, a Memphis neurophysiologist and one of the
treatment's pioneers, believe myoblast transfer therapy looks promising, and
gene therapy treatment may be years away -- possibly too late for Logan.

   Law's treatments have restoredmuscle strength to 34 children, all without
side effects, he says. Some 80 children in the United States and Canada have
received the treatment, with no side effects, he says.

   Law says scientific reticence may be due to the cost and the sophisticated
and time-consuming nature of the treatment.

   Donors travel to Memphis to donate cells from a small slice of thigh tissue.
These myoblast cells -- immature muscle cells with a potential for building
stronger muscle function -- are grown in a laboratory for about two months.

   One donor's cells multiply into 12 1/2 billion cells -- 250 two-liter bottles
worth for one upper body treatment.

   Each procedure costs about $70,000, currently not covered by insurance. Law
hopes to raise $10 million to fund his research.

   That's where Jacklinn Brayan comes in. Last year, she set up a Great Lakes
chapter of Law's Cell Therapy Research Foundation, one of about 10 chapters.
Brayan organized six fund-raisers, including dances, golf outings and a bowl-a-
thon. Still, she has only $20,000 to show for her efforts.

   She divides her time between her bookkeeping job at United Auto Workers Local
No. 599 in Flint and her Grand Blanc home. As often as possible, she pushes her
medical crusade into the background so her husband, Jeff, and sons Logan and
Travis, 8, can swim, snowmobile, do homework or play video games, as the boys
like.

   "He has the disease and we make the best of it," she says. "We've
mainstreamed him. We haven't tried to treat him special."

   Logan, a handsome boy with big dimples who is fond of drawing, prefers to let
his mother do the talking, though he lets his picture be taken and does the
drawings for prizes at fund-raisers.

   "I try to put myself in his shoes and I know I couldn't be as happy a boy as
he is," she says. The Brayans help Logan daily with stretching exercises and
twice a week with more rigorous physical therapy.

   This spring, she plans a golf outing, and will publish another edition of her
semiannual cell therapy newsletter. Her work has schooled her in laws governing
charitable fund-raising -- knowledge that doesn't come easily, she says. She
advises others interested in nonprofit health charities to call the state
attorney general's office, or Michigan Lottery Commission for raffles, to avoid
legal problems.

   In the last year, Logan's strength has deteriorated. Some days, he barely can
lift his arm over his head. His spine shows more curvature.

   Still, she believes, she has reason for optimism. "Before this, we had
nothing for these kids," she says. "Now we have hope."

   For more information, call the Great Lakes chapter of Law's Cell Therapy
Research Foundation, 695-5858, 8-5 weekdays.

NOTES: BODY & MIND; UP CLOSE

GRAPHIC: Photo JIM CHEEK, Special to the Free Press;

:
Muscular dystrophy patient Logan Brayan, right, will soon
undergo myoblast transfer therapy from Dr. Peter Law, left.
***

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             827 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 5, 1994 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 210 words

HEADLINE: Viagene gets more cash for AIDS project

BYLINE: CRAIG D. ROSE, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Viagene Inc. has caught its third wave of cash in six months. The local
company said yesterday that Green Cross Corp. will provide at least $10 million
over two years to fund Viagene's work on an anticipated treatment for AIDS. The
funding extends a four-year agreement set to expire early next year under which
Green Cross of Osaka, Japan, is providing $34 million to Viagene for its AIDS
effort. The agreement provides Green Cross with worldwide marketing rights to
treatments that may result, while Viagene retains manufacturing rights. Last
November, Chiron Corp. invested $20 million in Viagene under an agreement
calling for the two to cooperate in developing gene therapy treatments for
cancer and other diseases.

   Chiron also purchased warrants that could lead to an additional $30 million
investment. Soon after Chiron's announcement, Viagene raised about $20 million
through an initial public offering of stock. In its AIDS effort, Viagene is
using gene therapy to stimulate a patient's immune system to fight HIV
infection.

   The company's approach is to insert certain genes from HIV into a crippled
mouse virus and then inject the virus as a vaccine into the patient's muscles.

   Viagene hopes this will stimulate the production of so-called killer T-cells.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             828 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                      APRIL 4, 1994, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A18; EDITORIALS

LENGTH: 189 words

HEADLINE: Using Genes to Treat Disease

BODY:

    THERE HAS BEEN a lot of talk about genetic therapy -- altering the genetic
makeup of a patient's cells to combat disease. Some of it has been on the scary,
don't-mess-with-Mother Nature's- building-blocks side. Others see the approach
as solid, reasonable science with great potential for palliating hitherto
unreachable ailments.

   So considerable encouragement can be gained from the recent revelation that
the first effort along these lines has produced positive results in a patient.
Thanks to the process, a 30-year-old woman from Quebec has received at least
partial remedy for a devastating cholesterol disorder that runs its deadly
course through family networks.

   The procedure was a physically wrenching one; involving removal of portions
of the patient's liver, followed by infusion of the crucial cells that this
patient's body lacked. But two years on, there is no evidence of arterial
clogging. She's active and feels ''very well physically and morally.''

   This may be a modest triumph, but it serves to validate a potentially
far-reaching process. Of such are pioneering achievements made.


LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1994


                             829 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      April 1, 1994, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 567 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy shows promise in cholesterol case

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED ORESS

BODY:


   NEW YORK -- Her cholesterol was so high that she had a heart attack at age
 16. Twelve years later, researchers set out to treat her by implanting genes
 into her liver.

   Now, the first published study of this use of gene therapy in humans
 reports that the woman's cholesterol levels have fallen significantly,
 bolstering hopes for what some researchers see as a coming revolution in
 medicine.

   The woman's cholesterol has remained lower since the treatment in 1992,
 said Dr. James Wilson, director of the University of Pennsylvania's
 Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

   Though she still has dangerously high cholesterol, the therapy probably
 will prolong her life, perhaps by years, a heart specialist said.

   "I feel much better in the sense that I can do more physical activities
 now, such as skiing and dancing. I was limited before," the 30-year-old
 seamstress and part-time bank teller from Quebec City said yesterday.

   The woman, who insisted on anonymity, has a severe form of a disease
 called familial hypercholesterolemia, in which the liver lacks the gene to
 produce a normally functioning protein that removes cholesterol from the
 blood. About one in a million people lack the gene.

   Scientists surgically removed about 15 percent of the woman's liver. In
 the laboratory, they used viruses to shuttle copies of the missing gene into
 liver cells. About one-fifth of the cells took up the gene. The corrected
 cells were then put back into the woman's liver.

   "I had nothing to lose," the woman said of the experimental treatment.

   Both her parents have the disease, and her 9-year-old daughter appears to
 have it. Her parents are still alive, but she has lost two siblings to the
 disease. Another sibling has it, and two other siblings were born without
 it.

   The woman was 28 years old when she underwent the therapy. The average
 level of "bad" cholesterol, called LDL, for a woman of that age is 108
 milligrams per deciliter. Her level was 482 without medication and 448 with
 it.

   After gene therapy, her LDL level fell to 404 without medication and about
 360 with it.

   The results, reported in the April issue of the journal Nature Genetics,
 were about as expected based on experiments with rabbits, Dr. Wilson said.
 There have been no side effects, he said.

   "She's probably still going to die of her heart disease, but . . . she's
 going to have a longer life expectancy because of this," said Dr. Margo
 Denke, a cholesterol researcher at the University of Texas Southwestern
 Medical Center in Dallas. Dr. Wilson said four other patients have since
 been treated with the therapy but that it was too early to say how well it
 was working.

   Dr. Kenneth Culver, executive director of the Human Gene Therapy Research
 Institute at Iowa Methodist Medical Center in Des Moines, said the result
 with the woman "further strengthens the whole premise that gene therapy is
 going to revolutionize science and medicine."

   Gene therapy also is being studied for use in treating several other
 diseases, including cystic fibrosis.

   Dr. Wilson said he hopes to find a way to deliver the genes to the liver
 without surgery. Such a therapy might prove useful for people with a less
 severe and much more common form of the disease, which affects about one in
 every 500 people.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1994


                             830 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      April 1, 1994, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 659 words

HEADLINE: Gene implants brighten prognosis

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   PHILADELPHIA -- The cholesterol clogged her arteries as relentlessly as
 the disease thinned the ranks of her family. She watched two siblings die.
 She saw her parents sicken and knew her 9-year-old daughter could be next.

   "I had nothing to lose," said the woman, whose cholesterol was so high
 that she suffered a heart attack at 16.

   The woman underwent surgery in the first known effort to treat an
 inherited disease permanently by introducing genes into a patient's body.

   Now, with a few genes implanted in her liver, the woman's cholesterol
 remains dangerously high, but it has fallen dramatically. And the
 30-year-old seamstress and part-time bank teller from Quebec is skiing and
 dancing and living her life as she never thought she could.

   The 1992 experimental treatment bolsters hopes for what some see as a
 coming revolution in medicine.

   "She's probably still going to die of her heart disease, but ... she's
 going to have a longer life expectancy because of this," said Dr. Margo
 Denke, a cholesterol researcher at the University of Texas Southwestern
 Medical Center in Dallas. The difference might be months, or it might be
 years, Dr. Denke said. Gene therapy is also being studied as a way to treat
 other diseases, including cystic fibrosis.

   The woman, who insisted on anonymity, has a severe form of an inherited
 disease called familial hypercholesterolemia. The severe form affects one in
 a million people. Their livers lack the gene to produce proteins that skim
 cholesterol from the blood.

   In the woman's case, scientists removed about 15 percent of her liver. In
 the laboratory, they used viruses to shuttle copies of the missing gene into
 liver cells, then returned the corrected cells to her body.

   "I did it for myself in the first place," she said yesterday. "But I am
 very conscious of what can happen to my daughter , so I did it for her
 secondly."

   The average level of "bad" cholesterol for a woman of her age is 108
 milligrams per deciliter of blood. Her level was 482 without medication and
 448 with it. After gene therapy, it fell to 404 without medication and about
 360 with it.

   There have been no side effects, researchers said.

   The results, reported in the April issue of the journal Nature Genetics,
 met researchers' expectations, which were based on experiments with rabbits,
 said the project leader, Dr. James Wilson. He is director of the University
 of Pennsylvania's Institute for Human Gene Therapy in Philadelphia.

   The operation itself took place at the University of Michigan Medical
 Center in Ann Arbor, where Dr. Wilson worked previously.

   Four other patients have since received the cholesterol-grabbing gene, Dr.
 Wilson said. It's too early to say how well it's working.

   The apparent success of the woman's treatment "further strengthens the
 whole premise that gene therapy is going to revolutionize science and
 medicine," said Dr. Kenneth Culver, executive director of the Human Gene
 Therapy Research Institute at Iowa Methodist Medical Center in Des Moines.

   And Dr. Ronald Crystal, a gene therapy researcher at New York
 Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, said the work suggests that correcting even
 a relatively small number of cells can produce a significant effect.

   Dr. Wilson hopes to find a way to deliver the genes to the liver without
 surgery. That might help people with a less severe and much more common form
 of the disease that affects about one in every 500 people. Currently, the
 risk of surgery outweighs the benefit for those people.

   Most people with the severe form of the disease die by age 30, but some
 who did not develop heart disease in their youth have lived into their 50s,
 Dr. Denke said.

   The woman has more ambitious plans.

   "I am certainly going to live to 90 years of age," she said. Then she
 laughed and added, "More, possibly."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, ASSOCIATED PRESS, Dr. James Wilson with woman from Quebec who,
 after  having genes implanted in her liver, saw her cholesterol level fall
  sharply.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1994


                             831 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      April 1, 1994, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 933 words

HEADLINE: Doctors cite success in gene therapy

BYLINE: By Richard A. Knox, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Calling it the first verified success in human gene therapy, US scientists
announced yesterday that they have lowered the fatally high blood cholesterol
level in a 30-year-old Quebec woman by supplying her with a few hundred million
normal copies of a gene that was defective in her cells.

   The case shows, they said, that gene therapy corrected the targeted defect
and that the effect can persist for months and years - two benchmarks that had
not been passed.

   The achievement, more recently tried in three children and another adult, is
a medical tour de force that involved removing about 15 percent - a half-pound -
of the woman's liver, digesting it with enzymes into 32 billion cells, infecting
the cells with a virus that carried the missing gene, and injecting the
reengineered cells back into her liver.

   Now, almost two years later, the transplanted genes continue to function
normally, producing a protein on the surface of about 5 percent of the woman's
liver cells. The protein receptor pulls excess cholesterol out of her blood, so
presumably it will not clog her arteries quite so fast.

   The woman is not cured. Although her blood cholesterol has fallen from 525
milligrams per deciliter to 410, desirable cholesterol levels are below 200
milligrams.

   However, researchers hope they have bought the unidentified woman a reprieve
from the early death she faced from premature heart disease. She suffered a
heart attack at age 16, underwent coronary bypass surgery at age 24 and still
her heart disease worsened. Her two brothers died of the high-cholesterol
disorder in their 20s.

   Recent tests show her heart disease has not progressed since the therapy, but
some observers say it is too early to tell how much the intervention will help.

   "We hope it's helped her and that we're on the way to proving human gene
therapy," said Dr. James M. Wilson, director of the Institute for Human Gene
Therapy at the University of Pennsylvania, who led the effort.

   The other four cases, a 40-year-old woman, two girls 7 and 11 years old and a
12-year-old boy, were done too recently for researchers to evaluate them. "When
we recently reviewed the data" on the second and third cases, Wilson said
yesterday, "we were pleased with the outcome of those patients as well."

   Of approximately 70 human gene therapy experiments under way, early promise
has been reported in some involving the immune disorder adenosine deaminase
deficiency and the lung disease cystic fibrosis. However, up to now, repeated
intervention has seemed required to sustain the genetic tinkering, or
effectiveness has been difficult to show.

   Wilson and his colleagues, who report their findings in today's issue of the
journal Nature Genetics, say the Quebec woman's case is "the first report of
human gene therapy in which stable correction of a therapeutic endpoint has been
achieved."

   They said they are encouraged that there have been no signs that the woman's
immune system has attacked the new cells, which had been theoretically possible
because they are expressing a protein her body had not previously encountered.

   Even so, Wilson and others say that the cumbersome and risky procedure of
removing large pieces of liver and manipulating cells outside the body is only
the first step toward a more practical treatment in which the desired gene is
ferried directly into the body by a virus that homes in on liver cells.

   "Gene therapy is really in its infancy," Wilson said. "What we've been able
to demonstrate is the . . . introduction of a gene into a patient and its
expression over a long time in a beneficial manner."

   Specialists who treat patients with inherited high-cholesterol disorders
welcomed the news as a hopeful sign for patients with relentlessly grim
prognoses. "It's a start on a long, long path to try to find some more effective
therapy than we have now for these unfortunate patients," said Dr. Evan Stein,
director of cardiovascular research at Christ Hospital in Cleveland. "They're
really difficult to treat."

   While cautioning that "it's too soon to tell if this represents a clinical
advance" for such patients, Stein said the degree of cholesterol reduction
achieved in Wilson's patient may put her within range of significant help from
other treatments.

   It might be possible, Stein speculated, to add a treatment called LDL
apheresis, an expensive, twice-monthly process that extracts cholesterol from
the blood, in the quest for more nearly normal lifespans for patients with
inherited forms of severely elevated cholesterol.

   Doctors are also encouraged that the Quebec woman now responds for the first
time to the cholesterol-lowering drug lovastatin, signalling that her
cholesterol receptors are behaving normally.

   About 250 Americans suffer from the most severe form of cholesterol disorder,
called familial hypercholesterolemia or FH, that afflicts the Quebec woman and
the four other patients who have undergone the liver-cell gene therapy. People
who have this severe form inherit two defective genes for the receptor for
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, or LDL cholesterol.

   However, an estimated 500,000 people in this country have a less severe form,
in which they have inherited one defective cholesterol-receptor gene and one
normal gene.

   Wilson's group has so far been approved by federal officials to do only five
gene therapy cases for the cholesterol disorder. After they analyze the results
of these cases, they plan to try the technique in other genetic disorders that
might be reversed by reengineering liver cells, such as phenylketonuria.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1994


                             832 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                      April 1, 1994, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 480 words

HEADLINE: BREAKTHROUGH REPORTED IN GENE THERAPY THREAT TO WOMAN'S LIFE REDUCED,
SCIENTISTS SAY

BYLINE: By RICK WEISS, Washington Post

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

    In a landmark achievement in the field of genetic medicine, scientists
Thursday reported using gene therapy to yield a lasting improvement in a patient
with a life-threatening inherited disease.

   In the first published study of this use of gene therapy in humans, the
technique did not completely cure the patient, but researchers familiar with the
case hailed the results as the strongest evidence yet that genetic manipulation
represents a practical approach to treating an array of lethal diseases.

   The patient -- a 30-year-old Quebec seamstress and part-time bank teller --
is now healthy but remains at increased risk of early death.

   The patient, who requested that her identity remain secret, suffers from
familial hypercholesterolemia, a rare hereditary syndrome that causes
cholesterol to rise to eight to 10 times normal levels, clogging blood vessels
and precipitating heart disease.

   When she underwent the therapy at age 28, her level of "bad" cholesterol,
called low-density lipoproteins, was 482 milligrams per deciliter without
medication and 448 with it. The average for a woman of that age is 108.

   After gene therapy, levels fell to 404 without medication and about 360 with
it, said Dr. James Wilson, director of the University of Pennsylvania's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy, whose results will be published in the April
issue of the journal Nature Genetics.

   Scientists surgically removed about 15 percent of the woman's liver. In the
laboratory, they used viruses to shuttle copies of the missing gene into liver
cells. About one-fifth of the cells took up the gene. The corrected cells were
then put back into the woman's liver.

   Wilson said that four other patients, ranging in age from 7 to 40, have since
been treated with the therapy but that it was too early to say how well it was
working.

   Though the woman still has dangerously high cholesterol, a heart specialist
said the therapy probably will prolong her life, perhaps by years.

   The experiment was not the first gene therapy procedure in the United States.
In 1990, National Institutes of Health researchers provided new genes to a child
with an inherited immune system deficiency.

   But that technique must be repeated every few months.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 1994


                             833 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                April 1, 1994, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 666 words

HEADLINE: Landmark Gene Therapy Aids Woman

BYLINE: By Rick Weiss

BODY:


   Scientists on Thursday reported the first successful use of gene therapy to
help a patient with a life-threatening inherited disease.

   The experimental technique -- a landmark in genetic medicine -- involved
replacing defective genes with normal ones. The technique appears to have fallen
short of a complete cure in the patient. The woman, a 30-year-old Quebec
seamstress and part-time bank teller, is now healthy but remains at increased
risk of early death.

   But researchers familiar with the case hailed the results as the strongest
evidence yet that genetic manipulation represents a practical approach to
treating an array of lethal diseases.

   "This is the first published account of stable, partial correction of a
genetic disease using gene therapy, and that makes this a pretty important
event," said Francis Collins, director of the National Center for Human Genome
Research at the National Institutes of Health.

   "This is proof that this approach, which has been talked about so much and
has stirred a bit of controversy, can do what it's supposed to do," Collins
said.

   The patient, who requested that her identity remain secret, suffers from a
rare hereditary syndrome that causes cholesterol to rise to eight to 10 times
normal levels, clogging blood vessels and precipitating heart disease.

   Many victims of the ailment, called familial hypercholesterolemia, need
bypass surgery while still in their teens. The Quebec woman had a heart attack
at 16 and underwent bypass surgery at 24. Most victims of the condition die from
heart attacks in their 20s or 30s. The patient said that two of her brothers had
already died of sudden heart failure, and a sister was now ill with the disease.

   The woman stood before reporters in Philadelphia on Thursday, almost two
years after becoming the first person to receive the experimental therapy. She
was flanked by her doctors, including James M. Wilson, the University of
Pennsylvania researcher who pioneered the radical therapy, and expressed relief
that recent tests had indicated the procedure was largely a success.

   "I had nothing to lose but to go ahead," she said, looking trim and healthier
than many of the reporters who attended. "And it's paying off."

   The experiment was not the first gene therapy procedure performed in the
United States; NIH researchers passed that landmark in 1990 when, after a
prolonged debate over the scientific and ethical issues relating to genetic
manipulation in humans, they provided new genes to a child with an inherited
immune system deficiency.

   But that technique is not permanent -- it requires that therapeutic infusions
be repeated every few months -- and results from that patient have yet to be
published in a scientific journal. Details of Wilson's work appears in the
journal Nature Genetics. The lead author of the report is Wilson's colleague
Mariann Grossman, director of the Human Applications Laboratory of Penn's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

   "Gene therapy is still very much in its early stages," Collins said. "But a
few decades from now, when people look back, they'll see this as a significant
milestone."

   While generally impressed with the work, other scientists said that the
technique is cumbersome compared to other gene therapy approaches under
investigation, some of which avoid surgery by injecting gene-bearing viruses
directly into the body.

   "Theirs is a difficult and technically demanding procedure," said R. Michael
Blaese, one of the NIH scientists involved in the nation's first gene therapy
experiment, adding that the report on that work should be ready for publication
soon.

   "But it's feasible that their approach will prove lifesaving for a number of
fatal diseases that affect the liver."

   Since treating the woman who appeared Thursday, Wilson's team has treated
four more patients ranging in age from 7 to 40. He said it's too soon to report
results from any of those patients, but that overall he was pleased with their
progress.

GRAPHIC: Washington Post

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1994


                             834 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                April 1, 1994, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 666 words

HEADLINE: Landmark Gene Therapy Aids Woman

BYLINE: By Rick Weiss

BODY:


   Scientists on Thursday reported the first successful use of gene therapy to
help a patient with a life-threatening inherited disease.

   The experimental technique -- a landmark in genetic medicine -- involved
replacing defective genes with normal ones. The technique appears to have fallen
short of a complete cure in the patient. The woman, a 30-year-old Quebec
seamstress and part-time bank teller, is now healthy but remains at increased
risk of early death.

   But researchers familiar with the case hailed the results as the strongest
evidence yet that genetic manipulation represents a practical approach to
treating an array of lethal diseases.

   "This is the first published account of stable, partial correction of a
genetic disease using gene therapy, and that makes this a pretty important
event," said Francis Collins, director of the National Center for Human Genome
Research at the National Institutes of Health.

   "This is proof that this approach, which has been talked about so much and
has stirred a bit of controversy, can do what it's supposed to do," Collins
said.

   The patient, who requested that her identity remain secret, suffers from a
rare hereditary syndrome that causes cholesterol to rise to eight to 10 times
normal levels, clogging blood vessels and precipitating heart disease.

   Many victims of the ailment, called familial hypercholesterolemia, need
bypass surgery while still in their teens. The Quebec woman had a heart attack
at 16 and underwent bypass surgery at 24. Most victims of the condition die from
heart attacks in their 20s or 30s. The patient said that two of her brothers had
already died of sudden heart failure, and a sister was now ill with the disease.

   The woman stood before reporters in Philadelphia on Thursday, almost two
years after becoming the first person to receive the experimental therapy. She
was flanked by her doctors, including James M. Wilson, the University of
Pennsylvania researcher who pioneered the radical therapy, and expressed relief
that recent tests had indicated the procedure was largely a success.

   "I had nothing to lose but to go ahead," she said, looking trim and healthier
than many of the reporters who attended. "And it's paying off."

   The experiment was not the first gene therapy procedure performed in the
United States; NIH researchers passed that landmark in 1990 when, after a
prolonged debate over the scientific and ethical issues relating to genetic
manipulation in humans, they provided new genes to a child with an inherited
immune system deficiency.

   But that technique is not permanent -- it requires that therapeutic infusions
be repeated every few months -- and results from that patient have yet to be
published in a scientific journal. Details of Wilson's work appears in the
journal Nature Genetics. The lead author of the report is Wilson's colleague
Mariann Grossman, director of the Human Applications Laboratory of Penn's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

   "Gene therapy is still very much in its early stages," Collins said. "But a
few decades from now, when people look back, they'll see this as a significant
milestone."

   While generally impressed with the work, other scientists said that the
technique is cumbersome compared to other gene therapy approaches under
investigation, some of which avoid surgery by injecting gene-bearing viruses
directly into the body.

   "Theirs is a difficult and technically demanding procedure," said R. Michael
Blaese, one of the NIH scientists involved in the nation's first gene therapy
experiment, adding that the report on that work should be ready for publication
soon.

   "But it's feasible that their approach will prove lifesaving for a number of
fatal diseases that affect the liver."

   Since treating the woman who appeared Thursday, Wilson's team has treated
four more patients ranging in age from 7 to 40. He said it's too soon to report
results from any of those patients, but that overall he was pleased with their
progress.

GRAPHIC: Washington Post

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1994


                             835 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                    April 1, 1994 Friday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 482 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY PASSES CHECKUP TREATMENT OF LIVER EFFECTIVE 2 YEARS LATER

BYLINE: MALCOLM RITTER Associated Press

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   NEW YORK -- High cholesterol caused her heart attack at age 16. Twelve years
later, researchers treated her unusual condition by implanting genes in her
liver.

   Now, the first published study of this use of gene therapy in people shows
her cholesterol levels have fallen dramatically, bolstering hopes for what some
researchers see as a coming revolution in medicine.

   The woman's cholesterol has remained lower since the treatment in 1992, said
Dr. James Wilson, director of the University of Pennsylvania's Institute for
Human Gene Therapy and a former researcher at the University of Michigan.

   Though she still has dangerously high cholesterol, a heart specialist said
the therapy probably will prolong her life, perhaps by years.

   The 30-year-old woman, who requested anonymity, works as a seamstress in
Quebec City, Canada. She has a severe form of a disease called familial
hypercholesterolemia, in which the liver lacks the gene to produce a protein
that removes cholesterol from the blood. About one in a million people don't
have the gene.

   Scientists surgically removed about 15 percent of the woman's liver. In the
laboratory, they used viruses to shuttle copies of the missing gene into liver
cells. About one-fifth of the cells took up the gene. The corrected cells then
were put back into the woman's liver.

   "I had nothing to lose," the woman said of the experimental treatment.

   Her parents and a sibling have the disease, and her 9-year- old daughter
appears to, also. But she has lost two siblings to familial
hypercholesterolemia; two others were born without it.

   The woman was 28 when she underwent the therapy, and the average level of
"bad" cholesterol -- called LDL -- for a woman her age was 108 milligrams per
deciliter. Her level was 482 without medication and 448 with it.

   After gene therapy, levels fell to 404 without medication and about 360 with
it.

   The results, reported in the April issue of the journal Nature Genetics, were
about as expected based on experiments with rabbits, Wilson said. There have
been no side effects, he said.

   Wilson said four other patients since have been treated with the therapy, but
that it is too early to say how well it is working.

   Dr. Kenneth Culver, executive director of the Human Gene Therapy Research
Institute at Iowa Methodist Medical Center in Des Moines, said the woman's
experience "further strengthens the whole premise that gene therapy is going to
revolutionize science and medicine."

   Dr. Ronald Crystal, a gene therapy researcher at the New York
Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, said the work suggested that correcting even a
relatively small number of cells can produce a significant effect.

   Gene therapy also is being studied for other diseases, including cystic
fibrosis -- marked by faulty digestion and difficulty in breathing -- which
usually appears in early childhood.

   ***

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             836 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 1, 1994, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 71 words

HEADLINE: Landmark experiment shows gene therapy can work

BODY:

   The first effort to reverse an inherited disease permanently by
altering the genetic makeup of a patient's cells shows signs of a
real, if modest, triumph.

   In results to be published today in the journal Nature
Genetics, researchers said they have managed to partly correct a
devastating cholesterol disorder by supplying the patient, a
30-year-old woman, with copies of an essential gene she lacked:
Page 12A.


LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1994


                             837 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 1, 1994, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 581 words

HEADLINE: Genetic technique draws praise;
Lasting improvement seen in manipulation experiment

BYLINE: RICK WEISS; Washington Post

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   PHILADELPHIA -- Marking a landmark achievement in the nascent
field of genetic medicine, scientists Thursday reported the first
successful use of gene therapy to bring about lasting improvement
in a patient with a life-threatening inherited disease.

   The experimental technique, which involved replacing
defective genes with normal ones, appears to have fallen short of a
complete cure in the patient -- a 30-year-old Quebec seamstress and
part-time bank teller who is now healthy but remains at increased
risk of early death.

   But researchers familiar with the case hailed the results as
the strongest evidence yet that genetic manipulation represents a
practical approach to treating an array of lethal diseases.

   ""This is the first published account of stable, partial
correction of a genetic disease using gene therapy, and that makes
this a pretty important event,'' said Francis Collins, director of
the National Center for Human Genome Research at the National
Institutes of Health.  ""This is proof that this approach, which has
been talked about so much and has stirred a bit of controversy, can
do what it's supposed to do. ''

   The patient, who requested that her identity remain secret,
suffers from a rare hereditary syndrome that causes cholesterol to
rise to eight to 10 times normal levels, clogging blood vessels and
precipitating heart disease.

   Many victims of the ailment, called familial
hypercholesterolemia, need bypass surgery while still in their
teens.  The Quebec woman had suffered a heart attack at 16 and
underwent bypass surgery at 24.

   Most victims of the condition die from heart attacks in their
20s or 30s.  The patient said two of her brothers have died of
sudden heart failure, and a sister is ill with the disease.

   The woman stood before reporters Thursday, almost two years
after becoming the first person to receive the therapy.

   She was flanked by her doctors, including James M. Wilson, a
University of Pennsylvania researcher who pioneered the radical
therapy, and expressed relief that tests had indicated the
procedure was largely a success.

   ""I had nothing to lose but to go ahead,'' said the woman,
looking trim and healthier than many of the reporters who attended.

   ""And it's paying off. ''

   The experiment was not the first gene therapy procedure
performed in the United States; NIH researchers passed that
landmark in 1990 when they provided new genes to a child with an
inherited immune system deficiency.

   But that technique is not permanent -- it requires that
therapeutic infusions be repeated every few months -- and results
from that patient have yet to be published in a scientific journal.

   Details of Wilson's work appear in today's issue of Nature
Genetics.  The lead author is Wilson's colleague, Mariann Grossman,
director of the Human Applications Laboratory of Penn's Institute
for Human Gene Therapy.

   ""Gene therapy is still very much in its early stages,''
Collins said.



   Repairing liver cells

   People with familial hypercholesterolemia have liver cells
that lack receptors to mop up circulation-clogging LDL cholesterol.

   In an experimental therapy, part of the liver is removed and some
liver cells are given the missing gene.

   1. Portion of liver removed.

   2. Liver cell extracted and cultured.

   3. Harmless virus, carrying gene for LDL receptor infects
liver cell.

   4. LDL receptor produced by altered cell.

   5.Altered liver cells restored by injection.


GRAPHIC: Graph: Repairing liver cells (text); New York Times, Sources:
University of Pennsylvania Medical Center; Nature Genetics.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1994


                             838 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 1, 1994, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 581 words

HEADLINE: Genetic technique draws praise;
Lasting improvement seen in manipulation experiment

BYLINE: RICK WEISS; Washington Post

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   PHILADELPHIA -- Marking a landmark achievement in the nascent
field of genetic medicine, scientists Thursday reported the first
successful use of gene therapy to bring about lasting improvement
in a patient with a life-threatening inherited disease.

   The experimental technique, which involved replacing
defective genes with normal ones, appears to have fallen short of a
complete cure in the patient -- a 30-year-old Quebec seamstress and
part-time bank teller who is now healthy but remains at increased
risk of early death.

   But researchers familiar with the case hailed the results as
the strongest evidence yet that genetic manipulation represents a
practical approach to treating an array of lethal diseases.

   ""This is the first published account of stable, partial
correction of a genetic disease using gene therapy, and that makes
this a pretty important event,'' said Francis Collins, director of
the National Center for Human Genome Research at the National
Institutes of Health.  ""This is proof that this approach, which has
been talked about so much and has stirred a bit of controversy, can
do what it's supposed to do. ''

   The patient, who requested that her identity remain secret,
suffers from a rare hereditary syndrome that causes cholesterol to
rise to eight to 10 times normal levels, clogging blood vessels and
precipitating heart disease.

   Many victims of the ailment, called familial
hypercholesterolemia, need bypass surgery while still in their
teens.  The Quebec woman had suffered a heart attack at 16 and
underwent bypass surgery at 24.

   Most victims of the condition die from heart attacks in their
20s or 30s.  The patient said two of her brothers have died of
sudden heart failure, and a sister is ill with the disease.

   The woman stood before reporters Thursday, almost two years
after becoming the first person to receive the therapy.

   She was flanked by her doctors, including James M. Wilson, a
University of Pennsylvania researcher who pioneered the radical
therapy, and expressed relief that tests had indicated the
procedure was largely a success.

   ""I had nothing to lose but to go ahead,'' said the woman,
looking trim and healthier than many of the reporters who attended.

   ""And it's paying off. ''

   The experiment was not the first gene therapy procedure
performed in the United States; NIH researchers passed that
landmark in 1990 when they provided new genes to a child with an
inherited immune system deficiency.

   But that technique is not permanent -- it requires that
therapeutic infusions be repeated every few months -- and results
from that patient have yet to be published in a scientific journal.

   Details of Wilson's work appear in today's issue of Nature
Genetics.  The lead author is Wilson's colleague, Mariann Grossman,
director of the Human Applications Laboratory of Penn's Institute
for Human Gene Therapy.

   ""Gene therapy is still very much in its early stages,''
Collins said.



   Repairing liver cells

   People with familial hypercholesterolemia have liver cells
that lack receptors to mop up circulation-clogging LDL cholesterol.

   In an experimental therapy, part of the liver is removed and some
liver cells are given the missing gene.

   1. Portion of liver removed.

   2. Liver cell extracted and cultured.

   3. Harmless virus, carrying gene for LDL receptor infects
liver cell.

   4. LDL receptor produced by altered cell.

   5.Altered liver cells restored by injection.


GRAPHIC: Graph: Repairing liver cells (text); New York Times, Sources:
University of Pennsylvania Medical Center; Nature Genetics.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1994


                             839 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      April 1, 1994, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 26; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 304 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY USED ON CHOLESTEROL DISORDER;
MEDICINE: THE TREATMENT HAS SLOWED THE PROGRESSION OF HEART DISEASE IN A WOMAN
WITH A RARE MALADY.

BYLINE: From Times staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Gene therapy has dramatically slowed the progression of heart disease in a
woman with a severe inherited cholesterol disorder, and surgeons have already
applied the technique to four other victims of the disorder, Pennsylvania
researchers said Thursday.

   Although the 30-year-old woman still has dangerously high cholesterol, the
gene therapy probably will prolong her life, perhaps by years, said Dr. James
Wilson of the University of Pennsylvania.

   "I feel much better in the sense that I can do more physical activities now,
such as skiing and dancing. I was limited before," the seamstress and part-time
bank teller from Quebec City, Canada, said Thursday.

   The woman, who insisted on anonymity, has a severe form of a disease called
familial hypercholesterolemia, in which the liver lacks the gene to produce a
normally functioning protein that removes cholesterol from the blood. About one
in a million people lack the gene.

   Because of the disorder, cholesterol clogs the arteries of victims, most of
whom die in their teens. The Quebec City woman had a heart attack at age 16 and
underwent a coronary artery bypass graft at age 26.

   Wilson's team surgically removed about 15% of the woman's liver. In the
laboratory, they used viruses to shuttle copies of the missing gene into liver
cells. About one-fifth of the cells took up the gene. The corrected cells were
then put back into the woman's liver.

   "I had nothing to lose," the woman said of the experimental treatment, whose
results are reported today in the journal Nature Genetics.

   In addition to helping the woman's liver clear cholesterol from her blood,
the gene therapy also made her more sensitive to the beneficial effects of a
cholesterol-lowering drug called lovastatin, thereby increasing the overall
efficacy of the procedure, Wilson said.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1994


                             840 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  April 1, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 999 words

HEADLINE: Gene Experiment to Reverse Inherited Disease Is Working

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER,   Special to The New York Times

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, March 31

BODY:

   The first effort to reverse an inherited disease permanently by altering the
genetic makeup of a patient's cells so far shows all the signs of a real, if
modest, triumph.

   In results to be published on Friday in the journal Nature Genetics,
researchers said they had partly corrected a devastating cholesterol disorder
called familial hypercholesterolemia by supplying the patient, a 30-year-old
woman from Quebec, with copies of an essential gene she lacks.

    The new paper is the first to report any therapeutic benefits of human gene
therapy, a radical approach to treating disease that has been rich in publicity
but, until now, quite thin on hard data. Now, scientists and others have their
first opportunity to scrutinize the real merits of gene therapy and decide what
its benefits and limitations may be.

   Announcing the results of their first patient's outcome almost two years
after the woman received gene therapy, Dr. James M. Wilson and Mariann Grossman
of the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center and their colleagues said at a
news conference that they had cut the woman's harmful cholesterol levels by
almost 20 percent and raised her concentration of so-called good cholesterol
significantly.

   Recent scans of her arteries showed no evidence of progressive clogging, a
problem that had caused the woman to suffer a heart attack at the age of 16 and
require coronary bypass surgery at 26. Familial hypercholesterolemia, an
extremely rare condition, causes such severe buildup of cholesterol throughout
the body that many people with the disorder die of heart attacks in childhood or
adolescence.

   The researchers emphasized, however, that the woman's cholesterol levels
remained quite high -- more than twice the normal range -- and that they had no
idea whether their intervention would end up prolonging her life.

   "We've achieved a partial correction of a metabolic defect," Dr. Wilson said
in an interview. "This shows that the principle of gene therapy is sound, and
that it can work. We have high hopes for this patient, but what will happen to
her in the long run, there is no way of predicting now."

   The gene therapy procedure is a physically grinding ordeal, requiring major
surgery. In it, the researchers remove about 15 percent of the liver, separate
and grow the cells in plastic dishes and supply the cells with copies of the
gene they need, using a harmless virus as a delivery shuttle.  The crucial gene
dictates the production of the so-called low-density lipoprotein receptor, the
body's sponge for harmful cholesterol. A billion of those manipulated cells are
then re-infused into the patient through the portal vein that feeds the liver,
where at least some of them resettle into their home base and begin producing
the needed cholesterol receptor.

   Dr. Wilson has estimated that about 3 to 5 percent of the woman's liver cells
are now behaving as vigorous liver cells do, generating the receptors and
pulling cholesterol from the bloodstream.

   Appearing at the news conference, the woman, who has asked that her name and
picture not be used, appeared to be as healthy -- and as shy -- as a teen-ager.
Her blond hair swept back and her prim white blouse buttoned up to the collar,
she said she had felt "very well" since the operation in 1992. Speaking through
an interpreter in her native French, she said: "I feel very well physically and
morally. I feel I can do more physical activity, like skiing, dancing and other
social activities."

2 Brothers Died

    Two of her brothers died of heart attacks in their early 20's as a result of
familial hypercholesterolemia, but she sounded an optimistic note: "I'm
certainly going to live until 90 years of age." The woman, a seamstress and
part-time bank teller, is also benefiting from cholesterol-lowering drugs, which
had no effect on her before the gene therapy intervention. The researchers have
also been pleased to see that the therapy has raised her levels of high-density
lipoprotein, or good, cholesterol, for reasons that remain mysterious. This
could further cut down on her risk of future heart attacks.

   Hearing of the new results, other researchers were at once heartened and
cautious. "These are early days, and it's exciting that it works," said Dr.
Dusty Miller, a gene therapy expert at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center in Seattle. "The problem is, of course, that the liver technique is very
cumbersome and difficult to do."

   Dr. John Kane, director of the Lipid Clinic at the University of California
at San Francisco, said, "This is far from a complete correction, but the fact
that they have stable engraftment of the cells over all these months is
encouraging." He added: "This is a landmark experiment. It's the Kitty Hawk of
gene therapy."

4 Others in Experiment

    The severe form of familial hypercholesterolemia is exceedingly rare,
afflicting about one in a million people in the United States, although about
one in 500 have a milder form of the disorder. Since the Quebec woman, four
other hypercholesterolemia sufferers have undergone the liver redesign
experiment, the youngest of them a 7-year-old girl from Philadelphia.

   Dr. Wilson said a similar gene therapy protocol might soon prove useful for
treating other metabolic disorders, like phenylketonuria and a hereditary
inability to break down ammonia in the body. "Individually these disorders are
relatively rare, but collectively they're relatively common," he said. He and
others also hope to find less invasive ways of delivering new genes to liver
tissue, perhaps packaging them into carrier bubbles of fat, or into cold viruses
that can directly infect liver cells.

   Many other gene modifying experiments are at various stages of clinical
trials, among them treatments for severe combined immune deficiency disorder,
cystic fibrosis and a number of types of cancer. Dr. Wilson had the great good
fortune, Dr. Miller said, to be the first to reach the publication finish line.


GRAPHIC: Diagram/Chart: "Repairing Liver Cells"

   People with familial hypercholesterolemia have liver cells that lack
receptors to mop up circulation-clogging LDL cholesterol. In an experimental
therapy, part of the liver is removed and some liver cells are given the missing
gene. When the altered cells are restored to the liver, they seem to help it
handle cholesterol.

   Diagram shows basic steps in in experimental proceedure.

Sources: University of Pennsylvania Medical Center; Nature Genetics (pg. A16)

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1994


                             841 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  April 1, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 23 words

BODY:

   "This is a landmark experiment. It's the Kitty Hawk of gene therapy."   DR.
JOHN KANE of the University of California. [A16:2.]

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1994


                             842 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1994 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                              April 1, 1994 Friday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: GRAPHICS; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 113 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY

BODY:

   Friday, April 1, 1994 GENE THERAPY

   WHAT:  The first apparently successful effort to permanently reverse  an
inherited disease by altering the genetic makeup of a patient's cells.

   WHO:  A 30-year-old woman from Quebec suffering from familial
hypercholesterolemia, which causes such drastic buildup of cholesterol in the
body that many people with the disorder die young of heart attacks.   HOW:
Researchers partly corrected the disease by supplying the woman with  copies of
an essential gene she lacks.   WHAT IT MEANS:  Experts hailed the results as the
strongest evidence yet  that genetic manipulation represents a practical
approach to treating an array of lethal diseases.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             843 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       April 1, 1994 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1243 words

HEADLINE: PENN TEAM REPORTS GENE BREAKTHROUGH THE SCIENTISTS REDUCED A TEST
PATIENT'S RUNAWAY CHOLESTEROL LEVELS. THE EFFECT APPARENTLY IS PERMANENT.

BYLINE: Jim Detjen, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In one of the most dramatic uses of gene therapy to date, a team of
Philadelphia scientists has corrected defects in the genes of a Canadian woman's
liver, significantly reducing her risk of dying from a hereditary heart disease.

   The woman's illness was so severe that she had suffered a heart attack at age
16, and her health was failing at the time of the experimental treatment.

   James M. Wilson, of the University of Pennsylvania, said yesterday that his
team had corrected a potentially fatal flaw in the genetic makeup of the woman's
liver, and thereby significantly reduced her abnormally high cholesterol levels
and her accompanying risk of dying of heart disease.

   The findings, reported in today's issue of Nature Genetics, are important
because the treatment appears to have permanently corrected the defect in some
of her genes. Previously reported examples of gene therapy have required ongoing
treatments.

   "We have demonstrated the long-term safety and efficacy of gene therapy in
this patient," said Wilson, director of Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy.
"By doing so, we have opened the doors for the potential of gene therapy in
treating various forms of inherited, lethal disorders."

   Gene therapy excites many researchers because it seeks to correct the
underlying genetic defects that cause many diseases. More than 40 clinical
trials are underway around the world using gene therapy for cystic fibrosis,
cancer, AIDS and other diseases, but until now none of the results have been
formally reported in a scientific journal.

   Sir David Weatherall, a genetics expert at John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford,
England, called today's report "a genuine step forward" on the road to the
successful use of gene therapy.

   At a meeting with reporters yesterday in Philadelphia, the 30-year-old Quebec
woman said she felt well and was optimistic about the future.

   "I feel very well physically," said the seamstress and part-time bank
cashier, who asked that her name not be used. "I'm going to live to 90 years of
age, and maybe more."

   The woman suffers from a rare illness, known as familial hypercholesterolemia
(FH), which often causes death at a young age. Two of her brothers died of heart
attacks while in their 20s, and her daughter and parents also have the illness.

   The woman underwent a coronary artery bypass operation at age 24. When she
was referred to Wilson, one of her bypass grafts had begun to fail, and there
were signs that heart disease was spreading.

   Wilson said the gene therapy procedure, performed in June 1992, "resulted in
an immediate and significant decrease in cholesterol levels, and those levels
have remained low for the past 21 months with no unexpected or adverse side
effects."

   Between 300 and 400 people in the United States suffer from a deadly form of
FH, which makes it impossible for their liver to remove the "bad" form of
cholesterol from the blood. As a result, extremely high levels of cholesterol
build up in the blood vessels, choking the oxygen supply to the heart. Many of
its victims die suddenly of heart attacks and strokes.

   About one in 500 people - about 500,000 people in the United States - have a
milder form of the disease, in which the patient inherits one faulty
cholesterol-lowering gene. People suffering from the more deadly variety have
two faulty genes.

   In an effort to halt the progression of the Quebec woman's disease, Wilson
and his team performed a risky and experimental operation at the University of
Michigan Medical Center in Ann Arbor. Surgeon Steven Raper removed about nine
ounces of her liver and then inserted a tube into her liver through her abdomen.

   The liver section was rushed to a special laboratory where Wilson's
colleague, Mariann Grossman, oversaw the delicate procedure of injecting
corrective genes into the cells.

   The liver segment was washed with a special enzyme that softened the tissue
and broke it down into individual cells. The researchers then took billions of
liver cells and put them in 800 tissue culture dishes.

   The tissues were stored in an incubator at body temperature for two days. The
tissues were then bathed in a liquid containing a virus that had been
genetically modified to contain the cholesterol-lowering gene that FH patients
lack.

   The virus acts "as a way to shuttle the corrective gene" into the liver
cells, Wilson explained. About one-fourth of the liver cells then took up the
corrective gene.

   The following day, the patient's liver cells - many now containing the
cholesterol-lowering gene - were infused back into the woman's remaining liver
through the tube in her abdomen. The tube was removed a few days later, and the
woman was soon sent home.

   Five months after gene therapy, her cholesterol levels were still high by
normal standards, but had dropped 25 to 30 percent. The cholesterol-lowering
drug Lovastatin, which had failed to work before the surgery, was now helping
reduce her cholesterol levels.

   "We have not yet cured familial hypercholesterolemia, but we have shown we
can lower cholesterol significantly and potentially inhibit its deadly
progression," Wilson said.

   The ratio of her "bad" cholesterol to her "good" cholesterol - a traditional
indicator of the risk of heart disease - was reduced by about 40 percent from
11-to-1 to 6.6-to-1, Wilson said. (Doctors consider ideal a ratio of 4-to-1 or
less.)

   Since the woman's operation, four other FH patients have undergone the gene
therapy treatment: a 12-year-old boy from Cyprus, an 8-year-old girl from
Philadelphia, a 40-year-old woman from Quebec and an 11-year-old girl from
China.

   "All of the patients have tolerated the procedure well," said Wilson, who
noted that it's too early to say whether their cholesterol levels have also been
reduced.

   Three of the five patients were treated in Michigan. The last two were
treated at the University of Pennsylvania, where Wilson's team moved last year.

   The cost of the gene therapy treatment for the 30-year-old Canadian woman
amounts to almost $100,000, said Grossman, director of Penn's Human Applications
Laboratory. The National Institutes of Health is paying for most of these
expenses.

   Other members of the gene-therapy team include Karen Kozarsky and John F.
Engelhardt at Penn; David Muller at the University of Michigan; Paul-J. Lupien,
of the Lipid Research Center in Quebec; and Evan A. Stein, of the Medical
Research Laboratories in Cincinnati.

   While Wilson said he was pleased with the FH patients' progress, he said less
risky and invasive procedures must be devised before gene therapy can be used
more widely.

   "The question is how can we get the virus into the liver without surgery," he
said.

   Nevertheless, he said, the model used to treat FH patients might also work
with other inherited genetic diseases such as phenylketonuria (PKU), a metabolic
disease that can cause mental retardation in infants, and Maple Sugar Urine
Disease, which affects the Amish people in Lancaster County.

   Wilson said the gene therapy reported yesterday would never have been done if
the 30-year-old Canadian woman had not demonstrated "overwhelming courage."

   "Three days before the operation, we were all apprehensive and nervous," he
said. "As I was making the rounds in the hospital, she handed me a saying she
had cut out of a book. It said, 'When you wait for assurances that everything
will go perfectly, you risk never starting.' "

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND DIAGRAM;

PHOTO (1)
1. Project leader James Wilson and the Canadian woman who underwent the
procedure. He praised her "overwhelming courage." (The Philadelphia Inquirer
, VICKI VALERIO)
DIAGRAM (1)
1. Gene Therapy for Inherited High Cholesterol (The Philadelphia Inquirer)

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             844 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                    April 1, 1994 Friday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 411 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY AIDS LIVER PROBLEM

BYLINE: Anne Fahy Morris, Associated Press

BODY:

   In her 30 years, the Canadian woman has had enough physical infirmities to
last several lifetimes.

   At 16, she suffered a heart attack. At 24, she needed a coronary artery
bypass. By 29, the grafts from the bypass were failing and the disease that had
killed two of her brothers - when they were younger than she - was slogging
through her arteries.

   "I had nothing to lose," she said yesterday, explaining her decision to
participate in an experimental gene therapy treatment at the University of
Pennsylvania Medical Center in June 1992.

   Now, as she says in her native French, she plans to live to 90 - at least.

   According to the first published study of this use of gene therapy in humans,
the Quebec woman's inherited disease has been greatly eased.

   "I am certainly going to live to 90 years of age," she said through an
interpreter at the Penn Tower Hotel. "More, possibly," she added with a laugh.

   The woman, whose name is not being released, suffers from the deadly liver
disorder called familial hypercholesterolemia, or FH.

   The disease prevents its victims from processing low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol - the "bad" cholesterol - leading to premature heart attacks and
strokes.

   Doctors, who have detailed their work in the current issue of Nature
Genetics, removed about 10 percent of the woman's liver, treated the cells with
a healthy receptor gene and used an innocuous virus to re-infuse them into her
body.

   The genetically corrected cells immediately began to produce the receptor
protein that cleanses the body of bad cholesterol, without side effects and so
far without limited duration.

   "We have not yet cured FH," said Dr. James M. Wilson, director of the
Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the University of Pennsylvania Medical
Center. "But we have shown we can lower cholesterol significantly and
potentially inhibit its deadly progression."

   Within the first four months after the treatment, the woman's cholesterol
level dropped by 20 percent. A drug and a low-fat diet have reduced it by 30
percent, according to Wilson. Before treatment, her level was five times higher
than normal.

   The woman, a seamstress and part-time bank teller, says she hopes the
treatment that helped her will also help her 9-year-old daughter, who appears to
have the disease.

   "I did it for myself in the first place," she said of the treatment, "but I
am very conscious of what can happen to her, so I did it for her secondly."

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             845 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     APRIL 1, 1994, FRIDAY, REGION EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A8

LENGTH: 690 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY HELPS CURE INHERITED DISEASE

BYLINE: NATALIE ANGIER, THE NEW YORK TIMES

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:


   The first effort to reverse an inherited disease permanently by altering the
genetic makeup of a patient's cells so far shows all the signs of a real, if
modest, triumph.

   In results to be published today in the journal Nature Genetics, researchers
said they have managed to partly correct a devastating cholesterol disorder
called familial hypercholesterolemia by supplying the patient, a 30- year-old
woman from Quebec, with copies of an essential gene she lacks.

   The new paper is the first to report any therapeutic benefits of human gene
therapy, a radical approach to treating disease that has been rich in publicity
but, until now, quite thin on hard data.

   Now, scientists and others have their first opportunity to scrutinize the
real merits of gene therapy and decide what its benefits and limitations may be.

   Announcing the results of their first patient's outcome almost two years
after the woman received gene therapy, Dr. James M. Wilson and Mariann Grossman
of the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center and their colleagues said at a
news conference that they had managed to cut their pioneer subject's harmful
cholesterol levels by almost 20 percent, and to raise her concentration of
so-called good cholesterol significantly.

   Recent scans of her arteries showed no evidence of progressive clogging of
the arteries, a problem that had caused the woman to suffer a heart attack at
the age of 16 and require coronary bypass surgery at 26.

   Familial hypercholesterolemia, an extremely rare condition, causes such
drastic buildup of cholesterol throughout the body that many people with the
disorder die of heart attacks in childhood or adolescence.

   The researchers emphasized, however, that the woman's cholesterol levels
remained quite high -- more than twice the normal range -- and that they have no
idea whether their intervention would end up prolonging her life.

   ''We've achieved a partial correction of a metabolic defect,'' Wilson said in
an interview. ''This shows that the principle of gene therapy is sound, and that
it can work. We have high hopes for this patient, but what will happen to her in
the long run, there is no way of predicting now.''

   The gene therapy procedure is a physically grinding ordeal, requiring major
surgery. In it, the researchers remove about 15 percent of the liver, separate
and grow the cells in plastic dishes and supply the cells with copies of the
gene they need, using a harmless virus as a delivery shuttle.

   The crucial gene dictates the production of the so-called low-density
lipoprotein receptor, the body's sponge for harmful cholesterol. A billion of
those manipulated cells are then re-infused into the patient through the portal
vein that feeds the liver, where at least some of them resettle into their home
base and begin producing the needed cholesterol receptor.

   Wilson has estimated that about 3 to 5 percent of the woman's liver cells are
now behaving as vigorous liver cells do, generating the receptors and pulling
cholesterol from the bloodstream.

   Appearing at the news conference, the woman, who has asked that her name and
picture not be used, appeared to be as healthy -- and as shy -- as a teen- ager.
Her blond hair swept back and her prim white blouse buttoned up to the collar,
she said she had felt ''very well'' since the operation in 1992.

   Speaking through an interpreter in her native French, she said: ''I feel very
well physically and morally. I feel I can do more physical activity, like
skiing, dancing and other social activities.''

   The researchers have also been pleased to see that the therapy has raised her
levels of high-density lipoprotein, or good, cholesterol, for reasons that
remain mysterious. This could further cut down on her risk of future heart
attacks.

   Hearing of the new results, other researchers were at once heartened and
cautious. ''These are early days, and it's exciting that it works,'' said Dr.
Dusty Miller, a gene therapy expert at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center in Seattle. ''The problem is, of course, that the liver technique is very
cumbersome and difficult to do.''

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1994


                             846 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       April 1, 1994 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 558 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY CUTS WOMAN'S CHOLESTEROL

BYLINE: By RICK WEISS

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   Marking a landmark achievement in the emerging field of genetic medicine,
scientists yesterday reported the first successful use of gene therapy to bring
about lasting improvement in a patient with a life-threatening inherited
disease.

   The experimental technique, which involved replacing defective genes with
normal ones, appears to have fallen short of a complete cure in the patient - a
30-year-old Quebec seamstress who is now healthy but remains at increased risk
of early death.

   But researchers familiar with the case hailed the results as the strongest
evidence yet that genetic manipulation represents a practical approach to
treating an array of lethal diseases.

   "This is the first published account of stable, partial correction of a
genetic disease using gene therapy, and that makes this a pretty important
event," said Francis Collins, of the National Center for Human Genome Research
at the National Institutes of Health.

   "This is proof that this approach, which has been talked about so much and
has stirred a bit of controversy, can do what it's supposed to do."

   The patient, who requested that her identity remain secret, suffers from a
rare hereditary syndrome that causes cholesterol to rise to eight to 10 times
normal levels, clogging blood vessels and precipitating heart disease.

   Many victims of the ailment, called familial hypercholesterolemia, need
bypass surgery while still in their teens. The Quebec woman had suffered a heart
attack at 16 and underwent bypass surgery at 24. Most victims of the condition
die from heart attacks in their twenties or thirties. The patient said that two
of her brothers had already died of sudden heart failure, and a sister was now
ill with the disease

   The woman stood before reporters yesterday, almost two years after becoming
the first person to receive the experimental therapy. She was flanked by her
doctors, including James Wilson, the University of Pennsylvania researcher who
pioneered the radical therapy, and she expressed relief that recent tests had
indicated the procedure was largely a success. "I had nothing to lose but to go
ahead," she said, looking trim and healthier than many of the reporters who
attended. "And it's paying off."

   The experiment was not the first gene therapy procedure performed in the
United States; NIH researchers passed that landmark in 1990 when, after a
prolonged debate over the scientific and ethical issues relating to genetic
manipulation in humans, they provided new genes to a child with an inherited
immune system deficiency.

   But that technique is not permanent - it requires that therapeutic infusions
be repeated every few months - and results from that patient have yet to be
published in a scientific journal. Details of Wilson's work appears in today's
issue of Nature Genetics.

   While generally impressed with the work, other scientists said that the
technique is cumbersome compared to other gene therapy approaches under
investigation, some of which avoid surgery by injecting gene-bearing viruses
directly into the body.

   Since treating the woman who appeared yesterday, Wilson's team has treated an
additional four patients, ranging in age from 7 to 40. He said it's too soon to
report results from any of those patients, but that overall he was happy with
their progress.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1994


                             847 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      April 1, 1994, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 265 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy unclogs damage of cholesterol

BYLINE: Doug Levy

BODY:

    In what scientists hope is the start of a trend, a 30-year-old Canadian
woman is doing well more than 1 1/2 years after receiving the first genetic
therapy for a rare liver disease.

   Though the experiment is not a cure, doctors hope the study in the journal
Nature Genetics establishes that gene therapy works and is safe.

   The woman was born without the gene that enables the liver to clear
cholesterol from blood. Familial hypercholesterolemia, an inherited disorder,
leads to clogged arteries, heart attacks in teen-agers and wildly high
cholesterol levels - often in the 500s.

   The patient had her first heart attack at 16 and bypass surgery at 24. Two
brothers died of the disease while in their 20s.

   But Dr. James Wilson, director of the University of Pennsylvania's Institute
for Human Gene Therapy, says fixing about 5% of the woman's defective liver
genes has lowered her cholesterol level by more than 20%.

   What isn't known is how long the correction will last.

   In the procedure, doctors removed a section of the woman's liver, broke it
down into individual cells and used a special virus to carry healthy genes into
them. The cells were reinserted into the woman's liver through a tube.

   Four more people with the same condition have since been treated similarly.

   "We've convinced ourselves we know how to get a gene expressed" in a patient,
says Wilson. "It's important that we show the principle that this can work."

   Gene therapy experiments are also under way for a variety of diseases,
including cystic fibrosis and cancers such as melanoma and brain tumors.


                             848 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      April 1, 1994, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A1

LENGTH: 1043 words

HEADLINE: Human Gene Therapy Achieves a Milestone

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, March 31, 1994

BODY:

   Marking a landmark achievement in the nascent field of genetic medicine,
scientists today reported the first successful use of gene therapy to bring
about lasting improvement in a patient with a life-threatening inherited
disease.

   The experimental technique, which involved replacing defective genes with
normal ones, appears to have fallen short of a complete cure in the patient, a
30-year-old Quebec seamstress and part-time bank teller who is now healthy but
remains at increased risk of early death.

   But researchers familiar with the case hailed the results as the strongest
evidence yet that genetic manipulation represents a practical approach to
treating an array of lethal diseases.

   "This is the first published account of stable, partial correction of a
genetic disease using gene therapy, and that makes this a pretty important
event," said Francis Collins, director of the National Center for Human Genome
Research at the National Institutes of Health. "This is proof that this
approach, which has been talked about so much and has stirred a bit controversy,
can do what it's supposed to do."

   The patient, who requested that her identity remain secret, suffers from a
rare hereditary syndrome that causes cholesterol to rise to eight to 10 times
normal levels, clogging blood vessels and precipitating heart disease.

   Many victims of the ailment, called familial hypercholesterolemia, need
bypass surgery while still in their teens. The Quebec woman had suffered a heart
attack at 16 and underwent bypass surgery at 24. Most victims of the condition
die from heart attacks in their twenties or thirties. The patient said today
that two of her brothers had already died of sudden heart failure, and a sister
is now ill with the disease

   The woman stood before reporters today, almost two years after becoming the
first person to receive the experimental therapy. She was flanked by her
physicians, including James M. Wilson, the University of Pennsylvania researcher
who pioneered the radical therapy, and expressed relief that recent tests
indicated the procedure was largely a success. "I had nothing to lose but to go
ahead," she said, looking trim and healthier than many of the reporters who
attended. "And it's paying off."

   The experiment was not the first gene therapy procedure performed in the
United States; NIH researchers passed that landmark in 1990 when, after a
prolonged debate over the scientific and ethical issues relating to genetic
manipulation in humans, they provided new genes to a child with an inherited
immune system deficiency.

   But that technique is not permanent -- it requires that therapeutic infusions
be repeated every few months -- and results from that patient have yet to be
published in a scientific journal. Details of Wilson's work appear in today's
issue of Nature Genetics. The lead author of the report is Wilson's colleague,
Mariann Grossman, director of the Human Applications Laboratory of Penn's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

   "Gene therapy is still very much in its early stages," Collins said. "But a
few decades from now, when people look back, they'll see this as a significant
milestone."

   Familial hypercholesterolemia is caused by a tiny inherited defect in a gene
that helps the body make a biological receptor, or "sink," through which
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL, the "bad" cholesterol) is scavenged
from the blood.

   "When the gene is defective, that sink is clogged," Wilson said at a news
conference. Before treatment, he said, the patient's blood concentrations of LDL
ranged between 450 and 500 milligrams per deciliter, or about three times the
upper limit of normal levels.

   Over a period of a few years, such levels of LDL can clog blood vessels
leading to the heart, starving the organ for oxygen and triggering a fatal heart
attack. Indeed, the Quebec woman's arteries -- freshly grafted after her bypass
surgery -- were already becoming blocked again when she received the gene
therapy in June 1992.

   To treat the patient, Wilson and his team removed about 15 percent of her
liver and rushed the living lobe to a laboratory where its billions of cells
were teased apart and nourished for two days in more than 800 petri dishes. Then
the cells were exposed to a laboratory-reared virus able to inject into each
liver cell a copy of the LDL-lowering gene that the woman lacked. The fixed
cells were reinfused into her liver (through a catheter placed in a blood vessel
that enters the organ), and tests indicate that many have taken up residence
there.

   Significantly, the woman's LDL levels dropped 17 percent after the treatment
and an additional 13 percent with cholesterol lowering drugs, which had had
little effect. Moreover, the therapy unexpectedly raised the amount of
high-density lipoprotein (HDL, or "good" cholesterol). All told, her LDL/HDL
ratio, a common measure of the risk of heart disease, dropped by 40 percent. And
perhaps most encouraging, no new clogging of her vessels seems to have occurred
since the $ 75,000 treatment, which has been funded mostly by NIH.

   Significant as those changes are, it remains to be seen whether they are
enough for the woman to achieve her goal, stated today, to live to 90. "Whether
it's going to prolong her life is very difficult to rigorously prove," Wilson
said. "But these are the kinds of changes we have to make" to lower her risk of
heart disease.

   While generally impressed with the work, other scientists said the technique
is cumbersome compared with other gene therapy approaches under investigation,
some of which avoid surgery by injecting gene-bearing viruses directly into the
body.

   "Theirs is a difficult and technically demanding procedure," said R. Michael
Blaese, one of the NIH scientists involved in the nation's first gene therapy
experiment, adding that the report on that work should be ready for publication
soon. "But it's feasible that their approach will prove life saving for a number
of fatal diseases that affect the liver."

   Since treating the woman who appeared today, Wilson's team has treated four
more patients, ranging in age from 7 to 40. Wilson said it is too soon to report
results from any of them, but that overall he was "pleased" with their progress.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1994


                             849 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 31, 1994, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 69

LENGTH: 413 words

HEADLINE: Millennium gets $ 70m partner;
Hoffmann-La Roche looks to develop obesity, diabetes drugs

BYLINE: By Alex Pham, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Pharmaceutical giant Hoffmann-La Roche Inc. has agreed to bet up to $ 70
million on Millennium Pharmeceuticals Inc., a little Cambridge biotechnology
company that is looking for ways to treat diseases through gene therapy.

   The companies will work together over five years to develop drugs to treat
chronic obesity and adult diabetes.

   The deal, which reflects a rising interest among drug companies in the
emerging field of genomics, is the second-biggest partnership agreement between
a young biotechnology firm and a major pharmaceutical company. The largest was
SmithKline Beecham Corp.'s $ 125 million deal with Human Genome Sciences Inc. of
La Jolla, Calif., in May.

   "Millennium and Hoffman-La Roche share a common vision," said Mark Levin,
Millennium's founder and chief executive.

   The partnership combines Millennium's knowledge of sophisticated genetics and
its 50-person research staff with New Jersey-based Hoffman-La Roche's ability to
develop a drug, take it through lengthy clinical trials and bring it to market,
said Cynthia Robbins-Roth, editor of BioVenture View, a biotechnology industry
newsletter.

   It is the type of partnership most biotech companies are now scrambling to
make. Faced with high development costs and lacking extensive in-house marketing
or manufacturing experience, they seek the deep pockets and global networks of
pharmaceutical giants. In return, the drug companies obtain rights to what may
be the next generation of wonder drugs.

   "There's a very high level of excitement in harnessing this research," said
Mark Edwards, a Millennium consultant and principal of a San Francisco venture
capital firm, Recombinant Capital. Pharmaceutical firms feel that "if they don't
get involved now, they may miss out on owning the genes later," he said.

   Gene researchers hope that by unlocking genetic sequences, they can develop
drugs to treat the underlying causes of genetically based diseases.  But it
could be years - perhaps decades - before Millennium scientists will have a
drug, Robbins-Roth said.  The five-year partnership gives Hoffman-La Roche
rights to all Millennium-developed drugs marketed outside North America, and
North American rights to drugs that can be taken orally. Millennium will get
North American rights to drugs administered through injections or other
alternative methods.

   Millennium, incorporated just 14 months ago, has been financed until this
point with $ 8.45 million in venture capital.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1994


                             850 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    March 31, 1994, Thursday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Business briefs; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 501 words

HEADLINE: Business briefs

BYLINE: Staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Gene therapy patent

    GeneMedicine, a Houston biotech firm, said Wednesday it has
obtained a U.S. patent that covers a technology for
introducing gene therapy into muscles.  The patent was issued
to Baylor College of Medicine, and GeneMedicine has the
exclusive license.

   Mexican eateries to open

   Dallas-based ZuZu Handmade Mexican Food will build six
franchised restaurants in Houston during the next two years.

   The first, located on Bissonnet in Bellaire, is set to open in
May.

   Federal Express expands

   MEMPHIS, Tenn. - Federal Express Corp. said Wednesday it plans
to offer shipping services to Vietnam and Saudi Arabia
beginning in April.

   The U.S.government recently lifted a 19-year-old embargo
prohibiting American companies from doing business in Vietnam.

   Federal Express' new operation in that country will reach Ho
Chi Minh City, Hanoi and DaNang.

   In Saudi Arabia, Federal Express will offer service to Riyadh,
Jeddah and Dhahran.  The operation will be coordinated through
SMSA, a Saudi Arabian company, Memphis-based Federal Express
said.

   Rustling report

   FORT WORTH - Thieves stole more than $ 2.8 million in livestock
and ranch equipment from farmers and ranchers in Texas and
Oklahoma in 1993, the Texas and Southwestern Cattle Raisers
Association has said.

   The association gave its annual report Wednesday to members
attending its convention in Fort Worth.  The Fort Worth-based
group was founded 117 years ago to fight the theft problem.

   New PowerPC unveiled

   HOPEWELL JUNCTION, N.Y. - International Business Machines
Corp. and Motorola Wednesday unveiled a fourth version of the
PowerPC 601 microprocessor that is faster, smaller and more
powerful than the original launched in September.

   The PowerPC 601 is one of four new-generation microchips being
developed by IBM, Motorola and Apple Computer.  Apple began
shipping its first personal computers based on the PowerPC 601
this month.

   The new 100-MHz version of the microprocessor will be
available in limited quantities in the second quarter.  Full
production is planned for the fourth quarter, the companies
said.

   Telmex signs labor pact

   NEW YORK - Telefonos de Mexico said Wednesday it had signed a
new wage and benefits agreement with its principal labor
union.

   Under the agreement, the Mexican telephone company will raise
wages by 5 percent and benefits by 3 percent, the company
said.

   Telmex also renewed an agreement providing incentives for
worker productivity increases.

   Coors sues Miller

   DENVER - Adolph Coors' Coors Brewing Co. has sued rival Miller
Brewing Co. to block Miller's interest in Molson Breweries,
according to papers filed in federal court Wednesday.

   Coors' lawsuit stems from a January 1993 alliance between
Miller and two companies that own Molson Breweries - Molson
Cos.  Ltd. and Foster's Brewing Group.

   The lawsuit alleges Miller's acquisition of a 20 percent stake
in Molson may substantially lessen competition in the U.S.
beer market.


LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1994


                             851 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                March 30, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 488 words

HEADLINE: Drug Makers Plan Genetics Research Deal

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

BODY:

   In a vote of confidence for the emerging drug-discovery science of genomics,
Hoffmann-La Roche Inc. plans to enter a research collaboration agreement with
Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc. valued at more than $70 million.

   The deal, which the companies expect to sign within the next day or two, will
involve the second-largest investment ever in a privately held biotechnology
company. The collaboration will cover the use of Millennium's genomics
technology for the development of drugs to treat obesity and adult-onset
diabetes.


Big Genetics Project

    Genomics technology is derived from the Human Genome Project, a huge
federally supported research effort aimed at identifying all the genetic
information in the human body. Genomics companies like Millennium hope to create
drugs by isolating the genes associated with leading diseases.

    "I personally believe that the Human Genome Project, and genome research in
the widest sense, is the most exciting development in biomedical research in our
times," said Dr. Jurgen Drews, president of international research and
development for Hoffmann-La Roche. "We are very excited to be working with
Millennium."

   Analysts said the deal showed the tremendous premium that big pharmaceutical
companies are willing to place on genomics, a field that promises to treat
diseases with far more specific and safer drugs than are possible with existing
technology. Hoffmann-La Roche's scientific prominence, and its earlier majority
investment in Genentech Inc., a leader in biotechnology, make it a particularly
desirable partner, they said.

   In a similar although broader arrangement, SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. last
summer entered an agreement valued at up to $125 million with Human Genome
Sciences Inc., of Bethesda, Md.

   F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. of Basel, Switzerland, will take an equity position
in Millennium, which is based in Cambridge, Mass., and Hoffmann-La Roche Inc.,
of Nutley, N.J., the United States subsidiary, will provide substantial research
money. The majority of the $70 million value of the deal will be in research
support, the companies said.

   Hoffmann-La Roche will gain worldwide rights to small-molecule drugs,
chemical compounds that could be taken in oral form, and the rights outside
North America to antisense gene therapy and protein-based therapies. Millennium
retains North American rights to these alternative therapies, all of which
require injection or more complex delivery mechanisms.

'A Common Vision'

    "Millennium and Hoffmann-La Roche share a common vision," said Mark Levin,
Millennium's founder and chief executive. "We believe that genomics research
will lead to a new generation of therapeutic products that target the genetic
basis of disease. This type of technology will literally transform modern
medicine by creating disease-specific therapeutics that treat the causes rather
than the symptoms of diseases."


LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1994


                             852 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1994 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            March 30, 1994 Wednesday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B07

LENGTH: 455 words

HEADLINE: FIND MAY HELP TREAT BRAIN DISEASES

BYLINE: OZ HOPKINS KOGLIN, of the Oregonian Staff <

BODY:

   Wednesday, March 30, 1994 FIND MAY HELP TREAT BRAIN DISEASES

   Summary

   Portland researchers hope iron particles can treat bad genes

   Portland researchers have discovered a technique that may pave the way for
gene therapy to treat certain brain diseases.

   Dr. Edward A. Neuwelt, a neurosurgeon at Oregon Health Sciences University,
led the team that has found a way to deliver tiny iron particles, about the
size of viruses, to specific nerve cells inside rodent brains.

   ``If we can target genes to specific nerve cells inside the brain,''  Neuwelt
said, ``we may eventually be able to replace defective genes that  underlie
Parkinson's disease or a variety of enzyme deficiencies in the  brain.'' Genes
are units of hereditary material contained in a person's cells  that influence
and direct the body's development and functioning.

   Scientists around the world are attempting to develop treatments for
inherited diseases using modified viruses to deliver good genes to replace
defective ones. However, viruses are too large to cross the normal blood-brain
barrier, so their use is limited to genetic diseases outside the brain.

   The blood-brain barrier is an invisible shield formed by tightly joined
cells lining the brain's smallest blood vessels. Scientists say the barrier  may
be nature's way of protecting the brain from toxins, hormones and other
chemicals.

   Neuwelt and his colleagues say iron particles may provide and alternative  to
the use of viruses in gene therapy. They hope the particles may eventually  be
used to carry corrective genes piggyback fashion into nerve cells and  correct
inborn genetic errors. Ultimately, doctors might use magnetic  resonance
imaging, or MRI, to determine if gene therapy has been targeted to  the right
area in the brain.

   Neuwelt is know for his pioneering method of using certain substances to
temporarily coax open the blood-brain barrier so that therapeutic drugs can  get
across to treat cancerous tumors.

   A report on the findings, ``Delivery of Virus-sized Iron Oxide Particles to
Rodent CNS Neurons,'' will appear in the April issue of the journal
Neurosurgery. The team includes researchers at OHSU, the Portland Veterans
Affairs Medical Center and Harvard Medical School.

   The discovery is significant for three reasons, according to Robert A.  Kroll
and Leslie L. Muldoon, co-researchers at OHSU:

   *It demonstrates that virus-sized particles can be delivered across the
blood-brain barrier.

   *The iron particles can be accurately seen on an MRI image.

   *The iron particles are specifically taken up by nerve cells in the brain,
so it may be possible to attach genetic information directly to the particles,
which would then be absorbed by nerve cells.

   ILLUSTRATION: Photo of EDWARD NEUWELT

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             853 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 29, 1994 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 255 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Viagene Inc. has begun testing a gene therapy designed to fight HIV
infection.

   The University of California at San Diego said 20 San Diego residents who are
HIV positive, but not yet experiencing AIDS symptoms, will participate in the
trial.

   Two patients have already been given the first treatment.

   The trial's primary goal is to determine the safety of the treatment. Ailing
Bank of Southern California said its losses widened last year to $7.6 million,
from $3.5 million a year earlier, the result primarily of large loan-loss
provisions taken earlier in the year.

   Bank of Southern California's leverage capital ratio, a key measure used by
government regulators, stood at 5.2 percent of assets, well below the
6.5-percent minimum imposed by a 1992 Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. order.

   Meanwhile, the search for a president and chief executive officer to replace
Ron Bird, who resigned last summer, is continuing.

   The bank, which needs FDIC permission before hiring a new CEO, withdrew its
most recent nominee, George Hale, after the government said it wanted someone
with more commercial banking experience. Rohr Inc. will have to wait another
month for its long-awaited settlement with the government over testing problems
at its Riverside plant.

   A federal judge yesterday heard presentations on the proposed criminal
settlement, but will not rule until May 2. Under terms of the criminal
settlement, as well as related civil and Air Force pacts, Rohr will pay out $7.5
million, plus another $4 million in cash reserves and parts.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             854 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1994 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             March 25, 1994 Friday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. C08

LENGTH: 441 words

HEADLINE: WHAT IS RIGHT AND WRONG?

BODY:

   Friday, March 25, 1994 WHAT IS RIGHT AND WRONG?

   Summary: Sort out ethical issues before gene-science issues pass us;  Oregon
companies, universities need such guidance, too

   President Clinton in January created a panel to set the ethical and
scientific standards to use in the government's probe of radiation research   on
humans that began in the 1940s.

   That's half a loaf.

   Clinton also should create a national commission to examine the ethical
issues that biomedical science will place before us in the near future. That
way the president can ensure that science doesn't get the jump on us again in
another research field.

   Scientists know there will be plenty of controversies. For example, some
concern genetic privacy. Who should have access to the information on your
genes, genes that may contain insights into future diseases or proclivities?
Should your employer or insurance company? Or just your doctor? And what
controls should there be on how such information can be used?

   These issues should be of special interest to Oregonians. The Oregon Health
Sciences University is one of the top U.S. testers of unusual genetic  diseases.
Oregon is home to at least 27 biotechnology companies. And they are  part of a
growing industry, feeding off the state's research universities.

   In the next 10 years, says Nan Newell of the Oregon Biotechnology
Association, scientists will go beyond pinpointing genetic diseases to
pinpointing genetic proclivities -- a proclivity, say, toward high  cholesterol.

   What will we want to do with this kind of information? What ethical  concerns
will arise in the area of gene therapy? What is disease and what is a trait or
characteristic, and is it right or wrong to tamper with genes to  alter height,
weight, eye color or, perhaps in the future, sexual  orientation?

   These and similar important questions go to the very core of who we are --
or will be -- as a society and as individuals. Better to start answering them
now before the future is upon us. Better to enlist a cross section of
scientists and ethicists to organize the national conversation on these issues
and make recommendations to the federal government and biomedical researchers
and clinicians.

   A national bioethics review board has been done before. The last one went
out of business in 1983. A lot has changed since then. A lot will change in  the
next decade.

   Clinton should heed his science advisers, who think it's time for another
national bioethics committee. The right decision now may spare a successor  from
having to set up a commission to sift through a new wave of avoidable  ethical
transgressions in scientific research.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             855 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              March 24, 1994, THURSDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; WORLD BRIEFINGS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 658 words

BODY:


   TALKS FAIL: United Nations-backed talks on Somalia collapsed, apparently
setting the stage for deeper chaos as the last U.S. troops prepared to leave the
African country. A ceremony at which 15 factional leaders were to pledge to work
together and rebuild a country in ruins was repeatedly postponed this week in
Nairobi, Kenya. UN special representative Lansana Kouyate said efforts to broker
a settlement had foundered on disputes over the representation of a faction
linked to one of Somalia's main warlords, Mohamed Farrah Aidid, the National
Movement for Southern Somalia.

   TOUVIER TESTIFIES: Accused Nazi collaborator Paul Touvier told a Versailles
court how he hid in a priest's home to escape death from vengeful Resistance
fighters when France was liberated from German forces in 1944. Touvier, 78, gave
the court trying him for crimes against humanity a dramatic description of how
he hid in a hole in the floor and then sought asylum in churches during years in
hiding. The former intelligence chief in the French militia said Resistance
fighters broke into the home of the priest who was hiding him when the allies
captured Lyon in 1944. "I jumped through a trap door and hid in a hole under the
floor," he said. "They searched everywhere but they didn't find me." Touvier is
charged with selecting seven Jews to be killed by firing squad in 1944.

   BURUNDI BATTLE: Troops and tribal gunmen battled around the Burundi capital
of Bujumbura, and the interior minister said about 1,000 people had died in two
days. Aid workers said President Cyprien Ntaryamira addressed the nation on
Burundi radio and asked the army to withdraw from their positions ringing the
embattled suburbs. Tens of thousands of people have been killed in tribal
fighting between Hutus and Tutsis since renegade soldiers killed Burundi's first
Hutu president, Melchior Ndadaye, in a failed coup last October.

   PLANE CRASHES: A Russian Aeroflot airliner traveling from Moscow to Hong Kong
crashed in Siberia, killing all 75 people on board. Rescue teams found no
survivors among the 63 passagers and 12 crew members. One American was among
those killed, but no identities were released. Yuri Korinevsky, an official with
the Russian Transport Ministry, described as "suspicious" a 19-minute break in
communication between the pilots and ground control before the crash. Korinevsky
said that the sudden drop in altitude of the airliner could only have been
caused by an explosion or a collision.

   RADIO JFK: A Berlin radio station named after John F. Kennedy went on the
air, broadcasting news and 1960s American pop music. Radio JFK says its
broadcasts are aimed at yuppies living in Germany's biggest city. Kennedy
remains a towering figure in Berlin for his pledge to defend West Berlin's
freedom against a feared Communist invasion.

   HEMOPHILIA RESEARCH: A cure for hemophilia based on gene therapy could be
developed by 2000, said specialists for the World Health Organization. Experts
from Australia, the United States, the United Kingdom, India, Italy and Sweden
were brought together to assess the research into the illness. They agreed that
only gene therapy -- replacing a defective gene with a normal one -- could cure
hemophilia, a hereditary disease of the blood that affects men. But extending
the treatment to undeveloped areas is likely to be slow, they said.

   MAPPING RUSSIA: A new map of Russia will be published this year without the
distortions Soviet authorities once used to foil Western intelligence services,
the newspaper Segodnya said in Moscow. The map and a new atlas will reflect the
political changes that have taken place since the Soviet breakup in 1991, the
newspaper said. In previous maps, important roads were given a distorted shape,
and cities and towns built around strategic defense facilities never appeared.
The Kartografiya company also plans to publish some recently declassified
large-scale maps of Russia.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1994


                             856 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 March 24, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B;   Page 11;   Column 5;   National Desk

LENGTH: 171 words

HEADLINE: Cure for Hemophilia Is Seen by Year 2000

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: GENEVA, March 23

BODY:

   The World Health Organization predicted today that a cure for hemophilia,
using gene therapy, would be found by the year 2000.

   The therapy would involve the insertion of a synthetic, normal gene into
cells to replace the defective gene that causes hemophilia, the most frequent
inherited blood disorder.

    Transmitted by mothers to their sons, the disease can cause a
life-threatening tendency toward excessive bleeding for the 100,000 to 350,000
men who suffer from it worldwide.

   The World Health Organization, an agency of the United Nations, said the
conclusion that a cure was within reach was made after three-day talks in Geneva
by international experts.

   "The first cases of cure of the disease through the technique of gene therapy
will be achieved, given essential further developments, by the end of the
decade, the experts predict," the agency said. "Their predictions for the first
gene therapy cures for the disorder are based on their assessments of the latest
scientific progress in the field."

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1994


                             857 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      March 24, 1994 Thursday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 19A

LENGTH: 100 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH OFFICIALS PREDICTXK CURE FOR HEMOPHILIA

BYLINE: FROM WIRE REPORTS

DATELINE: GENEVA, SWITZERLAND

BODY:

   The World Health Organization predicted yesterday that rapid advances in
genetic technology will produce a cure for hemophilia by the end of this decade.

   The U.N. health agency said promising research into gene therapy for
hemophiliacs offered hope for victims of other hereditary diseases such as
cystic fibrosis.

   About one in 10,000 males are born with a defective gene that means blood
cannot clot properly. Few women are affected. If a hemophiliac cuts himself
badly he may bleed to death without a speedy transfusion of blood products
containing the necessary clotting factors.

COLUMN: WORLD BRIEFS

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1994


                             858 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1994 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         March 24, 1994 Thursday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 287 words

HEADLINE: CURE FOR HEMOPHILIA PREDICTED WITHIN YEARS

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

DATELINE: GENEVA

BODY:

   The World Health Organization predicted Wednesday that rapid advances in
genetic technology will produce a cure for hemophilia by the end of this decade.

   The U.N. health agency said promising research into gene therapy for
hemophiliacs offers hope for victims of other hereditary diseases such as cystic
fibrosis.

   About one in 10,000 males is born with a defective gene that means blood
cannot clot properly. Few women are affected. If a hemophiliac cuts himself
badly he may bleed to death without a speedy transfusion of blood products
containing the necessary clotting factors.

   Screening of blood products has reduced the danger of hemophiliacs being
infected during transfusions by viruses that cause AIDS or hepatitis, although
there is still a risk in many developing countries. However, the scandal last
year over a German company that distributed contaminated plasma products revived
fears among European hemophiliacs about the safety of their treatment.

   "These serious side effects raise many problems, and the only way to truly
abolish them is to cure hemophilia by gene therapy - the insertion of a normal
gene to replace the defective one," said Pier Mannucci, a professor of medicine
at Italy's Milan University.

   Mannucci was chairman of a three-day meeting of experts, sponsored by WHO and
the World Federation of Hemophilia, to discuss the prospects for gene therapy
and the use of genetically engineered products.

   The United States leads research in the field.

   Victor Boulyjenkov, of WHO's hereditary diseases program, said the
organization hopes that genetic engineering also would offer a cure for victims
of cystic fibrosis, which affects about one in every 2,000 people.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1994


                             859 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                            March 22, 1994, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 566 words

HEADLINE: GENE MIGHT HALT SPREAD OF DEADLY SKIN CANCER

BYLINE: Laurie Loscocco; Dispatch Medical Reporter

DATELINE: TUCSON, Ariz.

BODY:


   Researchers are zeroing in on a gene that appears to prevent the spread of a
deadly skin cancer.

   Studies performed on mice provide evidence that a gene that suppresses
metastasis, or spread, of malignant melanoma is found on chromosome 6.

   If the gene can be precisely located, that could pave the way for therapy
that could stop the spread of melanoma in humans, said Danny Welch, assistant
professor of pathology at the Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine.
He presented his research yesterday at the American Cancer Society's science
writers seminar.

   The number of cases of malignant melanoma in the United States has doubled
every decade since the 1950s, with about 32,000 cases expected to be diagnosed
this year. The disease is expected to kill 7,000 people in 1994, Welch said.

   If melanomas are caught before they spread, they can be cured about 90
percent of the time; once they have spread, only 10 percent of patients are
alive five years later, Welch said.

   It appears that the gene that keeps melanoma from changing to a metastatic
state lies on chromosome 6, Welch said. Human cells contain 46 chromosomes -
contiguous strings of genes that control biological functions.

   Welch said that in metastatic melanoma, pieces of chromosome 6 are missing.
In experiments done on mice, researchers took a normal chromosome and infused it
into a melanoma cell that was both malignant and metastatic. With the addition
of the normal chromosome, the cell still was malignant but was not metastatic,
Welch said.

   ''This is the first time we've been able to block metastasis,'' Welch said.
''It's my hope that gene therapy may be used one day to block metastasis.''

   Gene therapy involves inserting normal genes for faulty or missing ones.

   The possibility of gene therapy relies on finding the gene, which has not yet
been done, and duplicating it. That could be decades away, but ''this is an
important first step,'' Welch said.

   Blocking metastasis should not be confused with a cancer cure because
''there's still a tumor there,'' he added. However, if the cancer can be halted
in its tracks, conventional treatments such as chemotherapy and surgery can be
used, he said.

   In other research presented yesterday, a scientist from the University of
Nebraska Medical Center described attempts to garble the messages produced by
certain cancer-causing genes.

   Called ''anti-sense'' therapy, the technique uses a short strand of DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid) produced in a laboratory. DNA is a molecule containing
genetic information and comprises genes.

   The laboratory-produced DNA, through a series of interactions with other
molecules in a cell nucleus, stops genes from producing proteins involved in the
growth of cancerous cells.

   The anti-sense material has thus far been administered to 18 patients, who
have not experienced complications from the therapy, said Dr. Michael Bishop,
assistant professor of medicine.

   It was given to patients to ''purge'' them of cancer cells before they
underwent bone marrow transplants for a blood cancer called acute myelogenous
leukemia.

   Five patients have since had bone marrow transplants and all are doing well,
Bishop said.

   However, other patients treated have died of their disease, he added.

   ''This has great potential, but we're just at the tip of the iceberg,'' he
said. ''We have lots to learn.''

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1994


                             860 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    MARCH 22, 1994, TUESDAY, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1897 words

HEADLINE: CASUALTIES OF REFORM WHAT HEALTH CHANGES MEAN TO TRANSPLANTS

BYLINE: HARRY STOFFER, POST-GAZETTE WASHINGTON BUREAU

BODY:


   It was a straightforward question.

   Under national health care reform, asked Sen. John Danforth of Missouri, what
would happen to a deathly ill alcoholic who needed a liver transplant?

   Or, he added, what would national health care reform mean for a baby born
without a brain, or an older dialysis patient waiting for a kidney, or a newborn
preemie weighing less than 2 pounds?

   In other words, will the umbrella of health insurance for everyone cover such
high-cost procedures as organ transplants and intensive care for newborns, or
will some of those treatments be left out in the rain?

   Danforth, a Republican known for his thoughtfulness and strong principles,
posed those tough questions in a recent Senate hearing.

   And here is the answer he got from Judith Feder, a top Clinton administration
health official:

   ''The way to promote quality care, efficiently delivered, is to change the
way in which health plans and providers and consumers are operating in the
system and to leave those decisions in the hands of physicians who are actually
working with patients in circumstances and can best make those in an environment
in which the incentives are to promote efficiently delivered care.''

   This masterpiece of generalities clearly angered Danforth.

   The Clinton administration and most other advocates of health care reform, he
said, have ''ducked and dodged and bobbed and weaved and avoided the economic
questions and the ethical questions before this country.''

   Health care reform by its very nature means having to say no sometimes,
Danforth said, and for policy makers to refuse to acknowledge the need for
limits on health care is ''a disservice to the American people.''

   With an average liver transplant now costing nearly $ 300,000 and the cost of
an average heart transplant exceeding $ 200,000, organ transplants are prime
candidates for austerity advocates.

   The University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, as the world's leading
transplant center in the number and type of operations it does, has a major
stake in the debate.

   Experts who are knowledgeable about transplants believe that even if Congress
does not approve universal health care reform, organ transplantation is bound to
face some limits.

   They say there will be restrictions imposed on who will be able to perform
transplants, on who will be eligible to receive them, and on how much insurers
are willing to pay for them.

   The heyday is over

   Roger Evans, the head of health services evaluation at the Mayo Clinic in
Minnesota, believes ''the heyday of transplants has more or less ended.''

   Evans, who conducted one of the most extensive studies ever done on
transplant costs, said public support for the procedure had waned, partly
because of questions about the cost of the operations but also because of what
he says are still-unanswered ethical questions, such as why Gov. Casey got his
heart-liver surgery at Pitt so quickly last year.

   Evans still defends transplantation as a proven way to save lives -- for the
expenditure of about $ 3 billion, 75,000 people are still alive, he said.

   But he believes the need to control costs as part of health reform will force
more reliance on a cost-benefit analysis to decide who should get a persistently
scarce supply of donated organs.

   While nearly 16,000 people get transplants each year, the waiting lists
contain more than 32,000 names and are growing, despite an increasing number of
people who are dying while they wait.

   Organ transplants have a better cost-benefit ratio than many other procedures
that generate less controversy, said Jeffrey Romoff, Pitt medical center
president. A desperately ill liver disease patient has a one-year survival rate
of less than 10 percent without a transplant, but more than 70 percent with one,
he said. A less seriously ill liver patient has a one-year survival rate of
about 80 percent without a transplant and 90 percent with one, he said.

   Contrast that with a seriously ill cancer patient who gets a bone-marrow
transplant, Romoff said. The marrow transplant may improve the patient's
survival rate from 10 percent or less to about 20 percent, ''and everyone
believes we have done a wonderful job.''

   Arthur Caplan, a medical ethicist at the University of Minnesota, agreed. A
cost-benefit analysis of transplant surgery comes out pretty good, he said,
against similarly costly but far less effective treatments for Alzheimer's
disease or terminal cancers.

   Caplan questioned whether additional limits would be placed on which patients
get transplants. ''There's no going back. The middle class will not allow
rationing'' of life-saving services, he said.

   Yet Evans thinks the policies on who gets organ transplants need to change.

   He disagrees with current criteria that favor giving organs to the very
sickest patients. ''We transplant those who are least likely to benefit at a
greater cost'' than for less sick patients, he said.

   Dr. Byers Shaw, chief of liver transplantation at the University of Nebraska,
agrees that there is a problem with the current method of choosing patients.

   Because organ allocation formulas give weight to how urgent someone's need
is, Shaw said, some organs are indeed going to people who are too sick and have
little chance of long-term survival.

   On the other hand, he said, the allocation rules give weight to how long
someone has been waiting. When people are put on a waiting list early in a
disease, he said, they can end up getting organs when they are relatively
healthy.

   Consolidating centers

   Sara Singer, a top aide to Alain Enthoven, the Stanford University professor
who helped shape the Clinton administration's reform plan, said costly,
high-tech procedures like organ transplants should be performed only at regional
centers, where they could be done more efficiently and with better results.

   Current financial incentives lead too many hospitals to attempt too many
kinds of sophisticated operations, resulting in more mistakes and higher costs,
she contended.

   Fred Graefe, a partner in the big-league Washington lobbying firm of Baker &
Hostetler, said he had been trying to warn the transplant community -- a
notoriously fractious group of hospitals, doctors, patients and donor
organizations -- that limitations are coming and that it will need to unify and
lobby hard for reasonableness.

   ''All the entities in the field need to be aware that the generous policies
that are in effect now may not continue,'' said Graefe, whose clients include
two large organ procurement organizations.

   Evans said consolidation of transplant facilities into fewer, larger centers
would happen by default, if not by law, because of pressure from insurance
companies and federal budget constraints.

   Not everyone thinks that will happen, though.

   Ethicist Caplan said health care reform might slow the proliferation of
transplant centers, but he doubted that many medical centers would give up their
transplant programs.

   On the other hand, he thinks federal health care reform could make it more
difficult for new, unproven technologies to be covered by insurers.

   Among the techniques that might not get routine coverage, he said, are fetal
tissue transplants, mechanical hearts, new reproductive procedures, genetic
therapies, new psychiatric drugs and multiorgan transplants.

   The research question

   For major transplant centers like Pitt, future restrictions on transplants
may be unavoidable, but raise a major question: Where will the money come from
for the costly research that made transplants a practical therapy in the first
place?

   Caplan worries that reform could ''put an embolism in the research
pipeline.''

   And liver surgeon Shaw said that if health care reform were to lead to
government micro-management, ''we will have a stagnant field and no scientific
development.''

   Romoff, the Pitt Medical Center chief, said he was confident that Pitt would
''thrive under virtually all of the logical outcomes'' of the health care
debate.

   But he acknowledged that Pitt now charged higher prices so that it could use
the extra money for its transplant research. If Pitt is not able to continue
doing that, Romoff said, then there should be grants from a separate research
fund to compensate, as President Clinton has suggested.

   One reason people are speculating so much about the future of organ
transplants is that the Clinton administration has not really addressed how its
health care reform plan would affect such areas.

   Christine Heenan, a senior policy analyst at the White House, said the
Clinton plan would require insurance companies to cover ''organ transplants that
are appropriate and medically necessary,'' but said some transplants might not
be covered if they were considered experimental.

   Yet Heenan doesn't give any examples of transplants that might be considered
medically necessary, vs. those that might be deemed experimental.

   Medicare, the federal health program for the elderly and disabled, covers
many kidney, heart and liver transplants now, but does not cover lung, pancreas
or multiorgan procedures.

   Sue Connors, director of utilization review for Pitt's Presbyterian
University Hospital, deals every day with the current hodgepodge of private
insurance, Medicare and Medicaid, the state-federal program for welfare
recipients.

   Sometimes, she said, ''it just doesn't make any sense.'' In the case of some
multiorgan transplants like liver-bowel combinations, which Medicare has not
approved, the hospital will accept Medicare's payment for the organ that is
covered -- the liver in this case -- and absorb the cost of transplanting the
other organ.

   Romoff noted that even for a covered organ, the Medicare payment is only
about 60 percent of the hospital's actual cost.

   The Clinton reform plan does call for one major change in Medicare payment
policies on organ transplants. Medicare will no longer be the primary insurer
for kidney dialysis and kidney transplants, said Helen Smits, deputy chief of
the federal Health Care Financing Administration.

   Kidney patients have had a special place in federal law since 1972, when
Congress and President Nixon, responding to widespread publicity about the
hardships caused by the costs of dialysis, created the End-Stage Renal Disease
program under Medicare.

   Medicare's ESRD program grew from a modest 11,000 people initially to about
200,000, and now costs more than $ 5 billion a year.

   The cost of survival

   The most expensive organ transplants do not necessarily produce the highest
survival rates, as the figures below show. The operations are listed in
decreasing order of cost, with liver transplants being most expensive and
pancreas transplants least expensive. The cost figures are for 1993, and the
survival rates are for three years.

   Organ........................ Cost..........................Survival rate

   Liver.................... $ 302,900.....................................67%

   Heart-lung.................$ 248,000.....................................42%

   Lung.......................$ 243,600.....................................48%

   Heart......................$ 209,100.....................................75%

   Kidney......................$ 87,700.....................................85%

   Pancreas....................$ 65,000.....................................81%

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, CHART, Christopher Millette/For the Post-Gazette: Debbie Jewell,
of Charleston, W.Va., who is awaiting a lung transplant, has no medical
insurance and didn't know until recently how the procedure would be paid for.

TYPE: INSIGHT

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1994


                             861 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     March 22, 1994, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 1434 words

HEADLINE: High tech labs shortens the path to new genes

BYLINE: Tim Friend

DATELINE: ROCKVILLE, Md.

BODY:

    Meet the future of genetics.

   It's arrived early at The Institute of Human Genomic Research (TIGR) and its
commercial launch pad Human Genome Sciences Inc., (HGS).

   Here, within the red brick walls of two laboratories, TIGR and HGS scientists
have created a system of identifying pieces of human genes at warp speed and for
comparing those signature fragments with genes already known in bacteria, yeast,
fruit files, humans and other organisms.

   When the laboratories' super computers find a match, that suggests a
billion-year-old evolutionary relationship and that the fragment may be part of
a previously unknown human gene with a key role in the cycle of life and
disease.

   In just over a year, TIGR founder Craig Venter and HSG chief William
Haseltine have filled their data banks with the partial codes of more than
40,000 human genes - roughly half of all the genes that make up a human being.

   Just last week, collaborating scientists at TIGR, HGS, Johns Hopkins Oncology
Center, University of Helsinki and Creighton University reported that one of
these fragments is indeed a gene that, when mutated, is responsible for 30% of
inherited colon cancer cases.

   This discovery marks the beginning of a revolution in genetics and the way it
was achieved reveals the face of research in the 21st century.

   After the painstaking discovery of the first colon cancer gene, reported in
December by Hopkin's Bert Vogelstein and others, pieces of the puzzle were still
missing. The initial gene - shown to normally function as a DNA repair gene -
did not explain all cases.

   Studies of families by Vogelstein and collegue Kenneth Kinzler suggested that
a second DNA repair gene would be on chromosome 3.

   Until recently, it could take years to locate the gene. By comparison, after
the Huntington's disease gene was known to be on chromosome 4, it took a decade
to locate it.

   So in early January, Kinzler visited TIGR and HGS and asked if they had any
human gene fragments in their data banks that resembled DNA repair genes known
in bacteria. HSG had been working on three such genes for the past eight months.

   Four weeks later, Vogelstein and Kinzler had their second colon cancer gene
and two potential new candidates.

    Anatomy of a gene

    The human body is mad of cells. Each cell contains 46 chromosomes (23
pairs).

    Chromosomes contain genes that define human characteristics. Genes are
written in a code called DNA. Ther are approximatedly 75,000 genes in each cell.

    Genetic alphabet A Adenine C Cytosine T thymine G Guanine

    Think of the body as a dictionary filled with random letters and no
punctuation. In this body alphabet, though, there are 4 letters - ACTG - rather
than 26. When scientists spot letters that mean something - such as ATG, which
is the code for an amino acid - and then find other blocks of three-letter words
- they can begin to understand the body's sentences. These sentences tell
scientists such things as the code for making cholesterol or metabolizing sugar.

    How scientists are uncovering the secret codes

    Gathering the information

1. Human tissues are collected from hospitals and tissue banks.

2. Of all the DNA, only the "useful" portion (or mRNA) is studied. mRNA
represent 3% of the genetic information. The mRNA, which is naturally unstable,
is collected. Messenger RNA - which in the cells is a template for making
proteins - is easily destroyed. So a complementary, stable form called cDNA is
made in the lab, creating "libraries."

    Reverse transcriptase is added to the mRNA to form the stable complementary
DNA.

Genetic colonies are created

   3. The gene fragment is then placed into a plasmid, which is the
self-replicating part of a cell. The plasmid is then placed in bacteria in a
petri dish. The bacteria grow in colonies, presumably multiplying the gene
fragment. A dye is then added. If a colony turns white, it contains the gene
fragment. If a colony is blue, it is void of the cDNA.

4. Robots scan the petri dishes for white colonies, picking 10,000 a day from
the petri dishes and placing them into dishes with 96 wells. These are put in an
incubator for a couple hours to grow the colonies further.

DNA is scanned and color-coded

   5. A few hours later, the fragments can be amplified a million times and then
"sequenced." Fluorescent dyes are applied and then a sugar gel creates a
molecular sieve. The microscopic particles get "sequenced" - C,G,A,T - as they
run through the sieve, operating by electricity. A laser beam activates the dyes
and a computer analyzes them.

DNA sequences are identified

   6. The computers search for comparisons with other known human genes. If the
order of the CGATs is 95 percent similar to a known human gene, then it's
considered to be already discovered. If not, the computer reads the sequence
again, comparing it with other sequences in human, bacteria, plants and animals.
A sequence is about 300 letters long.

   7. If the sequence represents a new gene but is similar to a known gene, say
in bacteria, then the scientists go back to cDNA library and pull out the whole
gene and determine the entire sequence.

   8. Now scientists can do experiments to determine if the gene does what they
think and whether it will be useful as a screening test for genetic diseases or
as a treatment in a genetically engineered drug or gene therapy.

   9. Between TIGR and HGS, about 750,00 "letters" or nucleotides of DNA are
being produced each day.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHICS, color, Stephen Conley, USA TODAY (Illustrations)


                             862 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                             March 20, 1994, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 572 words

HEADLINE: DRUG MAY BETTER LUNG FUNCTION OF PATIENTS WITH CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: Laurie Loscocco; Dispatch Medical Reporter

BODY:


   A new drug that acts as a sort of genetic mulching mower is buying time, and
a healthier life, for some people with cystic fibrosis.

   Scientists believe the drug, when inhaled, acts like molecular clippers,
''cutting up'' excess genetic material in the thick secretions lining the
airways of people with cystic fibrosis.

   ''This is the first medication to come along that is specifically geared to
take care of problems associated with cystic fibrosis,'' said Dr. Karen McCoy,
chief of pulmonary medicine at Children's Hospital, which was a testing site for
the new drug.

   Cystic fibrosis is the result of a malfunctioning gene, which causes a
problem with the flow of fluid out of cells. That leads to the production of
thick, sticky secretions, which clog the lungs and make breathing dfficult. The
secretions also are a breeding ground for infections, which damage lung tissue
and ultimately kill the patient.

   The median survival age of someone with cystic fibrosis is 29 years.

   At 34, Duane Woodcox of Grove City has surpassed that average survival time.
About three years ago, however, he was deteriorating.

   ''They told me it was time to start preparing for a lung transplant,'' said
Woodcox, an engineer and father of two children. Because he was so sick, Woodcox
said he would have welcomed a transplant, but he also has seen friends undergo
transplants and knows the risks and complications involved.

   Instead, Woodcox started taking part in a study of the new drug, called
Pulmozyme. For the first six months, Woodcox believed he was getting a placebo,
or inactive substitute that is given to some patients in drug studies. But,
''once I got on the real stuff, a transplant wasn't even a consideration.''

   Since taking the drug, Woodcox said he feels much better, and his breathing
scores - a vital measure of a patient's condition - have improved.

   ''I feel like I can't go without it,'' he said.

   In studies, patients taking Pulmozyme have had fewer respiratory tract
infections, spent less time in the hospital and have had better lung function
than those who did not receive it.

   The side effects, which include hoarseness, ''fall into the nuisance category
for someone with cystic fibrosis,'' McCoy said.

   However, she said, it is too soon to tell whether the drug will extend
patients' lives significantly.

   ''It could prolong someone's life enough that they could have a transplant
or, ultimately, gene therapy,'' which is being done experimentally in a few U.S.
medical centers.

   Pulmozyme costs about $9,000 to $10,000 a year, McCoy said. Woodcox's
insurance is covering it, but not all insurance plans do.

   The drug, a genetically engineered version of an enzyme found naturally in
the body, targets DNA left behind by white blood cells that attempt to destroy
bacteria in cystic fibrosis patients.

   The white cells ''wear themselves out and die, and their DNA is left
behind,'' McCoy said. DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is found in the nucleus of
cells and contains genetic information necessary to guide biological functions.

   The DNA debris is ''thick, sticky, tenacious stuff,'' and it causes problems
of its own by further thickening secretions. The new drug breaks down the
material.

   McCoy said the drug must be taken every day for it to be effective. Also, she
said, ''it's not for everybody. We're trying to target people with evidence of
DNA in their respiratory tracts.''

GRAPHIC: Photo, Lynn Ischay/ Disaptch, Duane Woodcox holds the nebulizer that he
uses to administer Pulmozyme.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1994


                             863 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 20, 1994 Sunday

SECTION: BOOKS; Pg. BOOKS-4

LENGTH: 809 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy history is a complex puzzle

BYLINE: SCOTT LaFEE, LaFEE is science writer for the San Diego Union-Tribune.

BODY:

   CORRECTING THE CODE Larry Thompson Simon & Schuster, 367 pages, $23) That
doctors increasingly can introduce genes absent in an ailing patient, or repair
or replace defective versions responsible for some dreadful diseases, is one of
the great medical science stories of this century.

   Even now, more than 40 years after the idea was born, gene therapy still
smacks of the fantastic. The first successful gene therapy application was less
than four years ago. On Sept. 14, 1990, doctors at the National Institutes of
Health extracted white blood cells from a dying 4-year-old girl, infused them
with a virus carrying a crucial missing gene, then injected the altered cells
back into her body. "Correcting the Code" begins with this event -- and the
harrowing tale of young Ashanthi Vinodani DeSilva, who suffered from severe
combined immune deficiency (SCID), a genetic disease in which her body could not
produce enough antibodies to fend off disease-causing germs.

   Without extraordinary precautions, such as those taken for David (the "Bubble
Boy" who lived almost his entire life inside a sterile, isolated environment),
children with this immune deficiency eventually are overwhelmed by common
ailments that wouldn't even bother a healthy person.

   Until the mid-1980s, most sufferers died before their second birthday. But
Ashanthi's story takes up only a small portion of the book.

   "Code" is a history of gene therapy, from concept to cure -- or at least, the
beginnings of a cure.

   The protagonist is W. French Anderson, a bright, ambitious
physician-researcher who lobbied and pushed for the idea of beneficial genetic
engineering decades before he finally got to do it with Ashanthi. Anderson is
the thread stitching the book together, but he's hardly the only character.

   Thompson, a veteran reporter of medicine and science, mentions virtually
everyone who ever played a role -- big or small, direct or indirect -- in the
erratic, often frustrating development of gene therapy. (A number of gene
therapy's prime movers worked in San Diego.

   Many still do, usually at UCSD or the Salk Institute.

   Among them: Theodore Friedmann, Francis Crick, Renato Dulbecco and Inder
Verma.) Thompson shows how these brilliant, award-winning researchers -- and
others such as James Watson, Paul Doty, Marshall Nirenberg and Joshua Lederberg
-- built a scientific continuum, each adding to the sum, each contributing a
piece to the puzzle. And what a puzzle.

   Finding cures for genetic diseases is among medicine's holiest grails and
also among its most inaccessible.

   Nature does not give up its structural secrets easily, which Thompson
repeatedly shows through descriptions of long, painstaking research, as in that
of the scientist who examined about 20 million mouse cells looking for a
particular telltale genetic characteristic -- and never found it. This is one of
the strengths of Thompson's book.

   He has done his homework and has included detailed but concise explanations
of how DNA works, the history of genetic research and of political movements
that helped and hindered the scientific effort. But herein also lies one of the
book's faults.

   With so much space devoted to chronicling facts -- who did what when, where
and why -- glimpses of the humans involved and their day-to-day work are
disappointingly limited.

   The few that exist seem only to whet the appetite for more. For example,
Thompson describes the remarkable, unknowing early ambivalence of researchers
who handled viruses with little personal protection, sucking viruses through
straws and sometimes inadvertently ending up with a mouthful of microorganisms.
His description of Elaine Diacumakos, an unsung scientist who perfected a method
for safely inserting a tiny needle into a single cell, is wonderfully revealing.
"She was a nice little lady, a pure scientist.

   All she did was sit in front of the microscope all day, and play with her
chromosomes and things," Thompson quotes Anderson saying.

   "No one took her seriously."

   But Diacumakos, like her better-known colleagues, advanced the cause. Others
did not.

   The story of Martin Cline, a UCLA scientist involved in two rash and
ethically objectionable gene-therapy operations in Israel and Italy, says much
about the pressures on scientists to be not just the best, but first.
"Correcting the Code" covers the history of gene therapy through Ashanthi, who
incidentally has improved, her body now producing some antibodies. Since her
landmark operation, more than 100 other patients have received genetic therapy
for a wide range of diseases, from cystic fibrosis to brain cancer. Gene therapy
, far from being the eugenic scourge imagined by its early detractors, promises
to be a long-term remedy to a host of dreaded ills.

   It assuredly will continue to be in the news, as further breakthroughs are
reported. "Code" is a good way to bone up on the future.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             864 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     March 19, 1994 Saturday FIRST EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 006

LENGTH: 240 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy offered at Worcester hospital

BYLINE: MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   The University of Massachusetts Medical Center in Worcester opened a unique
bone marrow transplant program yesterday that will offer gene therapy for cancer
and AIDS patients. The nine-bed unit will offer conventional bone marrow
transplants for leukemia and other cancer patients, but Dr. Peter Quesenberry,
the director of the hospital's cancer center, said the gene therapy trials will
be unique to the region.

   The idea is to insert specific genes into bone marrow cells to alter the
behavior of the cells, he said. For example, under one trial, genes will be
inserted that would make the marrow more resistant to the effects of
chemotherapy, he said.

   Another trial will seek to add genes that would help prevent the HIV virus
from replicating.

   Marrow transplants for breast cancer patients will also be offered, he said.

   The state Legislature in January passed a law requiring insurers to pay for
marrow transplants for women with advanced breast cancer.

   Bone marrow is the soft, sponge-like material in the cavities of the bones
that produces blood cells. In transplantation, the marrow is removed, frozen,
and then returned following high-dose chemotherapy. The reinjected marrow is
intended to produce new, healthy blood cells.

   The UMass unit at first will offer only autologous transplants, which use the
patient's own marrow. Eventually, Quesenberry said, transplants from donors will
also be done.


LOAD-DATE: March 08, 1995


                             865 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                            March 19, 1994 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 233 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy offered at Worcester hospital

BYLINE: MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   The University of Massachusetts Medical Center in Worcester opened a unique
bone marrow transplant program yesterday that will offer gene therapy for cancer
and AIDS patients.

   The nine-bed unit will offer conventional bone marrow transplants for
leukemia and other cancer patients, but Dr. Peter Quesenberry, the director of
the hospital's cancer center, said the gene therapy trials will be unique to the
region.

   The idea is to insert specific genes into bone marrow cells to alter the
behavior of the cells, he said.

   For example, under one trial, genes will be inserted that would make the
marrow more resistant to the effects of chemotherapy, he said.

   Another trial will seek to add genes that would help prevent the HIV virus
from replicating.

   Marrow transplants for breast cancer patients will also be offered, he said.

   The state Legislature in January passed a law requiring insurers to pay for
marrow transplants for women with advanced breast cancer.

   Bone marrow is the soft, sponge-like material in the cavities of the bones
that produces blood cells. In transplantation, the marrow is removed, frozen,
and then returned following high-dose chemotherapy. The reinjected marrow is
intended to produce new, healthy blood cells.

   The UMass unit at first will offer only autologous transplants, which use the
patient's own marrow. Eventually, Quesenberry said, transplants from donors will
also be done.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             866 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 17, 1994, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 579 words

HEADLINE: CORRECTION;
FOR THE RECORD

BODY:

    CORRECTION: Because of incorrect information supplied to the Globe's venture
capital survey, a chart in the Business section on March 9 misstated the amount
of venture capital raised in 1993's fourth quarter by Transkaryotic Therapies
Inc. of Cambridge. The correct amount was $ 8.1 million.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1994


                             867 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     March 17, 1994, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: View; Part E; Page 2; Column 1; View Desk

LENGTH: 1023 words

HEADLINE: ON VIEW / MARY LOU LOPER:  ALL GET ROYAL TREATMENT AT SYMPHONY ASSN.
BENEFIT

BYLINE: By MARY LOU LOPER

BODY:

   Yukiyasu (his calling cards say "Call me Yuki") Togo and his wife, Misako,
who have been instrumental in forging Japanese-American relationships, took the
spotlight at the Regent Beverly Wilshire last week as the Japan America Symphony
Assn. honored the couple for a decade of contributions to the community.

   Princess Yasuko Konoe, first cousin of the emperor of Japan, flew in from
Tokyo to be honorary imperial chairwoman. With her was her husband, Tadateru
Konoe, brother of the prime minister. And Eiji Toyoda, chairman emeritus of
Toyota Motor Corp. Japan, arrived with his wife, Kazuko, to celebrate.

   Togo is the former president and CEO of Toyota Motor Sales USA, and he and
his wife have been instrumental players in charitable causes including the Los
Angeles Music Center, the Los Angeles Urban League and the National Multiple
Sclerosis Society.

   The invitation from chairman Kenneth Tokita, an oncologist at St. Johns
Hospital in Santa Monica, and his wife, Sandie (in a stunning Badgley Mischka
gown) said "formal" and numerous ladies among the 640 guests at the affair opted
for colorful silk kimonos and obis. Etsuko Price, attending with her husband,
Joe (they're donors to the Los Angeles County Museum of Art), was stately in a
kimono.

   Among those at head tables were Barbara and Marvin Davis; Walter and Speedy
Beran; Lodwrick and Carole Cooke; Bill and Keith Kieschnick; Consul Gen. of
Japan Seiichiro Noboru and his wife, Yoko; and Maria Hodgson, wife of former
U.S. Ambassador to Japan James D. Hodgson.

   When Togo received an honorary baton at the podium, he first seemed to reject
it. He stepped to center stage and indulged in a few humorous calisthenics. Then
he returned for his baton and led orchestra members in Mozart's "Eine kleine
Nachtmusik."

   Among those applauding was a crowd including Japanese actor Sonna Chiva,
Henry and Val Noguchi, Paul and Hisako Terasaki, David and Tina Nishida, Michael
and Mimi Mullen, Gary Omura and Masahiko and Mitsuko Oe. The affair raised
$250,000.

   *

   'S Wonderful: Gordon Davidson led the kickoff party for Center Theatre
Group's Salon Evening III in a specially written serenade of " 'S Wonderful" the
other evening at Bottega Veneta in Beverly Hills. The evening was a salute to
Salon star Michael Feinstein, who will entertain on stage at the Mark Taper
Forum on April 25 in a special musical tribute to Alan Jay Lerner, giant of
American musical theater.

   Nancy Olsen Livingston, Lerner's wife when he wrote "My Fair Lady," is
co-chairing the evening with Phyllis Hennigan, Joan Burns and Patti Skouras.
Invitations go out next week. All funds go to CTG, the Mark Taper Forum and the
Ahmanson and Doolittle theaters.

   Over luncheon at Le Dome, the chairwomen envisioned the evening and
Livingston recounted, with tune and lyrics and animation, the night Lerner and
Lowe wrote "The Rain in Spain."

   "They woke me up in the middle of the night, bundled me up and pushed me in
the snow across the road to where they'd been working all night. Then they
played both parts -- running around like children. Fritz was at the piano . . .
Alan takes over . . . Fritz runs over and plays Eliza Doolittle -- 'The rain in
Spain falls mainly on the plain.' Then they ended up laughing hysterically and
falling on the sofa. Then they looked at me. 'What do you think?' " Nancy told
them it would stop the show. Of course she was right.

   The Salon Evening Series is dedicated to the memory of the late producer Nick
Vanoff, an ardent CTG supporter.

   *

   Real World: At the Beverly Hilton last weekend, the parking situation was
unbelievable. The Junior League of Los Angeles hosted a spirited salute to Nancy
Reagan in the Grand Ballroom. And in the International Ballroom, the Merchants
Club for City of Hope Regal Ball raised $1 million-plus for gene therapy
research while honoring Diane Trauth Randall.

   Said hotel owner Merv Griffin, who sat at Reagan's right, "If you think it
was bad earlier, wait till you leave." But, the parties broke up at different
times, and getting out was easy.

   At the league's "Affair to Remember," people cheered as if they were at a
political rally as benefit chairwoman Linda Small announced a surprise guest and
Nancy Reagan's "roommate," the former President, walked in.

   Emily Hsu and Melina Montoya, vice chairwomen of the party, bustled all
evening, tending details of the silent auction andlive auction conducted by Jim
Hill. League President Ann Zimmerman saluted Nancy Reagan for her "love of a
child" campaign and work with "Just Say No."

   In the crowd: Carrie and Peter Tilton, Mollie Shea, John Dietsch, Maureen and
Matthew Cline, Dawne Ward, Jodi and Scott Adair, Ellen and Doug Weitman, Kim and
Richard Iselin, Lisa Nesbit, Janet and David O'Neil, Marian Miller, Nancy
Hindle-Katel and Bettina and Glenn Duval. At one of the two tables of Reagan
friends was Jean Smith, wife of the late U.S. Attorney General William French
Smith. She is former president of the National Assn. of Junior Leagues and a
former L.A. president, too. She was with Ross Barrett, husband of the late Rita
Barrett.

   At the Regal Ball, veteran comedian Norm Crosby presented the fourth annual
Norm Crosby Goodwill Ambassador Award to Randall, owner of Rabbit Rabbit Des
igns.

   The Merchants Club is the medical center's apparel industry support group.
Joining in the applause were president Donald Ladinsky and his wife, Shirley,
who was dinner chairwoman, Barry Sacks and City of Hope president/CEO Dr.
Sanford M. Shapero, who escorted Giorgio Beverly Hills president/CEO Linda LoRe.

   *

   The Scene: Nancy Daly hosted a tea Tuesday at her home to announce that Jane
Eisner, Wendy Goldberg, Verna Harrah and Lynda Resnick will be honorary
co-chairwomen of an auction June 21 at Resnick's home. The event is to get
donors of special pieces for Getty House, Los Angeles Mayor Richard Riordan's
official residence . . . .

   Emily Hancock and Lauri Wax co-chaired the Pasadena Day Nursery Guild's
spring "Day at the Races" at Santa Anita Race Track last weekend. Lisa
Williamson drew the charming invitations. President Nancy Jezina was trackside.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Princess Yasuko Konoe and her husband, Tadateru, left, with
Yukiyasu and Misako Togo, who were both honored for their contributions to the
community by the Japan America Symphony Assn.  Long Photography Inc.; Photo,
Star of the evening Nancy Reagan, second from left, is congratulated by Ann
Zimmerman, left, Linda Small, Melina Montoya, Emily Hsu at Junior League of L.A.
toast to the former First Lady.  LUIS SINCO / For The Times; Photo, Dr. Sanford
M. Shapero, left, George Randall, honoree Diane Trauth Randall and Norm Crosby
are all smiles at the Merchants Club for City of Hope Regal Ball. It raised more
than $1 million for gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1994


                             868 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    March 16, 1994, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 790 words

HEADLINE: Japanese company throws Newton's Cellcor a lifeline;
EMERGING BUSINESS / FAST TRACK

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    At the eleventh hour, Cellcor Inc., which was down to less than six months
of operating cash after laying off more than half its employees, has found a
savior. The company said yesterday that a large Japanese medical diagnostic
testing company has agreed to put as much as $ 10 million into the Newton
company's coffers over the next three years.

   Like a lot of biotechnology companies that raised money during the 18-month
financing boom of 1991 and 1992, Cellcor is now scrambling for cash, seeking
corporate alliances, private investors and other financing sources.

    For Cellcor, that came in the form of SRL Inc. of Tokyo, a leading clinical
laboratory service in Asia. As part of the financing agreement, SRL will license
Cellcor's proprietary cell therapy technology and will build a cell processing
laboratory for the Asian market.

   Obtaining this financing should help improve Cellcor's image. Its
controversial living cell therapy is used to treat patients with severe kidney
cancer.

   Cellcor's cell therapy, called autolymphocyte therapy, or ALT, is aimed at
putting healthy blood cells into these patients. The aim is to reduce cancer
tumors and extend the patient's life from an average of five to eight months, or
even 18 months and longer.

   Until recently, the company did not need Food and Drug Administration
approval for its products and services. Cellcor was criticized by some medical
professionals, including Dr. Arnold Relman, former editor of the New England
Journal of Medicine, for charging $ 25,000 for an unproven medical treatment.

   One former consultant, Dr. Herschel L. Copelan, who treated 77 patients in
Orange, Calif., during a 10-month period, questioned the treatment's
effectiveness. Cellcor officials counter that Copelan's comments on patient
medical records and related correspondence show patients stayed alive longer
with the ALT treatments. Also, patients gained weight and some had no further
cancerous tumor growth, the company says.

   "We were unfairly criticized for a pioneering approach to helping people with
kidney cancer," said Richard R. D'Antoni, president and chief executive.

   Yesterday D'Antoni said that, since Drs. Relman, Copelan, and others
questioned Cellcor's ALT therapy, Cellcor has restructured its entire operations
and worked with the FDA, which last year began to regulate cell and genetic
therapies.

   The changes have also led Cellcor to reduce its staff to 43 persons from 100
a year ago, close down treatment centers in Orange, Calif., Atlanta and Boston,
and take a $ 3.5 million writeoff in 1993. Cellcor stock's has plunged
dramatically from $ 11 a share in March, 1992 to less than $ 1. Yesterday the
company's shares closed at 15/16, up 1/16.

   Despite the setbacks and the criticism, D'Antoni says Cellcor's science
remains solid, with the treatment having been used on nearly 650 patients in 20
medical centers who are dying of kidney cancer. The Cellcor ALT therapy calls
for the removal of white blood cells from a patient. The cells are shipped to
the company's Newton laboratory where some are removed and others treated in
cultures for five days. The treated cells are flown to the patient's doctor who
reinfuses them into the patient. This procedure is done once a month for six
months.

   D'Antoni said that the company is further along in human clinical trials than
anyone else, including Somatix Therapy Corp. of Alameda, Calif., its chief
rival. Last week Amgen Inc. of Thousand Oaks, Calif., the nation's largest
biotechnology company, announced plans to enter the cell therapy business.

   "We think we're ahead of our competitors because we are the first to be in
clinical trials under the new FDA guidelines," said D'Antoni.

Ariad plans to offer shares

    Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Cambridge, which was launched two years ago
with $ 46 million in private capital - a record for a biotech start-up -
announced its initial public offering plans yesterday with D. Blech & Co. as its
underwriter. Blech provided Ariad founder Dr. Harvey J. Berger with $ 2 million
in initial financing. Blech, which filed a registration statement with the
Securities and Exchange Commission Friday, said it plans to sell 2.75 million
units consisting of one share of Ariad common stock and one redeemable common
stock purchase warrant. The company said the securities included in the unit may
be transferred only as a unit until 180 days from the date the offering becomes
effective. After six months, the common stock and the purchase of warrants will
trade separately. The company is developing pharmaceuticals that target the
intracellular communications pathways to treat such illnesses as asthma,
osteoporosis and immune-related disorders.

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1994


                             869 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      March 13, 1994 Sunday FIRST EDITION

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 033

LENGTH: 595 words

HEADLINE: PEOPLE IN BUSINESS O'Neill to head consulting at VMARK Software

BODY:

   VMARK Software in Framingham named Charles M. O'Neill director of consulting
services. O'Neill was previously director, transition services at Computervision
Corp.

   Sylvie Otten Sollard joined Clarke Goward Fitts Matteson in Boston as account
executive. Otten Sollard was most recently account executive at Waring & Larosa
in New York.

   Butterworth-Heinemann appointed Philip Shaw president. Butterworth-Heinemann
is a scientific, technical and medical publishing company in Stoneham.

   AT&T in Framingham named Donna M. Driscoll senior VP of marketing. Driscoll
was most recently VP of Fidelity Investments Retail Marketing.

   Michel Associates in Boston named Judy A. Hickey VP of corporate finance.
Hickey was director of investor services at a Boston real estate syndication
firm. Also, Frederick J. Montiero joined the company.

   Fidelity Investments in Boston named Elizabeth Pohl Maitland director of
retail public relations and Constance Navin Hubbell director of institutional
and brokerage public relations. Maitland was recently senior VP, director of
client service at Burston-Marsteller. Hubbell was head of media relations for
Bank of Boston.

   Edward P. Maggio was named VP operations and customer services for Boston
Technology in Wakefield. Maggio will replace Paul DeLacey, who will be GM.
Maggio was VP of operations and chief operating officer for Imagitex.

   Xyplex in Boxboro named Peter A. Arguin test engineer, Michele N. Campbell
marketing services coordinator, Kevin W. Dick new product support engineer, Arif
M. Mahmood test engineer, Ira M. Heller customer support analyst and Keith E.
Rauseo programmer analyst.

   The Coffee Connection in Boston appointed Charlotte Connally Bogardus
marketing director and Robert G. King chief financial officer. Bogardus was
previously creative director for -- Conventures. King was recently senior VP,
chief financial officer for Ground Round.

   Schneider & Associates in Boston named Jeffrey Loucks senior account
executive. Loucks was previously director of public relations at
Lowell-Harrison-Leifer in New York.

   Roche Bros. Supermarkets in Wellesley Hills named Paul J. Kennealy vice
chairman and CEO andBob Annand president and chief operating officer. Kennealy
was executive VP of the company. Annand was previously VP and GM.

   Peter Martin was named account executive at Currier Enterprises in Hingham.
Previously, Martin worked in the graphics industry in custom loose leaf
packaging products.

   The Dodge Group in Waltham named Steven Wright president and chief operating
officer. Recently, Wright was president and chief operating officer at Landmark
Systems Corp.

   Alan J. Hinnand was re-elected president of the Association of Massachusetts
Homes for the Aging in Boston. Previously, he was executive minister of American
Baptist Churches in New York.

   Transkaryotic Therapies in Cambridge named Dr. Christoph Michael Adams VP
business development. Most recently, Adams was international product manager for
CIBA-GEIGY.

   Dr. Donald J. Kippenberger joined Psychmedics Corp. in Cambridge as VP of lab
operations. Previously, Kippenberger was forensic toxicology consultant to U.S.
Army Surgeon General. Nancy M. Davids, Leonard H. Frieman, Phillip G. Levy,
Michael M. Robinson and John E. Twohig were named directors of Boston law firm
Goulston & Storrs.

   This column is compiled by Sarah P. Jones. Please send items to People in
Business, the Boston Herald, P.O. Box 2096, Boston, Mass. 02106 or fax them to
(617) 426-1865. No phone calls, please.


LOAD-DATE: March 08, 1995


                             870 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1994 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                             March 13, 1994 Sunday

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 580 words

HEADLINE: PEOPLE IN BUSINESS;
O'Neill to head consulting at VMARK Software

BODY:

   VMARK Software in Framingham named Charles M. O'Neill director of consulting
services. O'Neill was previously director, transition services at Computervision
Corp.

   Sylvie Otten Sollard joined Clarke Goward Fitts Matteson in Boston as account
executive. Otten Sollard was most recently account executive at Waring & Larosa
in New York.

   Butterworth-Heinemann appointed Philip Shaw president. Butterworth-Heinemann
is a scientific, technical and medical publishing company in Stoneham.

   AT&T in Framingham named Donna M. Driscoll senior VP of marketing. Driscoll
was most recently VP of Fidelity Investments Retail Marketing.

   Michel Associates in Boston named Judy A. Hickey VP of corporate finance.
Hickey was director of investor services at a Boston real estate syndication
firm. Also, Frederick J. Montiero joined the company.

   Fidelity Investments in Boston named Elizabeth Pohl Maitland director of
retail public relations and Constance Navin Hubbell director of institutional
and brokerage public relations. Maitland was recently senior VP, director of
client service at Burston-Marsteller. Hubbell was head of media relations for
Bank of Boston.

   Edward P. Maggio was named VP operations and customer services for Boston
Technology in Wakefield. Maggio will replace Paul DeLacey, who will be GM.
Maggio was VP of operations and chief operating officer for Imagitex.

   Xyplex in Boxboro named Peter A. Arguin test engineer, Michele N. Campbell
marketing services coordinator, Kevin W. Dick new product support engineer, Arif
M. Mahmood test engineer, Ira M. Heller customer support analyst and Keith E.
Rauseo programmer analyst.

   The Coffee Connection in Boston appointed Charlotte Connally Bogardus
marketing director and Robert G. King chief financial officer. Bogardus was
previously creative director for Conventures. King was recently senior VP, chief
financial officer for Ground Round.

   Schneider & Associates in Boston named Jeffrey Loucks senior account
executive. Loucks was previously director of public relations at
Lowell/Harrison/Leifer in New York.

   Roche Bros. Supermarkets in Wellesley Hills named Paul J. Kennealy vice
chairman and CEO andBob Annand president and chief operating officer. Kennealy
was executive VP of the company. Annand was previously VP and GM.

   Peter Martin was named account executive at Currier Enterprises in Hingham.
Previously, Martin worked in the graphics industry in custom loose leaf
packaging products.

   The Dodge Group in Waltham named Steven Wright president and chief operating
officer. Recently, Wright was president and chief operating officer at Landmark
Systems Corp.

   Alan J. Hinnand was re-elected president of the Association of Massachusetts
Homes for the Aging in Boston. Previously, he was executive minister of American
Baptist Churches in New York.

   Transkaryotic Therapies in Cambridge named Dr. Christoph Michael Adams VP
business development. Most recently, Adams was international product manager for
CIBA-GEIGY.

   Dr. Donald J. Kippenberger joined Psychmedics Corp. in Cambridge as VP of lab
operations. Previously, Kippenberger was forensic toxicology consultant to U.S.
Army Surgeon General.

   Nancy M. Davids, Leonard H. Frieman, Phillip G. Levy, Michael M. Robinson and
John E. Twohig were named directors of Boston law firm Goulston & Storrs.

   This column is compiled by Sarah P. Jones. Please send items to People in
Business, the Boston Herald, P.O. Box 2096, Boston, Mass. 02106 or fax them to
(617) 426-1865. No phone calls, please.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             871 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                             March 11, 1994, Friday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Section A; Page 10

LENGTH: 1091 words

HEADLINE: WASHINGTON IN BRIEF A lifetime of government benefits?

BYLINE: By Ernie Freda STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Probably no Republican in the Senate cries out more or louder about
government programs and government incompetence than Sen. Phil Gramm of Texas.
He extols the virtues of free enterprise and argues to get government out of
people's lives.

   But, as The Washington Monthly points out, Gramm joined the government's
rolls at birth and has never left, making him a living rebuke to that notion he
propounds.

   Gramm's father was an Army master sergeant, so young Phil was born in a
military hospital at Fort Benning, Ga. He attended private school with the GI
insurance money Gramm's mother received when her husband died. He got his B.A.
at the University of Georgia and Ph.D. from Texas A&M, both state-supported
schools.

   Gramm even used a National Defense Fellowship to attend graduate school. He
then taught economics at Texas A&M before his election to the House, followed by
the Senate. For Gramm, government has been a way of life.

   . . . GRAMM AND THE DREAM: This same Phil Gramm, while not admiring
government, wouldn't mind running it. He's been a fixture at GOP events around
the country, positioning himself for a presidential run. To this end, his office
has issued specific instructions about the "Official Greeting Party for Media
Events at Airport," which the Dallas Morning News got hold of: "Please be
advised that whenever the Senator arrives by airplane to a media event taking
place at the airport, there should be an official greeting party. As soon as the
plane lands and comes to a complete stop, this greeting party should approach
the plane and form a receiving line. In the past, the Senator has deboarded for
a media event without a greeting party there to welcome him. There were TV
cameras present to film the Senator having to walk to locate the people to meet,
rather than having them walk to meet him. Obviously we wish to avoid this
situation in the future."

   PROBLEM WITH THE CO-STAR: Rarely one to avoid a TV camera, Rep. Newt Gingrich
(R-Ga.) turned down an offer to appear with Democratic opponent and former Rep.
Ben Jones on a "Larry King Live" program. "The most dangerous place to be is
between Newt Gingrich and a television camera, and suddenly he's struck dumb?"
said Jones, in the first of what's expected to be many irritating jabs headed
Gingrich's way before election day. "It appears to me there is more than one Big
Chicken in the 6th District," Jones added. Not to be outdone, Gingrich spokesman
Allan Lipsett countered, "It's a little presumptuous to assume Ben Jones will be
the Democratic nominee four months before the primary. Is Cooter in such a hurry
to get back into show business?" he added, referring to the character Jones
played on television's "The Dukes of Hazzard." But Jones won't be getting back
on national TV any time soon. Gingrich's refusal means there'll be no appearance
by Jones, either.

   NEXT TIME, DON'T ASK: More than 100 experts were at the White House recently
to figure out how to make the 202-year-old building more environmentally
correct, and Indiana architect Bill Brown was among them. Brown says that during
a tour of the kitchen, he asked a Secret Service agent what was in the three
basement levels he saw labeled on the dumbwaiter control but couldn't find on
his section drawings. "The agent said, without the hint of a smile, 'I could
tell you, but then I would have to kill you.' "

   ELSEWHERE

   Nine months after President Clinton dropped Lani Guinier as his nominee to
head the Justice Department's civil rights division, Boston lawyer Deval
Patrick, 37, appears headed for swift confirmation after a cordial hearing
before the Senate Judiciary Committee. . . . Sen. Dave Durenberger (R-Minn.)
pleaded innocent in U.S. District Court to charges of falsifying his Senate
expense account to collect $ 3,825, and requested the case be transferred to a
federal court in Minnesota. . . . Rep. John Linder (R-Ga.), saying congressional
insiders are holding needed legislation hostage, urged the House Rules Committee
to adopt his "Linder rule," controlling the "unchecked power of committee
chairmen and special interest groups" by limiting their terms to six consecutive
years. . . . The House voted 353-70, in an amendment by Rep. Richard Durbin
(D-Ill.) on an education bill, to put cigarettes on equal footing with alcohol
and drugs in school programs to combat drugs and violence. . . . A day after
four women in the military told a Senate panel about being punished for
reporting sexual harassment and abuse, Navy Secretary John Dalton said he was
"embarrassed" by the allegations, dissatisfied with the Pentagon's response, and
that ''reading those statements made my blood boil." . . . Clinton wore a Calvin
Klein tuxedo to his formal dinner for South Korean President Kim Young-sam,
according the the fashion gazette W, but wore his Donna Karan to a party for the
nation's governors. . . . Celebrity photographer Albert Watson has shot photos
of Hillary Rodham Clinton and the White House for an upcoming issue of Working
Woman magazine.

   IT'S A FACT

   Some of the Smithsonian Institution's 1993 acquisitions: the postal uniform
worn by the Cliff Clavin character on TV's "Cheers"; a syringe and infusion bag
used in the first human gene therapy experiment at the National Institutes of
Health; nearly 500 small items of Buck Rogers and Flash Gordon memorabilia; a
meteorite that probably came from Mars; 20 dish towels made from feed sacks and
embroidered with kitchen themes in the late 1940s by an Aurora, Ill., farm
woman; and a flight suit, prison suit, fur hat, diary, unpublished journal and
rug made by or belonging to U-2 pilot Francis Gary Powers while he was in a
Soviet prison.

   SAY IT AGAIN

   "I'd ask girls out and they'd turn me down, and so finally it got to the
point where you didn't want to be rejected. And so you just didn't ask." - Sen.
Bob Packwood (R-Ore.), on his teenage experiences, in Newsweek. OK, maybe that
explains it.

   COMING UP

   TODAY: Final House passage expected for $ 1.51 trillion budget that reflects
most of President Clinton's priorities, and would squeeze the 1995 federal
deficit to $ 175.3 billion, the least red ink since 1989. SUNDAY: Vice President
Al Gore campaigns in Cincinnati for freshman Rep. David Mann (D-Ohio), opposed
by organized labor for his pro-NAFTA vote. . . . Veterans Affairs Secretary
Jesse Brown receives the "Trailblazer'' award at the 15th annual
African-American Achievement Awards in Los Angeles.

   From staff, news services and published reports; contributing: Jeanne
Cummings

GRAPHIC: Photo: Phil Gramm Photo: Deval Patrick

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1994


                             872 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 9, 1994 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 293 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Jenny Craig Inc. of Del Mar says William R. Lewis has resigned as chief
financial officer after one month on the job.

   Lewis and Albert J. DiMarco, who resigned as president of Jenny Craig last
week, were associates at Nutri/System.

   W. James Mallen, CFO of Jenny Craig from the company's founding in 1983 until
Lewis was appointed, has agreed to postpone his retirement until a replacement
is found. Vical Inc.'s share price has gained 13 percent since the company
received approval to expand human testing of a cancer treatment based on gene
therapy.

   Vical's shares gained $1.50 to close at $13.50 in Nasdaq trading of 221,000
shares.

   That's compared with a three-month daily average of 50,789. Vical said Friday
that an advisory committee for the National Institutes of Health approved tests
of Allovectin-7 in patients with kidney and skin cancer. ThermoTrex Corp. says
it has commenced a public offering of 1.4 million shares of its common stock at
$15.375 per share.

   Nat-West Securities Ltd. and Lehman Brothers Inc. are co-managing the
offering.

   ThermoTrex makes and markets mammography and biopsy systems for the early
detection of breast cancer. Pacific Precision Laboratories of JMAR Industries
Inc. received a $1.3 million order for eight computer disk drives from a
Japanese manufacturer, which the company declined to identify. Sibia Inc. and
Skandigen AB have announced the sale of their Siska Diagnostics Inc. joint
venture to Organon Teknika for an undisclosed amount.

   Sibia, a privately held pharmaceutical company, was founded in 1981 by the
Salk Institute for Biological Studies. Synthetic Blood International Inc. has
sold 1 million shares to American Heritage Fund Inc. of New York. American
Heritage holds 6.7 percent of Synthetic Blood's stock.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             873 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1994 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                      MARCH 7, 1994, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: DAILY DATEBOOK; Pg. D7

LENGTH: 582 words

HEADLINE: Killing Tumors With Genes
 Herpes virus used to target cancer cells

BYLINE: DAVID PERLMAN, Chronicle Science Editor

BODY:

    Cancer researchers for the first time are using new techniques of gene
therapy in an attempt to treat patients who are near death from malignant brain
tumors, and the efforts will be described in San Francisco this week at a
special conference for patients and their families.

   Although animal experiments have proved highly successful over the past three
years, human trials of an unusual type of gene therapy have just begun, and only
12 patients have been treated so far, while eight more are awaiting treatment by
specialists at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.

   Results of the early effort with the human patients are not being disclosed
yet. But physicians and gene therapy researchers at the University of California
at San Francisco are already preparing to develop similar strategies for
clinical trials of gene therapy in patients suffering from glioblastomas, brain
cancers that are the most malignant of all.

   For 20 years these tumors -- which are most common in children and young
adults -- have defeated the best efforts of physicians treating them with every
known combination of surgery, radiation and chemotherapy. The malignant tumor
cells divide relentlessly, and death most often comes within a year of
diagnosis.

   ENGINEERING CANCER

   The human gene therapy effort is being directed by Dr. Edward H.  Oldfield
and Dr. Zvi Ram at the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
a component of the NIH. Oldfield and his colleagues have managed to engineer the
malignant cells of their patients' brain tumors by endowing them with harmless
herpes virus genes that produce an enzyme called thymidine kinase.

   That enzyme, in turn, should make the brain tumor cells sensitive to a
powerful anti-viral drug called ganciclovir, and the hope is that the
ganciclovir will kill the tumor cells.

   In several series of earlier experiments with rats and mice bearing
transplanted human brain tumors, the drug did in fact cause the transformed
cancer cells to stop multiplying, and in most cases the tumors themselves either
shrank dramatically or disappeared completely.

   Redfield and his colleagues will be describing their human trials for the
first time at a medical meeting in San Diego next month, but at UCSF Dr. Mark A.
Israel, a molecular geneticist in the department of neurological surgery, said
the new gene therapy approach could prove a hopeful advance in human brain
tumors that have stubbornly resisted other treatments.

   CONFERENCE ON TREATMENT TECHNIQUES

   In San Francisco the National Brain Tumor Foundation is sponsoring an unusual
conference that will link scientists, health professionals, brain-tumor patients
and the families of patients in discussions of many current treatment techniques
and future research prospects. The new experiments in gene therapy will be
described, as well as new techniques in treating tumors with highly precise
beams of radiation.

   Experts at the conference will describe new approaches toward developing
support groups that research has shown can significantly improve the outlook for
many cancer patients, and the conference will also feature workshops for parents
of children with brain tumors, and others for professionals who deal with the
emotional needs of patients and families.

   The conference, organized by the San Francisco-based National Brain Tumor
Foundation, will be Thursday through Sunday at the Airport Hyatt Regency Hotel.
For more information, call (800) 934- CURE.


LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1994


                             874 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      March 6, 1994, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: BOOK WORLD; PAGE X6

LENGTH: 1020 words

HEADLINE: Getting the Message to the Errant Cell

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Terence Monmaney

BODY:

   CORRECTING THE CODE

   Inventing the Genetic Cure

   For the Human Body

   By Larry Thompson

   Simon & Schuster. 378 pp. $ 23


   IN THE FALL of 1990, a young girl named Ashanthi, who suffered from an
inherited disease that crippled her immune system, crossed the threshold of a
National Institutes of Health hospital and became the first American to undergo
government-approved gene therapy. That experiment, which aimed to correct the
girl's genetic deficiency by inserting into her white blood cells the vital gene
they lacked, is the centerpiece of Larry Thompson's enthusiastic account of the
beginnings of an amazing new branch of medicine.

   The force behind Ashanthi's therapy was Dr. W. French Anderson, a math
prodigy. Tae Kwon Do practitioner, ace administrator, intellectual snob and
self-described "maverick." After serving an apprenticeship under a Nobel
laureate geneticist and then making a name for himself by developing a drug
treatment for an inherited blood disorder, Anderson rather cunningly set out to
become gene therapy's undisputed champ. That was in the late '70s, after
scientists developed the biochemical techniques for cutting specified stretches
of DNA and joining those to other DNA strands -- recombinant DNA technology.
Anderson mastered an onerous technique of inserting DNA into human cells, and,
perhaps more important, he shrewdly managed to overcome scientific opposition,
eventually convincing federal authorities to let him try the technique out on a
human being.

   Years before Ashanthi came to the NIH's attention, Thompson explains, the
very rare disease that she suffered from had been singled out as a likely test
case for genetic engineering, because it was caused by a missing gene whose
exact chemical message was already decoded; the gene instructs cells to make a
crucial enzyme called adenosine deaminanse, or ADA. Still, taking the step of
attempting gene therapy on Ashanthi, Thompson says, was "historic." Spooning out
the whipped cream, he also says it was a "revolution," a "sea change," and the
arrival of a "brave new future." And that's just Chapter One.

   Thompson, a correspondent for Medical News Network and a former Washington
Post editor, wants to dramatize the experiment, explain the science that made it
possible, and elucidate the social and political pressures on the researchers
who throbbed to be first. I wonder if he didn't overexert himself. Describing
the scene at Ashanthi's bedside, he points out that this little preschooler
"seemed unaware of the historic events that were about to take place in her
body." In spite of absurd attempts at "Movie of the Week" suspense, Thompson
tells a compelling story of the hours and minutes leading up to the injection of
the genetically altered cells. And he succeeds nicely at getting across the
tensions -- nasty rivalries, healthy disagreements -- that obtain among medical
scientists playing for the highest stakes.

   But once the therapeutic cells drip into the vein of the little girl, who,
Thompson soon reminds us, "didn't have any appreciation of history," Correcting
the Code runs out of steam. At length the book recapitulates both the major
controversies in genetic engineering and the major developments in molecular
biology of the last few decades. Thompson treats these passages like tiresome
guests; he chats with them forever, but all the while he's steering them to the
door.

   The book suffers from muddles and contradictions. Once, Thompson shows
Ashanthi crying during a hypodermic injection; a few pages later he says, "She
never cried." Sometimes he refers to the therapy as "adding" a normal gene,
other times as "changing" a gene -- a world of difference, it seems to me. (Try
adding socks instead of changing them.) Early on, he says that Ashanthi was 4 at
the time of the experiment; later, he says she was 5. Tiny errors, perhaps, but
only a couple of gnats can drive you to distraction.


   HAVING REACHED the end of Correcting the Code, you may want to know about the
gene therapist's art today, three and a half years after Anderson's first
venture. Thompson limits his overview to hyperbole, saying that "more than 100
patients worldwide had genes put into their bodies as part of more than fifty
different gene therapy studies across the planet."

   Razzle-dazzle aside, the critical public health question is whether gene
therapy can ever really expect to lighten the great burden of diseases that
appear to have a genetic component -- heart disease, say, and cancer -- but that
are nowhere near as simple as Ashanthi's singular inborn defect.

   Meanwhile, Ashanthi's case remains up in the air, since Thompson doesn't
describe how she feels, what she does, whether she's robust or sickly. In an
oddly brief epilogue, he says that Ashanthi's immune system showed signs of new
health and that about a quarter of her white blood cells now seemed to carry the
ADA gene -- a definite, if partial, triumph. And a number of those cells, as
hoped, seemed to produce the enzyme ADA. But how much ADA? Enough? Is the gene
therapy keeping her alive? Dashing for the exit, Thompson doesn't say. Instead,
he raises the possibility that Ashanthi owes some or all of her vigor, perhaps
even her life, to another, nongenetic therapy -- shots of purified cow enzyme --
which she began receiving even before she underwent the "revolutionary" gene
therapy. So much for the "cure" trumpeted in the book's subtitle. Of course,
it's not Thompson's fault that Ashanthi's case is ambiguous; but if he didn't
hype it to begin with, you wouldn't feel so cheated in the end.

   Ultimately, Thompson says, the significance of Anderson's experiment is that
it "opened the field," enabling other medical scientists to try gene therapy on
people. Here I disagree with Thompson's appreciation of history, for his own
reporting shows many other medical scientists were only months away from
performing it.  Dr. Anderson didn't make their experiments possible any more
than the horse that wins the race makes it possible for the rest of the pack to
finish.

   Terence Monmaney writes for the New Yorker.

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 1994


                             875 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 5, 1994 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 503 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Microsoft Corp., reacting to last week's loss of a patent-infringement
lawsuit brought by Stac Electronics of Carlsbad, reportedly is revamping as many
as a half-dozen software products that make use of the disputed technology.

   Stac's data-compression patents were upheld by a federal jury in Los Angeles,
but the panel agreed with Microsoft that Stac improperly had gained access to a
Microsoft trade secret.

   Microsoft was ordered to pay Stac $120 million, while Stac was ordered to pay
$13.6 million. Protein Polymer Technologies stock jumped 53 cents yesterday to
close at $1 per share on 17,800 shares traded on the Nasdaq system, but Aaron
Stern, chief financial officer, said the company had no news.

   Apparently the interest stemmed from a report in USA Today in which investor
Ed Davis, a company director, listed it among "small, relatively undiscovered
companies ... with compelling 21st century technology." Drew Ford sold 5,335 new
and used cars and trucks in 1993 to lead Ford retail sales in San Diego County,
Ford Motor Co. reported.

   Mossy Ford sold 4,748 units; El Cajon Ford, 3,468 and Kearny Mesa Ford,
3,105. There are 13 Ford dealers in San Diego County. Recreation World Inc. of
Los Angeles has acquired Ice Chalets Inc. for about $4.1 million and will
operate the company as a wholly owned subsidiary.

   Ice Chalets has 11 ice skating locations in California, including one at
University Towne Centre. Vical Inc. has received approval from the U.S. National
Institutes of Health to significantly expand clinical testing of its
Allovectin-7 cancer gene therapy product.

   The drug is a gene-based product intended for direct injection into tumor
lesions of cancer patients. Biocom, a local association of businesses supporting
the biomedical industry, has elected Mary Walker president for 1994. Walker is a
partner with the law firm of Luce, Forward, Hamilton & Scripps, a former
assistant secretary for the U.S. Department of Energy and a former deputy
assistant U.S. attorney general. IDEC Pharmaceuticals Corp. and Mitsubishi Kasei
Corp. have entered into a research-and-development collaboration targeting
treatments for inflammatory and chronic autoimmune conditions.

   Mitsubishi Kasei is a diversified, chemical company with headquarters in
Japan. Two golf companies have signed prominent professionals as spokesmen.
Charter Golf Inc., Carlsbad, maker of Ashworth golf apparel, said it has a
lifetime contract with Fred Couples.

   Aldila, which makes graphite golf club shafts for other manufacturers, has
extended its agreement with Payne Stewart. Burnham Pacific Properties Inc., a
San Diego-based real estate investment trust, announced a first-quarter dividend
of 35 cents per share, payable March 31 to shareholders of record March 21. It
is BPP's 112th consecutive quarterly dividend. Lancer Orthodontics stock closed
at 31 cents per share, up 13 cents, in Nasdaq trading yesterday, but company
president Doug Miller said the company has made no announcements and he knows of
no reason for the activity.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             876 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              March 4, 1994 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 405 words

HEADLINE: SAN DIEGO

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Jenny Craig Inc., Del Mar, said Albert J. DiMarco resigned as president and
chief operating officer, citing personal reasons.

   DiMarco, appointed last November, had been chairman and chief executive of
Nutri/System Inc. Senior vice president Ellen Destray was appointed chief
operating officer of Jenny Craig Inc. No successor has been chosen for
president. WD-40 Co. of San Diego said its appeal of a 1989 judgment awarding
former WD-40 sales representatives $10.3 million was denied by the state Court
of Appeal.

   The former representatives alleged breach of contract by WD-40 when it
replaced its commissioned sales representatives with an in-house sales staff.

   WD-40 contends that the Court of Appeal upheld the jury verdict based on a
theory of law and evidence neither presented to the jury nor argued to the court
and said it will petition for review by the California Supreme Court. TV/COM
International and Nokia Corp., a Finnish electronics manufacturer, have agreed
to develop set-top cable TV converters and satellite TV receivers using the
local firm's digital compression technology.

   The multimillion-dollar manufacturing and distribution pact covers the
European television market. Hughes Network Systems Inc., based in San Diego,
introduced the first pocket-sized cellular phone that uses voice-activated
dialing.

   The phone, manufactured here, will respond to a user's voice and dial up to
20 preset numbers or any number spoken by the caller.

   The company also introduced another hand-held phone that can be used with new
digital cellular phone systems. Viagene Inc. received approval from the National
Institute of Health's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee to begin testing its
gene therapy to treat neuroblastoma, a form of childhood cancer. County housing
permits dropped 4 percent last year to 5,828, according to data from Berkeley's
Economic Sciences Corp. The 1992 figure had been the worst since 1947, and
economists had incorrectly thought it would be a bottom.

   Single-family permits were up 11 percent last year, but multiples were down
29 percent.

   The valuation of nonresidential construction rose 7 percent in 1993. Sequana
Therapeutics announced a research collaboration with Kaiser Permanente Northern
California aimed at understanding the genetic causes of adult-onset diabetes.

   Sequana will collaborate with the Kaiser Division of Research to isolate,
clone and sequence human genes associated with the disease.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             877 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                February 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 11;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1223 words

HEADLINE: Viewpoints;
Innovation: Medicine's Best Cost-Cutter

BYLINE: By MICHAEL PORTER, ELIZABETH TEISBERG and GREGORY BROWN;  Michael Porter
and Elizabeth Teisberg are on the faculty of the Harvard Business School.
Gregory Brown, a former surgeon, is a vice president of Vector Securities
International in Chicago. The three have just completed a three-year study of
the economics of health care.

BODY:

   IN his State of the Union Message last month, President Clinton began the
final stage of his courageous campaign for health care reform.  But neither his
proposal nor any of the other leading proposals will yield the desired results.
They all fail to recognize the central importance of innovation in reducing
health care costs.

   The Administration's proposal does try to control costs; it just does it the
wrong way. It depends upon simplified paperwork, the greater bargaining power of
new purchasing alliances and caps on prices. But costs cannot be reduced enough
with these measures, which are essentially ways to deliver today's health care
more efficiently. The savings from these efforts are possible and necessary, but
the desire to widen access to health care, the growing health needs of an aging
population and Americans' demands for the best treatments available will soon
overwhelm the gains.

    As many industries have shown, the only real way to lower costs
substantially is through innovation. It was innovation that drove down the price
of the average long-distance phone call by more than 50 percent between 1984 and
1992 -- while raising quality as well. And although the first personal computer
cost $50,000, innovation has reduced cost so much that, today, a PC that
drastically outperforms the original model can easily be purchased for less than
$3,000.

   Despite these and many other examples of innovation's great cost-reducing
power, the Clinton proposal completely neglects this principle, and the
competing proposals are not much better. The reformers may assume that the march
of technology is impervious to Government regulation, but this is wrong. In
1993, for example, more than $500 million in public and private stock offerings
for medical-device and drug firms were canceled because of the threat of price
controls.

   Or the reformers may regard technology as the cause rather than the cure of
high costs. They often dwell, say, on the $1 million cost of a magnetic
resonance imaging machine while ignoring the diagnoses doctors can make with it
and the expensive exploratory surgery it avoids.

   This approach is also mistaken; innovation's savings and other benefits are
as substantial in health care as in other industries. New drugs to prevent
postsurgical infections can reduce hospital stays as much as 10 days. Gene
therapy for illnesses like cystic fibrosis and Parkinson's disease can eliminate
years of chronic care costs, while also improving patients' quality of life. New
cell therapy techniques can reduce the cost of a bone-marrow transplant as much
as $50,000. Similarly, the laparoscope, originally developed for use in
gynecology, has reduced the bill for gall bladder surgery to $6,400 from $21,000
and turned a six-day hospital stay into an outpatient procedure.

   Drugs and devices are not the only ways to innovate; services can be
revolutionized, too. Special head-trauma centers have been shown to lower cost
and quicken rehabilitation, for example.

   What does all this mean? It means health reform will only work if it spurs
innovation.

   But, by reducing the rigorous competition that innovation requires, the
Administration's proposal discourages this invaluable process. Under the
proposal, health care will be overseen by yet another sclerotic Government
bureaucracy, the National Health Board. There will be monopolistic regional
purchasing alliances, which will trigger the rapid consolidation of payers and
providers. These large provider-payer networks will reduce choice and
competition among specialty-care providers, while deciding what treatments are
covered, for whom and when. With a bias against covering anything new, these
powerful entities will replace the diversity and experimentation that have long
fueled innovation and maintained this country's leadership in the global
pharmaceutical, biotechnology and medical-device industries.

   To make matters worse, if prices are tightly controlled under reform,
America's flow of innovation will slow to a trickle because the incentives
needed for its huge investments will disappear. Schering-Plough spent $100
million for a plant to make alpha interferon when that drug was known only to
help a rare cancer. Under price controls such an effort would not be made -- nor
the discovery that the drug treats 15 other diseases.

   THE Clinton proposal aims to compensate for these risks to innovation by
continued Government financing of basic research. But private-sector investment
in research and development of drugs and medical technologies dwarfs the budget
of the National Institutes of Health, the principal Federal source of research
funds. And if we deaden the incentives for private-sector investment, much of
the Federal research will never be transformed from science into usable
technology.

   The challenge that confounds health care reformers is that although the
United States has produced a breathtaking rate of advance in innovation,
competition appears to have failed on another crucial dimension: cost.
Incentives to keep costs down have been so skewed by regulation, insurance
practices, limited information about quality and price and the natural price
insensitivity of ill patients that the normal economic rules do not apply:

   * Prices remain high in the face of excess capacity because, until recently,
prices were set to cover full costs rather than meet competition.

   * Technologies remain costly even when widely diffused because reimbursement
has been based on customary charges, not costs.

   * Hospitals and physicians who charge higher prices or fail to provide
quality service are not forced out of business because quality is poorly
understood and local hospitals have been preserved in spite of inefficiencies
and underutilization. Instead, providers and payers compete on proficiency at
"gaming" the system by cost-shifting, self-referral, "balance billing" of
patients above insurers' agreed rates and creative denial of insurance claims.

   In other words, the reformers are addressing a health care system that works
well in one way but does not in another. Given this diagnosis, the prescription
is a straightforward one. We must realign the skewed cost incentives -- the part
that does not work well -- and preserve and protect the incentives for
innovation -- the part that does work well.

   To do this, reform must accomplish many tasks. It must promote competition by
forcing insurers to make their money by finding good, low-cost providers, rather
than by avoiding the payment of claims. It must be vigilant in enforcing
antitrust laws to avoid overconsolidation of providers into a few powerful
networks and Government agencies. It must also preserve choice by guarding
against overextension of full-service provider networks; only through choice can
the best providers emerge. And reform must permit lower-quality, inefficient
providers to fail; only then will they be replaced by better ones.

   But the first step in successful reform is to recognize the central
importance of innovation. And no leading reform proposal -- not the Clinton
plan, the Cooper plan, the Chafee-Dolan plan or the Canadian-style single-payer
system -- understands this fact. Instead, they all severely limit choice and
competition -- and thus innovation, the only long-term solution to our ills.

GRAPHIC: Drawing

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1994


                             878 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               February 26, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 51;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 7434 words

HEADLINE: Uncovered Short Sales Rise to Record on Nasdaq

BYLINE: By KENNETH N. GILPIN

BODY:

   Speculators expecting a drop in Nasdaq stocks raised their bets to record
levels in the month that ended on Feb. 8, according to figures from the National
Association of Securities Dealers.

   The organization said yesterday that the total number of shares sold short in
Nasdaq trading rose 2.5 percent, to 701.7 million, from 682.4 million for the
previous monthly period. This was the 12th consecutive monthly increase. Since
February 1993, short interest in Nasdaq stocks has risen by almost 50 percent.

    Short interest represents the number of shares that investors have borrowed
and sold without covering their positions by buying shares. While there are
several reasons someone might sell a stock short, by far the most common is the
expectation that the stock's price will fall.

   Those expectations have been continually thwarted during the last year,
however, and last month was no exception.

   During the period just ended, the Nasdaq composite index did post a small
decline, closing at 790.12 on Feb. 15, the day that short interest positions
reported as of Feb. 8 were settled. That was down from the close of 792.10 on
Jan. 17, the beginning of the period. But during the reporting period, the index
rose to a record, hitting 800.47 on Jan. 31.

   Shorting a stock is the flip side of buying a stock in the hope that it will
go up. A short-seller borrows shares, sells them and later buys them back to
return to the original owner. If the share price has dropped in the meantime,
the short-seller pockets the difference.

   Historically, a high short-interest level has indicated that many investors
are bearish. But some analysts say large short positions are a positive sign
because the short-sellers eventually must buy shares. For the last year, the
optimists have been right, and short-sellers have lost.

   Shorting Nasdaq stocks is particularly dangerous, if only because prices of
so many of the small- to medium-sized companies listed on the Nasdaq market can
fluctuate wildly from one day to the next.

   The newest favorite on the short-seller's list last month was the Southland
Corporation, the troubled owner of the 7-Eleven chain of convenvience stores.
Southland's shares topped the list of largest increases in short positions,
rising 1.7 million shares, to 6.4 million shares.

   Comcast's special nonvoting class A shares showed the largest short position.
Short interest in those shares stood at 15.3 million shares, down from 17.7
million shares last month.

   American Power Conversion, another stock that short-sellers love to hate, was
the second-largest short on Nasdaq, at 12.2 million shares. The company
continues to reap record revenues and profits from its devices that protect
computers from power surges. Bears, however, are expecting competition in this
market to heat up.

Largest Positions

Security Name                          02/15/94     01/14/94       Change

+Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl                15,356,188   17,736,189   -2,380,001   T
Amer Power Convers                   10,988,640   12,237,284   -1,248,644   T
Snapple Beverage Cp                   9,319,433    9,522,428     -202,995   T
Mobile Telecomm Tech                  8,509,055    8,429,578       79,477   T
MCI Comm Cp                           7,752,137    9,855,975   -2,103,838   T
Dell Computer Cp                      7,604,424    8,325,190     -720,766   T
Noble Drilling Cp                     6,612,460    6,252,122      360,338   T
Apple Computer Inc                    6,546,400    6,203,715      342,685   T
Food Lion Inc Cl A                    6,470,322    6,623,649     -153,327   T
Southland Cp                          6,406,597    4,658,857    1,747,740
Cott Cp                               6,362,223    5,413,243      948,980   T
LDDS Commun Inc                       5,792,096    5,366,914      425,182   T
Casino Magic Cp                       5,655,657    5,443,204      212,453   T
Seagate Tech                          5,478,072    5,184,137      293,935   T
Checkers Drive-In                     5,204,287    4,846,134      358,153   T
Grand Casinos Inc                     5,082,192    4,925,454      156,738   T
Electronic Arts Inc                   4,882,849    4,165,458      717,391   T
TPI Enterprises                       4,657,357    4,707,363      -50,006   T
Greenwich Pharm Inc                   4,628,901    3,193,376    1,435,525   T
Intel Cp                              4,233,978    4,885,400     -651,422   T
Synoptics Commun Inc                  4,193,552    5,459,275   -1,265,723   T
Stryker Cp                            4,126,023    4,444,964     -318,941   T
Nextel Commun A                       4,106,669    2,938,940    1,167,729   T
Borland Intl                          3,990,233    3,895,844       94,389   T
+IDB Commun Gp Inc                    3,965,659    3,872,185       93,474   T



Largest Cover Ratios

Security Name                          02/15/94    Avg. Vol.         Days Mkt

Hollinger Inc                         2,883,700       42,570           68   T
Dibrell Brothers Inc                  2,495,928       39,084           64   T
Savoy Pict Entertnmt                  1,206,710       30,364           40   T
Littelfuse Inc                          970,347       25,689           38   T
TPI Enterprises                       4,657,357      130,819           36   T
Fastenal Co                           1,581,132       56,593           28   T
Tseng Labs Inc                        3,260,698      118,341           28   T
Dresdner AG Sp ADR                    1,261,592       46,863           27
Circon Cp                             1,614,332       60,367           27   T
Fortune Bancorp                         821,637       30,885           27   T
Lady Luck Gaming Cp                     715,540       26,743           27   T
Cell Com Puerto Rico                  1,314,252       50,687           26   T
Copytele Inc                          2,119,498       81,104           26   T
50-Off Stores Inc                     1,812,907       72,846           25   T
Zeos Intl                               742,879       31,079           24   T
Tokos Med Cp Del                      3,812,911      165,841           23   T
United Gaming Inc                     1,623,170       71,797           23   T
Somatogen Inc                         2,521,189      114,089           22   T
Big B Inc                               851,424       41,185           21   T
Marshall & Ilsley                     1,857,677       87,849           21   T
Interface Inc A                         896,282       45,137           20   T
Ornda Healthcrp                       2,128,716      104,264           20   T
PDK Labs Inc                            662,518       33,435           20   T
York Research Cp                        791,650       39,804           20   T
Amtech Cp                             2,323,379      119,738           19   T



Largest Increases

Security Name                          02/15/94     01/14/94       Change

Southland Cp                          6,406,597    4,658,857    1,747,740
Greenwich Pharm Inc                   4,628,901    3,193,376    1,435,525   T
Omega Environment                     2,983,446    1,612,489    1,370,957   T
Sun Microsystems Inc                  3,693,595    2,404,853    1,288,742   T
AST Research Inc                      3,074,672    1,817,733    1,256,939   T
Nextel Commun A                       4,106,669    2,938,940    1,167,729   T
Tricord Systems Inc                   1,538,384      480,186    1,058,198   T
US Long Distance Cp                   1,724,641      733,900      990,741   T
Cott Cp                               6,362,223    5,413,243      948,980   T
Informix Cp                           2,771,321    1,918,620      852,701   T
Octel Commun Cp                       1,159,902      378,270      781,632   T
Electronic Arts Inc                   4,882,849    4,165,458      717,391   T
Aldila Inc                            1,078,369      361,155      717,214   T
Hollinger Inc                         2,883,700    2,245,000      638,700   T
Watson Pharm Inc                      1,582,767      944,547      638,220   T
+Chico's F A S Inc                    1,009,392      379,574      629,818   T
Agnico Eagle Mines                      655,751       34,445      621,306   T
Site Based Media Inc                  1,043,501      434,867      608,634
Mid Ocean Ltd Ord                       673,375       67,720      605,655   T
Pantheon Inds                           851,988      276,330      575,658
Centocor Inc                          3,861,690    3,292,325      569,365   T
Comp Concepts Cp New                    597,200       34,505      562,695
Stac Electronics                        592,468       45,212      547,256   T
IKOS Systems Inc                        578,281       40,000      538,281   T
Amer Intl Petro Inc                     605,065       75,434      529,631   T



Largest Decreases

Security Name                          02/15/94     01/14/94       Change

LM Ericsson Tel Add                     383,297    3,553,462   -3,170,165
+Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl                15,356,188   17,736,189   -2,380,001   T
MCI Comm Cp                           7,752,137    9,855,975   -2,103,838   T
Tele Commun Inc A                     1,755,773    3,255,643   -1,499,870   T
DSC Commun Cp                         2,777,375    4,086,587   -1,309,212   T
Sequent Computer Sys                  1,150,052    2,434,120   -1,284,068   T
+Comcast Cp A                           852,599    2,121,927   -1,269,328   T
Synoptics Commun Inc                  4,193,552    5,459,275   -1,265,723   T
Amer Power Convers                   10,988,640   12,237,284   -1,248,644   T
3Com Cp                                 810,704    1,778,764     -968,060   T
QVC Network Inc                       1,884,418    2,773,383     -888,965   T
US Healthcare Inc                     3,202,701    4,016,567     -813,866   T
Dell Computer Cp                      7,604,424    8,325,190     -720,766   T
Amgen                                 1,160,844    1,852,309     -691,465   T
Qualcomm Inc                            881,124    1,552,087     -670,963   T
Intel Cp                              4,233,978    4,885,400     -651,422   T
SCI Systems Inc                       1,311,850    1,958,657     -646,807   T
Quantum Cp                            3,561,241    4,189,601     -628,360   T
Software Toolwks Inc                  1,309,928    1,897,282     -587,354   T
Spectrum Info Tech                    1,602,483    2,160,517     -558,034   T
Compumed Inc                            335,887      891,097     -555,210
Cisco Sys Inc                         3,022,964    3,576,797     -553,833   T
Picturetel Cp                         3,706,970    4,248,926     -541,956   T
Presidential Life Cp                    428,792      927,443     -498,651   T
Quickturn Design Sys                     36,423      524,173     -487,750   T



Nasdaq

Security Name                            02/15/94       01/14/94

3Com Cp                                   810,704      1,778,764
 *4th Dimen Sftwar Ltd                    221,423         95,513
50-Off Stores Inc                       1,812,907      1,887,015
 *ADAC Labs                               260,083         41,966
Advanta Cl-A                              714,518        948,055
Advanta Cl-B                              379,400        232,253
+AES Cp                                   409,176        352,358
AGCO Cp                                 2,384,208      2,680,251
ASK Group                                 352,699        406,765
AST Research Inc                        3,074,672      1,817,733
Abbey Healthcare Gp                     1,230,035      1,143,597
 *Access Hlth Mktg Inc                     98,684         15,589
Acclaim Entertainmnt                    2,714,250      2,707,864
 *ACE Cash Express Inc                    154,090         79,676
Actel Cp                                  314,158        181,248
+Adaptec Inc                              884,935      1,153,584
Adobe Systems Inc                       1,649,308      1,742,290
Adv Tech Labs                             310,275        210,826
Advanced Logic Res                        126,352        199,189
Advanced Polymer Sys                      308,407        273,023
Advanced Promotions                     1,270,629        964,078
Advanced Tissue Sci                       168,957        218,999
 *Agnico Eagle Mines                      655,751         34,445
 *Air Methods Cp                          339,093         44,004
Akzo N V ADR                              135,783        180,766
Alantec Cp                                 41,945           N.L.
 *Aldila Inc                            1,078,369        361,155
 *Aldus Cp                                473,523        266,932
Alliance Pharm Cp                         793,283        765,884
 *Allied Clinical Labs                     64,878         13,225
Alpha 1 Biomedicals                       594,975        645,515
Alpha-Beta Tech Inc                       345,513        284,613
Alteon Inc                                 83,857        167,504
Altera Cp                                 163,135        422,017
Amer Biogenetic Cl A                      290,567        294,782
Amer Business Info                        152,396        371,425
 *Amer Colloid Co                         125,293         21,563
Amer Dental Techs                         128,421        232,089
 *Amer Intl Petro Inc                     605,065         75,434
 *Amer Management Sys                      61,508         20,114
Amer Pacific Cp                           761,353        746,756
Amer Power Convers                     10,988,640     12,237,284
 *Amer Rec Co Hlds Inc                          0        161,110
Amer Software Inc A                       254,951        258,236
America Online Inc                        948,314        587,244
Amgen                                   1,160,844      1,852,309
Ampex Inc Cl-A                             79,636        140,792
Amtech Cp                               2,323,379      2,442,522
Amylin Pharma Inc                         133,509         91,254
 *Andrew Cp                               121,029         57,631
Apple Computer Inc                      6,546,400      6,203,715
 *Apple South Inc                         287,552        138,021
+Applebee's Intl                        1,220,273      1,107,078
Applied Bioscience                        263,799        237,860
Applied Materials                         983,879        864,979
 *Applied Sci & Tech                        1,700        288,125
Arch Commun Gp                            166,168        106,444
Arctco Inc                                394,029        394,826
Argosy Gaming Co                        1,758,977      1,648,832
Arkansas Best Cp                          334,250        358,431
Artisoft Inc                              417,611        381,085
Asante Tech Inc                           407,859        292,378
Aspect Telecomm Cp                        799,443        690,881
 *Assoc Commun Cl B                        70,900          4,900
 *Astoria Finl Corp                        79,258         34,726
 *Athena Neurosciences                     61,354          5,801
Atmel Cp                                  681,169        589,568
Au Bon Pain Cl A                        1,347,865      1,264,660
Aura Systems Inc                        3,409,159      3,025,792
Auspex Systems Inc                        152,864        205,359
Autodesk Inc                            2,887,463      2,992,281
Autotote Corp Cl A                      1,898,331      1,760,110
Avid Tech Inc                           1,047,908        952,592
BMC Software Inc                          524,363        695,623
BPI Packaging Tech                        251,419        313,121
Bally Gaming Intl                         722,992        599,540
 *Banc One Cp Pfd C                        95,183         36,003
 *Bank South Cp                            31,037        172,085
 *BankAtlantic FSB                         74,262         22,588
 *Banyan Systems Inc                      368,355        167,407
Battery Techs Inc                          65,282           N.L.
Bayport Restr Grp                          62,514        112,323
BE Aerospace Inc                          209,928        126,692
Bed Bath & Beyond                         723,468        954,496
Bell Sports Cp                          1,748,912      1,243,987
Ben Franklin Retail                       342,276        395,439
Big B Inc                                 851,424        857,108
 *Big O Tires Inc                          13,690         66,206
Bindley Wstn Ind                          481,690        504,794
Bio Tech Gen Cp                           325,603        272,450
Biochem Pharm Inc                         529,809        547,697
Biogen Inc                              1,946,491      1,776,355
Biomedical Waste Sys                      427,420        310,118
Biomet Inc                                690,114        550,995
Blyth Holdings Inc                        318,901        283,020
Boatmen's Bancshares                      988,186      1,061,483
Bob Evans Farms Inc                       323,689        318,972
Boomtown Inc                            1,303,194      1,325,787
Borland Intl Inc                        3,990,233      3,895,844
Boston Chicken Inc                        841,155        601,647
Boston Tech Inc                           515,965        670,676
Box Energy Cl B NV                        806,450        937,089
 *Braun's Fashions                         72,253         32,076
Broadband Techs Inc                     1,191,677        993,583
Broderbund Software                     1,141,927        861,256
 *Brothers Gourmet                        115,390         14,755
Buffets Inc                             2,599,602      2,642,238
Burnup & Sims Inc.                        449,600        439,911
CIS Tech Inc                              614,866        614,616
Cabot Medical Cp                          517,765        490,995
Caere Cp                                  128,652        212,039
 *Cal Micro Devices                       243,843         31,529
Cal Microwave Inc                         561,438        593,502
Canandaigua Wine A                        149,413         89,640
Canyon Resources Cp                       574,641        573,764
Cardinal Distr                            158,304         93,233
Care Gp Inc                               290,101        192,249
Carlton Commun ADR                         32,852        110,903
Carson Pirie Scot Il                      153,562        211,518
Casey's Gen Stores                        691,291        619,423
Casino America Inc                      1,258,524      1,431,193
Casino Magic Cp                         5,655,657      5,443,204
 *Castle Energy Cp                        502,073        152,442
Cato Cp The Cl A                           44,959        118,482
Celestial Seasonings                      122,006        297,595
Cell Com Puerto Rico                    1,314,252      1,275,840
 *Cell Genesys Inc                         72,200         18,077
 *Cellpro Inc                             339,547         24,900
 *Cellstar Cp                               2,610         63,607
Cellular Comm Cl A                        477,259        438,556
 *Celtrix Pharmaceut                       95,120         52,816
Centerbank                                250,544        231,248
Centocor Inc                            3,861,690      3,292,325
 *Cephalon Inc                             73,947         33,802
 *Cerner Cp                               181,335         94,438
Charming Shoppes Inc                      338,733        329,653
Checkers Drive-In                       5,204,287      4,846,134
Cheesecake Factory                        157,947        208,869
 *Chemtrak Inc                            296,364        167,282
 *+Chico'S F A S Inc                    1,009,392        379,574
Chipcom Cp                                761,421        664,019
 *Chips & Tech Inc.                       131,149         67,294
Chiron Cp                               1,611,202      1,880,364
Cholestech Cp                             417,610        452,797
Chronimed Inc                             264,025        249,564
Cincinnati Financial                      388,461        341,959
Circon Cp                               1,614,332      1,706,395
Cirrus Logic Inc                          984,906        929,338
Cisco Sys Inc                           3,022,964      3,576,797
 *Clayton Williams Egy                     54,185          6,000
Clearly Canadian Bev                      345,594        328,546
Clothestime Inc The                       140,703         93,645
 *Coastal Healthcare                      241,068        132,211
 *Cobra Golf Inc                          577,159        213,301
Collagen Cp                               429,248        409,729
+ComcAst Cp A                             852,599      2,121,927
+ComcAst Cp Cl A Spcl                  15,356,188     17,736,189
 *Commercial Bncp Colo                          0         74,922
Community Hlth Sys                        149,764        367,580
Compression Lab Inc                     2,030,365      1,945,041
Comptronix Corp                           325,046        325,057
Compucom Systems Inc                      501,415        523,483
 *Compuware Corp                          120,805         66,695
 *Comstock Resources                       83,565         24,672
Comverse Tech Inc                         678,913        590,996
Concord Camera Cp                         496,593        504,756
Cons Papers Inc                           186,957        331,487
Consep Inc                                 55,000           N.L.
 *Control Data Sys Inc                     93,357         38,247
Cooker Restaurant Cp                      463,471        462,752
Copley Pharm Inc                          793,448        688,587
Copytele Inc                            2,119,498      2,250,858
Cordis Cp                                 392,576        266,481
Corel Cp                                  486,404        668,155
 *Corrections Cp Amer                     117,236         55,108
Cortech Inc                               135,309         90,149
Cott Cp                                 6,362,223      5,413,243
Coventry Cp                               293,613        374,734
Cracker Barrel Old                      1,294,936      1,195,101
Cragin Finl Cp                             61,691        117,196
Cray Comp Cp                              696,418        667,362
 *Creative Biomolecule                     49,484        254,632
Creative Tech Ord                       1,112,771        911,927
 *Crop Genetic Intl Cp                     54,066        442,036
Crosscomm Cp                              600,993        802,885
Crown Resources Cp                        303,779        304,548
Cryomedical Sci                         1,041,746      1,201,925
 *Culp Inc                                138,303         74,490
Curaflex Hlth Svcs                        310,103        304,489
Cyrix Cp                                  696,865        779,602
 *Cyrk Inc                                150,970         25,299
Cytogen Cp                              1,023,262        789,510
DAKA Intl Inc                             341,390        327,978
 *DNA Plant Tech Cp                     1,128,849        617,701
DSC Commun Cp                           2,777,375      4,086,587
Danka Business ADR                        229,613        305,637
Data Race Inc                             337,519        360,080
Davidson & Associate                      330,057        352,727
 *Day Runner Inc                           65,797         21,380
Dell Computer Cp                        7,604,424      8,325,190
Dentsply Intl Inc                         395,299        418,688
Deprenyl Research                         177,815        267,523
Dial Page Inc                             370,562        317,549
Dibrell Brothers Inc                    2,495,928      2,547,889
Digi Intl Inc                             279,759        166,445
Digital Microwave Cp                      530,105        518,769
Digital Prods Cp                          272,190        308,158
 *Dionex Cp                                63,382         13,547
Discovery Zone Inc                        986,984      1,152,325
Dollar General Cp                         455,515        480,228
 *Dreyers Grand Ice                       341,516        145,407
Duriron Co Inc                             23,402         65,417
 *Dynatech Cp                             109,431         51,397
ECI Telecom Ltd                           768,971      1,221,092
 *EP Techs Inc                             96,411         17,088
 *Executo N E                               4,119         62,301
Ezcorp Cl-A                               665,018        466,840
Eagle Hardware & Gdn                      864,454      1,253,502
 *Earth Tech Cp Usa                        64,910          4,690
Education Alternativ                    1,417,352      1,392,998
Egghead Inc                             1,149,984      1,096,661
 *El Paso Electric Co                      17,760        155,495
Elec Imaging Inc                          743,792        768,653
Electronic Arts Inc                     4,882,849      4,165,458
Emisphere Tech Inc                        569,622        543,936
Empi Inc                                1,322,167      1,241,072
Engle Homes Inc                           602,735        577,956
Envoy Cp                                  301,935        534,429
 *Equinox Systems Inc                      90,443            180
+Executive Telecard                       284,650        257,924
Farm & Home Fin Cp                        602,709        610,052
Fastcomm Comm Cp                        1,312,149      1,176,840
Fastenal Co                             1,581,132      1,602,843
Fifth Third Bncp                          739,675        723,397
 *Figgie Intl Cmn Cl A                    223,780         54,753
First Alabama Bcshs                       233,797        331,693
First Commerce Cp La                      852,920        810,553
First Hawaiian Inc                        181,794        116,120
First Pacific Ntwks                       795,452      1,095,510
First Palm Beach                           22,823         72,917
Flagstar Cos Inc                          576,364        841,707
Food Lion Inc Cl A                      6,470,322      6,623,649
 *Food Lion Inc Cl B                      281,310         98,454
 *Foremost Cp of Amer                     111,575         62,232
Forest Oil Cp                           2,254,154      2,341,678
Fortune Bancorp                           821,637        919,396
Fourth Financial Cp                       405,745        450,997
 *Framingham Savs Bk                       20,865         88,224
Fresh Choice Inc                          389,027        339,662
 *Fuller H B Co                            81,036         28,985
Funco Inc                                 429,916        405,055
GP Financial Cp                           811,952           N.L.
 *Gates/FA Distributin                    105,250         27,364
Gateway 2000 Inc                        1,290,504        882,314
Gen Nutrition Cos                         604,562        597,846
Genetic Therapy Inc                       215,575        307,593
Genetics Inst Dep Sh                      341,385        334,789
Gensia Inc                              2,428,837      2,713,642
 *Genta Inc                               183,980        103,158
Gentex Cp                                 361,851        360,571
 *Genus Inc                               476,203         31,188
Genzyme Cp                              1,662,996      1,838,825
Geotek Inds                               116,692        239,847
Giddings Lewis Inc                        403,998        558,348
Glenayre Techs Inc                        511,569        389,300
 *Golden Systems Inc                        4,356        131,150
 *Good Guys Inc The                       625,531        326,663
 *Gotham Apparel Corp                      84,022            785
Grand Casinos Inc                       5,082,192      4,925,454
Great Amer Rec Inc                      1,268,693      1,427,597
Greenwich Pharm Inc                     4,628,901      3,193,376
Groundwater Tech Inc                       48,412        118,855
Gupta Corp                                231,957        313,611
Gymboree Cp (The)                         736,060        769,523
HBO Co.                                   176,517        230,696
 *Health Risk Mgmt Inc                     50,337          5,325
Healthcare Compare                        351,526        221,743
 *Healthcare Imaging                       14,728         66,967
Healthcare Svcs Gp                        447,499        622,965
 *Healthdyne Inc                           96,968         55,175
Healthinfusion Inc                        744,424        751,088
Heart Tech Inc                          1,262,819      1,091,965
Hechinger Co Cl A                         167,187        211,481
Herbalife Intl Inc                        342,103        331,374
Hilite Inds Inc                           163,725           N.L.
Hollinger Inc                           2,883,700      2,245,000
Hollywood Casino A                        262,919        257,021
Hollywood Park Inc                        467,952        537,929
Home State Hldgs Inc                      169,911        263,000
Homecare Mgmt Inc                       1,236,221      1,176,904
Hornbeck Offshore                         197,803        296,173
 *Human Genome Sci Inc                     71,457         21,631
Hutchinson Tech Inc                       316,873        291,185
 *ICO Inc                                 178,515         72,844
ICOS Cp                                   456,470        491,253
+IDB Commun Gp Inc                      3,965,659      3,872,185
Idexx Labs Inc                            539,136        536,161
IHOP Cp                                   919,412        838,724
IIS Intell Info                           147,809         99,998
 *IKOS Systems Inc                        578,281         40,000
I-Stat Cp                                 710,690        485,731
Igen Inc                                   43,265           N.L.
Image Entertainment                       267,054        263,975
 *Imclone Systems Inc                     483,279         91,842
Immulogic Pharm Cp                         44,110        122,055
Immune Response Cp                      1,416,732      1,742,174
Immunex Corp                            1,411,126      1,198,687
Immunomedics Inc                          400,893        470,344
Imperial Bancorp                          226,985        451,501
 *Inacom Corp                             280,989         53,408
Infinity Broadcast A                      378,373        380,701
Info Resources Inc                        329,937        250,035
Informix Cp                             2,771,321      1,918,620
Input Output Inc                          144,304        103,859
 *Ins Auto Auctions                       841,722        413,613
Insituform Techs A                        598,774        541,293
 *Integrated Circuit                       66,541         16,068
Integrated Devic Tec                      608,389        478,599
Intel Cp                                4,233,978      4,885,400
Intel Cp Wts                              743,835        933,102
Intelligent Elec                          363,913        350,246
Interactive Network                     1,627,054      1,728,990
Interface Inc A                           896,282        840,889
Intergraph Cp                             355,671        357,228
Interleaf Inc                              92,272        246,547
Intermet Cp                               198,464        301,846
Interneuron Pharm                         766,340        795,576
 *Interpoint Cp                            51,368          1,230
Intl Cabeltel Inc                         592,156        853,019
Intl Cablecasting                         235,263        171,914
 *Intuit Inc                              403,730        176,543
Iwerks Entertain Inc                      751,361        568,636
JB Hunt Trans Svcs                        703,772        570,770
JB Restaurants Inc                         52,868         96,407
J Baker Inc                             1,887,345      1,968,313
 *Jacor Commun Inc                        206,988         37,276
Johnstown Amer Inds                       116,210        194,537
Jones Intrcable A                         594,725        591,061
 *Kaydon Cp                                67,603         13,027
Kelley Oil Cp                           1,902,903      1,457,340
Kelly Services Cl A                       139,026         97,020
Kendall Square Res                      1,477,126      1,443,000
Knowledgeware Inc                         425,971        626,491
 *Koll Real Est Cl A                      102,521         56,870
Komag Inc                                 803,971        685,663
Kopin Cp                                  481,392        452,890
Kulicke & Soffa                           236,650        352,230
LDDS Commun Inc                         5,792,096      5,366,914
LM Ericsson Tel ADR                       615,424        932,298
 *LTX Cp                                  281,977        104,818
 *Ladd Furniture Inc                      125,538         70,033
Lady Luck Gaming Cp                       715,540        720,241
 *Lafayette Amer Bncp                      76,216         32,769
LAM Research Cp                         1,157,538      1,211,981
Lance Inc                                 238,227        279,177
Landair Services Inc                       99,518        155,437
 *Landrys Seafood Rest                    197,916         15,700
 *Lasermaster Tech Inc                    210,349         51,226
Lattice Semiconduct                       140,269        200,741
 *Leader Fin Cp                           153,601         82,472
Learning Co (The)                         502,099        525,650
Lechters Inc                              399,398        340,242
Legent Cp                                 344,585        400,107
Lidak Pharm Cl A                          398,185        360,527
Lin Broadcasting Cp                       101,403        164,589
Linear Technology Cp                      290,704        319,905
Liposome Co Inc                           612,135        656,230
Liposome Tech Inc                         723,253        722,765
Littelfuse Inc                            970,347      1,034,626
Lo Jack Cp                                118,488        187,951
Lodgenet Entertain                        494,014        382,110
Lone Star Steakhouse                    3,033,105      3,187,699
Lone Star Tech Inc                         76,198        170,128
Lotus Development Cp                    3,311,798      3,461,878
MCI Comm Cp                             7,752,137      9,855,975
 *MFRI Inc                                184,320          2,172
 *MS Carriers Inc                          85,120         30,892
MTC Elec Tech Ltd                         350,066        340,274
Magma Power Co                            482,782        569,950
Mail Boxes Etc                             76,332        181,114
Marcam Cp                                 250,711        457,574
Marshall & Ilsley                       1,857,677      1,902,464
Maxicare Hlth New                       1,145,321      1,286,303
Maxtor Cp                                 346,375        413,969
McAfee Associates                         324,908        296,248
McCaw Cellular A                          444,978        426,235
McCormick Co NV                           332,114        390,091
McGaw Inc                                 748,814        480,199
Medaphis Cp                               425,269        540,931
Media Vision Tech                       2,740,459      2,615,926
Medicine Shoppe Intl                      834,533        745,743
Medicis Pharm Cl A                        643,417        802,231
Medimmune Inc                             868,802      1,039,408
Megahertz Corp                            834,345        909,203
 *Megatest Corp                             2,033         43,777
Mentor Graphics Cp                        520,711        487,863
 *Mercantile Bkshs Cp                      48,854          8,140
 *Mercer Intl Inc SBI                     322,719        114,365
Mesa Airlines Inc                       1,136,054      1,111,563
Metricom Inc                              130,621        257,481
 *Metrocall Inc                             5,100         55,685
Michaels Stores Inc                     1,765,830      1,645,664
Michigan Natl Cp                          308,387        331,982
Micro Warehouse Inc                        39,259        102,912
Microage Inc                              147,249        201,340
Microchip Tech Inc                        193,369        135,307
Microcom Inc                              148,456        102,510
Micropolis Cp                             115,711        275,543
Microprose Inc                            381,001        241,392
Microsoft Cp                            3,273,799      3,151,768
Mid Atlantic Medical                      251,932        308,556
 *Mid Ocean Ltd Ord                       673,375         67,720
Midlantic Cp                              709,476        608,568
Mitek Surgical Prods                      430,056        472,927
Mobile Telecomm Tech                    8,509,055      8,429,578
Molten Metal Tech                       1,317,367      1,136,808
 *Monterey Pasta Co                       116,551         37,646
NAC Re Cp                                 258,493        276,606
Nextel Commun A                         4,106,669      2,938,940
NS Bancorp Inc                            265,737        284,493
 *Nam Tai Electronics                     142,748         75,391
Natl Comp Sys Inc                          51,598        167,882
 *Natl Gypsum Co                          899,138        472,081
 *Natl R.V. Hlds Inc                      107,100         35,040
Natl Vision Assoc                         620,264        607,970
Natural Wonders                           188,642        239,665
Nature's Bounty Inc                       254,890        363,899
 *Nature's Sunshine                       127,614         16,327
Nellcor Inc                                78,928        172,511
 *Neoprobe Corp                           242,293        134,456
Net F R A M E System                    1,036,070      1,051,569
Network General Cp                        152,072        202,548
Network Imaging Cp                        195,273        312,381
Network Systems Cp                        390,682        395,898
Neutrogena Cp                             427,037        499,494
New Image Inds                          1,106,463      1,004,664
Newbridge Netwks Cp                     1,061,382      1,008,561
Noble Drilling Cp                       6,612,460      6,252,122
 *Noel Group Inc                          144,434          4,276
Noise Cancellation                        925,154        932,857
Norand Cp                                 201,815        155,363
Nordstrom Inc                           1,098,622      1,502,111
Northern Tr Cp                            276,279        221,993
Novell Inc                              3,093,738      3,076,469
Novellus Systems Inc                      251,892        169,425
 *Octel Commun Cp                       1,159,902        378,270
+Old Natl Bncp                            296,808        313,248
Olicom A/S    E                           253,293        414,857
Olympic Finl Ltd                          341,281        323,594
 *Omega Environment                     2,983,446      1,612,489
Omni Films Intl Inc                        67,190        241,400
 *On Assignment Inc                        69,852         10,720
Onbancorp Inc                             303,699        312,642
Oracle Systems Cp                       2,353,844      2,086,002
Orbital Sciences Cp                     1,491,367      1,455,388
Ornda Healthcrp                         2,128,716      1,642,555
Oshkosh B Gosh Cl A                       119,077        169,671
Outback Steakhouse                      2,935,428      2,771,321
Oxford Health Plans                     1,620,396      1,580,985
PDK Labs Inc                              662,518        658,916
Pet Smart Inc                             694,782        636,434
Pacific Dunlop ADR                        299,371        263,854
Pacific Physician                         329,040        348,441
Pacificare Hlth Cl B                      645,249        609,563
Paging Network Inc                        971,246      1,328,763
 *Pairgain Tech                           927,109        451,787
Papa John's Intl Inc                      216,443        169,920
Parallan Computer                          60,845        219,715
Parametric Tech Cp                      1,582,961      1,498,981
Parcplace Sys Inc                          64,661           N.L.
Park Commun Inc                           274,143        285,747
Partnerre Hlds Ltd                        267,983        187,635
Penwest Ltd                               268,500        251,974
 *People's Choice TV                      308,263        114,455
Peoples Bk (Ct)                           733,800        493,761
Peoples Heri Fin Gp                       354,622        324,838
Peoples Telephone                         439,439        424,492
Peoplesoft Inc                          1,464,601      1,167,789
Perrigo Company                           372,613        499,659
Petroleum Geo Sv Ads                      296,996        230,138
Pharmos Corp                              133,456        245,685
 *Philly Cons Hlds                         92,585         47,148
Phoenix Re Cp                           1,069,506      1,135,288
 *Photonics Corp                           12,165        177,983
Phycor Inc                                839,934        878,753
Physician Cp America                       86,494        158,601
Picturetel Cp                           3,706,970      4,248,926
 *Pinkerton's Inc                         246,879        132,503
Pittencrieff Commun                       640,700        572,968
Platinum Software Cp                      164,835        389,918
Players Intl Inc                        2,970,634      3,007,707
 *Pollo Tropical Inc                      149,538         62,645
Powersoft Corp                            680,909        672,880
Pres Riverboat Casin                    3,144,937      3,278,068
Presidential Life Cp                      428,792        927,443
Presstek Inc                              578,636        580,469
Price/Costco Inc                        2,342,877      2,546,728
Primadonna Resorts                        480,410        432,003
Primedex Health Sys                       271,074        374,812
 *Procyte Cp                              481,650         46,299
 *Progress Software Cp                    519,021        243,225
 *Proteon Inc                             269,695         63,670
Protocol Sys Inc                           27,797         82,580
Pure Tech Intl                            302,334        245,388
Purepac Inc                               680,055        599,005
Puritan Bennett Cp                        834,188      1,154,803
Pyramid Technology                        437,656        350,277
Pyxis Cp                                1,876,628      1,467,956
Qualcomm Inc                              881,124      1,552,087
QVC Network Inc                         1,884,418      2,773,383
Quality Food Centers                      951,397        804,048
Quantum Cp                              3,561,241      4,189,601
Quantum Hlth Res Inc                      985,315      1,005,924
 *Quickturn Design Sys                     36,423        524,173
RPM Inc                                   819,695        774,726
 *Racotek Inc                             128,773          9,255
 *Rainbow Tech Inc                        284,388         50,434
Rally's Hamburger                       3,083,728      3,493,981
 *Random Access Inc                         4,022         48,489
Re Capital Cp                             468,188        470,600
Read-Rite Cp                              255,088        214,889
Regal Commun Cp                           835,324        715,285
Renaissance Commun                        105,794           N.L.
 *Renal Treatment Ctr                      23,273        105,349
Repap Enterprises Cp                      283,239        410,435
 *Repligen Cp                             470,553        137,732
Resound Corp                            1,425,540      1,335,545
Retix                                      89,556        202,231
Reuters Hldg Plc ADR                    2,408,627      2,271,816
Rexall Sundown Inc                        120,345        187,651
Ribi Immunochem                            19,174         59,199
 *Riggs Natl Cp The                       380,107        204,815
Roadway Services Inc                      605,993        746,714
Roberts Pharm Cp                          338,691        401,046
Rochester Comm Sav                      1,255,794      1,181,193
Roosevelt Finl Group                      766,146        547,724
Roper Inds Inc                            468,384        391,152
 *Rose's Stores Cl B                       75,303         27,593
Rose's Stores Inc                         256,946        210,912
 *Ross Systems Inc                         63,493          5,308
Rouse Co                                  884,521        951,490
Safeco Cp                                 285,546        194,308
SCI Systems Inc                         1,311,850      1,958,657
Seacor Hldgs                              350,365        340,402
 *SEEQ Technology                          62,865          2,344
SGI International                         847,287        910,454
SLM Intl Inc                              234,519        508,944
Steri's Cp                              1,527,715      1,596,274
S3 Inc                                  1,309,037      1,671,652
 *Safety 1st Inc                          112,406         11,165
Sage Tech Inc                           1,467,721      1,724,678
Sanmina Cp                                653,437        455,866
Sapiens Intl Cp N V                     1,043,286      1,172,444
Savoy Pict Entertnmt                    1,206,710      1,271,255
Schuler Homes Inc                       1,464,180      1,377,102
Schulman A Inc                             37,788        112,989
Sciclone Pharma Inc                       334,549        300,909
 *Scientific Software                      55,196         11,334
Scimed Life Sys Inc                     2,820,241      2,722,362
Scitex Cp                                 715,295        556,117
Score Board Inc The                     1,973,201      1,974,823
Seagate Tech                            5,478,072      5,184,137
Sequent Computer Sys                    1,150,052      2,434,120
 *Shared Medical Sys                      117,863         50,663
Shoe Carnival Inc                          84,963        126,665
Sierra On Line Inc                        197,216        245,436
Sigma Aldrich Cp                          433,320        377,402
 *Siskon Gold Cp A                        232,264         94,842
Skybox Intl                               527,999        549,118
Smithfield Foods Inc                    1,473,234      1,451,733
Snapple Beverage Cp                     9,319,433      9,522,428
Software Publishing                        64,613        119,691
Software Toolwks Inc                    1,309,928      1,897,282
Somatogen Inc                           2,521,189      2,694,825
Sonoco Products Co                      1,189,349      1,204,182
 *Southern Electron Corp                   65,533         18,991
Spacelabs Medical                         131,164        222,129
Spartan Motors Inc                        433,774        487,525
Spectrum Info Tech                      1,602,483      2,160,517
 *Sportmart Inc                           179,210          2,417
Sports & Recreation                     2,005,586      1,995,069
 *Sports/Leisure Inc                      167,531         50,785
St Jude Medical Inc                       562,388        511,392
 *St Paul Bancorp Inc                      85,687         36,077
 *St. Francis Capital                      46,784          2,770
 *Stac Electronics                        592,468         45,212
Stacey's Buffet Inc                        28,792         95,120
Staff Builders (Del)                      174,756        407,512
Standard Mgmt Corp                        380,568        372,360
Standard Microsystem                      352,951        441,683
Stanford Telecommun                        25,246         82,912
Staples Inc                             1,902,284      2,314,834
Starbucks Cp                            3,938,877      3,829,501
Starsight Telecast                        432,880        399,871
 *State Street Boston                     409,962        224,540
Station Casinos Inc                       359,709        341,652
Stein Mart Inc                            128,332        199,068
 *Stewart Enterpr Cl A                      4,732         65,992
 *Stolt Nielsen S.A.                       92,900          3,206
Stratacom Inc                             739,421        928,811
Structural Dynamics                     1,189,491      1,338,818
Stryker Cp                              4,126,023      4,444,964
Summa Four Inc                            146,175        221,516
Summit Care Cp                            461,046        407,614
Summit Tech Inc                         3,304,983      3,490,007
Sun Microsystems Inc                    3,693,595      2,404,853
 *Sun Television & App                     53,969        290,288
Sunglass Hut Intl                         680,629        598,962
Sunrise Tech Intl                         567,517        501,877
Sunshine Mining Rts                        55,719           N.L.
 *Supermac Tech Inc                       287,560         92,198
Sybase Inc                              1,552,071      1,675,484
Symantec Cp                               492,456        532,627
 *Symmetricom Inc                         103,100          8,257
 *Syncor Intl Cp Del                       95,717          8,894
Synergen Inc                              321,828        218,762
Synopsys Inc                              629,190        601,324
Synoptics Commun Inc                    4,193,552      5,459,275
 *Syquest Tech Inc                         89,417         31,562
System Software                           985,471      1,030,453
Systemed Inc                              526,066        475,454
Systems Comp Tech Cp                      998,695        791,791
TCA Cable TV Inc                          163,511        105,727
 *T Cell Sciences Inc                     132,491         32,462
TJ Intl Inc                               526,731        527,933
TPI Enterprises                         4,657,357      4,707,363
T Rowe Price Assoc                        651,364        741,766
 *Target Therapeutics                      16,478         66,006
 *Tecnol Medical Prods                     92,021         21,113
Tele Commun Inc A                       1,755,773      3,255,643
Tellabs Inc                               307,875        549,798
Telxon Cp                                 656,862        657,487
 *Teva Pharm Ind ADR                      167,578         76,975
The 3Do Co                                975,581        970,571
Thomas Nelson Inc                         520,092        490,896
 *Thomson C S F ADR                       105,751         15,098
Titan Wheel Intl                          286,332        215,610
Today's Man Inc                           337,541        280,373
Tokos Med Cp Del                        3,812,911      3,817,817
Topps Co Inc The                          296,155        207,851
Tops Appliance City                       111,774        168,850
Transamerican Waste                       569,012        577,742
Transmedia Ntwk Inc                       254,249        251,348
Trenwick Group Inc                        277,262        231,775
 *Tricord Systems Inc                   1,538,384        480,186
Trimble Navigation                        523,691        504,974
 *Trinzic Cp                              130,300         11,790
 *Triquint Semicon Inc                    129,022          2,422
Tristar Corp                              371,054        388,156
Tseng Labs Inc                          3,260,698      3,385,469
Tyson Foods Inc Cl A                      265,191        355,779
US Bancorp Oregon                         697,002        693,701
US Healthcare Inc                       3,202,701      4,016,567
 *US Long Distance Cp                   1,724,641        733,900
US Robotics Inc                           760,496        699,422
UST Cp                                  1,013,771      1,008,229
 *US Wireless Data A                        5,392         68,368
Ultratech Stepper                          68,008        168,405
United Gaming Inc                       1,623,170      1,735,616
 *United Waste Systems                    116,505         20,415
Universal Elect Inc                       563,177        458,625
 *Urban Outfitters Inc                     75,053         10,527
USA Mobile Commun Hd                       46,550           N.L.
VLSI Tech Inc                             202,872        244,502
Valence Tech Inc                          518,018        408,119
Valuevision Intl A                        135,086        202,803
Vanguard Cellular A                       318,656        273,923
Varlen Cp                                 375,019        392,309
Ventritex Inc                             432,334        828,313
Verifone Inc                              254,386        162,786
Vertex Pharmaceutic                        52,860        100,279
Vestar Inc                                262,410        237,638
Veterinary Ctrs                           206,812        122,540
Video Lottery Tech                         83,624        159,652
Viewlogic Systems                         658,000        635,313
Vision Sciences Inc                       134,875         83,926
Visx Inc                                  175,752        108,800
WPP Gp Plc ADR                            548,114        526,884
 *WRT Energy Corp                         604,815        259,022
Wall Data Inc                             140,548         81,052
 *Wang Labs Inc Wi Del                     79,999         38,007
Wang Labs Inc Wts Wi                      125,500         79,920
 *+Washington Fed Sv Ln                     9,454         52,831
Washington Mut Sv Bk                    1,415,245      1,575,617
Watson Pharm Inc                        1,582,767        944,547
Wellfleet Commun Inc                    2,040,186      2,332,260
West One Bancorp                        1,290,439      1,491,768
Westcott Comm                           1,298,454      1,330,230
 *Western Water Co                         76,854         18,005
Westpoint Stevens A                        82,891        152,275
Westwood One Inc                        2,441,789      2,416,586
Whole Foods Market                      1,165,918        783,810
 *Wholesome Hearty                        395,841        199,153
Willamette Inds Inc                       318,504        313,669
William Sonoma Inc                        678,820        520,736
Worthington Inds Inc                      166,447        211,828
XOMA Cp                                 1,243,748        933,959
Xircom Inc                                269,011        281,578
Yellow Cp                                 221,824        157,675
York Research Cp                          791,650        821,666
Zale Corp                                 105,251        309,431
Zebra Tech Cp Cl-A                        247,554        351,554
Zenith Labs Inc                         2,664,739      2,392,122
Zeos Intl Ltd                             742,879        810,720
 *Zions Bancorp                             5,676         49,206
Zoll Medical Cp                         1,599,380      1,622,571
Zoom Telephonics Inc                      263,131        250,964
Other Nasdaq
 *Acorn Venture Cap Cp                      7,000        167,600
 *Advanced Enviro A                       185,723         57,124
Alanco Envirnmtl Res                      261,777        228,125
Alter Sales Co Inc                        266,515        219,215
Amer Bus Comp Cp                          270,306        320,361
Amer West Airline                       2,470,617      2,456,477
 *American Complex                        369,672        172,472
Aphton Corp                               354,626        483,830
Applied Laser Sys                         359,832        246,462
 *Applied Laser Wts A                         176        142,369
 *Applied Laser Wts B                     204,250         97,760
Aquanatural Co                            174,036        121,641
 *Armanino Foods                           93,796          1,030
Bio-Refer Labs Wts A                       55,290        120,030
Bio-Reference Lab                          65,180        108,530
Biocontrol Tech Inc                       546,702        405,032
Biomechanics Cp Amer                      310,993        322,038
 *Blue Chip Comptrware                     14,090         57,175
 *Blue Dolphin Energy                      99,926         45,329
 *Boston Pac Med Wts C                          0         44,787
 *Bradley Pharma A                         81,100         40,790
 *CB Bancorp Inc                           43,975             32
CCAir Inc                                 162,636         94,456
Capital Gaming Intl                       676,557        628,152
Cellular Tech Svcs                        319,651        322,378
Check Express Inc                         220,500              0
 *Chefs Intl Inc                           90,660          2,100
Churchill Technology                       70,350              0
 *Coded Commun Cp                          77,994          6,355
 *Command Credit Corp                       2,900        128,050
 *Comp Concepts Cp New                    597,200         34,505
Comp Mktplace Inc                         351,700        263,120
Compumed Inc                              335,887        891,097
 *Cons Tech Grp Ltd                       271,764          5,323
 *Cortex Pharm Inc                         23,246        176,355
Country Star Rest                          76,675              0
Country Star Wts                           83,065              0
Diamond Entertain                         330,911        410,773
 *Digital Solutions                       336,798        159,124
 *Dollar Time Inc.                        244,641         54,280
Dresdner Ag Sp ADR                      1,261,592      1,242,585
Driefontein Cons ADR                       21,648         72,566
 *Drug Screening Sys                      154,132         15,154
 *Eagle Auto Entrpr                        52,830          1,000
 *Employee Solution                        71,763          1,150
 *Equivest Finance Inc                      1,424         47,048
Fiberchem Inc                             260,394        300,871
 *Florida West Air Inc                    220,167         57,213
 *Fonar Corporation                        90,794         30,846
 *Food Integrated Tech                     10,700        156,500
 *Food Integrated Wts                           0        149,350
GB Foods Cp                               397,258        395,229
Gaming Cp of Amer                         279,582        261,775
Gentner Commun Cp                         218,460        282,345
 *Gerant Inds Inc                               0         65,105
 *Glendale Fed Bk Wts                           0        113,264
 *Grand Toys Intl                          52,025          2,273
 *Great Cntr Spon ADR                      27,240        273,058
 *H&S Treat & Relse                       187,645         92,207
 *Health Care Prods A                      52,000          7,500
 *Healthcare Tech Ord                           0         69,664
ICC Techs Inc                             396,474        333,234
Infonow Corp                               64,883        108,903
 *Innovative Gaming Cp                    187,652         49,618
 *Interline Res Cp                        196,676         17,260
Intl Fast Food Cp                          32,953         73,100
Intl Gaming Mgmt Inc                      400,467        540,842
Intl Retail Sys Inc                        81,400           N.L.
Invitro Intl                              452,447        435,936
Irvine Sensors Cp                         376,160        262,336
 *Kineret Acq Cp Uts                      182,734         65,878
 *LM Ericsson Tel Add                     383,297      3,553,462
Las Vegas Enter Ntwk                      136,655         81,332
Lasersight Inc                            187,822        122,313
 *Lasertechnics Inc                        85,136         22,165
 *Licon Intl Inc                            3,591         46,443
Lone Star Casino                          149,708        251,551
 *Lucille Farms Inc                        53,585          5,180
 *Magellan Restr Sys                       18,883        137,115
 *Malvy Tech Inc                           56,311          8,261
 *Master Glazier Uts                        5,700        135,360
Medical Dynamics Inc                      316,947        303,538
Microterra Inc                            269,950        301,110
Modern Med Modal Uts                      183,700           N.L.
N-Viro Recovery Inc                       322,475        320,850
Natec Resources                            31,012         74,714
Neolens Inc                               289,091        178,837
 *News Commun Wts A 95                    311,175        101,759
 *Of Counsel Ent Wts                      109,673          1,000
Oliver Trans Inc Uts                      165,145              0
 *Pantheon Inds Inc                       851,988        276,330
 *Parallel Tech                            76,292          9,565
 *Princeton Dental                         57,993          5,600
Projectavision Inc                        842,865        617,500
Quality Product Inc                       788,222        831,866
Response USA A Wt 97                       41,340              0
 *Response USA B Wt 97                     76,411         21,750
Royce Labs Inc New                         72,043        113,536
 *SMT Health Svcs                          93,615         42,750
SSE Telecom Inc                            30,450         71,571
Santuary Woods Mult                       120,810         74,863
Senetek Plc ADR                           347,250        327,412
 *Sherwood Cp                              57,877         10,795
Shuffle Master Inc                        298,741        319,839
 *Site Based Media Inc                  1,043,501        434,867
Skolniks Inc                              300,586        304,445
 *Sky Scientific Inc                            0         46,000
Solv Ex Corp                              266,344        268,900
Soricon Cp                                 46,173              0
Southland Cp                            6,406,597      4,658,857
Steven Maddens Ltd                        155,515        115,000
 *TJ Systems Cp                           311,179        127,181
 *TJ Systems Wts                          160,150         61,350
Telefonos De Mexico                       537,245        423,191
 *Telepad Cp Uts                            3,611         49,661
Touchstone App Sci                        117,549         71,602
 *US Lan Systems Cp                             0         87,100
+US Trans Inc New                         155,463        295,821
Urethane Techs Inc                        687,037        667,426
Voice Powered Tech                        261,958        201,888
 *Winners Entertn Inc                     180,711         81,084
 *Winstar Commun Inc                      105,416         37,201
Wisconsin Pharmacal                       507,746        424,828
Work Recovery Inc                         319,428        305,637
 *Xscribe Cp                               42,876          1,101


Short Sales Tables Explained

    These tables show issues with a short interest position in the current month
of at least 250,000 shares or a change up or down from the previous month of at
least 39,731 shares.

    Cover ratio represents the number of days, at average volume level, that it
would take to purchase the number of shares sold short.

    T -- National Market System.

    N.L. -- Not listed.

    + -- Stock split.

    * May have been affected by arbitrage transactions resulting from any one or
more of the following: proposed or pending acquisitions; convertible securities
of the same company; rights offerings; stock splits or distributions; tenders;
other special situations.

    Short interest may also be affected by options positions.

    * Indicates a change of 75 percent or more from the previous month.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1994


                             879 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   February 24, 1994, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE D11; DIGEST

LENGTH: 1436 words

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: From news services and staff reports

BODY:

   Sony confirmed that some U.S. cable and telephone companies have asked to buy
parts of its Columbia Pictures subsidiary, but the Japanese electronics giant
said it has made no decision. Sony bought Columbia in November 1989 for $ 3.4
billion.

   Philip Morris's board boosted the firm's quarterly dividend to 69 cents per
share from 65 cents despite a 37.4 percent decline in earnings last year. The
earnings decline reflected an accounting charge and the impact of a tobacco
price war. "The company concluded 1993 in strong financial condition and with
encouraging market share trends in our core domestic tobacco business as well as
good results from all other parts of our business," a spokesman said.

   The federal government posted an unusual budget surplus in January. The
government said it collected $ 15.6 billion more than it spent last month. That
compares with a $ 29.8 billion surplus a year ago, when the total was inflated
by a quirk in the timing of the mailing of Social Security checks. Last month's
surplus was largely caused by an unexpected decline in spending, one analyst
said.

   The Senate Banking Committee approved a bill that would dismantle many of the
regulations barring interstate banking. Under the bill banks would be allowed to
acquire existing banks in any state and to combine their bank subsidiaries in
different states into a single main bank with branches.

   Molten Metal Technology and Hoechst Celanese agreed to build a plant in Texas
for recycling and processing manufacturing wastes. It will be the first
commercial use of Molten Metal's catalytic extraction technology, which uses a
molten metal bath to recycle waste into raw materials for industrial use.

   The Clinton administration awarded another $ 190 million to companies,
schools and local governments nationwide to develop commercial products from
military technology. The announcement completed a yearlong series of such
awards, which now total $ 605 million, in a program to ease the burden of
defense budget cuts on industry.

   Canon said it will use PowerPC chips developed by IBM, Motorola and Apple
Computer in computers and other products. It was the first major backing for the
PowerPC chip, which will compete against Intel's chips.

   Eaton said it will cut 1,200 jobs -- or 2.4 percent of its work force -- and
close eight facilities in the United States and Canada in an effort to reduce
excess manufacturing capacity created by its acquisition of Westinghouse's
electrical distribution and control business.

   Two-year Treasury note yields rose to the highest level in 14 months. The
high yield at the Treasury's auction was 4.66 percent, up from 4.11 percent on
Jan. 25. The notes will carry a coupon interest rate of 4 5/8 percent, with each
$ 10,000 in face value selling for $ 9,993.40.

   Hewlett-Packard's purchase of 15 percent of Taligent, a system software
company, received regulatory approval. Taligent was founded two years ago by
Apple Computer and IBM. The Hewlett-Packard purchase will reduce Apple's and
IBM's stakes to 42.5 percent each.

   U.S. officials complained to GATT about new European Union limits on
whitefish imports, but stopped short of calling for a settlement panel, trade
sources said. The EU, the new name of the European Community, defended the
temporary measures, which affect cod, haddock, coalfish, hake, monkfish and
Alaska pollack, saying the bloc faced an "acute crisis" due to low prices.

   United Airlines flight attendants balked at joining an employee buyout of the
carrier unless United eliminates weight restrictions and pares its foreign work
force. The $ 5 billion deal does not depend on the flight attendants'
participation, but their cooperation would make it easier for United to create a
second, lower-cost airline to fly currently unprofitable domestic routes.

   First Bank System, a Minneapolis-based bank holding company, said its Rocky
Mountain BankCard System and Colorado National Bank subsidiaries received a GSA
contract to provide Visa cards to government employees for small government
purchases. It said the contract continues and expands a program its subsidiaries
have administered for GSA since 1989.

   L.A. Gear, which has been reorganizing, said it lost $ 16.9 million in its
fourth fiscal quarter, ended Nov. 30, compared with a loss of $ 31.8 million a
year ago. For the full year, the company said it lost $ 40.2 million, compared
with a loss of $ 79.6 million in the prior year.

   Dillard Department Stores earned $ 110.3 million in the fourth quarter, well
below Wall Street's average estimate. In the 1992 quarter, Dillard earned $
110.4 million. For all of 1993, Dillard earned $ 241.1 million, up from $ 236.4
million in 1992.

   British Aerospace's pretax loss narrowed to $ 350.2 million last year from $
1.77 billion in 1992. The company said it made progress last year on focusing on
its strengths in defense and aerospace.

   Viacom said the waiting period under federal antitrust law for its
acquisition of Blockbuster Entertainment has expired. The same period covered
Viacom's indirect acquisition of Blockbuster's interests in Republic Pictures,
Discovery Zone and Virgin Interactive Entertainment. The waiting period for its
acquisition of Paramount Communications expired Oct. 22, months before it outbid
QVC for Paramount.

   Office Depot acquired Yorkship Press, a Cherry Hill, N.J., printer of
business stationery supplies, for an undisclosed amount of Office Depot stock.

   Honda is studying the feasibility of setting up an auto assembly plant in
Mexico, where it already makes motorcycles and car parts. A spokesman said no
decision has been made but that Honda sees Mexico as a "high potential" market
for its cars.

    Kimberly-Clark and Unilever are forming a 50-50 joint venture in India, to
be known as Kimberly-Clark Lever, to build a $ 10 million plant in the state of
Maharastra that would employ 100 people.

   Universal Electronics said a federal court has held that its remote controls
do not infringe upon Zenith's patent.


   LOCAL BUSINESS

   Merry-Go-Round Enterprises of Joppa, Md., closed its Boogie's Diner in New
York and is seeking a buyer for its Georgetown counterpart. It said it closed
its New York store on Feb. 7 and shut the dining portion of its Washington store
on Feb. 13. A clearance sale to be completed between April 1 and July 1 is
underway at the clothing section of its Georgetown store, the company said.

   Genetic Therapy of Gaithersburg reported a fourth-quarter loss of $ 2.5
million, compared with a loss of $ 1.7 million for the same period in 1992. The
loss for 1993 was $ 8.6 million, compared with a loss of $ 7.1 million in 1992.

   Smithfield Foods of Smithfield, Va., said earnings increased more than
22-fold, to $ 11.7 million, in its third fiscal quarter. It cited "substantially
improved operating performance at our Bladen County, N.C., fresh pork facility,
and improved sales volumes and margins on both fresh pork and processed meats."

   Virginia Power asked the State Corporation Commission to block a proposal by
a Louisville Gas & Electric Energy and DuPont partnership to supply energy to
DuPont plants in Virginia Power's service territory. Virginia Power argued that
the proposed arrangement would violate state law by creating a new public
utility for the retail sale of electricity.

   First Virginia Banks' board approved the repurchase of as many as 1 million
of the Falls Church-based company's common shares to be used for employee stock
plans, mergers, acquisitions and other purposes.

   Geico, the Washington-based insurer, raised its quarterly cash dividend on
its $ 1 par value common stock from 17 cents a share to 25 cents. The dividend
is payable March 31 to shareholders of record on March 7.

   Tracor of Rockville said its Vitro subsidiary was awarded a five-year Navy
contract valued at as much as $ 39 million to provide systems support and
integration for anti-air weapons on frigates. The contract also calls for the
company to research and develop improvements in the Mk 92 Anti-Air Warfare
Weapon System and the Mk 13 Guided Missile Launching System.

   Bill McDown, a familiar face in Safeway's local TV ads and Savings Club
fliers, is retiring as senior vice president and manager of the company's
Eastern Division. James Donald, most recently vice president in charge of
Wal-Mart's SuperCenter Food Division, will succeed him.

   Government Technology Services of Chantilly promoted Frank H. Slovenec to
president. He succeeds R.M. Rickenbach, who will continue as chief executive and
chairman for GTSI, a government supplier of computer products.


GRAPHIC: CHART, CHINA'S GROWING AUTO MARKET (CHART WAS NOT AVAILABLE.)

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1994


                             880 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   February 24, 1994, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE D11; DIGEST

LENGTH: 1439 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: From news services and staff reports

BODY:

   Sony confirmed that some U.S. cable and telephone companies have asked to buy
parts of its Columbia Pictures subsidiary, but the Japanese electronics giant
said it has made no decision. Sony bought Columbia in November 1989 for $ 3.4
billion.

   Philip Morris's board boosted the firm's quarterly dividend to 69 cents per
share from 65 cents despite a 37.4 percent decline in earnings last year. The
earnings decline reflected an accounting charge and the impact of a tobacco
price war. "The company concluded 1993 in strong financial condition and with
encouraging market share trends in our core domestic tobacco business as well as
good results from all other parts of our business," a spokesman said.


   The federal government posted an unusual budget surplus in January. The
government said it collected $ 15.6 billion more than it spent last month. That
compares with a $ 29.8 billion surplus a year ago, when the total was inflated
by a quirk in the timing of the mailing of Social Security checks. Last month's
surplus was largely caused by an unexpected decline in spending, one analyst
said.

   The Senate Banking Committee approved a bill that would dismantle many of the
regulations barring interstate banking. Under the bill banks would be allowed to
acquire existing banks in any state and to combine their bank subsidiaries in
different states into a single main bank with branches.

   Molten Metal Technology and Hoechst Celanese agreed to build a plant in Texas
for recycling and processing manufacturing wastes. It will be the first
commercial use of Molten Metal's catalytic extraction technology, which uses a
molten metal bath to recycle waste into raw materials for industrial use.

   The Clinton administration awarded another $ 190 million to companies,
schools and local governments nationwide to develop commercial products from
military technology. The announcement completed a yearlong series of such
awards, which now total $ 605 million, in a program to ease the burden of
defense budget cuts on industry.

   Canon said it will use PowerPC chips developed by IBM, Motorola and Apple
Computer in computers and other products. It was the first major backing for the
PowerPC chip, which will compete against Intel's chips.

   Eaton said it will cut 1,200 jobs -- or 2.4 percent of its work force -- and
close eight facilities in the United States and Canada in an effort to reduce
excess manufacturing capacity created by its acquisition of Westinghouse's
electrical distribution and control business.

   Two-year Treasury note yields rose to the highest level in 14 months. The
high yield at the Treasury's auction was 4.66 percent, up from 4.11 percent on
Jan. 25. The notes will carry a coupon interest rate of 4 5/8 percent, with each
$ 10,000 in face value selling for $ 9,993.40.

   Hewlett-Packard's purchase of 15 percent of Taligent, a system software
company, received regulatory approval. Taligent was founded two years ago by
Apple Computer and IBM. The Hewlett-Packard purchase will reduce Apple's and
IBM's stakes to 42.5 percent each.

   U.S. officials complained to GATT about new European Union limits on
whitefish imports, but stopped short of calling for a settlement panel, trade
sources said. The EU, the new name of the European Community, defended the
temporary measures, which affect cod, haddock, coalfish, hake, monkfish and
Alaska pollack, saying the bloc faced an "acute crisis" due to low prices.

   United Airlines flight attendants balked at joining an employee buyout of the
carrier unless United eliminates weight restrictions and pares its foreign work
force. The $ 5 billion deal does not depend on the flight attendants'
participation, but their cooperation would make it easier for United to create a
second, lower-cost airline to fly currently unprofitable domestic routes.

   First Bank System, a Minneapolis-based bank holding company, said its Rocky
Mountain BankCard System and Colorado National Bank subsidiaries received a GSA
contract to provide Visa cards to government employees for small government
purchases. It said the contract continues and expands a program its subsidiaries
have administered for GSA since 1989.

   L.A. Gear, which has been reorganizing, said it lost $ 16.9 million in its
fourth fiscal quarter, ended Nov. 30, compared with a loss of $ 31.8 million a
year ago. For the full year, the company said it lost $ 40.2 million, compared
with a loss of $ 79.6 million in the prior year.

   Dillard Department Stores earned $ 110.3 million in the fourth quarter, well
below Wall Street's average estimate. In the 1992 quarter, Dillard earned $
110.4 million. For all of 1993, Dillard earned $ 241.1 million, up from $ 236.4
million in 1992.

   British Aerospace's pretax loss narrowed to $ 350.2 million last year from $
1.77 billion in 1992. The company said it made progress last year on focusing on
its strengths in defense and aerospace.

   Viacom said the waiting period under federal antitrust law for its
acquisition of Blockbuster Entertainment has expired. The same period covered
Viacom's indirect acquisition of Blockbuster's interests in Republic Pictures,
Discovery Zone and Virgin Interactive Entertainment. The waiting period for its
acquisition of Paramount Communications expired Oct. 22, months before it outbid
QVC for Paramount.

   Office Depot acquired Yorkship Press, a Cherry Hill, N.J., printer of
business stationery supplies, for an undisclosed amount of Office Depot stock.

   Honda is studying the feasibility of setting up an auto assembly plant in
Mexico, where it already makes motorcycles and car parts. A spokesman said no
decision has been made but that Honda sees Mexico as a "high potential" market
for its cars.


   Kimberly-Clark and Unilever are forming a 50-50 joint venture in India, to be
known as Kimberly-Clark Lever, to build a $ 10 million plant in the state of
Maharastra that would employ 100 people.

   Universal Electronics said a federal court has held that its remote controls
do not infringe upon Zenith's patent.


   LOCAL BUSINESS


   Merry-Go-Round Enterprises of Joppa, Md., closed its Boogie's Diner in New
York and is seeking a buyer for its Georgetown counterpart. It said it closed
its New York store on Feb. 7 and shut the dining portion of its Washington store
on Feb. 13. A clearance sale to be completed between April 1 and July 1 is
underway at the clothing section of its Georgetown store, the company said.

   Genetic Therapy of Gaithersburg reported a fourth-quarter loss of $ 2.5
million, compared with a loss of $ 1.7 million for the same period in 1992. The
loss for 1993 was $ 8.6 million, compared with a loss of $ 7.1 million in 1992.

   Smithfield Foods of Smithfield, Va., said earnings increased more than
22-fold, to $ 11.7 million, in its third fiscal quarter. It cited "substantially
improved operating performance at our Bladen County, N.C., fresh pork facility,
and improved sales volumes and margins on both fresh pork and processed meats."

   Virginia Power asked the State Corporation Commission to block a proposal by
a Louisville Gas & Electric Energy and DuPont partnership to supply energy to
DuPont plants in Virginia Power's service territory. Virginia Power argued that
the proposed arrangement would violate state law by creating a new public
utility for the retail sale of electricity.

   First Virginia Banks' board approved the repurchase of as many as 1 million
of the Falls Church-based company's common shares to be used for employee stock
plans, mergers, acquisitions and other purposes.

   Geico, the Washington-based insurer, raised its quarterly cash dividend on
its $ 1 par value common stock from 17 cents a share to 25 cents. The dividend
is payable March 31 to shareholders of record on March 7.

   Tracor of Rockville said its Vitro subsidiary was awarded a five-year Navy
contract valued at as much as $ 39 million to provide systems support and
integration for anti-air weapons on frigates. The contract also calls for the
company to research and develop improvements in the Mk 92 Anti-Air Warfare
Weapon System and the Mk 13 Guided Missile Launching System.

   Bill McDown, a familiar face in Safeway's local TV ads and Savings Club
fliers, is retiring as senior vice president and manager of the company's
Eastern Division. James Donald, most recently vice president in charge of
Wal-Mart's SuperCenter Food Division, will succeed him.

   Government Technology Services of Chantilly promoted Frank H. Slovenec to
president. He succeeds R.M. Rickenbach, who will continue as chief executive and
chairman for GTSI, a government supplier of computer products.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1994


                             881 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 22, 1994, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1525 words

HEADLINE: Latecomer Boston labs eyeing gene therapy

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Little more than three years after physicians inserted genes from a
laboratory dish into little Ashanthi DeSilva's white blood cells in an attempt
to treat a lethal immune deficiency, the new science of gene therapy is rapidly
gaining momentum. Hospitals everywhere are agonizing over how soon to join what
may become a medical revolution.

   Ashanthi and 12-year-old Cynthia Cutshall - the second gene therapy patient,
afflicted with the same disease, known as ADA deficiency - are both doing well,
and a federal panel has by now approved nearly 70 gene therapy experiments on
humans.

   Through it all, Boston, medical mecca though it is, has remained on the
sidelines. Researchers here follow gene transfer experiments elsewhere with keen
and critical eyes, and despite the promise of using genes as medicine, many have
taken the view that it is premature to jump into this brave new world of gene
therapy. But change may be in the wind.

   As a treatment for Ashanthi and Cynthia, the bioengineered bits of DNA that
researchers inserted into the girls' blood cells seem to have partially
corrected the inherited misprint in their genetic code that caused them to be
born with perilously weakened immune systems. No longer living in virtual
quarantine for fear of infection, the girls attend public school and live active
lives.

   In the wake of these historic gene implants at the National Institutes of
Health in Bethesda, Md., more than a dozen medical centers elsewhere have begun
testing gene therapies for cystic fibrosis and melanoma, brain tumors and rare
genetic diseases, heart disease and AIDS.

   But not one of those pioneering medical centers is in Boston.  "This is a
very conservative city," says Dr. David G. Nathan, physician-in-chief at
Children's Hospital. "We want to pioneer when we think we can win," he adds,
voicing some skepticism even about the results of the gene transfer treatments
in Ashanthi and Cynthia. And he argues that no unvarnished gene therapy
successes are yet on the books.

   To some desperate parents of children with lethal inherited diseases or
cancer, such cautious skepticism is maddening.

   "I have been inundated by patients who say, 'Why aren't you doing this now?'
" says Dr. Howard Fine, who is assembling a gene therapy program at the
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute that he says could be up and running within two
years.

   Boston's conservatism especially rankles Dr. Deane Marchbein, a Brookline
physician whose son, Caleb Marchbein Cohen, died last October at age 6, after a
long struggle with the inherited bone marrow disease called Fanconi anemia.

   Marchbein, who suspended her anesthesia practice to care for Caleb at home,
says researchers emphasize scientifically sound experiments and place
"importance on the fact that there are children who have no other options, and
whose families might want to take the risk" of not-yet-perfected gene therapy.

   Marchbein would not have to go far - only to Worcester - to find scientists
moving faster toward human gene therapy. Last year, University of Massachusetts
Medical Center officials recruited a group of gene therapy researchers from the
University of Virginia and built a brand-new gene therapy lab, and they have
announced they plan to begin human gene transfer experiments in June.

   "We're doing cutting-edge, front-line research, and we're probably going to
give the Boston hospitals a run for their money," says Dr. Marc Stewart, one of
the former Virginia researchers who is now head of hematology and oncology at
UMass.

   An estimated 3,000 to 4,000 inherited disorders are caused largely by a
defect in a single gene, a mutation or error in the genetic code for a
particular protein. Defective genes also play a key role in a number of more
common illnesses, like heart disease, cancer and diabetes.

   Although tedious and careful research over the past dozen years has made it
possible for scientists to use weakened viruses and other vehicles for getting
genes into patient's cells, the techniques are inefficient and have potential
dangers.

   In theory, the gene-carrying viruses could trigger cancer or serious
inflammations. Also, it is hard to target gene "carriers" to the precise spot in
the cell where they need to go. To get the imported genes to function at all is
not simple; to control the genes' activity is an even bigger challenge.

   Still, enthusiasts like Dr. Kenneth Culver, a former member of the NIH team
that carried out the historic first human gene implants, focus on the
possibilities, not the problems.

   "Some of us clinicians have a vision of how gene therapy is going to change
forever the way we practice science and medicine," Culver said - implying that
other clinicians do not see that big picture.

   Culver now heads a new gene therapy program at Iowa Methodist Hospital in Des
Moines, inserting experimental "suicide genes" into brain tumors that make them
vulnerable to toxic drugs.

   In Boston, scientists say they are keenly aware of gene therapy's potential
to attack a long list of lethal disorders, but they have argued until recently
that the field is too young, and that current methods are inefficient, the
chances of failure too great.

   Besides, Boston lacks a dynamic scientist "with a burning desire" to use gene
therapy "as a career path," as one doctor put it.

   Dr. Ronald Crystal, a physician trained at Massachusetts General Hospital,
has been testing gene therapy for cystic fibrosis, first at the NIH and
currently at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.

   "If I were in Boston, I'd be doing gene therapy," he says.

   Maybe, maybe not. Nathan, at Children's Hospital, says, "We are very unlikely
to undertake a study here of the kind that Ron did." He is referring to gene
therapy tests in which Crystal administered corrective genes for cystic fibrosis
into cells lining human patients' lungs. One patient suffered an inflammation
that forced Crystal to slow the pace of experiments - which Nathan says is just
what he would have predicted.

   In just the past few months, however, the beginnings of a dramatic shift have
emerged, and now at least two Boston hospitals are moving toward the large
financial and institutional commitment needed to start gene therapy.

   MGH's key research committee and trustees have given a green light - but as
yet no funds - to a gene therapy program.

   "I think the tide has turned," says Dr. Mason Freeman, an MGH physician who
visited several hospitals that have opened their doors for gene therapy. "I
think we have succeeded in convincing people who were initially skeptical that
this is an effort we have to make," he says.

   Fine, the brain tumor specialist at Dana-Farber, echoes other Boston
scientists when he says one reason for lagging behind is that current methods of
delivering genes into cells are primitive. "We want to begin when we think we
have something novel and more likely to help patients," he says.

   Even Richard Mulligan of Cambridge, one of the leading developers of gene
therapy techniques but also one of the strongest cautionary voices, now says
it's time to move ahead.

   "Right about now is time to set up a gene therapy effort," says Mulligan, a
member of the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research in Cambridge.

   After years of poking intellectual holes in the gene therapy experiments of
those who were moving ahead faster, Mulligan is now collaborating on human
testing of a genetic "cancer vaccine" manufactured by a company with which he is
involved, Somatix Therapy Corp. in Alameda, Calif.

   Patients are receiving the engineered genes not in Boston, but at Johns
Hopkins Hospital in Maryland. However, Mulligan has been working with MGH
researchers on a variation of the experiment that would involve patients at
Mass. General. In fact, an application to carry out the work has been filed with
the Harvard University biosafety committee - the first gene therapy proposal
submitted to that panel, says Freeman.

   Dr. John Potts, chief of medicine at Mass. General, strongly supports gearing
up for gene therapy, but he warns that it will be expensive: Other medical
centers are spending from $ 15 million to $ 40 million to open their programs.

   "We have the breadth and depth of research in Boston, the molecular biology
and the cell biology and the clinical investigators," says Potts. "But what we
need is leadership and focus, and we're a year or more behind."

   From his home in North Olmsted, Ohio, Raj DeSilva, father of pioneering
patient Ashanthi, can sympathize with the caution of the researchers and the
frustration of desperate families of children who might someday benefit.

   "It's heartbreaking, and I understand it perfectly," he said of Marchbein,
who lost a son. But DeSilva, an electrical engineer, knows as well as any
genetic scientist that no one can predict what long-term price may yet be
exacted for what now appears "like a miracle."

   "You just don't do things to human life without great caution. I look at
Ashi," as he calls his daughter, "and I think, 'Twenty years from now, will I
still feel we did the right thing?' I will wonder about that for the rest of my
life."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Dr. Deane Marchbein sits in the room of her deceased son, Caleb,
who died last fall from Fanconi anemia at age 6. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / PAM BERRY

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1994


                             882 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                 February 22, 1994 Tuesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SCI; Pg. 6F

LENGTH: 2040 words

HEADLINE: MIND-EXPANDERS 1994 MICHIGAN'S BEST SCIENCE TEACHERS SHOW STUDENTS HOW
TO FIGURE THINGS OUT

BYLINE: NANCY ROSS-FLANIGAN, Free Press Science Writer

BODY:

   Science class.

   Oh yeah, that's where you've gotta memorize a bunch of stuff like
deoxyribonucleic acid and the life cycle of liverworts. Then you cut up some
nasty-smelling dead frog and squint through a microscope but can't quite see
what the teacher says you're supposed to see. If you're a real brain, you might
ace the class. Otherwise, you just grit your teeth and try to get through it.

   Maybe that's how you remember science class. But if visionary science
educators in Michigan have their way, today's kids may remember their science
classes differently. Heck, they may even remember what they learned there.

   Through individual programs and a bold initiative for statewide reform,
Michigan is looking to radically overhaul how science is taught, from
kindergarten through high school. Among the ideas educators are talking about
and trying are:

   * Science success for all -- keeping high standards for motivated students
without leaving low achievers behind.

   * Teaching fewer concepts, but teaching them in more depth -- the "less
taught is more learned" philosophy.

   * Treating science and math as tools for understanding and acting in the real
world, not just as collections of facts and skills.

   * Getting parents more involved in their children's science education.

   Somebody's got to do something, the reformers say -- not just in Michigan,
but across America. More and more jobs require high levels of competence in
science and math. Even Americans whose jobs don't require it need scientific
savvy to make sense of increasingly technical issues: whether to worry about
irradiated food or milk from cows treated with genetically engineered hormones,
how to sort out the benefits and risks of human gene therapy, how concerned to
be about destruction of the rain forests.

   Yet in the face of these needs, American students lag far behind their
counterparts in other countries, many studies have shown.

   That's what prompted the American Association for the Advancement of Science
to draft "Science for All Americans" as part of Project 2061 -- a long-term
effort to restructure the way science is taught. That 1989 report serves as a
blueprint for efforts in several states, including Michigan. The state's efforts
gained momentum in 1992 when the National Science Foundation awarded Michigan a
$10-million grant for system-wide changes in science education, with emphasis on
reaching schools with traditionally underachieving students.

   Driven by the new guidelines -- and by their own inspiration -- Michigan
teachers are putting innovations into action. The winners of this year's
Michigan Science Teacher of the Year awards, sponsored by the Detroit Free Press
and the Michigan Science Teachers Association, are A-plus examples.

   In Whitmore Lake, expect to find Michael Krebill's seventh-graders crawling
around looking for worms every spring.

   Using a technique he calls structured choice, Krebill lets middle schoolers
choose from a list of activities -- some very challenging, some easier, some
just for fun -- that help them grasp scientific concepts. Some activities are
required, but kids earn points by choosing others to do alone, in groups or as a
class.

   In the worm and soil conservation unit, for example, they can choose to
estimate the number of night crawlers in their backyards, dissect a worm and
draw its insides. Kids who accumulate 40 points earn a Worm Doctor (WD) degree,
complete with certificate. Most try to rack up more than 100 points for an
A-plus.

   "One of our missions here is to produce independent learners, and this
certainly gets at it very quickly" says Krebill.

   This is "science success for all" in action. The point is to stop aiming
science instruction at only the brightest students, leaving the rest with blank
stares. The idea is not to lower standards or dumb down the curriculum, it's to
find ways of getting science across to all students, regardless of their
abilities.

   At Plymouth Canton High School, Stephen Rea encourages teamwork and asks
better students to help those who don't catch on as quickly.

   "We're finding from corporations and major universities a greater emphasis on
the need to work together cooperatively on projects," Rea says. So students who
learn that skill will have an advantage.

   Watch Rea, and you don't get the sense that he's sugarcoating science. Sure,
he has kids pitch eggs into a sheet and does a demonstration with a
bungee-jumping Ken doll to bring physics principles to life. But he also uses
the usual graphs and equations.

   Yet even he agrees that the "less taught is more learned" concept -- if
properly used -- has its place.

   At first, the less-is-more notion may sound like a cop-out: If kids can't
learn everything, just teach them what they can learn, and call that success.

   But that's not the idea at all, science educators say. The point is to
identify what people need to know to be well- informed about science and
technology, then teach those topics in enough depth to assure real
understanding. Broad concepts and problem-solving skills are stressed, rather
than memorization of minute details and definitions.

   For example, in the Project 2061 view, students should know that the main
function of living cells is putting together protein molecules according to
instructions coded in DNA molecules. It's not soimportant that they know the
terms "ribosome" or "deoxyribonucleic acid."

   "Nobody ever saved a rain forest or made a better automobile engine or
developed a way of reducing deaths due to heart disease . . . by memorizing a
list of scientific terms and formulas and getting them all right on a short
answer test," wrote the authors of "Scientific Literacy and Mathematical Power
for All," a 1991 Michigan Department of Education report.

   Hands-on science has been touted as an alternative to dry lectures and rote
memorization. But science education has to go beyond that.

   "It's not so simple as just doing activities," explains Dr. Richard Moyer, a
University of Michigan-Dearborn professor of science education. "It's
structuring activities so they are truly explorations of ideas." In educational
lingo, it's the difference between hands-on and "minds-on."

   The difference is clear in Beth Clawson's sixth-grade science class at
Golightly Educational Center, an alternative Detroit public school.

   Students in aprons and safety goggles work in small groups on an exercise
about gases. They put vinegar and magnesium into a test tube, corking it. They
put vinegar and baking soda into a small bottle and stretch a balloon over the
bottle's mouth.

   It's a typical chemistry class activity, but what comes next isn't so
typical. Instead of mindlessly recording observations in a notebook or listening
to a teacher's explanation, Clawson's students speculate about what they've
seen.

   They figure out why there was a loud pop when they stuck a flame into the
test tube, and why the flame went out when they stuck it into the bottle. But
they also point out things they noticed on their own.

   Amy McDuffee observes that the balloon inflated when it was stretched over
the top of the bottle and offers an explanation: "Oxygen in the bottle was
pushed up into the balloon by carbon dioxide."

   "I could tell there was both hydrogen and oxygen in the test tube," Goldie
Patrick volunteers. "I know, because water vapor formed on the inside of the
test tube."

   Clearly, these kids' minds have been as busy as their hands.

   Arlene Hicks saw the same thing when her students at Pierce Middle School in
Grosse Pointe Park connected two aquariums with a gutter to make a model river.

   "At first, they just put a bunch of stuff in there to make it pretty. Then --
and this is what I wanted to happen -- kids started coming to me and saying,
'You know, those plants are in the wrong place. And the stream is moving too
fast -- it needs some rocks to slow it down,' " says Hicks.

   "Children always think that the teacher is going to give the answers. I don't
want my students to be like that. I want my students to say, 'Just give me some
guidance here -- I can find the answer on my own.' "

   Capturing parents' interest is almost as important as engaging their
children's minds, educators say. "Where we have good parental support, we have
good achievement," says Dick Braun, a longtime science educator who now works
for the Great Lakes Collaborative in Belleville, a project that uses computer
networks to provide classroom resources and let teachers exchange ideas.

   Involving parents isn't an afterthought for Clawson. When school lets out for
vacations, she sends home instructions and materials for science activities kids
can do with their families. She holds workshops to show parents how to help
their kids with science fair projects, and she trains moms and dads to teach
mini-classes at a four-day science camp every spring.

   Changes aren't just happening in the classrooms of Clawson, Hicks, Rea and
Krebill. As enthusiastic educators share ideas and teaching techniques, they're
spreading throughout the state.

   Yet there are stumbling blocks to widespread reform: unenlightened school
administrators; teaching schedules that don't allow time to breathe, much less
think creatively; inadequate teacher training and professional development;
tight budgets and scarce classroom equipment.

   "They're talking about the information superhighway, but I don't even have a
phone line and a modem in my classroom," says one teacher who scrounges
classroom materials from the trash at a local community college.

   But where investments are made, they never fail to pay off, Braun says.

   "Because of a few dollars in technology in a classroom, a teacher has caught
fire. And if you have a fired-up teacher, students will follow along."

   NAME: Michael Krebill

   AGE: 51

   EXPERIENCE: 20 years

   SCHOOL: Whitmore Lake Middle School, Whitmore Lake. Teaches seventh grade
life science, eighth grade physical science, first aid and safety for
eighth-graders and an elective course for seventh- and eighth-graders on edible
wild plants.

   TEACHING TRADEMARKS: Developed "structured choice" approach to let kids work
alone or in small groups, at their own pace; has published a teachers' guide to
the method called "Kid Tested, Kid Approved." Recruits residents to take kids
out on pontoon boats for fish and water quality surveys; annual science canoe
trip on Huron River.

   QUOTE: "To me, there should be a lot of doing of science, as well as just
listening. . . . I want kids who come into my science class who have not
necessarily liked science that much before to love science when they leave."

   NAME: Arlene Hicks

   AGE: 45

   EXPERIENCE: 22 years

   SCHOOL: Pierce Middle School, Grosse Pointe Park. Teaches seventh grade life
science.

   TEACHING TRADEMARKS: Uses toys to teach measurement and science concepts; has
students make pop-up books on science topics to read to younger children; has
assembled impressive collection of biological specimens -- from dog heartworms
to squid; made a planetarium out of plastic bags and a telescope out of plastic
pipe; puts on such classroom dramatizations as "Mother Chloroplast," giving her
recipe for photosynthesis.

   QUOTES: "I try to begin each day with the thought that all the children that
I teach are potential world problem-solvers."

   NAME: Beth Clawson

   AGE: 58

   EXPERIENCE: About 23 years teaching science, health and physical education;
also has taught driver education and swimming.

   SCHOOL: Golightly Educational Center, Detroit. Teaches science and health.

   TEACHING TRADEMARKS: Yearly recycling and neighborhood tree- planting
projects; takes students to science camp every year; involves parents through
workshops and take-home science activities; brings the world to her students
through pictures and souvenirs of her travels -- stalks of cotton, beach sand,
desert poppies, volcanic ash from Costa Rica.

   QUOTES: "I really believe that you can teach any scientific concept to any
student, K-12, as long as you do it in a way that makes it live to them.

   . . . If, on an elementary level, I can make the world make sense to
children, then when they grow up, it will make sense, and they'll make better
decisions."

   ***

NOTES: SCIENCE TEACHERS OF THE YEAR
BODY & MIND; COVER STORY

GRAPHIC: Photo Color

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             883 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 20, 1994, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 1213 words

HEADLINE: A three track attack;
In pursuit of its first product, OraVax targets ulcers, children's pneumonia and
'the runs';
EMERGING BUSINESS

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE

BODY:

   A liquid vaccine against "Montezuma's revenge." A pill to prevent ulcers. An
inhalant to immunize frail infants and the elderly against pneumonia.

   OraVax Inc. is staking its fortunes on getting one or all of those products
to physicians and pharmacists within the next five years.

   "We think we're ahead of our competition," said the OraVax president, Lance
R. Gordon. "We see a family of oral vaccines to treat infectious disease that
will replace injected products as well as create new ones."

   Founded four years ago with research from the Harvard Medical School and the
Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, and financed with more than $
16 million in venture and private investor capital, OraVax has embarked on an
ambitious search for oral vaccines and related therapeutic drugs.

   While the potential rewards are dazzling, there's stiff competition in at
least two of the three areas and the scientific obstacles are formidable.

   "I have some doubts, and I wish them luck," said Dr. Sandor Szabo, associate
professsor of pathology at Harvard University Medical School. "We have had
problems developing a vaccine for the common cold, because there are so many
variations of the virus. So to find one for ulcers - well, I think it's like
shooting a fly in a dark room."

   In fact, oral vaccinations have eluded scientists for years because of the
difficulty of getting medication through the linings of the stomach, respiratory
and urinary tracts and the surface of the nose and eyes. These surfaces are the
body's most extensive natural barriers to infections and, as such, are good at
resisting vaccines.

   It is recent scientific advances in understanding these natural defense
mechanisms and how to get around them that are at the core of OraVax's work.

   The company's broad mission is developing drugs and vaccines that can be
swallowed or inhaled - to target a variety of infectious diseases. And even an
ulcer is now considered an infectious disease.

    On Feb, 9. an independent panel of 15 medical authorities reported that most
stomach ulcers, which seriously affect four million Americans, can be cured by
treating the root cause, a bacteria known as helicobacterium pylori. Using
antimicrobial agents and antibiotics the bacteria can be killed, potentially
eliminating peptic ulcers and severe gastritis, and perhaps lessening the
incidence of stomach cancer, according to the scientists convened by the
National Institutes of Health.

   Although helicobacterium pylori has been suspected as the cause of ulcers for
more than a decade, the NIH panel's ruling gives new support to OraVax's search
for an ulcer vaccine.

   A vaccine works by stimulating production of antibodies against a specific
infectious agent. Later, when a person is exposed to a real threat, the
antibodies provide a quick response and allow the immune system to fight off the
infection.

   OraVax has a proposed vaccine that is based on an enzyme produced by
helicobacterium pylori, which it plans to test in human later this year.

   "We don't think anyone else is even close to us in ulcer vaccines," said
Robert B. Rombauer, OraVax vice president of business development.

   In addition to boosting OraVax's bottom line, federal Food and Drug
Adminsitration approval of such a vaccine could seriously erode the $ 7 billion
ulcer-remedy market.

   And then there's Respiratory Synctial Virus, a respiratory virus that puts
90,000 American children each year under the age of 2 in the hospital with
pneumonia and bronchitis. Worldwide, the infection causes one million deaths
annually.

   To combat it, OraVax has developed a nasal spray. The company hopes it will
prove effective in preventing those who take it from catching the viral
infection.

   Beginning next month, 10 to 20 adults at Johns Hopkins University in
Baltimore will test the nasal spray to determine its safety. If the product
surmounts that first hurdle, OraVax will move on to more advanced trials of
effectiveness in children. The goal is to get the spray through the FDA approval
cycle and onto the market by the end of 1998. It would be OraVax's first
product.

   There's competition in this field.

   Last Monday, scientists at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases in Bethesda, Md., and the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla,
Calif., reported that they have developed a novel genetic therapy to cure the
respiratory viral infection in mice.  Scripps has completed its animal trials
and will begin human testing next month.

   Meanwhile, MedImmune Inc. of Gaithersburg, Md., is further along in human
testing with its injectable childhood penumonia treatment. And several major
drug companies, including Lederle Laboratories and SmithKline Beecham are also
developing respiratory virus treatments.  MedImmune estimates that the market
for a vaccine is upward of $ 400 million.

   The largest product candidate in OraVax's arsenal is its proposed "travelers'
vaccine." Sometimes called "Montezuma's revenge" and "tourista," the diarrhea
"runs" could be history in the next five years, OraVax officials say.

   Working on behalf of the US Army with researchers at the Walter Reed Medical
Center in Bethesda, Md., OraVax is developing both a pill and a liquid vaccine
against the ailment - most frequently contracted by drinking tainted water. The
company is developing two different vaccines, targeting different strains of
travelers diarrhea, and testing them at the University of Maryland's Center for
Vaccine Development.

   As currently envisioned, a soldier or traveler heading for the tropics would
swallow a liquid or a pill three times a day for 10 days to become immune to
water-borne diarrhea. A small-scale trial of the vaccine produced promising
results last summer; a second test is slated for this summer.

   OraVax estimates there is a $ 300 million to $ 400 million worldwide market
for a traveler's vaccine.

   To get all these vaccines and treatments to market will require as much as $
400 million, Rombauer estimated, noting that OraVax will seek pharmaceutical
companies as partners. "Suffice it to say that a lot of companies are interested
in the vaccine area," he said.

   The big drug houses would handle marketing and distribution with OraVax doing
the manufacturing. OraVax, which had planned to build a manufacturing facility
in Maryland, has recently decided to expand in Massachusetts - probably leaving
Cambridge for the Route 128 suburbs, Rombauer noted.

   To finance the expansion, along with initial human drug testing, the
50-employee company is looking to raise another $ 10 million to $ 12 million in
private financing.

   "OraVax has a terrific network of outside scientific collaborators and have
licensed some key patents which puts them in the lead for developing oral
vaccines," said Davis Farmer, partner in the Ulysses Group, a New York-based
medical market research firm.

   Still, OraVax faces an arduous journey to get its proposed products approved.
While the company has tested some of its vaccines in a wide range of animals,
the leap to human trials is a major step, especially in the coming years when
hundreds of people will be tested.

   If they work, the vaccines will be good as gold. If they don't, it will be an
expensive trip back to the lab.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/JONATHAN WIGGS / OraVax president Lance K.
Gordon and vice president Thomas P. Monath: "We think we're ahead of our
competition."

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1994


                             884 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   February 20, 1994, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 989 words

HEADLINE: Genetic study offers promise of "no more heartaches'

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   More than three years ago, Van and Raj DeSilva made a brave
decision to allow their 4-year-old daughter to become the first
gene therapy patient in history.

   Ashanthi DeSilva suffered from severe combined immune
deficiency caused by a deficiency in an enzyme called adenosine
deaminase.

   The defect was different from the one that afflicted David,
Houston's bubble boy.  But the effect was the same.  She had no
protection against disease.

   Today, her mother, in a telephone interview from the Ohio
town where the second-grader and her family live, describes her as
""perfect. ''

   But even her mother sees the current treatment as a short
step.  She envisions a future in which babies are screened for such
defects ""in utero'' where they will be repaired.

   ""I would like to see healthy babies, happy parents and no
more heartaches,'' she said.

   Ashanthi took the first step down that path when she received
an infusion of genetically corrected cells at the National
Institutes of Health on Sept. 14, 1990.

   But it was David, for whom there was no such treatment, who
cast a glimmer of light on that possibility with the information
doctors gained by treating him over the years.

   Cultures of his white cells now serve as living receptacles
of information at Texas Children's Hospital.

   Van DeSilva had read about David, but ""until my daughter was
born, it was just another story. '' She understood the heartache
during the next two years while doctors were at a loss to diagnose
her baby's condition.

   Meeting David's mother at the Immune Deficiency Foundation in
Washington, D.C., made it even more real.  ""It brings tears to my
eyes,'' she said.

   Without the knowledge gained from David, doctors would be at
a loss in dealing with immune deficiencies, said Dr. William T.
Shearer, the Baylor College of Medicine immune specialist.

   Indeed, without David, they would not have identified the
genetic defect that caused his disease.

   ""It's really amazing that we've come so far, and it's all
happened bunched up in the past year,'' Shearer said.

   ""We knew all along that it was on the X-chromosome because
of the inheritance pattern,'' Shearer said.  Mothers carry the
defective gene on the X-chromosome.  If they pass it to a daughter,
that daughter has a normal gene that performs the normal function.

   But a son who receives the abnormal X-chromosome from his
mother and a Y-chromosome from his father has no normal gene.  He
develops the immune deficiency.

   His form of severe combined immune deficiency occurs once in
every 100,000 live births.  Half of those cases are the X-linked
form.

   The defective gene affects the entry point on the cell for a
hormone called interleukin-2.  That spot is called the receptor.

   Interleukin-2 sparks the disease-fighting potential of the
T-cell.  But when the receptor is malformed, that does not happen,
said Shearer.

   The receptor is formed from proteins that three different
genes tell the cell to make.  In X-linked SCID, one of the genes is
defective and causes the receptor to have a shortened portion
called the gamma chain.

   IL-2 (interleukin-2) might be able to bind (to the cell)
without an effective gamma chain, but it doesn't do anything to the
cell.  The gamma chain is critical to signaling the cells.

   If the T-cells do not work, the B-cells will not either, said
Shearer.  It is a signal from the T-cell that activates B-cell
activities.

   ""The cells we have grown in perpetuity that are derived from
David actually contributed to this discovery,'' said Shearer.  Dr.
Warren Leonard, chief of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute's section on pulmonary and molecular immunology, led the
team in collaboration with doctors at Texas Children's Hospital and
Baylor, including Shearer and Dr.Howard Rosenblatt.

   Eventually, Shearer hopes that a gene therapy for David's
disease will be developed.

   If a doctor knows that parents carry the defective gene,
fixing the problem could be possible, Shearer said.

   ""If the parents have had one child with the lethal disease,
the next time a baby comes, it can be sampled in utero to determine
if it is carrying the lethal gene, '' Shearer said.

   Stem cells, which are the progenitors of the mature immune
system cells, are the best choices for gene repair because the
effect will be longer lasting, said Shearer.

   ""But there are very few of them,'' he said.  Doctors could
take the placenta, separate out the critical stem cells, insert the
good genes and then return them to the infant soon after birth.

   That was attempted last year in children with adenosine
deaminase deficiency, but there has been no information on the
results, Shearer said.

   In David's disease, the ""next step is to isolate the gene
for (X-linked) SCID and then take a normal gene segment to correct
it. ''

   ""Finding the lesion and knowing the molecular defect is a
big step forward,'' he said.

   Because of the difficulties of getting enough of the good
gene into enough cells to have an effect, Dr. Savio Woo, who heads
the gene therapy program at Baylor, predicts it may be another 10
years before a truly effective therapy is developed.

   And Shearer worries about how the problem can be corrected in
children who are the first in their families to develop the
defective gene.

   The Human Genome Project that is designed to outline the
makeup of all the estimated 100,000 genes in the human genetic
blueprint will be an important boost to attempts in correcting such
problems, he said.

   ""All this came about because of these children, like David,
whom we studied so intensely.  Ten years earlier, we would be
groping in the dark,'' said Shearer.

   Perhaps Elaine Potts, the nutritionist who found the sterile
food that kept David alive for his 12 years, described it best:
""Everyone should know that it was not in vain.  David contributed
to medical science. ''

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. William T. Shearer and Dr. Howard Rosenblatt; Buster
Dean/Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 1994


                             885 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   February 20, 1994, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1628 words

HEADLINE: A decade gone;
David, the bubble boy, still lives in many hearts

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   A mother and child embrace behind clear plastic -- a moment
forever frozen in white bas-relief, high on a sun-splashed wall.

   It is a private reminder of the son that Carol Ann lost so
publicly a decade ago -- David, Houston's bubble boy.

   Color photographs of her daughter Katherine, the stepchildren
she gained when she married Kent Demaret and the grandchildren they
share figure prominently in the decor of the elegant living room.

   But she keeps photographs of David in the private areas of her
home.  The bas-relief that decorates her living room wall is a
reminder only to her.

   Privacy was key during the 12 years that David lived in the
protected environment that was popularly dubbed his ""bubble. '' He
had bubbles at Texas Children's Hospital and his home in
Shenandoah, a suburb to the north of Houston.

   David was born with a form of severe combined immune
deficiency disease.

   To this day, the media are hesitant to use his last name
because of the conspiracy of silence that allowed the little boy to
live at home without public scrutiny.

   In the years since his death, the media have followed the
same policy with his mother, father and sister out of courtesy,
even though the original reason for maintaining his privacy no
longer exists.

   It was David's decision to try to leave the bubble a little
more than 10 years ago when his physicians attempted a bone marrow
transplant as a way of curing the severe combined immune deficiency
disease with which he was born.

   David suffered from an X-linked form of the disease in which
a defective gene is passed from mother to son.

   Carol Ann and her then-husband, David, had had a previous son
who died of the disease as an infant.

   His birth and death alerted doctors to the likelihood that
subsequent sons would also be affected.  David was born in a sterile
operating room and immediately popped into a small version of the
bubble that became his home.

   Over the next 12 years, the bubbles grew in size with David.

   Through the combined efforts of medical people at Texas Children's
Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine and his parents, he remained
healthy.

   Finally, at his urging, David's doctor, Dr. William T.
Shearer, agreed to attempt a bone marrow transplant, using
specially treated marrow from David's sister.  Her marrow was not a
perfect match, but Shearer hoped the treatment would prevent a
rejection reaction.  Ultimately, he wanted David to emerge from the
bubble cured and able to live a normal life.

   But that was not to be.

   David was ill when he emerged from his bubble Feb. 7, 1984.

   He died Feb. 22, 1984, of a cancer induced by a virus he acquired
along with the donated bone marrow.

   But although he has been dead 10 years, his memory lingers in
the hearts of Houstonians and others around the world.

   Katherine is 25 now, married to James Canion and early in a
difficult pregnancy.  But she was touched last week when a
fourth-grade class at the David School sent a list of questions
about David to her and her mother.

   Instead of cold, written answers, she and her mother visited
the Woodlands-area school named for her brother in 1990.

   ""They were so concerned and interested,'' she said.  ""And
they got so excited when we came.  As I was walking out with my
mother, I said, "Why don't we go out there every year and answer
questions. ' ''

   The school is a vivid reminder of the brother she lost.  ""I'm
still overwhelmed when I drive up. ''

   The ""normal brother-sister relationship'' she and David
shared was little different from that of others.

   Yet few older sisters sleep on a pallet next to their
brother's bubble or bring their dinner into the room where he
stayed when he was home.

   But Katherine would not have anyone consider them saints.

   ""We fought, too,'' she said.

   David might have fought with her, but he accepted his lot in
life, Katherine said.  ""He never wondered why he was in the bubble
or tried to escape.  He never asked why he was and I wasn't.

   ""He didn't have any regrets. ''

   February -- the cold month when David emerged and died -- is
always a difficult time for David's family.

   ""I remember how brave he was until the end,'' Katherine
said.

   Elaine Potts, the dietitian who prepared David's food,
remembers as well.

   She was there the day they put David into the bubble and the
day they took him out.  In between, she struggled to keep him
well-nourished with foods that withstood the requirements of his
life in a sterile bubble.

   Because he had never actually experienced human contact, it
was difficult for David to bear being touched when he came out of
the bubble.  But one day, he specifically asked Potts to visit him.

   ""There was no one in the room,'' she said.  ""I told him, "I
would love to touch and hold you.  But I know it bothers you. ' But
then he said, "Would you feed me? '

   ""I had fed him so many times,'' she said.  But when someone
else walked in the room, he told her, ""No more. ''
 ""A 12-year-old doesn't want someone to see him being fed,''
she said.  ""But he wanted that special thing from me.  It was a
remarkable event in my life. ''

   At Valentine's, Potts made sure there were hearts and special
food for David.

   ""On the morning he died, he called the nurses' desk and told
them he wanted to talk to me on the intercom,'' she said.  ""He
said, "I want to thank you for all the Valentine's stuff.  You never
forgot me.  I love you. '

   Her voice breaking, Potts said, ""He wanted to thank me for
what I had done.

   ""There have been so many special children here, but he was
the most special,'' she said.  ""He was unique. ''
 David's father finds it difficult to talk about his son.

   ""We still miss him,'' he said.

   During David's life, the family received a few crank calls
about the boy.

   But it comforts him that there is an outpouring of love for
the youngster.  ""All that makes this (the anniversary) a positive
thing,'' he said.

   He takes comfort in the fact that David is ""in a better
place'' and that other children with severe combined immune
deficiency now receive more advanced treatment for their diseases
because of what was learned from David.

   But that is little comfort for Shearer, the Baylor College of
Medicine immunologist who treated David for the last half of his
life.

   ""It makes no sense to me as a doctor why David had to suffer
that consequence,'' Shearer said.

   He has treated many patients with severe combined immune
deficiency, and statistics show that 50 percent of those who
receive a mismatched transplant like David's live.  Seventy-five
percent of those with perfectly matched bone marrow survive.

   ""When you think of all the several hundred children who have
been given marrow transplants, why did that complication happen to
him?  It bothers me.  Everyone had such high hopes and expectations,
and absolutely the worst thing imaginable happened. '' But, as David's father
said, life goes on.  The years
following his son's death have been full for him, he said.  He is an
accountant, and Katherine's presence in his office is a constant
comfort.

   He and Carol Ann have divorced, but they maintain a cordial
relationship.

   She is no longer tied to her home and enjoys her job in a
local bank.

   She frequently counsels other mothers who are dealing with
children who have immune deficiencies.  Those often late-night
sessions revive the sadness for her.

   During a recent conversation with a young mother, ""I was
quite moved by her.  And of course, my sympathies are with her. ''

   Many children are diagnosed only after they have suffered
significantly.  But she sees hope on the horizon.

   Recently she was elected as a board member for the national
Immune Deficiency Foundation.

   On Sept, 14, 1990, doctors at the National Institutes of
Health attempted the first gene therapy for another form of immune
deficiency on 4-year-old Ashanthi DeSilva.

   Each year since, the Immune Deficiency Foundation has held an
anniversary celebration to commemorate that historic first.

   When it became apparent that the therapy was effective in
1992, the foundation proclaimed, ""The Bubble is Burst. ''

   Carol Ann was hesitant about attending that meeting, even
though she had been specially invited.  But then she realized that
the foundation was honoring her and her son.

   This year's meeting will be in Houston during September in
remembrance of David.  It will be held near the first gene therapy
celebration and, more poignantly, near David's birthday on Sept. 21.

   Soon, Carol Ann hopes to see an attempt to treat the disease
that killed David.

   But David's legacy continues.  Using cells maintained in
culture at Texas Children's Hospital, doctors have identified the
specific defect in the gene that is responsible for David's disease.

   It made the difference for Katherine, who had been devastated
in 1987 when doctors said the best tests at that time showed she
carried the defective gene.  But last year, after the gene had been
carefully described, Katherine and Carol Ann were tested again.

   This time, it was good news.  Katherine, it appears, does not carry
the gene.

   But Katherine will only believe it the day she has a baby boy
and the doctors will be able to tell her it doesn't have SCIDS.

   Like David, his family voices no regrets.

   His nutritionist, Potts, though, wishes he could have had
some of the Coca-Cola she had sterilized and waiting for him.  ""It
was the only thing he ever said he wanted.  That's always bothered
me,'' she said.

   David lived in the bubble longer than any other person has
ever survived in a sterile environment.

   He was the first to live virtually his whole life in a
bubble, and doctors say he will be the last.

GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. The bubble boy's mother, Carol Ann (color); 2. David,
Houston's bubble boy (b/w, p. 22); 3. In October 1983, Dr. William T.Shearer
gave David a specially treated infusion of his sister's bone marrow cells in an
attempt to transplant her immune system into the youngster (b/w, p. 22); 4.
David at age 6, was able to leave the protected environment in this specially
designed ""spacesuit'' that kept germs and disease-causing organisms out (b/ w,
p. 22); Mug: 5. Carol Ann (b/w, p. 22, 3-star edition); 1. E. Joseph
Deering/Chronicle, 2-4 Chronicle file

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1994


                             886 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 1994 The Sunday Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Sunday Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            February 20, 1994 Sunday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 3101 words

HEADLINE: THE RIVERKEEPER

BYLINE: BRIAN T. MEEHAN, of the Oregonian Staff <

BODY:

   Sunday, February 20, 1994 THE RIVERKEEPER

   Summary: Biologist Errol Claire bucked the tide and saved the  Columgia's
last wild salmon stronghold

   A coyote howl mixes with the braying of cattle bunched at the gap in the
river fence. The winter air is sweet with sage after the rain.

   Oregon's last big wild salmon river digs in the dry valley floor. The John
Day ducks past painted hills and slips seven miles through the winter pastures
of the tidy Longview Ranch.

   A square-jawed man in khaki peers at the fence break. The John Day was the
riverkeeper's life work; his labors kept the last stronghold for wild spring
chinook in the Columbia Basin. It is a task history will remember.

   ``You won't make this work unless you make his operation work,'' Errol
Claire says of the ranch below and his efforts to restore stream habitat.

   The Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife biologist has been hawking
riparian management for 32 years. He's leaned on corral posts, stood up at  farm
meetings, flapped his arms and talked. Few in Grant County can match his
enthusiasm, or his lungs.

   ``Errol Claire is the kind of guy that if he were running a sporting goods
store and you walked in wanting to buy some salmon eggs, he'd sell you a
canoe,'' said Bill Bakke, conservation director for Oregon Trout. ``He could
have made a fortune as a salesman.''

   Claire kept hatcheries out when colleagues thought the future was a  concrete
fish farm. He refused to blame Columbia River dams alone when local  watersheds
were in ruins. He helped ranchers build river fence and held the  line on
habitat. And as he prepares to retire next month, Claire has seen the
department embrace his once lonesome view.

   ``Errol chose another route, to strongly oppose hatcheries and dams and to
push wild fish and riparian management as an alternative,'' said his boss, Jim
Martin, the department's chief of fisheries. ``It's the way leaders always
are,'' he added. ``They see a different vision and have the courage and
convictions to portray a different vision.''

   The result? Where most wild runs in the Columbia system have crashed or  been
mingled with hatchery fish, John Day salmon and steelhead remain wild.  They are
the last.

   The Longview Ranch is another ``win-win'' for Claire. The fence saves the
John Day from the cattle. Willow and cottonwood will grow shade and weave a
natural sponge that leaks cool water back into the river under the relentless
summer sun. A healthy riparian system, as the green corridor is called,
benefits fish, wildlife and the rancher. Cattle water at fence gaps; brush
anchors streambanks, cuts erosion and slows the velocity of floods.

   ``I don't think it's an either-or,'' Claire says. ``I think it can be a
win-win to a fairly high degree both ways. It does not have to be at the
expense of one over the other.''

   Part salesman, part scientist and part country philosopher, the talkative
Claire often faced a hostile public, and many people fiercely resented any
intervention or change. He represented an agency hated by many ranchers and
loggers. Claire missed school plays and ballgames as he traveled the
Massachusetts-sized basin. His family sometimes felt like second-class  citizens
as Claire's job dug a line across the rangeland of Grant County.  There were
those who drew a living from the land, and those who got in the  way.

   Mike Emmel was the first rancher Claire recruited in a Bonneville Power
Administration habitat program. Emmel's view is typical.

   ``Errol Claire is a friend of mine,'' Emmel said. ``This project, we were
the first one to do it and it worked out great.''

   But Emmel is no fan of the department, which he compares to the Communist
Party. ``I would say Fish and Game is one of the worst enemies a rancher has
got out here,'' he said.

   Claire became a legend in his agency. He helped defeat federal dam projects
on one of America's last major free-flowing rivers. He developed a smallmouth
bass fishery that grew from 82 transplanted fish in 1971 into one of the  West's
finest. He pushed wilderness protection for the headwaters of his  beloved North
Fork. He was a champion for wild fish long before they showed up on bumper
stickers.

   Biologists today understand the importance of wild fish goes far beyond
aesthetics. Wild salmon and steelhead are more resistant to disease, better
adapted to unique watersheds. Wild runs, though embattled across the  Northwest,
are less susceptible to the boom-and-bust cycles that dog hatchery  fish. And
for the future, the genetic diversity of wild stocks may hold the  key for
maintaining hatcheries and saving the Columbia's once mighty runs.

   ``The John Day basin is a true wild, untouched basin,'' says Mark Fritsch,  a
biologist with the Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs. ``We may not respect
that information now, but down the road that reserve may be a savior of spring
chinook in the basin. It's a wild genetic reserve, and we don't even  comprehend
its importance right now.''

   A model of restoration

   The South Fork of the John Day River is cloaked in brush. Mule deer have
rubbed bark off streamside saplings. Quail flourish in dense honeysuckle.
Native redband rainbow trout grow fat in a stream flecked with gold hummocks  of
grass.

   This stretch in the Murderers' Creek Wildlife Management Area is a poster
child for riparian management. It was not always so. The river healed itself
after Claire implemented a recovery plan. The beauty of Claire's program lies
in its simplicity: Limit the access of cattle; nature will take care of the
rest.

   ``It stands to reason that if you've got a stream that is wide and shallow
in the middle of the summer and you've got 100-degree heat beating down,  you've
got tremendous evaporation losses and you have no contributions to that
system,'' says the 54-year-old Claire. ``It's your ground water and springs
that have to feed this system. We're not dealing with a big lake, we're not
dealing with a big snowpack. So where are you going to get that water? You've
got to have a system that functions. And that's what's going on here.''

   Twenty years ago, the South Fork was tattered by 100 years of overgrazing.
In summer, the canyon's ovenlike heat pushed water temperatures into the
mid-80s. In winter, the absence of insulating vegetation made killer ice in  the
shallow stream.

   Claire and Guy Sheeter of the U.S. Bureau of Land Management drafted the
plan to re-establish the riparian zone, a concept as foreign as gene therapy  20
years ago.

   ``A lot of people thought we were crazy and couldn't understand why we were
wasting our time on less than 2 percent of the land base,'' said Wayne Elmore,
another pioneer in riparian restoration. ``A common comment was `these creeks
have looked like this for 100 years. Why do you think they can look like
anything else?' '' said Elmore, the BLM's national riparian field manager who
has known Claire for 20 years.

   Little was known about the John Day's wild fish when Claire arrived in  1959.
He had been raised on a family farm near Otis, near Lincoln City on the  coast.
As a boy, he chased steelhead and salmon on the Salmon River and  wondered at
the cycles that drew these gleaming fish back from the sea.

   The broad-shouldered Claire -- described by his boss, Jim Martin, as the
``Marlboro man without the cigarettes'' -- rowed heavyweight crew at Oregon
State and graduated with a degree in fish and wildlife management.

   He planned a career in Alaska, but two 1962 events shaped his future: He
took a job with the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, and he went on a
blind date.

   The elegant brunette seemed an unlikely match for the country biologist.
Carol Hauck had grown up in Salem and worked as a model. Young Claire thought
he cut quite a figure in his polished black 1961 Chevy Impala.

   ``I walked in there and here she was, I mean she was dressed fit to kill,''
he says with a chuckle. ``I thought, `Man, what have I walked into now?' She
laughs about this now. But I was thinking to myself, `Man, I've got me a real
gold digger here. I can't support this gal.' ''

   After a brief courtship, the couple married. Claire, the fish squeezer, and
his stylish bride honeymooned in the Murderers' Creek ranger station.

   After his first post in John Day, Claire transferred to the coast. The
couple spent five years in Alsea and Newport as Claire worked in the research
division. He grew as a scientist but yearned to be where the action was. He
went to Portland as a stepping stone.

   ``The districts were the best mix between paperwork and field work,'' he
said. ``The districts were the cornerstone of our state operation. And that's
where I wanted to be.''

   In 1971, a biologist slot opened in John Day. Claire's boss worried that  the
Claire family might not adjust to the isolated district. Claire reassured  him
and got the job.

   Though Carol Claire was happy to return to John Day, the years ahead often
would be lonely. The biologist collided with ranching and logging practices in
the resource-based community.

   ``When you are a policeman, all the people who are violators don't like
you,'' Carol Claire said. ``If you are a fisheries biologist, the ranchers and
the logging people, who are often very upstanding people, don't like you. It
puts you at odds in a small community like this. The lines are drawn pretty
firmly.''

   The couple's children heard the comments about their father the ``game
warden.'' Carol Claire felt a distancing in certain civic groups. The Claire
kids -- Kimberly is now 29, Chris, 25, and Jennifer, 22 -- grew up and left
home. But time did not erase the separation the couple felt.

   ``As Errol went on with his career, things happened on the job that  involved
more and more, and a wider range of people,'' Carol Claire said.  ``It's like
when you throw a pebble into a pond, the rings keep going out and  out and
out.''

   Errol Claire threw pebbles in a lot of ponds.

   ``I get along really well with Errol, but I know many people that don't,''
said Phil St. Claire, a rancher in Izee, in southwest Grant County. ``There  are
certain folks in Grant County that have no use for Errol Claire at all.''

   Over the years, Claire sold many ranchers on riparian recovery. A walk  along
the South Fork shows the mark of the stream doctor. Alder and cottonwood grew
back. New growth caught sediment during high flows; the river rebuilt its banks
and narrowed 30 feet. Deeper channels and summer shade lowered peak  water
temperatures 10 degrees, which became the difference between sustaining
cold-water fish and watching them die. Today, the South Fork supports a run of
1,500 wild steelhead.

   ``Of anything I did in my career or had a part in, this was what is most
valuable,'' Claire says. ``I was not an office boy. You have to do the
necessary paperwork to get the job done, but beyond that we have to put our
emphasis into the land. I'll tell you this is the bottom line for restoring  the
Columbia River fisheries. There's no doubt in my mind about it. We won't  do it
by high-priced artificial means.''

   A middle ground

   Overnight, a storm dusted the Strawberry Mountains with snow. Sunlight
punches through the overcast to paint gold stripes on the hills. Cottonwoods
glow like a silver fence along the mainstem of the John Day.

   Winter grips the wide valley, once a maze of beaver ponds, now an endless
hayfield. A cold front can't chill the fervor of Claire. He is showing a
visitor the fruits of his labors. Miles of river fence stretch west of town.
Many ranchers used fence paid for by fishing licenses; others just did it on
their own.

   Where the fence controls the cattle, the stream prospers. In places, Claire
has anchored juniper with steel wire to the banks. The junipers drape into the
river, providing cover for juvenile chinook. Wild salmon spawn up the road in
downtown Prairie City. Steelhead use the smaller creeks that crisscross the
valley. Here in the heart of agriculture, Claire has found middle ground
between cattle and wild fish.

   Claire's career has had its gloomy moments. In 1986, he was nearly killed  by
a wild-eyed gelding on remote Sutton Mountain, north of Mitchell in Wheeler
County. He broke five ribs and tore his left shoulder when the crazy bay did a
back flip. In 1982, a program to cull rough fish in the North Fork and Middle
Fork turned into disaster. The plan was to dose the river down to Kimberly  with
a poison aimed at squawfish and suckers. Unknown to Claire, the  manufacturer
had added a stabilizer that kept the toxic agent, rotenone,  active longer. The
poison traveled another 100 miles and killed thousands of  fish.

   Claire and other biologists worked day and night, dripping neutralizer into
the river. Fish stopped dying at Cottonwood Bridge, but the accident triggered a
firestorm.

   In recent years, Claire was criticized in the local press for Holmes Creek.
When the state announced plans to rebuild Oregon 19 over the creek, Claire
seized an opportunity.

   The stream dropped 15 feet out of a culvert. He persuaded the state to
install a 22-step concrete weir, or fish ladder, slowing the water and  creating
a series of pools to help fish cross under the roadway.

   Critics howled that the $150,000 project cost too much for a tiny stream
that sometimes ran dry. But the riverkeeper had his eyes on the future.

   Critics quieted last spring. For the first time in 40 years, about 60 adult
steelhead ran up the tiny creek and spawned. Claire was there to record the
event on videotape.

   ``We had the choice to sacrifice Holmes Creek,'' Claire says as the tiny
stream tumbles down the V-notched weir into the main river. ``But . . . I  could
not in good conscience do that because every 60 steelhead we lose is  just
another piece of the resource gone.''

   Claire's convictions go back to his days in the main office. He saw a film
about Hells Canyon Dam on the Snake River. When engineers drained the bypass
channel, more than 5,000 wild fall chinook were stranded and died. Salmon  would
no longer swim the South Fork of the Owyhee clear into Nevada.

   He also was moved by the mitigation report on Grand Coulee Dam, which wiped
out anadromous runs on 1,140 miles of river upstream. The report talked about
how for 10 years, the last of the giant Canadian chinook, called the ``June
hogs,'' beat themselves to death at the base of Grand Coulee.

   Claire left Portland with strong views about the Columbia.

   ``There's two great tragedies on the Columbia River,'' Claire said. ``One  of
them is flooding Celilo and the other one, of course, is Coulee. Those are  two
great tragedies.

   ``We should have left the tribal fisheries at their ancestral fishing sites
at Celilo,'' he said. ``Celilo would be so valuable not only to the tribes,  but
it would be so valuable in terms of the cultural interest and tourism it  would
generate. I mean for the long-term future, you can't compare what you  could get
out of Celilo if you had it there today. And it severely complicated Columbia
River management by losing that ancestral fishing site.''

   Claire made sure he wouldn't add a third tragedy to the list: fumbling the
last wild gene pool of Columbia River chinook.

   The ancient cycle

   A light snow falls amid the gray bluffs and old growth pine of the North
Fork Canyon. Shelf ice clings like an apron to the dark green ribbon in the
canyon basement. The river slips over fallen snags and gravel bars that  glisten
like jewels.

   The North Fork is the big producer in the John Day. The 112-mile river
carries the most water and runs the coldest. It is a sanctuary where wild
chinook and bull trout tilt against trends that have written their doom across
the Northwest.

   As twilight falls, a familiar figure gazes down at the river closest to his
heart. Under the ice, buried in redds, or spawning nests, a new generation of
wild chinook waits for spring and the renewal of an ancient cycle. Errol  Claire
dedicated his life to honoring the cycle, to guarding this place where  past and
future meet. Twilight is falling on the canyon, on a career.

   He does not gloat that he was right and so many others wrong about
hatcheries. He feels only sadness that the John Day stands alone. These are  the
last.

   Claire is retiring from the department, but he will not walk away from the
river. He will continue to spread the gospel of wild fish. He just wants to do
it on a part-time basis. He has a debt to repay.

   ``My family paid a price for my career,'' he says. ``They paid a price in
time I wasn't there, in days when I was preoccupied with my job. . . . I owe
something back to them. And I don't want to wait until I am too old. Because
they were part of this, too.''

   From the Big Red Wall in the lower rimrock country to mountain lakes in the
Strawberry Mountains, the riverkeeper left his mark on the vast basin knit by
the river he loves.

   ``I've left pieces of my hide over every inch of this district,'' he says.
``I have a footprint on every sandbar in this river.''

   Over 30 years, the riverkeeper slogged in boots through annual spawning bed
counts. He made the riverbank bloom with shade. He stuck his nose where it
wasn't wanted and struck bargains. But he never budged on one point: He owed
the future these fish. His enthusiasm never waned. Then and now, he is fueled
by awe for 15-pound salmon that flash silver in the green currents of the  North
Fork canyon.

   ``All I can hope is I had some small part in trying to do what is right,''
he says. ``At least I did what I believed in. I believe the John Day Basin is  a
living example that it is right. I think the John Day salmon resource is a
legend in its own right. It is surviving not in historic numbers, but it is
holding its own where many of these other fisheries have bottomed out. And
there are people now starting to ask questions. The John Day is going to be a
measuring stick a lot sooner than we realize because there are people already
looking at the John Day and asking ``What's happening in the John Day and why
isn't it happening somewhere else?' ''

   In the murky light of the canyon, one answer is clear: the John Day River
had Errol Claire.

   ILLUSTRATION: Color photo by STEVE NEHL/The Oregonian.

   3 BW photo by STEVE NEHL/The Oregonian.

   Graphics -- Map by The Oregonian/JOHN DAY RIVER.

   The 280-mile John Day River is one of 43 major, undammed rivers in the United
States. It drains portions of six mountain ranges. Historically, the river has
dumped the heaviest sediment load into the Columbia River. Today, riparian
recovery programs are helping to cut erosion and preserve habitat for wild
salmon and steelhead.

   See Graphics Notebook in the News Library.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             887 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    February 18, 1994, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 482 words

HEADLINE: Mrs. Clinton supports basic biomedical research

SOURCE: LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:


   BETHESDA -- Hillary Rodham Clinton pledged yesterday to increase White
 House support for basic biomedical research, saying that the work of medical
 scientists goes hand in hand with health care reform.

   The benefits of medical research could be spread to a greater number of
 Americans through reforms in the health care system, Mrs. Clinton said in a
 speech to researchers at the National Institutes of Health.

   "Health security not only means guaranteeing comprehensive benefits
 throughout a person's life; it also means emphasizing early diagnosis and
 prevention of diseases," she said.

   In a slap at the past two Republican administrations, the first lady
 complained that biomedical research had been "neglected and underfunded and
 even unappreciated" for much of the past decade. Those conditions will be
 rectified by passage of President Clinton's 1995 budget and the
 administration's health care reform plan, she predicted.

   "The work of scientists is more important than ever," she added. Despite
 an overall freeze on most domestic spending, President Clinton's 1995 budget
 has proposed a 4.7 percent funding increase for the National Institutes of
 Health, or $ 517 million, "most of it for basic research," she said.

   Before her speech, Mrs. Clinton met with NIH's leading scientists, who
 briefed her on their various programs, and met with several AIDS patients,
 including three children.

   She also met with Ashanti DeSilva, a 7-year-old Ohio girl, who three years
 ago was one of the first patients in the world to receive pioneering gene
 therapy -- a treatment that essentially repairs a defective gene -- to cure
 a rare immune disorder called Inherited Severe Immune Deficiency Disease.

   "Before her treatment, her life was one of confinement and fear," Mrs.
 Clinton said in her speech. "Today she is living a full life."

   At the White House yesterday, President Clinton continued his efforts to
 build support among the elderly for his health reform proposals by meeting
 with leaders of senior citizens organizations.

   The brunch session, following his speech Wednesday to 2,000 elderly
 citizens in New Jersey, was part of a White House strategy to gain the
 backing of the nation's influential senior citizens lobby.

   Officials from a dozen groups left the meeting promising to work in behalf
 of the Clinton health reform plan, although the White House failed to get
 the endorsement of the powerful American Association of Retired Persons.

   Horace Deets, AARP's executive director, said the Clinton proposals had
 the greatest chance of passage and addressed two of his group's minimum
 demands: prescription drug coverage and expanded long-term care.

   But Mr. Deets said AARP's membership needed more education about the
 Clinton proposals before it could make any recommendation.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, ASSOCIATED PRESS, Hillary Rodham Clinton talks with Tyler
 Griffin, 3, of Portville,  N.Y., who is suffering from a rare genetic
 disease.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1994


                             888 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                    February 18, 1994, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 16; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 527 words

HEADLINE: FIRST LADY PROMISES MORE HELP FOR MEDICAL RESEARCH

BYLINE: By MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton on Thursday pledged increased White House
support for basic biomedical research, saying that the work of medical
scientists goes hand-in-hand with health care reform.

   The benefits of medical research could be spread to a greater number of
Americans through reforms in the health care system, the First Lady said in a
speech to researchers at the National Institutes of Health.

   "Health security not only means guaranteeing comprehensive benefits
throughout a person's life, it also means emphasizing early diagnosis and
prevention of diseases," she said.

   In a slap at the past two Republican administrations, she complained that
biomedical research has been "neglected and underfunded and even unappreciated"
for much of the past decade. Those conditions will be rectified by passage of
President Clinton's 1995 budget and the Administration's health care reform
plan, she predicted.

   "The work of scientists is more important than ever," she said. "Without
basic biomedical research, we never would have achieved the quality of health
care that most Americans enjoy."

   Despite an overall freeze on most domestic spending, the President's 1995
budget has proposed a 4.7% funding increase for the NIH, or $517 million, "most
of it for basic research," the First Lady said.

   She listed several promising areas of biomedical research that could benefit
from the added funds, including AIDS, breast cancer and the Human Genome
Project, an ambitious NIH program that is attempting to map all the genes in the
body.

   Before her speech, Clinton met with the NIH's leading scientists -- who
briefed her on their various programs. She also met with several AIDS patients,
including three children.

   She also met with Ashanti DeSilva, a 7-year-old Ohio girl, who three years
ago was one of the first patients in the world to receive pioneering gene
therapy -- a treatment that essentially repairs or replaces a defective gene --
to cure a rare immune disorder called inherited severe immune deficiency
disease.

   "Before her treatment, her life was one of confinement and fear," the First
Lady said in her speech. "Today she is living a full life."

   At the White House on Thursday, the President continued his efforts to build
support among the elderly for his health care reform proposals by meeting with
leaders of senior citizens organizations.

   The brunch session, following his speech Wednesday to 2,000 elderly citizens
in New Jersey, was part of a White House strategy to gain the backing of the
nation's influential senior citizens lobby.

   Officials from a dozen groups left the meeting promising to work on behalf of
the Clinton reform plan, although the White House failed to get the endorsement
of the powerful American Assn. of Retired People.

   Horace Deets, AARP's executive director, said that among competing health
care proposals, Clinton's has the greatest chance of passage and addresses two
of his group's minimum demands: prescription-drug coverage and expanded
long-term care. But Deets said the AARP membership needs more education about
the Clinton proposal before the group could make any recommendation.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1994


                             889 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

             February 17, 1994 Thursday METRO FINAL CHASER EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 939 words

HEADLINE: FETAL DEFECTS CAN BE FIXED WITHOUT OPENING WOMB

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT Free Press Medical Writer

BODY:

   Hutzel Hospital doctors have developed ground-breaking techniques to correct
fetal birth defects without major surgery, in what they describe as a "new
frontier in fetal medicine."

   The use of so-called mini-surgery allows doctors at the Detroit hospital to
correct some life-threatening birth defects without removing the fetus from the
womb. It is less risky for both the pregnant woman and the fetus than
conventional fetal surgery, and gives doctors and couples more options to
correct defects that often jeopardize a pregnancy or require extensive treatment
after birth.

   The report in today's New England Journal of Medicine is the first published
case of doctors using mini-surgery to correct birth defects midway through a
pregnancy.

   The technique is a variation of endoscopic procedures -- known as Band-Aid
surgery -- that have revolutionized adult surgery to repair gallbladders,
hernias and other problems.

   Dr. Ruben Quintero, the Hutzel-Wayne State University School of Medicine
obstetrician and gynecologist who developed the new procedure, calls it
"operative fetoscopy." With tiny tools, Quintero makes one or two cuts, each
less than a tenth of an inch wide in the pregnant woman's abdomen, through which
long, thin scissors, miniature graspers, knot- tiers and tube-pushers can be
inserted. One tool -- an endoscope -- has a miniature camera at its end,
allowing doctors to actually see inside the fetus.

   "This is a historical moment in medicine," says Dr. Roberto Romero, senior
author of the report. "Now we can directly visualize inside the human fetus . .
. and treat some of the problems we have seen."

   Two to three percent of birth defects might be corrected this way, Quintero
says. These range from bladder and bowel obstructions to hernia repair. Now, as
many as three-fourths of fetuses with these defects die in utero, he estimates.
In cases of twins, a severely deformed fetus with no chance of survival usually
jeopardizes the healthier twin.

   Some 25 miles north of Detroit, in the Oakland County town of Oxford,
6-month-old Brittney Maslowski is a living, cooing result of Quintero's
research.

   "She's our little miracle," says Lynn Maslowski, 35, an Almont teacher who
was the third woman to undergo the procedure.

   An amniocentesis test during Maslowski's 16th week of pregnancy revealed that
one of the twins she was carrying lacked a skull, and that both fetuses were in
jeopardy.

   In a four-hour procedure, Quintero and a team of doctors inserted tiny
instruments through a slit in Maslow ski's stomach to tie off the umbilical cord
of the unhealthy fetus.

   Doctors had hoped the other fetus would dissolve in the womb, but when
Maslowski went into labor, it came out first, tiny and deformed. She delivered
Brittney by cesarean section two weeks early on July 28, 1993. The baby weighed
3 1/4 pounds and was hospitalized for nearly a month before going home.

   "We realized this was our only chance" to save the healthy fetus, Maslowski
says.

   Maslowski saved the medical records and pictures of the surgery to explain
someday to Brittney how she helped make medical history.

   The New England Journal of Medicine report describes how Hutzel doctors saved
the life of a South Carolina baby with an identical procedure, just a week
before Maslowski's surgery.

   One fetus lacked a heart, skull and arms. His twin was pumping blood for them
both through the umbilical cord, jeopardizing the healthier twin's survival.

   The woman, 24, was in her 18th week of pregnancy at the time of her surgery.
She delivered a healthy 5-pound baby boy on schedule 4 1/2 months later.

   The procedure has its risks. Both pregnant women required bed rest because
their amniotic sacs ruptured after the procedure, though one resealed on its
own. Maslowski leaked amniotic fluidthroughout her pregnancy, though not enough
to jeopardize the fetus.

   Until now, most fetal operations have involved traditional surgery -- opening
a woman's abdomen and correcting the defect. It is risky, complicated surgery
and couples frequently travel hundreds of miles for treatment at the few medical
centers that offer it.

   Without surgery, fetal defects may cause miscarriages, or the babies are born
severely handicapped and may need years of corrective treatment.

   The Hutzel technique may prove less risky to both the fetus and the pregnant
woman than conventional procedures. In fact, doing surgery early may be
beneficial, because the womb is an intensive care unit of its own, Quintero
says.

   "We now know that healing inside the uterus is a lot better than when the
baby is born," Quintero says. "There are many growth factors" that promote
healing, he says.

   Quintero adapted tools designed for heart procedures and mastered the new
technique using the tiny instruments on rabbits.

   The latest breakthrough builds on 10 years of work in fetal diagnosis
pioneered at Hutzel by Dr. Mark Evans, head of the hospital's internationally
known fetal diagnostic center.

   The procedures now take two to four hours. Once doctors become more adept,
they may be done in minutes.

   "The concept is relatively simple -- that's the remarkable aspect of it,"
Quintero says. "The actual doing is not so simple."

   Romero, who soon will leave Hutzel to become chief of the division of
perinatology at the National Institutes of Child Health and Human Development in
Washington, D.C., says fetal surgery and gene therapy advances someday may allow
doctors to treat a wider range of birth defects.

   "With all the developments to come . . . we'll be able to diagnose conditions
early and treat them," Romero says.

NOTES: SEE DIAGRAM ON MICROFILM, Page 8A;
SEE RELATED PHOTOSTORY, Page 8F

GRAPHIC: Photo Color RICHARD LEE;
Diagram Detroit Free Press;

:
(RICHARD LEE, Detroit Free Press)
Dr. Ruben Quintero, right, maneuvers an endoscopic camera while
a sonographer handles an ultrasound probe at Hutzel Hospital
during a recent procedure on a fetus inside the womb. Instead
of removing a fetus from the uterus, doctors now can correct
birth defects by maneuvering instruments through a tiny
incision in the pregnant woman's abdomen.
(RICHARD LEE, Detroit Free Press)
Doctors at Hutzel Hospital in Detroit perform surgery last
Wednesday on a fetus inside the womb. Using a new procedure,
they can correct some birth defects by manipulating tiny
instruments through an incision just one-tenth of an inch long
in a pregnant woman's abdomen.
(CUTLINES FROM DIAGRAM)
SURGERY BEFORE BIRTH
Mini-surgery techniques that have revolutioned adult surgery
now can be done on fetuses to correct some birth defects in the
womb.
Endoscopic camera is inserted through a slit in the mother's
abdomen.
Tiny instruments are inserted through the same slit or another
one nearby to cut, snip, grasp or push.
Untrasound machine shows position of the fetus.
Ultrasound and endoscopic camera images are displayed on a TV
monitor.
***

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             890 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                February 15, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 1; Science Desk; Medical Science Page

LENGTH: 944 words

HEADLINE: A Novel Genetic Therapy Holds Promise in Treating Pneumonia

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN, Special to The New York Times

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 14

BODY:

   A novel immune therapy has cured a respiratory viral infection in mice, and a
scientific report issued today says it holds great promise for treating the most
common cause of pneumonia in infants and young children.

   Experiments to prove the therapy's effectiveness in humans have yet to be
done. But in a report in The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
the authors said success with the animal experiments "may signal the beginning
of an era of immunotherapy" for many serious human viral infections, including
influenza.

    The virus targeted by the new therapy, respiratory syncytial virus, or
R.S.V., takes a heavy toll on people throughout the world. The infection causes
an estimated one million deaths a year worldwide, principally in developing
countries.

   In the United States, R.S.V. is the chief cause of early childhood viral
pneumonia and bronchiolitis and leads to the admission of 90,000 children to
hospitals each year. The infection often requires intensive respiratory care,
including use of mechanical ventilators.

   The new therapy can be likened to a targeted missile in which a genetically
engineered immune substance is introduced directly into the lungs. The immune
substance, known as Fab, is a tailor-made piece of a human antibody. Antibodies
are the proteins that defend against the invasion of viruses and other microbes.

   Last year in a preliminary report the scientists said they were "astonished"
by how effective the Fabs were in the animal experiments. The Fabs are part of a
broader area of research interest in the use of human viral antibodies to
prevent and treat many viral infections.

Targeting Specific Viruses

    Gamma globulins, which contain groups of antibodies, have long been used to
treat certain infections such as hepatitis A. But only a small proportion of
gamma globulins are specific for particular antigens, the foreign substances
that stimulate the immune system to produce antibodies.

   With new techniques, scientists have developed more specific antibodies,
known as monoclonal antibodies, that can be directed against certain antigens in
viruses. Scientists are using monoclonal Fabs, which are tiny pieces of immune
substances in the blood called immunoglobulins, to identify the number,
relationship and relative importance of protective antigenic sites on the
surface of many viruses to determine how the human immune system "sees" them.

   In the experiments, the researchers cured the infection in mice by
introducing small amounts of Fabs directly into their lungs. The research was
carried out by scientists at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, a Federal agency in Bethesda, Md., and at the Scripps Research
Institute in La Jolla, Calif.

   "This is the first time that a study has demonstrated the successful use of
recombinant Fabs in a therapy for a viral infection in an animal," Dr. Dennis R.
Burton, one of the authors from Scripps said in a news release issued by the
Federal institute in Bethesda.

   Although the research represents a significant advance, there is no assurance
that what works in animals will work in humans.

   The virus's chief targets are children 2 years old and under. About half of
the infections occur before age 1, with the peak age being about 2 months, and
re-infection is common among children, Dr. Robert M. Chanock, the head of the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases team, said in an
interview.

Decadelong Effort

    R.S.V. can also cause serious illness in adults with birth defects affecting
the heart and those whose immune systems are impaired, for example, as a result
of AIDS or treatment to prevent rejection of transplanted organs.

   Dr. Chanock said that for a decade his team has been working on ways to use
antibodies to prevent and treat R.S.V. Studies have shown that injections of
large amounts of human gamma globulin, which contains antibodies for R.S.V.,
protect infants and children at high risk for the infection for short periods.

   Dr. Chanock's team found that the therapy could be made several thousand
times stronger by introducing Fabs against R.S.V. into the lungs after mice were
anesthetized in the laboratory. No resistant strains could be detected after
such therapy, the scientists reported.

   Dr. Chanock said that delivering Fabs is safer than injecting whole
antibodies and that Fab therapy offers several additional potential advantages.

   One is that because Fabs can be produced in bacteria by recombinant
genetic-engineering techniques, such fragments are easier and cheaper to produce
than whole antibodies.

   Another advantage is that use of Fabs instead of the whole immunologlobulin
molecules from which they are derived reduced the amount of protein in a
therapeutic dose. The point is important, Dr. Chanock said, because only a
limited amount of protein can be delivered safely to the lungs.

Obstacles to Human Research

    Nevertheless, the researchers must overcome several hurdles before they can
attempt to test Fab therapy in humans.

   Relatively small amounts of Fabs are needed for the mice experiments, and Dr.
Chanock said the Scripps researchers could make the material in their
laboratories. But he said much larger amounts will be needed for the next step
in the research: experiments in larger animals such as monkeys and chimpanzees.

   Another hurdle is to develop techniques to deliver the Fabs as an aerosol for
eventual human use against R.S.V. Dr. Chanock said he could not estimate when
human trials can begin to test Fabs.

   He said his team is pursuing a different line of research, meanwhile, to
develop a vaccine against R.S.V.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1994


                             891 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   February 15, 1994, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z11

LENGTH: 5173 words

HEADLINE: GETTING NEW GENES;
A RADICAL TREATMENT FOR A FATAL LIVER FLAW;
ONE WOMAN'S STORY

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   Sitting in a hospital bed at the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center,
the 41-year-old woman looks perfectly healthy. She gestures dramatically while
she talks, winking conspiratorily at the doctors who surround her and slapping
the hospital bed for emphasis. When she shakes her head, she fans the room with
her full mane of hair. "The hard part," she says, speaking in her native French
through a translator, "is that I don't feel sick."

   But the woman, who lives in Quebec, is anything but healthy. She has familial
hypercholesterolemia (FH), a rare inherited fatal disease that causes
extraordinarily high levels of cholesterol to build up in the body. Children who
inherit the FH gene from their parents often have heart attacks before the age
of 10, as cholesterol deposits choke off the blood vessels that supply oxygen to
the heart. So severe is the disease that cholesterol-lowering drugs are useless,
and many victims need bypass surgery by the time they are teenagers. Most die
from coronary artery disease in their twenties and thirties.

   The woman's first name is Francine -- The Post agreed to withhold her last
name to protect her privacy -- and it's not clear why she has survived to the
age of 41.  A younger sister, who also had FH, dropped dead of a heart attack at
age 25. A younger brother, who had the same deadly genes, died of heart failure
in 1992. Francine herself has already had one bypass operation to replace the
cholesterol-clogged vessels in her chest. Left alone, her disease will almost
certainly kill her within a few years.

   But Francine intends to beat those odds.

   She has come to Philadelphia to be treated by James M. Wilson, a physician
and researcher who has devised a radical new genetic therapy aimed at
permanently fixing her fatally flawed genes. The experimental treatment carries
no guarantee of success. Indeed, there are life-threatening risks in the
procedure itself, which includes major surgery to remove part of the liver, and
it will take months to know for sure whether her new genes are working.

   Moreover, there is very little experience from which to draw hope. Only three
other patients have undergone the therapy: A 29-year-old woman from Quebec in
1992, a 12-year-old boy from Cyprus early last year, and a 7-year-old girl from
Colombia -- places where the culprit gene is more common than it is in the
United States. Although all are still alive, Wilson is only now preparing to
publish a report on his first patient. But if the therapy works as it has in
rabbits and baboons, Francine will leave the hospital with a brand new set of
genes to take over the cholesterol-lowering job that her body now is unable to
perform.

   Wilson's vision extends beyond FH, a disorder that affects only about one in
a million people in the United States. Success with these first few patients
could open the door to similar therapies for the millions of people who suffer
from other genetic diseases, including cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy.

   Francine too is motivated by more than her own predicament: Her surviving
sisters, nieces and nephews all carry the FH gene. "When I think about my
brother and sister who died so young, I think, 'How can this be?' " she says in
her room a few days before surgery, close to tears. "Now my brother has two
sons, and my sister has a son," all of whom carry the FH gene, "and I don't want
this disease to have any more progress."

   This is the story of Francine's gamble, taken earlier this month -- and of
Wilson's hunch, born years ago when he was a medical student -- that a deadly
disease can be cured by replacing faulty genes with healthy ones. It offers a
rare front-row seat inside the medical theater of the future, where the drama of
gene therapy is about to unfold.


   In Operating Room #1 in the hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, it's
clear that something out of the ordinary is about to happen. For one thing, the
medical center's two highest-ranking anesthesiologists are both in attendance,
offering double assurance that nothing will go amiss. For another, several
additional doctors and residents have scrubbed and entered the room to watch the
procedure, described obliquely on the surgical record as "left lateral liver
segment; Hickman catheter." Some have arranged footstools to gain better views
over the surgeons' shoulders.

   Perhaps most telling: This 7:45 a.m. operation is about to start on schedule.
"I've never seen the first surgery of the day start on time," a resident
whispers in apparent awe.

   The center of all this attention arrives silently on a rubber-wheeled gurney,
sedated but conscious. Looking up at the men and women in their powder-blue
smocks and face masks, Francine purses her lips in a half-hearted smile and
shrugs her shoulders in apparent surrender, her usual enthusiasm tempered by the
enormity of what she is about to undergo.

   "This morning, when I went to see her in her room, she cried," Wilson
whispers.  "But she told me, 'Don't worry, this is just normal crying.' She's
really determined to get through all this."

   The regimen that Francine is determined to get through is simple in
principle. Surgeons will remove about 10 percent of her liver, the organ that
normally sops up cholesterol from the blood but in Francine's case is failing to
do so. Then Wilson will whisk the living lobe to his laboratory, where its
billions of cells will be teased apart, washed and nurtured in petri dishes. Two
days later, these cells will be given laboratory-grown copies of the
cholesterol-processing gene they lack. Finally, the next day, the genetically
repaired cells will be infused through a tube directly into Francine's liver.
The hope is that they will make themselves at home there and do the job they've
been unable to do since birth, grabbing excess cholesterol as it circulates
through the liver and breaking it down before it can choke the body's blood
vessels.

   Simple as it sounds, the therapy could fail in any number of ways. Even if
Francine survives the extraordinary operation, her liver cells may not. Or the
finicky cells may refuse the new genes. Or the new genes may not function
properly inside her body, rendering the entire experiment a $ 75,000 exercise in
futility.

   But if everything works according to plan, Francine can expect a nearly
normal life, with her partially renovated liver bringing cholesterol levels down
enough so that cholesterol-lowering medicines can do the rest of the job.

   In a waiting room four floors below the surgical suite, Francine's husband
and mother sip coffee in silence. They've been told the operation could last
three to four hours and recovery from the surgery will take weeks. Wilson has
also said candidly that the procedure may not work. But the mother has already
mourned the loss of two children from the disease, and the husband knows that
Francine has exceeded her expected lifespan. They are Catholic and they pray,
but it is clear from the way they defer to the gene therapist whenever he enters
the room that they are also putting their faith in Wilson himself.

   Unlike his impassioned patient, Wilson rarely lets his emotions show. As
though concerned that an open smile might reveal too much of himself, the
boyish-looking 38-year-old barely turns up the corners of his mouth when he's
pleased.

   But now, in a rare display of insecurity, he is pacing about in the operating
room.

   Wilson has reason to worry about this operation, which differs from standard
liver surgery in two dangerous respects. Usually, he explains, when surgeons cut
away part of a person's liver -- to remove a tumor, for example -- they clamp
off the numerous blood vessels in the organ one by one as they snip, minimizing
blood loss. But that method also gradually cuts off the supply of oxygen to the
severed piece of liver, and, in Francine's case, it's critical that this tissue
survive. The lobe, which will be about the size of a dessert plate, must be cut
all at once, placed on ice and rushed to the lab. In doing so, several vessels
will be severed simultaneously and the surgeons will have to scramble to stop
the bleeding.

   "For me, the most anxiety comes when we rip through the liver," says Steven
Raper, the lead surgeon. "It's going to be cut, clamp and run," says Hansel
Stedman, the chief surgical resident who will be assisting Raper.

   The second set of risks involves the tube, called a Hickman catheter, through
which Francine's genetically fixed cells will later be infused. After removing
the piece of liver and before closing Francine up, Raper and Stedman must sew
that catheter directly into the large vein that supplies blood to the liver,
leaving one end hanging out of her abdomen. No other kind of surgery requires
this sort of tube placement, even for a few days, and for good reason. If the
tube causes a blood clot to form by irritating the lining of this critical vein,
Francine could suffer the equivalent of liver failure. And even if everything
goes perfectly until the end, there remains a risk that she will bleed to death
when the tube is pulled out, since there is no way to apply pressure to the
deeply buried vessel the way a nurse might apply pressure to an arm vein after
drawing blood. When it's time to perform that final maneuver, Raper explains,
there is nothing left to do but pray that the vein will quickly seal itself off
-- and rush Francine into surgery if it doesn't.

   Right now, however, Wilson's major worry is embarrassingly mundane.

   "I'm nervous," he says to Stedman. "Not about the surgery, but because I
don't know my way around this hospital."

   Wilson only recently moved to Penn, and the $ 3 million lab that was built
for him -- where he must bring the liver -- is located in the Moloney Building
next door, which is connected to the hospital by a labyrinth of corridors, some
of them under construction. What if he gets lost?

   Stedman signals across the operating room to Eric Cain, a third-year medical
student now rotating through surgery. Cain is accustomed to pop quizzes from his
mentor -- queries like "What's the best approach to removing a tumor from the
lower esophagus?" or "What are the major nerves to avoid when performing facial
surgery?" He strides across the waxed linoleum floor, ready for anything.
"Describe to me in perfect anatomical detail," Stedman says slowly, building
suspense, "the absolute fastest way to get from here to Moloney 6."

   The architectural question catches Cain off balance for a moment, then he
replies as though describing the best route to the appendix. "I'd take the
elevator to the first floor, go down the hall to the right, make a left at the
intersection, go up the stairs, down the hall to the Moloney lobby and up the
elevator to six. That's the absolute shortest way."

   Stedman nods with approval but maintains the upper hand. "I know a slightly
faster way," he says. "But you might get lost. When the liver comes out, lead
Dr. Wilson along your route to Moloney."

   Surgery is an act of immense violence, and abdominal surgery is perhaps the
most abusive of all surgeries. Once the protective layers of skin and muscle
have been breached, rubber-gloved doctors grope about wrist deep with apparent
impunity until they spot and seize their visceral quarry.

   To get away with this brashness, Francine's doctors must deal her nervous
system a knockout blow. So on the table where she will soon lie unconscious, the
patient sits up while an anesthesiologist numbs an area around the middle of her
back and then drives a tiny plastic tube directly into the bundle of nerves
running up her spine. Throughout surgery and for the next several days, this
thread of tubing will serve as a conduit through which a morphine-like drug will
drip, muffling her body's persistent messages of pain before her brain has a
chance to hear them.

   With everything ready at last, Francine lies down on her back and a heavy
black mask resembling a World War II fighter pilot's facepiece is lowered over
her nose and mouth. She takes a last look around, closes her eyes and breathes
the anesthesia.

   Three, two, one . . .  she's out, and a sudden sense of urgency comes over
the room. Trays of surgical tools are rolled to the center of the room,
surrounding the patient in a halo of sparkling chrome, and Stedman adjusts the
triad of pancake-shaped lights overhead. Then, with what seems to be very little
forethought, Raper leans over Francine's body and drags the scalpel hard across
her skin, just below the rib cage. A streak of red appears instantly, and it is
surreal that nobody shouts or swears.

   Francine remembers quite clearly the first time her disease brought her face
to face with a scalpel. She was a 14-year-old schoolgirl, as yet undiagnosed
with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), and fleshy lumps of tissue had been
growing on her elbows.

   "I used to study a lot, and I'd lean on my elbows when I studied, and they
thought the bumps were from that," she recounted a few days before her recent
surgery. Her doctor cut off the strange growths and considered her cured. But
had he performed some chemical analysis on the tissues, he would have made a
strange discovery: The lumps were made of cholesterol.

   It turns out that lumpy deposits of cholesterol, called xanthomas, are common
in people with FH -- evidence of the body's desperate attempt to stash its
oversupply of the fatty compound. By the time Francine celebrated her 21st
birthday, not only had the xanthomas on her elbows grown back, but new ones had
appeared on her hands, ankles and toes, and one of her sisters had developed
them on her face and eyelids.

   It was then that a doctor made the diagnosis, confirmed with a routine blood
test for cholesterol whose results were anything but routine: While most
Americans are advised to keep their total cholesterol levels below 200
milligrams per deciliter of blood (mg/dl), and cholesterol-lowering drugs are
generally prescribed if the levels hit 240 mg/dl, Francine's count was in the
stratospheric range of 600 to 800 mg/dl. Thus began a 20-year epic in which
Francine and her husband, then newlyweds, became experts in her disease.

   "First, I stopped eating food with cholesterol," she says. "No eggs, no
butter, no pate'." But the body makes modest amounts of cholesterol on its own
-- including the "bad" cholesterol, LDL -- to help repair damaged cells and as
an ingredient for making certain hormones. And given Francine's complete
inability to dispose of this cholesterol, her blood levels continued to rise
without regard to her diet.

   She tried every new medicine that came along, all to no avail. Tests showed
her arteries were narrowing and her heart was growing short of oxygen. Yet it
wasn't until her younger sister suffered a fatal heart attack that Francine and
her husband, a soft-spoken jewelry store owner, seriously considered that she
might succumb to the disease.

   "When my sister died, it was like cold water in my face," Francine says. "It
was like something sneaky that we didn't expect."

   Later, she tracked down Wilson, whom she had read about in a magazine
article. And in the fall of 1992, after months of medical tests and discussions
with her doctors, she finally got the long-awaited call from Wilson's office,
informing her that she'd been accepted as a patient.

   The timing was both sad and auspicious: When the telephone rang, Francine was
on her way to the funeral of her 36-year-old brother, who also had FH and had
died of a sudden heart attack.

   In Operating Room #1, Wilson listens to the hiss of a suction device, the
clinking of metal clamps and the low murmur of surgeons' voices, and marvels at
the progress it all represents. "It's an incredible time," he says, watching the
surgery from a few yards away. "Sometimes, you spend so much energy gearing up,
you forget where you're going. But now we're there."

   The gearing up started soon after Wilson entered the University of Michigan
medical school in 1978. Scientists were just learning how to manipulate genes,
the strands of DNA that tell cells what to do. As part of his research, Wilson
helped describe the mutant gene that causes Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, a devastating
inherited disease that causes mental retardation and compulsive self-mutilation
in boys.

   "I'll never forget the excitement," Wilson says of the gene's discovery, "but
the downer was meeting the families because they'd say, 'What does it mean for
our son?' And you know what? The answer was, 'Probably nothing.' " Having the
gene in hand and fixing it were two very different things, he realized. "That
was painful. And it really brought home the importance of taking the work
further."

   Soon after, Wilson read about a graduate student who had grown unhealthy
cells in laboratory dishes and "cured" them by giving the cells healthy versions
of the gene that they lacked. The implication for anybody with a genetic disease
was obvious. "From that time on, I knew I was going to do gene therapy," Wilson
says.

   After a stint in Boston, where he helped devise methods for putting genes
into cells, Wilson returned to Michigan in 1988 to apply his molecular skills to
medicine. Faculty members there would meet Wilson and his colleague, Mariann
Grossman, in the hallways and ask, "What will you be doing here at Michigan?"
and they'd reply, "Gene therapy." Eyeballs rolled heavenward, heads shook in
disbelief. "It was bordering on ridicule," Wilson recalls.

   But by the time the team left Michigan for Penn, four years later, "it was a
little different," Wilson says in characteristic understatement. By then he and
his team had perfected their gene therapy methods in rabbits with FH, tested the
technique's safety in baboons and dogs, and become the first team outside the
NIH to get federal permission to insert genes into patients with inherited
diseases. In their last year at Michigan, they treated their first three
patients.

   Now in the operating room at Penn, the air is acrid with the smell of burning
flesh as Raper and Stedman use a pencil-sized cauterizing tool to stanch
Francine's bleeding while cutting through a final layer of tissue. Raper, a
clean-cut, prematurely graying man with a brush mustache and eyebrows that flare
dramatically, wears his wedding ring on a chain around his neck. The golden
chain was a wedding gift from his wife, an operating room nurse, who knew that
her husband couldn't keep his ring on his hand while performing surgery but
wanted to make sure his marital status remained clear to all the women in the
operating room who would be assisting him. About half an hour into surgery, the
ring throws a golden flash of light as Raper leans back and announces he has
reached the pinkish-brown target.

   "That's a nice-looking liver," Stedman says, matter of fact. Indeed, there is
nothing to suggest that the five-pound organ harbors a fatal defect. Then, amid
a sudden burst of crimson, a hand-size piece of the critical organ is severed
and lifted high in the air. It hangs from a pair of forceps, jiggling strangely,
and then is flopped unceremoniously into a plastic bag in a 12-inch-square
plastic basin filled with ice. "All right!" somebody says. Wilson grabs the
container with both hands and tucks it under the crook of his right arm, holding
it like a football, then heads out the door, following in Cain's footsteps.

   The trip is a blur, with people practically leaping out of the way of the
white-coated doctor as he lopes down the corridors toward the Moloney building.
Hearts are beating fast; breathing in the elevator is louder than seems
necessary. Nobody speaks. The maze of corridors, ramps and stairs is navigated
perfectly and in less than five minutes the slab of tissue is sitting on a scale
in the laboratory, looking for all the world like a 7-ounce slice of beef liver
from the local Safeway. To a rubber-gloved hand, it feels rubbery and firm.

   "It's perfect, it's beautiful," says laboratory director Grossman, who has
been in the room since 5 a.m. preparing laboratory solutions and equipment for
this moment. She takes the liver away to the tissue culture room to start the
long process of washing the organ in enzymes that will dissolve it into its
constituent cells.

   During the next eight hours, Grossman and her assistant, Colleen Baker,
distribute those cells evenly into 1,500 individual petri dishes, about 5
million cells per dish, all bathed in $ 4,000 worth of a custom-brewed nutrient
soup containing growth hormones, minerals, sugars and antibiotics. The work is
tedious and exhausting. Stacked on top of each other, the petri dishes that
Grossman fills would reach as high as a 10-story building.

   For Grossman, who followed Wilson from Boston to Michigan and now to
Philadelphia, this is only the beginning of three days of worries. "My biggest
fear is that we go through this major surgery and then, for some reason, the
cells don't live," she says. "Things can be just a little bit off, and within 24
hours these cells can die. And whose fault is it that she doesn't get her cells
back? It's Mariann Grossman's fault."

   Happily, the cells look good. In fact, by the end of the day it's becoming
clear that Francine's cells are growing better than did any of the previous
patients'.

   Wilson checks in with the operating room and learns that all has gone well;
Francine will get two pints of blood to compensate for what she lost in surgery,
and the Hickman catheter is in place. Taking advantage of the brief opportunity
to relax, Wilson heads off to play some basketball.

   The next two days swing between fear and hope.  In the laboratory, Grossman
and Baker are devoting 15-hour days to the care and feeding of the liver cells,
washing them and giving them fresh nutrients every day. "I'm running on
adrenalin," Grossman says.

   In the surgical intensive care unit where Francine is recovering, Wilson,
Raper and the other doctors following her case are growing anxious. The night
after surgery, Francine's heart began to race; she developed a fever of 101
degrees, and her white blood cell count became elevated. These could be minor
side effects of her surgery -- or they could mean that an infection or other
complication has set in. The doctors don't want to give antibiotics or heart
drugs unnecessarily, since they don't know how that may affect their experiment.
But they also want to be cautious. With no clear rules about where to draw the
line, they huddle and agree to wait another day and see what happens.

   A more troubling question arises as Raper checks the Hickman catheter that
protrudes from Francine's abdomen. Using a syringe and a pressure detector that
resembles a barometer, Raper performs four tests to see if the tube is still
open and in its proper place. Three tests go fine, but one hints that the
catheter may be clogged -- a complication that would prevent the reinfusion of
the genetically repaired cells and require additional surgery.

   The catheter, literally Francine's lifeline, is the most fragile element in
the entire regimen, providing an ironic reminder that no matter how
sophisticated the techniques of gene therapy become, there remain some extremely
low-tech bottlenecks along the way. "The Hickman is definitely the Achilles'
heel of the whole thing," Wilson says.

   Francine, clearly uncomfortable, is frustrated by her inability to understand
her doctors as they talk to each other about her case in somber tones. "Is
everything okay?" she asks repeatedly through a translator. "Tre's bien," Raper
assures her in college French. She seems unconvinced, but her face carries an
expression of strong determination. "She is a great patient," Wilson says as he
leaves.

   The next day, tensions have risen. Francine's temperature hit 102 during the
night. Her heart continues to beat faster than normal. And again, one test
suggests a problem with the catheter. This is no time for problems. Tomorrow she
is due to get her cells, and there is no possibility of delay: If liver cells
are kept in culture plates for more than two or three days, they undergo changes
that render them useless once put back in the body.

   The doctors huddle again. To be safe, they order tests to see if Francine's
blood has become infected. They insist that she start breathing more deeply and
coughing regularly, in hopes that the fever is from an accumulation of fluids in
her lungs, a common complication after surgery. She immediately complies and
keeps on coughing the rest of the day.

   In the laboratory next door, another long day unfolds as Grossman and Baker
begin thawing 32 jars of frozen viruses that have been in suspended animation at
minus 158 degrees. These particular viruses have the innate capacity to inject
their genes into other cells. Wilson and his team have tinkered with the viruses
so they will serve as microscopic delivery vans: Rather than injecting their own
genes, the viruses will latch onto Francine's liver cells in the petri dishes
and inject into those cells a copy of the cholesterol-lowering gene that she
lacks. That gene will direct the recipient cells to start making a protein that
sops up LDL, the "bad" cholesterol.

   Not every cell will get successfully infected. For reasons that remain
frustratingly unclear, the technique works better in some cases than in others,
with anywhere from 10 to 75 percent of the cells getting the gene. But those
cells that do will for the first time in their lives perform to their original
job description. And animal tests have shown that even a few million working
cells can make a big difference in cholesterol levels.

   The next morning -- the day of the cell infusion -- excitement is in the air.
A fluorescent dye injected into Francine's veins has shown that the Hickman
catheter is indeed open and properly positioned. Francine's fever is gone.

   Grossman and Baker have drenched Francine's cells with the gene-delivering
viruses overnight and this morning washed the cells to rinse away the spent
viral shells. They spin the repaired cells in a centrifuge at 1,000 revolutions
per minute, concentrating them into a brown sludge that ultimately fills nine
large syringes. The plan is to squirt the cells into Francine's catheter in
three batches of about one billion cells each, a few hours apart. And since a
previous patient reacted badly to the infusion, with a sudden increase in blood
pressure and heart rate, Francine's vital signs are to be monitored constantly
via a jungle of wires attached to her body.

   By 10 a.m., Francine's room is filled with doctors and nurses to watch the
historic event. Having retraced the route Wilson followed three days before,
through hallways and stairways and elevator banks, Grossman and Wilson arrive
with Francine's liver cells on ice -- the same cells but this time with a gene
they lacked on their first trip through these halls.

   "Everything is excellent," Wilson tells Francine, and the interpreter echoes
his words in French. "This is the easy part. Just relax."

   Surrounded by doctors and nurses in white, Francine closes her eyes. And as
though suddenly bathed in a different light, the scene seems transformed into a
religious tableau. Standing at Francine's left side, Raper attaches the first
syringe of cells to the plastic catheter that snakes into her flesh. At her
right side, a nurse leans over and holds her hand. Francine's husband stands at
the foot of the bed, holding his wife's toes, and her mother stands stoically by
the doorway.

   Wilson looks at the catheter, then at Francine, and finally nods to Raper.
The surgeon squeezes the plunger gently, and the brown suspension flows slowly
into Francine's body. An eerie silence fills the hospital room. Days later, when
Francine is asked what she was thinking at the time, her answer is stunning.

   "Resurrection," she says. "I was thinking, "This is my resurrection.' "

   The next day nothing happens. Nor on the next day. This is just as it should
be. On the third day, Raper pulls on the catheter and to everyone's relief it
slides easily out of Francine's abdomen with no loss of blood.

   Five days after the cell infusion, Francine is ready to leave the hospital
for home. It will be three to four months before her doctors will know just how
well her new cells are working, but her recovery from surgery has gone well.

   "I know we've done what we can do," Wilson says while walking to Francine's
room to see her off. "There's nothing else to do -- but to do it better."

   Indeed, he is already developing a new approach in which gene-delivering
viruses can be injected directly into the body, making the surgery and the
troublesome catheter unnecessary. He also wants to improve the efficiency with
which he gets new genes into needy cells. In Francine's case, although a
record-breaking number of cells survived in the laboratory, only about 20
percent of them successfully took up the new gene -- fewer than he'd hoped but
within the range he has grown accustomed to in other patients. Whether that's
enough cells to make the difference between life and death for Francine remains
to be seen.

   "In my heart, I know that we don't have the best method yet," he says. "But I
know that before these patients die, I'm going to have something better for
them."

   Wilson joins the other doctors and nurses who have gathered in Room 166 of
the hospital's clinical research center. There, Francine is dressed triumphantly
in a brilliant red skirt and embroidered vest. With her hair freshly coiffed,
she is once again vibrant, gesturing flamboyantly and joking with visitors. The
only hint of her recent trek on medicine's frontier is the hospital bracelet
showing through the sleeve of her sheer silk blouse.

   Earlier, Francine had related an amazing story. In 1991, after her sister had
died and before she had heard about Wilson's work, she went with some friends to
a fortune teller. The old woman had looked at Francine's palm and read some
cards and told her that an American doctor was destined to heal her. "I laughed
and waved and said goodbye," she recalls. Now she doesn't know what to think.

   Perhaps she should get in touch with the old woman and tell her she was
right, someone suggests. But Francine knows her future is still not assured. She
becomes quiet for a moment, sobered by the knowledge that her life is still
hanging very much in the balance. "Maybe in two or three years," she says.

   Raper gives Francine a hug. Wilson shakes her hand and actually breaks into a
beaming smile. But there's no time to linger. Wilson has a grant proposal due
and viruses to prepare for next month's gene therapy patient, an 11-year-old
girl who was in the hospital last week for bypass surgery.

   With appointments made for Francine's return in May, when she will undergo a
series of tests to see how well the therapy has worked, Francine takes her
husband's arm. "Au revoir, goodbye," she says to all. And as she walks down the
hallway and out of the hospital, she raises a fist high and shakes it in
victory.



GRAPHIC: PHOTO, PHYSICIAN JAMES WILSON CONSULTS WITH FRANCINE ON THE DAY BEFORE
SURGERY AT THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA MEDICAL CENTER. MICHAEL WILLIAMSON

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1994


                             892 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   February 15, 1994, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z17

LENGTH: 304 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy at a Glance

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Rick Weiss

BODY:

   Gene therapy is an experimental approach to curing diseases in which new
genes, or genetic instructions, are given to cells in the body. The new genes
either correct an inherited defect or boost the body's production of a useful
substance.

   The experimental therapy for familial hypercholesterolemia led by James
Wilson at the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center is one of several gene
therapy attempts now underway in the United States. So far, federal officials
have granted approval for gene therapy tests for two other inherited diseases:

   "Severe combined immune deficiency, a rare immune disorder, was the first
inherited disease to be treated with gene therapy. The first patient was a
4-year-old girl, treated at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in September
1990. Four patients in the United States had been treated by the end of last
year. No results have been published.

   "Cystic fibrosis, a disease that affects the lungs, pancreas and other
organs, is being treated with gene therapy in three centers: The NIH in
Bethesda, the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, and the University of
Iowa in Iowa City. Nine patients had been treated by the end of last year. One
study with promising preliminary results has been published.

   In addition, approximately three dozen research teams have gained permission
to insert various genes into patients with cancer or AIDS in an effort to boost
those patients' immune responses against their diseases.

   None of the gene therapy experiments approved to date involve genetic changes
passed on to a patient's children. Although that kind of gene therapy is
theoretically possible, scientists and federal officials have said that those
experiments should not proceed until a full debate about the ethics of such
family-line changes has occurred.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1994


                             893 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            February 14, 1994 Monday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 1629 words

HEADLINE: Turf war imperils bone-marrow transplant program

BYLINE: REX DALTON, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Efforts to create a large, world-class bone-marrow transplant program here
are mired in a hospital turf war, threatening plans to use the most advanced
medical technologies to try to save patients with cancer and other diseases. If
a collaborative effort fails, some physicians are concerned that the San Diego
region may end up with three competing bone-marrow transplant programs.

   This would limit the number of patients each program would treat, possibly
reducing the quality of patient care. Advocates of a combined bone-marrow
transplant program envision an institute centralizing high-cost technologies --
"like an airport" -- among three of the region's major health-care systems:
UCSD, Sharp and Scripps. For a year, UCSD and Scripps have been negotiating to
create a joint cancer institute that they hope would include bone-marrow
transplantation.

   UCSD Medical Center in Hillcrest and Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation
in La Jolla now operate the region's only two bone-marrow transplant programs
for adults. The UCSD-Scripps cancer institute talks, however, have proceeded
haltingly, almost dying in recent months because of the inability of the two
organizations to overcome differences born of years of intense competition.
Despite the difficulties with their own talks, some officials from UCSD and
Scripps say they would like Sharp to join them in developing a countywide
bone-marrow transplant program. But the Sharp group is involved in preliminary
talks to start its own bone-marrow transplant program in affiliation with the
City of Hope Medical Center, which is east of Los Angeles. Although Sharp
officials say they are open to various options, and the UCSD-Scripps talks
recently have been rejuvenated, some cancer specialists fear what the future may
hold. "I am disillusioned," said Dr. Anthony Ho, a bone-marrow transplant
specialist at UCSD.

   "Two or three transplant programs are not good for the community, for
health-care reform.

   And the quality of care will suffer." Dr. Lawrence C. Piro, head of cancer
care at Scripps Clinic, said, "Fragmenting our resources is only going to impede
us from having a program of the highest quality." Dr. James M. Schibanoff, a top
executive at Sharp, said: "We would love to combine programs if we could;
unfortunately, we are fighting a lot of history." That history includes
tenacious competition among these major health-care systems to provide
high-technology medical services to their respective patients.

   Sometimes this competition has duplicated services -- thereby raising the
costs to all consumers and threatening the quality provided because each
institution performs a limited number of procedures. Typically, a bone-marrow
transplant costs $100,000 or more. Although only a few hundred patients from the
region annually will have the procedure, it is becoming an extremely important
therapy in novel attempts to save dying patients.

   And it is expected to become an even more valuable technique as genetic
therapies are developed. Because of this, many cancer specialists want the
transplants conducted in centralized programs -- where physicians and staff will
see the maximum number of patients so their skills will be the best. The
procedure involves collecting certain cells from a patient's blood system,
treating the patient with high-dose chemotherapy to kill the cancer, and then
injecting the marrow cells to recreate the system that makes the blood
components necessary for life. Historically, this has been called a bone-marrow
transplant, even though the patient's own cells were reinjected.

   The marrow cells of a patient's relative also can be used in some cases where
tissue matches.

   And in recent years, a nationwide system that registers tissue types is used
to identify marrow cell donors among nonrelatives. To develop a combined
program, officials from the three respective institutions must overcome years of
nasty battles that have left festering economic and political wounds. "The
politics are pretty hairy," said Dr. William Hryniuk, head of UCSD's Gildred
Cancer Center.

   "It is a matter of turf, and there are scars from many wars." A combined
bone-marrow program will require the institutions -- and their executives -- to
subjugate their respective egos regarding who offers what, observers say. "No
one wants to get on board anyone else's ship," said Dr. Paul M. Goldfarb, a
cancer surgeon who serves part-time as head of Sharp's cancer services.

   "There are a lot of egos involved; a lot of power-play stuff." Goldfarb, a
former president of the American Cancer Society in California, agreed that the
concept of three transplant programs is "ludicrous," but he pointed to the
difficulties UCSD and Scripps have had during their talks as a danger sign.
"They are having trouble trusting each other," Goldfarb said, "But they wonder
why we don't want to be a player with them." Among other cancer physicians
treating patients in the community, there also is a desire for a centralized
bone-marrow transplant program. "We will all suffer" if three transplant
programs are developed, said Dr. Joel W. Allgood, an Escondido oncologist.

   "Transplant centers need to do a large volume to have lower mortality and
morbidity rates." There recently has been an explosion of improvements in the
bone-marrow procedure, which itself carries a significant risk of killing the
patient. Both UCSD and Scripps Clinic have beefed up their bone-marrow
transplant programs with physicians recruited to capitalize on technological
advances that have made the procedure much safer and more effective. One of the
most promising advances involves transplanting a bone-marrow product called stem
cells into some patients with certain cancers. The transplantation of stem cells
-- which produce the infection-fighting white cells, the oxygen-carrying reds
cells and other key blood components -- is seen as replacing traditional bone
marrow transplantation. Stem cells -- which are injected -- graft into the body
within about a week, lessoning the time the patient needs to stay in the
hospital and the time during which the patient might develop potentially deadly
infections that a depleted immune systems can't fight. Old-style bone-marrow
transplants can take up to three weeks for the cells to implant and function,
leaving the patient exposed to infections for a longer period. And in the near
future, stem-cell transplantation is expected to become the method of choice for
some of the new genetic therapies in which genetically altered cells will be
transplanted into a patient to fight cancer, AIDS or other diseases. Such
procedures require enormous commitments of resources, highly trained staff and
access to experimental devices that are evolving at a rapid rate, medical
authorities say, making it extremely important for the centralization of such
care. "If we are to learn from treating these patients, we need a large
experience with the same types of (therapies) given by collaborating
physicians," said UCSD's Hryniuk.

   "If the programs fragment, none of the programs will have sufficient
experience to make good decisions." A region the size of San Diego County, with
its 2.4 million people, is expected to generate from 200 to 300 patients a year
who might benefit from a bone-marrow cell transplant. Both UCSD and Scripps
Clinic's marrow-cell transplant programs have been growing considerably in
recent months, with the addition of Ho at UCSD in 1992 and Dr. Barry R.
Meisenberg at Scripps Clinic. Meisenberg has about 45 marrow-cell transplant
patients since arriving in September, officials say.

   UCSD officials say they performed 48 marrow-cell transplants last year.
Children's Hospital in Kearny Mesa has the region's only pediatric bone-marrow
transplant program, which works in conjunction with Scripps Clinic.

   Children's Hospital performed nine transplants last year, officials said.
Children's has a contract to perform bone-marrow transplants on Medi-Cal
pediatric patients.

   But adult Medi-Cal patients needing bone-marrow transplants must leave the
county.

   UCSD reportedly is seeking a Medi-Cal contract for adult patients. The Kaiser
Health Plan here sends bone-marrow patients to its Los Angeles facility for
transplantation.

   About 30 adults and children were sent there last year, said Kaiser spokesman
Jim McBride, who added that the health plan was not interested in joining the
San Diego effort. Traditionally, bone-marrow transplants have been used for
treating leukemia, lymphoma or other malignancies of the blood and immune
systems. In recent years, marrow-cell transplants have been used more to treat
patients with solid cancer tumors.

   Such illnesses include breast, lung or ovarian cancer. As the procedure has
improved, patients previously given a prognosis of certain death have had their
lives prolonged considerably by marrow-cell transplants. For instance, double
stem cell transplants -- where the patient undergoes two complete courses of
chemotherapy and marrow transplantation -- are showing considerable promise in
treating some cases of recurring breast cancer. If these successes hold up with
time, UCSD's Hryniuk said, "There is no telling how many marrow-cell transplants
may be performed." This expected growth in bone-marrow transplantation is
another reason why a countywide program should be attempted, cancer specialists
say. "We all need to focus on the highest research and quality, rather than two
or three of our own styles," said Scripps Clinic's Piro. It is for this reason,
Hryniuk said, that he was so disturbed to learn about the Sharp-City of Hope
plans.

   Both UCSD and the City of Hope have federally funded cancer centers,
designated by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) to provide cutting-edge
research in various geographic regions.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             894 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   February 12, 1994, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 9C

LENGTH: 808 words

HEADLINE: DEED buys stock in biotech firm

BYLINE: David Conn, SUN STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Using authority granted by last year's General Assembly, the state
 Department of Economic and Employment Development (DEED) yesterday handed
 over a $ 250,000 check to the founder of a Baltimore biotechnology firm,
 representing the state's first equity investment in a private firm.

   The investment in Guilford Pharmaceuticals Inc., co-founded by Solomon H.
 Snyder, a Johns Hopkins School of Medicine neuroscientist, marks the first
 time the state has taken a direct ownership position in a private company.

   DEED has a variety of loan and loan guarantee programs for private
 businesses, the state has funded the construction of several high-tech
 facilities for the use of private companies, and a state-sponsored fund has
 invested almost $ 20 million in venture capital companies that do business
 in the region. But the purchase of preferred stock in Guilford
 Pharmaceuticals is a first, according to DEED Secretary Mark L. Wasserman.

   "We are embarking on activating a new approach to economic development by
 virtue of our ability to make direct equity investments in Maryland
 companies," Mr. Wasserman said yesterday. "That's not necessarily brand-new
 nationally, but it is cutting edge."

   For its first equity investment, DEED chose Guilford because the company
 isn't quite as speculative as many start-up biotech firms, Mr. Wasserman
 said. Although several drugs are still being researched in the lab at
 Hopkins, Guilford's two most promising products have been under development
 for years, first by Nova Pharmaceutical Corp., a Baltimore firm Dr. Snyder
 helped create a decade ago, and then by Scios Nova Inc., the Mountain View,
 Calif., company that acquired Nova in 1992. Scios Nova has invested about $
 4 million in Guilford.

   The new company's leading product is a drug delivery system called
 Gliadel, which is a treatment for almost invariably fatal malignant brain
 tumors, Dr. Snyder said. Gliadel has proved far more effective than existing
 treatments, with none of the agonizing side effects of conventional
 chemotherapy and radiation treatments, he said. Assuming Food and Drug
 Administration approval next year, the product should be ready for
 large-scale manufacturing in late 1995, he added.

   The second product is a drug used to diagnose and monitor the progression
 of Parkinson's disease, which afflicts about 600,000 Americans. Guilford
 hopes to initiate large-scale testing of its Dopascan this summer, which
 should take about a year, and expects to ask for FDA approval by the end of
 next year as well, said Dr. Snyder, who remains on the faculty at Hopkins
 and serves as chairman of Guilford's scientific advisory board.

   If approved, the two drugs could generate more than $ 250 million a year
 in revenues, Dr. Snyder estimated.

   He said that without the show of support from the state of Maryland, the
 company likely would have ended up in the Philadelphia area, which was the
 home of Guilford's chairman and chief executive officer, Dr. Craig Smith, a
 former top executive at drugmaker Centocor Inc., in Malvern, Pa.

   DEED's investment in Guilford stems from the legislature's approval of an
 Enterprise Investment Fund to make equity investments in Maryland companies.

   DEED transferred $ 1.8 million into the fund from some of its other
 programs, and plans to ask the General Assembly for another $ 1 million this
 year.

   Along with Guilford, one other company has been marked for an investment,
 said Mr. Wasserman, who declined to name the firm.

   Another five or six prospective investments "are in the pipeline," he
 said.

   Enterprise Fund investments will range from $ 150,000 to $ 250,000, and
 the state will limit itself to no more than a 25 percent stake in any
 company, Mr. Wasserman said. No investment will last more than 15 years, he
 said, and seven years is the ideal duration.

   "I see us sitting on this huge reservoir of science and technology in this
 state, and for a few dollars we can reel in some of the winners," Mr.
 Wasserman said.

   Investments will be focused in four industries Maryland has identified as
 having the best potential for growth: information technology; electronics
 and aerospace; environmental services and technology; and the life sciences.

   DEED has appointed an advisory board to help the fund make investment
 decisions.

   Board members include acting chairman John May, a general partner in
 Calvert Social Ventures, a Bethesda venture capital firm; Mark Schneebaum,
 chief financial officer of Genetic Therapy Inc., a biotech firm in
 Gaithersburg; Herb Rabin, who heads the engineering research center at the
 University of Maryland at College Park; and economic development consultant
 David Gillece.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, JED KIRSCHBAUM/SUN STAFF PHOTO, Dr. Solomon H. Snyder discusses
 Guilford Pharmaceuticals'  biotechnology future at a news conference
 announcing DEED's  investment.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1994


                             895 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1994 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            February 11, 1994 Friday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: FORUM; Pg. F11

LENGTH: 909 words

HEADLINE: FEMALE BONE DISEASE NOW GETTING RESEARCH ATTENTION

BYLINE: JOAN BECK

BODY:

   Friday, February 11, 1994 FEMALE BONE DISEASE NOW GETTING RESEARCH ATTENTION

   Osteoporosis had haunted her family like a curse for generations --  until it
came to seem like an inevitable part of growing older.

   Her grandmother, a small and fragile woman who had 10 children and worked  as
an active farmer's wife, had so many vertebral fractures her back was bent  over
at a 90-degree angle. An aunt's hip fractured as she stepped off a low  curb. A
deteriorating spine cost her mother many weeks-long bouts of  excruciating pain
and 10 inches in lost height; her hip broke as she pushed a  grocery cart
through a supermarket aisle and after hip-replacement surgery was never able to
walk easily again.

   She watched in anger and frustration as older friends developed a dowager's
hump from deteriorating vertebrae, broke a wrist in seemingly minor falls,
began to shuffle timidly, came to look years older than they really were.

   Even with diligent research, she could learn little that was useful about
the disease. Yes, osteoporosis seemed to cluster in families like hers. Yes,  it
affected mostly older white women. Yes, it had to do with imbalances in the
normal process of bone absorption and regeneration that weakened the bones,
especially in the spine, hips and wrists and left them prone to fracture.

   But the medical profession, research-funding politicians and private
money-raising organizations seemed to have little interest in a disease that
afflicts primarily older white women. ``We can't keep you women alive
indefinitely,'' a doctor once snapped at her pain-racked mother.

   There are many families like hers. Osteoporosis hits about 25 million
American women. It accounts for 1.3 million fractures every year -- 250,000 of
them broken hips, 500,000 collapsing vertebrae, 170,000 broken wrists. Of  those
who suffer a broken hip, about 20 percent die within six months and 15  to 25
percent need long-term nursing-home care. The annual cost of  osteoporosis is at
least $10 billion -- plus pain and loss of vitality,  independence and
self-image that can't be figured in dollars.

   In recent years, there has been a little more concern about osteoporosis --
lip service, at least, based in part on demands that the medical profession  pay
more attention to women's health needs.

   The apparent risk factors of osteoporosis have been listed for years:
female, Caucasian or Asian ancestry (males and blacks have heavier bone  density
and much less osteoporosis), early menopause, alcohol abuse, cigarette smoking,
low lifetime calcium intake, anorexia nervosa, lack of physical  activity.

   But the major risk is genetic, as a team of Australian scientists reported
last month. They have found a single gene that blueprints the formation of
receptors in the cells for a form of vitamin D that regulates the absorption  of
calcium and its use in rebuilding new bone.

   The Australian researchers calculate that the newly discovered gene  accounts
for as much as 75 percent of bone density, which determines how  easily bones
break. Environmental factors contribute only about 25 percent.  They are
important, of course. But they are only part of the problem and  changing them
can be only part of the remedy for osteoporosis.

   Women unlucky enough to inherit from each parent a form of the gene that
scientists labeled ``B'' have the highest risk of bone thinning and fractures.
Their bones are likely to become so porous they begin breaking about 18 years
after menopause, on the average, the researchers estimate.

   Those who have two copies of the ``b'' form of the crucial gene don't reach
the fracture point for 29 years. Women who inherit a ``Bb'' genetic  combination
from their parents fall in between.

   She was grateful for the confirmation of the genetic basis of osteoporosis
and for the hope that the discovery might some day lead to a gene therapy or
perhaps a new drug that could stimulate bone formation.

   But she was disappointed that so far new research has not led to better
recommendations for preventing or treating the disease.

   For years she has tried to follow the usual prescriptions. She doesn't
smoke, drinks only a little wine, drinks milk, takes calcium supplements,
watches her nutrition. She probably doesn't exercise enough, although she
tries. She has taken estrogen for years despite controversy about it. And she
has taken two medications that seemed promising, but were later discredited.
Still, she has already lost two inches in height.

   ``Estrogen-replacement therapy has been clearly shown to effectively retard
bone loss in postmenopausal women,'' the Department of Health and Human
Services says in a Public Health Service booklet. It appears to have other
benefits, too, such as reducing heart attacks and even Alzheimer's disease, as
other studies suggest. But says HHS, it ``is not without risk.'' Many women  are
still afraid to use estrogen. And many physicians are reluctant to  prescribe
it.

   A major, long-term study funded by the National Institutes of Health and
involving several health centers is under way to assess various combinations  of
estrogen and progestin, but the results won't be known until the  mid-1990s.

   Surely the 25 million people affected by osteoporosis -- with their
premature aging, pain, crippling, disabilities and deaths -- deserve more
scientific and medical attention than they have been getting.

   Joan Beck is a columnist for the Chicago Tribune.

   Knight-Ridder News Service.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             896 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   February 10, 1994, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A8

LENGTH: 915 words

HEADLINE: TODAY IN CONGRESS

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   SENATE

   Meets at 9 a.m.

   Committees:

   Agriculture, Nutrition & Forestry -- 2:30 p.m. Agricultural research,
conservation, forestry & general legislation subc. Meat inspection program. 485
Russell Office Bldg.

   Armed Services -- 9:30 a.m. Closed. Situation on Korean peninsula. 222 ROB.

   Banking, Housing & Urban Affairs -- 10:30 a.m. Mark up Fair Trade in
Financial Services Act & vote on pending FDIC nominations. 538 Dirksen Office
Bldg.

   Budget -- 10 a.m. Council of Economic Advisers' economic forecast &
president's proposed FY95 budget. 608 DOB.

   Commerce, Science & Transportation -- 9:30 a.m. Pending Commerce Dept
nominations. 253 ROB.

   Energy & Natural Resources -- 2 p.m. Public lands, national parks & forests
subc. Legislation relating to commemorative works. 366 DOB.

   Environment & Public Works -- 10 a.m. Superfund, recycling & solid waste
management subc. Admin.'s proposal to reauth. federal Superfund hazardous waste
cleanup program. 406 DOB.

   Finance -- 10 a.m. Health care coverage for uninsured. 215 DOB.

   Foreign Relations -- 10 a.m. Role of U.S. armed forces in post-Cold War
world. 419 DOB.

   Foreign Relations -- 4:30 p.m. Closed. Briefing on situation in Russia. S-116
Capitol.

   Indian Affairs -- 9:30 a.m. Regarding Little Traverse Bay Band of Odawa
Indians & regarding federal service to Pokagon Potawatomi Indians. 485 ROB.

   Judiciary -- 2 p.m. Admin.'s drug control strategy. 226 DOB.

   Labor & Human Resources -- 10:30 a.m. Children, family, drugs & alcoholism
subc. with House Education & Labor human resources subc. Admin.'s proposal for
Head Start program reauth. 216 Hart Office Bldg.

   Rules & Administration -- 9:30 a.m. Proposals to reform Government Printing
Office operations. 301 ROB.


   HOUSE

   Meets at 10 a.m.

   Committees:

   Appropriations -- 10 a.m. Commerce, Justice, State & the judiciary subc. FY95
approps. for Commission on Security & Cooperation in Europe & Arms Control &
Disarmament Agency. H-310 Capitol.

   Appropriations -- 10 a.m. Interior & related agencies subc. FY95 approps. for
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corp. & National Capital Planning Commission.
B-308 Rayburn House Office Bldg.

   Appropriations -- 10 a.m. Labor-HHS-Education subc. FY95 approps. for
miscellaneous programs. 2358 RHOB.

   Appropriations -- 10:30 a.m. Treasury-Postal Service-general government subc.
FY95 approps. for Office of National Drug Control Policy. 2362 RHOB.

   Armed Services -- 9:30 a.m. Military acquisition subc. C-17 aircraft program.
2118 RHOB.

   Armed Services -- 2 p.m. Military forces & personnel subc. Miscellaneous
personnel legislation. 2212 RHOB.

   Banking, Finance & Urban Affairs -- 10 a.m. Consumer credit & insurance sub
harge Card Disclosure Interest Rate amendments & Credit Card Reform Act. 2128
RHOB.

    Banking, Finance & Urban Affairs -- 2 p.m. Economic growth & credit
formation subc. Reauth. of Economic Development Administration & Appalachian
Regional Commission. 2222 RHOB.

   Budget -- 10 a.m. President's proposed FY95 budget. HUD Sec. Cisneros. 210
Cannon House Office Bldg.

   Education & Labor -- 10 a.m. Labor-management relations subc. Effect of
health care reform on providers. 2175 RHOB.

   Education & Labor -- 10:30 a.m. Labor standards, occupational safety & health
subc. Comprehensive Safety & Health Reform Act. 2261 RHOB.

   Energy & Commerce -- 9:30 a.m. Telecommunications & finance subc. Antitrust
Reform Act, focusing on long distance service. 2322 RHOB.

   Energy & Commerce -- 9:30 a.m. Transportation & hazardous materials subc.
Liability issues associated with admin.'s Superfund reauth. proposal. 2359 RHOB.

   Energy & Commerce -- 10 a.m. Health & the environment subc. & commerce,
consumer protection & competitiveness subc. Congressional Budget Office analysis
of president's health care reform proposal. 2123 RHOB.

   Energy & Commerce -- 3:30 p.m. Health & the environment subc. Health care
reform legislation. 2123 RHOB.

   Foreign Affairs -- 10 a.m. Asia & the Pacific subc. POW/MIA issues. 2172
RHOB.

   Judiciary -- 9:30 a.m. Economic & commercial law subc. Antitrust &
Communications Reform Act. 2141 RHOB.

   Judiciary -- 10 a.m. Intellectual property & judicial administration subc.
Title VI of Crime Control Act & Violent Crime Control & Regional Prison
Partnership Act. 2237 RHOB.

   Merchant Marine & Fisheries -- 10:30 a.m. Environment & natural resources
subc. Non-fisheries issues associated with reauth. of Marine Mammal Protection
Act. 1334 Longworth House Office Bldg.

   Natural Resources -- 10 a.m. National parks, forests & public lands subc.
Mark up pending public lands bills. 1324 LHOB.

   Public Works & Transportation -- 9:30 a.m. Investigations & oversight subc.
Transportation safety. Transportation Sec. Pena. 2167 RHOB.

   Science, Space & Technology -- 9:30 a.m. Technology, environment & aviation
subc. NASA aeronautics research enhances U.S. competitiveness. 2325 RHOB.

   Science, Space & Technology -- 10 a.m. Energy subc. Human radiation
experimentation, ethics & gene therapy. 2318 RHOB.

   Veterans Affairs -- 9:30 a.m. Admin.'s FY95 budget request for veterans'
programs. Sec. of Veterans Affairs Brown. 334 CHOB.

   Ways & Means -- 10 a.m. Health subc. Alternative health care reform
proposals. 1100 LHOB.

   Ways & Means -- 10 a.m. Oversight subc. hearing on tax refund fraud. B-318
RHOB.

   Ways & Means -- 11 a.m. Social Security subc. & human resources subc. Ways to
reach higher rates of treatment for alcoholics & drug addicts receiving federal
disability benefits. 1310A LHOB.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1994


                             897 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1994 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    February 8, 1994, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 678 words

HEADLINE: Dr. Brigid Leventhal, JHU oncologist, expert on treating  cancer in
 children

BYLINE: DeWitt Bliss, SUN STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Dr. Brigid G. Leventhal, professor of oncology and pediatrics at the Johns
 Hopkins School of Medicine and the first director of the Pediatric Oncology
 Division at Hopkins' Oncology Center, died Sunday of cancer at her home in
 Columbia.

   Dr. Leventhal, who was 58, was an expert on the development of new
 chemotherapy treatments and the assessment of their toxicity in children.

   At her death, she was working with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
 on a study of agents already approved for treatment of children and of any
 long-term side effects.

   "Dr. Leventhal's contribution to the management of childhood cancers is
 immeasurable," said Dr. Martin D. Abeloff, director of the Oncology Center.
 "She devoted her entire career to the pursuit of new and better ways to
 treat childhood cancers.

   "She had a true concern for the children she treated and the long-term
 effects the disease would have on their lives. Dr. Leventhal made a special
 effort to pass her knowledge on to younger researchers and clinicians. Her
 contributions will have a lasting impact on the field of oncology."

   Dr. Leventhal began working at Hopkins in 1976 and headed the pediatric
 unit until 1984, establishing the outpatient clinic and the inpatient unit.

   The former Brigid Gray was born in London and, with her mother and younger
 brother, came to the United States in 1940 at the height of the blitz of
 London. They settled in Los Angeles. Her father remained in England as a
 filmmaker in the Royal Air Force.

   She graduated from Hollywood High School in 1950, then studied for a year
 at a boarding school in Switzerland before beginning her studies in
 psychology at the University of California Los Angeles, from which she was
 graduated summa cum laude in 1955.

   She began her medical studies at UCLA then transferred to the Harvard
 University medical school, graduating in 1960. She served her internship and
 pediatric residency at Massachusetts General Hospital. After an additional
 year of residency at Boston City Hospital, she studied hematology on a
 one-year fellowship at St. Elizabeth's Hospital in Boston.

   In 1964, she came to Maryland to work at the National Cancer Institute in
 Bethesda, where she headed the Chemoimmunotherapy Section from 1973 until
 she went to Hopkins.

   She was a member of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee and its
 subcommittee on human gene therapy at the National Cancer Institute, and of
 the advisory committees of the Leukemia Society, the Yale Cancer Center, the
 Dartmouth Cancer Center and St. Jude's Children's Hospital.

   She was a former president of Women in Cancer Research, a member of the
 boards of the American Society of Clinical Oncology and the American
 Association of Cancer Research, and a founding member of the Pediatric
 Oncology Group, a national cooperative group of those participating in
 clinical trials, and chairman of its Hodgkin's Disease Committee.

   She was co-author of "Research Methods in Clinical Oncology" and wrote 52
 book chapters, including several in the "Nelson Pediatric Textbook." She
 published more than 135 articles.

   Her awards included the Outstanding Career Woman Award of the National
 Council of Women and the Outstanding Professional Achievement Award from the
 UCLA Alumni Association.

   Services were to be held at 10 a.m. today at the Owen Brown Interfaith
 Center, 7246 Cradlerock Way, Columbia.

   Dr. Leventhal is survived by her husband, Dr. Carl Leventhal, a division
 director at the National Institute for Neurological Disorders; two sons,
 George Leventhal of Takoma Park and James Leventhal of New York City; two
 daughters, Sarah Roark and Dinah Leventhal, both of Rockville; her mother,
 Barbara Gray, and brother, Kevin Gray, both of Los Angeles; and a
 granddaughter.

   Memorial donations may be made to an endowed lectureship bearing her name
 at the Oncology Center through its development office at 550 N. Broadway,
 Baltimore 21205.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1976 PHOTO, Dr. Brigid G. Leventhal began working at Hopkins in
 1976.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1994


                             898 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              February 6, 1994, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: MEDLIFE; CHECKUP; Pg. 51

LENGTH: 442 words

BODY:


   A weekly roundup of health news and information you should know.

   Cancer vaccine? Immunologists are on the path to developing a vaccine for
treating cancer patients, particularly those with breast, prostate and colon
cancer, researchers said this week at the First International Conference on Gene
Therapy and Vaccines for Cancer. Using new biotechnology tools, including the
cloning of genes for proteins on cancer cells, researchers are creating vaccines
that activate the immune system to attack tumors.  The scientists noted that
they have not cured cancer, and that they are probably a few years away from
developing a vaccine that can be widely used.

   AIDS cancer deaths: AIDS accounted for almost one in five deaths among male
cancer patients under age 45 from 1983 to 1991, and over one in 10 of all deaths
among male cancer patients, according to a report in the current issue of the
Journal of the National Cancer Institute. Most of the deaths were caused by
Kaposi's sarcoma, a cancer common in AIDS patients, said Dr. Timothy Cote of the
NCI.

   Nursing update: Doctors warn breast-feeding mothers to avoid taking
medication they don't really need, but a new study offers reassurance that most
drugs will not show up in breast milk. The American Academy of Pediatrics has
updated recommendations on which medications do and do not cross into breast
milk, and said mothers should not worry too much about the effect on their
babies of the drugs they take. Among its suggestions: If a nursing mother really
needs a medication, choose the safest one; for example, acetominophen rather
than aspirin for pain.

   Breast cancer heredity: A family history of breast cancer has previously been
thought to make a woman two to five times more likely to get the disease -- but
a recent 12-year study found that is not necessarily true. The study --
conducted by the Nurses' Health Study and reported in Prevention Magazine --
found that if a woman has a maternal history of the disease, the risk is about
1.8 times higher than other women. If a sister is afflicted with the disease,
the number will rise. And if both the mother and sister have had breast cancer,
the risk is about 2.5 times that of other women.

   Epilepsy study: The Rush Neuroscience Institute at Rush-Presbyterian-St.
Luke's Medical Center is seeking patients who respond poorly to standard
treatment for epilepsy. Researchers are looking at a new anticonvulsant drug
zonisamide, which has been used for the past four years in Japan. Subjects will
be between 18 and 65 and be in otherwise good health. For information, call
(312) 563-2030.

    -- From Sun-Times wires.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1994


                             899 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     February 6, 1994, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1653 words

HEADLINE: A spiritual reawakening

BYLINE: Thomas J. Billitteri

BODY:


   On a trip into Bosnia-Herzegovina last year, I passed through a small village

 once populated by working-class Croatians. Serb shells had smashed the humble
block homes into rubble. Not a single survivor was in sight - only Croatian
soldiers at a checkpoint nearby.

   Down the road a mile or so was an isolated house - or what had been a house
- abandoned and badly damaged. A Serb family had occupied it. I was told
Croatian forces had shelled it in retaliation for what had happened in the
small town nearby.

   Those sights represented something more than the insanity of the Bosnian
war. They also underscored the insanity of religious conflict, for as we
sometimes forget, the Bosnian war is partly a holy war, being fought among
Catholic Croats, Orthodox Serbs and Muslims (the only faction the Western  media
routinely identify by religion).

   Bosnia is emblematic of religion's monumental failure to push the world
toward a common ethic of tolerance and non-aggression. The failing has been
evident in Northern Ireland (where Protestants and Catholics carry on their
campaign of death despite peace overtures), in India (where Sikhs and Hindus
are locked in political and religious conflict), in Iran (where fundamentalist
Muslims persecute Bahais and Christians), in Israel, Egypt and in many other
places through time and history.

   Despite isolated successes, the worldwide religious community is unlikely
ever to forge a meaningful global ethic on morality and peace. There simply  are
too many competing ideologies and beliefs. At last September's Parliament  of
the World's Religions in Chicago, where Buddhists, Hindus and Muslims  rubbed
elbows with Jews, Christians and Goddess worshipers, a "Global Ethic"  did
emerge. But even in that unthreatening hotel venue, deep divisions emerged
among the religions. And months after the meeting, those differences persist
and the killing continues.

   Still, I believe we are entering a period when religion can - and should -
play an increasingly important role, if not on the global scene, then in the
lives and public spheres of people here at home.

   I don't mean the self-serving agenda of intolerance promoted by
Bible-wielding extremists on the religious right; nor do I mean the knee-jerk
liberalism of some on the left. I mean religion's duty to set a clear and
democratic moral vision for a nation being shaped ad hoc by talk-radio
fanatics, sports hucksters, government lobbyists and the advertising industry.
I mean a thoughtful recognition by religious leaders of the spiritual  yearnings
of people overwhelmed by what they see around them - crime,  violence, media
manipulation, the desecration of tradition, the failure of  institutions to
solve some of our most grievous problems.

   In fact, our troubled times present a historic opportunity for religious
leaders to respond to our most pressing social and spiritual ills. But doing
that will take new ways of thinking, risk-taking, accommodation and tolerance  -
and an ability to engage the people in a way that religion has not since the
civil rights era of the 1960s.

Looking at spiritual roots

   Clearly we are seeing a small but growing recognition of the importance of
the spiritual, the sacred, the moral in everyday life. We see it reflected in
the arts, a common indicator of cultural change. Angels in America, a
blockbuster Broadway play that deals with the issue of AIDS, has a strongly
spiritual theme, as does the highly regarded new movie, Shadowlands. Some
secular rock music talks about the spiritual in a way that would have been
unlikely a few years ago. TV shows such as LA Law and Picket Fences are
tackling religious themes, though not always to the liking of the established
church.

   These examples go to a larger point: Weary of the world's ills, people are
looking back on their spiritual roots and seeking answers in the interior life
of the soul. Many of these searchers are baby-boomers, for whom the ethic of
material success has grown hollow with age.

   "The baby-boom generation, now in the centripetal force of midlife, is  being
pulled back down to earth. . .," David N. Elkins, an associate  professor of
psychology at Pepperdine University, wrote recently in The Human  Quest
magazine. "Millions of this generation are realizing for the first time  that
life does not go on forever and that success, achievement and material  goods
may not, after all, be the answer to human existence. These midlife  issues are
having a profound effect on this generation and on the nature of  their
spirituality."

   We have plenty of clues about this spiritual reawakening: the booming
popularity of 12-step programs, which put people in touch with a "higher
power"; the appeal of Eastern religions, meditation and metaphysics;
preoccupation with reincarnation and "life after death"; popular books with  a
spiritual dimension, such as The Road Less Traveled and When Bad Things  Happen
to Good People ; the struggle over gender and sexuality issues in  virtually
every mainline faith.

   I suppose we can even take a clue from the most egregious examples of
religious abuse, such as Jim Bakker's PTL scandal and the Branch Davidian
fiasco in Waco. If nothing else, they show the lengths to which vulnerable
people will go to satisfy their spiritual yearnings.

   We also are seeing this new attention to spirituality and morality manifest
itself in the discourse of public life - and yes, even government. One of the
most important new books in recent months is Yale professor Stephen Carter's
The Culture of Disbelief, which argues that American law and politics have
trivialized religious devotion. It's a book that President Clinton singled out
as one of his favorites.

   And what of President Clinton? Recently, he told an audience that  "spiritual
change" is needed to fight violence in America. His inaugural  speech was
freighted with spiritual allusions. He has spoken about values,  morality,
personal responsibility and religion without public or media  reprisal. And
while the nation's two biggest denominations - the Catholic  Church and Southern
Baptist Convention - are fighting Clinton over inclusion  of abortion coverage
in a health reform plan, Clinton continues to set a  credible tone on "family
values" that Dan Quayle can only envy.

   "Let's be honest," Clinton said in reference to crime in last month's  State
of the Union address. "Our problems go way beyond the reach of any  government
program. They are rooted in the loss of values, the disappearance  of work, and
the breakdown of our families and our communities."

At an important crossroads

   All this suggests that the nation is at an important crossroads, a point
where it is willing to consider that issues of the spirit may be at least as
important as those of the physical and secular.

   For organized religion, that means two things: opportunity and
responsibility.

   First the opportunity: With membership in established mainline churches
declining, it may seem that spiritual relevance in society is waning too. Far
from it. With the confluence of pressing social ills and growing personal
spirituality, the door is open for the church to respond to people on the
issues that engage them most.

   One way of doing that is to become more meaningfully involved in the life  of
the community. Some of that is occurring now. Take, for instance, the  recent
gun buyback programs in Florida, including the Tampa Bay area, that  have been
administered by churches. Or groups such as St. Petersburg's  Congregations
United for Community Action, which has been working on issues of  crime, housing
and education and also bringing together congregations of  different faiths and
races. Or the initiatives among some black churches in  providing mentoring for
young black males, foster programs for cocaine babies,  tutorial services and
other social programs.

   Beyond greater community involvement, religion can have something  compelling
to say on the spiritual frontier opening before Americans. There  are Dr.
Kevorkian and the moral considerations of euthanasia. There are  bioethics, and
the ramifications of gene therapy and made-to-order babies.  There is the
information superhighway, and the need for a new moral code  governing 21st
century communications. There are calamities like the  California earthquake
that leave people asking "Why?" "What can we learn  from this?"

Religion must take the risks

  But I also mentioned responsibility. And that is where religion is most  prone
to fail, as it has so often on the world scene.

   Too often denominations become hung up on protocol, clerical pecking orders
and fuzzy mission statements. The spirituality gets lost.

   Too often congregations wall themselves off, thinking only of the next life
and little of the one that confronts the world now.

   Too often clerical leaders engage in Nixonian coverups of sexual
malfeasance, rather than coming clean and taking genuine steps to root out the
abusers.

   Too often churches build million-dollar sanctuaries and have few resources  -
time, energy, commitment - left for mission work.

   Too often ministers and their flocks do not want to risk the image to step
courageously into the problems that confound society - problems such as AIDS,
teen pregnancy, poverty and racism.

   If religion is going to survive in a meaningful way in the next century, it
must take the risks and pay the price of meeting people where they live - with
action, not study committees; help, not posturing; wisdom, not ambiguity;
resolve, not reluctance. Otherwise, religion will become irrelevant as a
positive social force - as it has in Bosnia and so many other places in the
world.

GRAPHIC: COLOR CARTOON, Clay Bennett; The five Olympic rings, with the last one
imperfect and labeled Tonya Harding.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1994


                             900 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    February 3, 1994 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B03

LENGTH: 684 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY TO TREAT LIVER DISEASE GETS FIRST PHILA. TEST AT PENN / A
HALF-MILLION AMERICANS WITH A MILDER FORM OF FH MAY BENEFIT. AN ALTERED VIRUS
WAS INJECTED.

BYLINE: Jim Detjen, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Philadelphia researchers have begun using gene therapy to treat an inherited
liver disease that kills most victims before they are old enough to vote.

   The experimental treatment may someday lead to a cure for the half million
Americans who have high cholesterol because of a milder form of the disease. The
treatment was completed on the first patient at the Hospital of the University
of Pennsylvania on Monday.

   "At this time, our patient is doing very well, with no signs of
complications," said James Wilson, director of Penn's Institute for Human Gene
Therapy. "She is stable and resting comfortably. She should be discharged
sometime soon."

   Gene therapy is one of the medical world's most promising new treatments
because it seeks to correct the underlying genetic defects that cause many
diseases. About 40 clinical trials are underway around the world using gene
therapy for a variety of diseases, including cystic fibrosis, cancer and AIDS.

   Wilson said physicians won't know for several months whether the therapy is
successful in curing his 41-year-old French Canadian patient. She has a severe
form of familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), which usually causes patients to die
of heart attack or stroke before the age of 20.

   She is the first patient in the Philadelphia area - and only the fourth in
the world - to receive gene therapy for FH. A fifth patient is scheduled to
undergo the treatment in Philadelphia in March.

   Two of the patients have been Canadian, a third is from Cyprus and the fourth
is living in Philadelphia. The fifth patient is Chinese.

   Wilson treated three of these FH patients using gene therapy when he was a
researcher at the University of Michigan. Since last September, he has also used
gene therapy in Philadelphia to treat patients with cystic fibrosis, a deadly
inherited lung disease.

   In the only public discussion of the effectiveness of the gene therapy
treatment for FH, Wilson told federal regulators in December 1992 that the
cholesterol levels of the first FH patient, a 29-year-old French Canadian woman,
had been reduced by about 30 percent.

   FH is a rare disease that renders the liver incapable of removing the "bad"
form of cholesterol from the blood. As a result of the buildup in cholesterol,
most patients with severe FH suffer heart attacks by the time they are 13 and
die prematurely of heart disease.

   At Penn, researchers are using a genetically-altered virus to correct the
defect that causes the disease. Patients with FH lack the ability to produce
low-density lipoprotein, which is needed to remove cholesterol from the blood.

   The gene therapy treatment for the 41-year-old woman began Jan. 19, when she
was admitted to the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania. After eight days
of preparation and evaluation, she was taken into an operating room on Friday,
where about a 5 1/2-ounce section of her liver was surgically removed.

   Chemicals were used to break down this section into individual cells, and the
cells were then placed on tissue culture plates. On Sunday, a solution of a
genetically-engineered virus was placed on the liver cells and allowed to remain
there for 24 hours.

   On Monday afternoon, about 3 billion of the specially treated cells were
injected back into the woman's liver through a catheter inserted through the
skin of her abdomen. If the procedure works, the woman's liver will produce a
protein that removes cholesterol from the blood.

   The severe form of FH afflicts only about one in a million people in the
United States, but it is 20 times more prevalent among Canadians with French
ancestry. The condition develops when an individual inherits two defective
copies of the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene.

   About one in 500 adults have a milder form of the disease, in which the
patient inherits only one of the faulty genes.

   "There is no question in my mind that people with the less severe form of FH
will be treated in time with gene therapy," said Wilson. "But the reality is
that we will have to find a less invasive approach that doesn't require
surgery."

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2002


                             901 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  FEBRUARY 2, 1994, WEDNESDAY, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1615 words

HEADLINE: PITT IS PROUD GIANT THAT SOME RESENT

BYLINE: MACKENZIE CARPENTER, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   It's the difference between boot camp and summer camp.

   To the young ''junior'' surgeons, the almost daily grind of learning how to
transplant livers at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center can make the
rigors of medical school seem gentle by comparison.

   But devotees of the Pittsburgh school of liver transplantation like it that
way.

   No one ever got eight hours of sleep going through a medical residency, but
at Pitt, where transplants take place almost every day, sleep deprivation is a
part of the culture, a badge of honor shrugged off with stoicism. They willingly
sacrifice slumber for skill.

   To connoisseurs of surgical technique, liver surgery is the most physically
demanding, the most tedious, the most unforgiving -- and the most exhilarating.

   Surgeons must work along the narrowest of margins between life and death
during the procedure, which can take between eight and 20 hours to complete.
There is a constant risk of the patient bleeding to death on the spot.

   Despite these perils, the feat of pulling someone back from the brink of
death to almost total health brings extraordinary personal rewards.

   ''When you do liver surgery you can really kill the patient right there on
the operating table, or save his life. Few other kinds of surgery offer that
kind of possibility,'' says Dr. Oscar Bronsther, a transplant surgeon at Pitt.

   ''Brain surgery is tedious, it's very demanding, but it just doesn't compare
to livers, which is just terribly difficult surgery,'' he says.

   Liver transplantation was not born in Pittsburgh, but it grew up here.

   The man who nurtured it is Thomas Earl Starzl, the brilliant, testy, Iowa-
born surgeon who already had attracted notice at the University of Colorado for
a small series of successful liver transplants, using the then- experimental
immunosuppressive drug cyclosporine.

   That success continued when Starzl came to Pittsburgh from Colorado in 1981.
More than any other person, he transformed the liver and kidney transplant
programs and a mediocre medical school into a world-class transplant center.

   By 1990, the annual number of liver transplants at Pitt nearly topped 600,
far more than any other place in the world.

   Sharing the wealth

   Increasing competition from newly opened transplant centers elsewhere in the
nation had decreased the number of operations at Pitt to 401 in 1993.

   And because more and more of the healthier patients are being transplanted
closer to their homes, Pitt doctors say they are increasingly seeing the sickest
liver candidates.

   With such difficulties facing it, is Pitt's liver program still a Mecca for
surgeons and patients?

   Or just Grand Central Station?

   Both, says Bronsther.

   ''We are the biggest, busiest liver transplantation center in the world --
and we are the best,'' he says.

   Pitt medical center president Jeffrey Romoff is equally boastful.

   ''The proof of the pudding is, there is only one Pittsburgh,'' says Romoff,
citing the medical center's still-leading number of liver transplants, its $ 25
million transplant research budget, and its other advanced programs, from gene
therapy to cancer treatment to the unprecedented transplant of baboon livers
into humans.

   Elsewhere in the nation, though, other doctors express irritation at what
they perceive as a haughty attitude by Pittsburgh and its complaints about being
burdened with the sickest transplant candidates.

   ''Pittsburgh does not have a monopoly on people who die while on the waiting
list,'' says Dr. Douglas Norman, who runs the transplant program at the Oregon
Health Sciences Center and is currently serving as president of the United
Network for Organ Sharing, which oversees the national transplant system.

   ''I worked at Pittsburgh for four years, and I know the patients they
transplanted there,'' adds Dr. Byers Shaw, who runs the University of Nebraska's
liver transplant program.

   ''Our patient population is virtually the same as Pitt's. If you look at
severity of illness, I would submit that patients here are just as sick as any
patient transplanted in Pittsburgh.''

   But there may be one area where Pitt's doctors are different, their
competitors say.

   Too often, they contend, Pittsburgh surgeons are willing to take an
eleventh-hour risk on patients who are too far gone for help, wasting organs in
the process. After all, they note, Pittsburgh's program was founded by a man who
always referred to his transplant cases as ''rescues.''

   Starzl's philosophy -- that ''urgency of need'' should be the defining
principle behind liver allocation -- is not necessarily shared by his colleagues
outside Pitt.

   Starzl ''never gives up. His philosophy is always to try, to never draw the
line. And if Tom Starzl hadn't tried, we never would have developed liver
transplantation as a science,'' says Goran Klintmalm, who trained with Starzl in
Denver and Pittsburgh and went on to run one of the top five liver centers in
the country at Baylor Medical Center in Dallas.

   But there are times when Starzl ''went farther than I would go'' in his
choice of transplant patients, Klintmalm says.

   Cowboys with a scalpel

   Today, says Pitt Chief of Transplantation John Fung, the medical center does
turn down some patients, and in fact, is beginning to encourage some of them to
register at other centers in regions of the country with shorter waiting lists.

   But that cowboys-with-a-scalpel reputation has stuck.

   While Starzl is retired from active surgery, his successors at Pitt are
afflicted with just as much hubris, critics say.

   ''It is just fallacious for them to have this attitude that they understand
this art and no one else does,'' says a transplant surgeon who asked not to be
named. ''There is just this incredible arrogance that nobody can do this but
them.''

   Another prominent surgeon who trained at Pittsburgh says the secret to
Pittsburgh's high volume isn't the quality of its care, which isn't
substantially better than at other large centers.

   Instead, he says, a decade-old referral system and Pittsburgh's name
recognition prompt many doctors who are unfamiliar with newer centers to send
their patients to Pittsburgh, even though other facilities come close in terms
of survival rates and quality of care for a much lower price.

   While these kinds of complaints were repeatedly voiced by transplant surgeons
outside Pittsburgh, no one wanted to be quoted on the record for fear of
retaliation by Starzl, who wields a lot of clout in medical circles around the
world.

   When they are pressed on specifics, the critics point to three areas: Too
many patients are retransplanted, depriving others of a first-time chance; too
many alcoholics are transplanted who haven't proved they are rehabilitated; and
too many foreign patients receive livers, exceeding guidelines set by UNOS.

   Fung, a boyish, enthusiastic surgeon with a mop of black hair that he's
constantly shaking out of his eyes, calmly responds to the accusations.

   Too many alcoholics? They're carefully screened on a case-by-case basis, and
Pittsburgh's recidivism rates are in line with the rest of the country's.

   Too many foreign patients? While the limit on foreigners was slightly
exceeded in 1992, Fung says closer monitoring will ensure it won't happen again.

   Too many retransplants? While about 20 percent of all liver transplants
nationally are retransplants, the figure at Pittsburgh has declined from a high
of 31 percent in 1987 to 17 percent in 1992, he says.

   All this criticism of Pitt must mean the critics are envious, says medical
center president Romoff.

   ''When you have an institution that is pre-eminent in anything, it is
resented by most of the others. That's the name of the game,'' Romoff says with
a shrug.

   But he sits up straight in his chair when confronted with the complaint that
Pittsburgh transplants too many hopeless cases.

   In fact, he counters, those ''hopeless'' cases are being dumped by other
centers at Pittsburgh's door.

   Treating castoffs?

   Are other transplant centers saving livers for their less sick patients and
sending the worst cases to Pittsburgh?

   When pressed for documentation, Romoff, Fung and other Pittsburgh officials
can come up with nothing except strong suspicions.

   ''I've had doctors call me up on the telephone and say, 'Look, I can't really
do this patient here because he's too sick','' Fung says. ''And the question is,
are some of those patients really too risky? And are they sent here as a way for
those hospitals not to have to tell the patient, 'I'm sorry, we can't transplant
you?' Do they want us to do their dirty work for them?

   ''It may not be like emergency room dumping, but indirectly it boils down to
that,'' he adds.

   Romoff agrees.

   ''One of the reasons our waiting list is the longest in the country, one of
the reasons ours is one of the most sought-after programs by patients who go on
this waiting list is,'' Romoff says, barely pausing for breath, ''one, that they
understand and believe that we're the finest, and two, they're not accepted for
candidacy in their local transplant programs, and those reasons are many and
varied.

   ''When other centers say we take patients we shouldn't take ... how do they
know that?'' he asks, glaring at a reporter. ''How do they know we're doing
those cases? They know that because those cases came to their door and they
looked at those cases and they told the patient, we can't help you, and the
patient then is sent to Pittsburgh.

   ''They may say to themselves that the patient is too sick to be treated, but
their true reason is they don't want the responsibility of taking care of such a
patient,'' he says.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, John Kaplan/Post-Gazette: Dr. Thomas Starzl, now retired from
surgery, is pictured in 1985 preparing a donor liver.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1994


                             902 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  February 2, 1994, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1621 words

HEADLINE: PITT IS PROUD GIANT THAT SOME RESENT

BYLINE: MACKENZIE CARPENTER, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   It's the difference between boot camp and summer camp. %EC%

   To the young "junior" surgeons, the almost daily grind of learning how to
transplant livers at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center can make the
rigors of medical school seem gentle by comparison.

   But devotees of the Pittsburgh school of liver transplantation like it that
way.

   No one ever got eight hours of sleep going through a medical residency, but
at Pitt, where transplants take place almost every day, sleep deprivation is a
part of the culture, a badge of honor shrugged off with stoicism. They willingly
sacrifice slumber for skill.

   To connoisseurs of surgical technique, liver surgery is the most physically
demanding, the most tedious, the most unforgiving -- and the most exhilarating.

   Surgeons must work along the narrowest of margins between life and death
during the procedure, which can take between eight and 20 hours to complete.
There is a constant risk of the patient bleeding to death on the spot.

   Despite these perils, the feat of pulling someone back from the brink of
death to almost total health brings extraordinary personal rewards.

   "When you do liver surgery you can really kill the patient right there on the
operating table, or save his life. Few other kinds of surgery offer that kind of
possibility," says Dr. Oscar Bronsther, a transplant surgeon at Pitt.

   "Brain surgery is tedious, it's very demanding, but it just doesn't compare
to livers, which is just terribly difficult surgery," he says.

   Liver transplantation was not born in Pittsburgh, but it grew up here.

   The man who nurtured it is Thomas Earl Starzl, the brilliant, testy, Iowaborn
surgeon who already had attracted notice at the University of Colorado for a
small series of successful liver transplants, using the thenexperimental
immunosuppressive drug cyclosporine.

   That success continued when Starzl came to Pittsburgh from Colorado in 1981.
More than any other person, he transformed the liver and kidney transplant
programs and a mediocre medical school into a world-class transplant center.

By 1990, the annual number of liver transplants at Pitt nearly topped 600, far
more than any other place in the world.

   Sharing the wealth

   Increasing competition from newly opened transplant centers elsewhere in the
nation had decreased the number of operations at Pitt to 401 in 1993.

   And because more and more of the healthier patients are being transplanted
closer to their homes, Pitt doctors say they are increasingly seeing the sickest
liver candidates.

   With such difficulties facing it, is Pitt's liver program still a Mecca for
surgeons and patients?

   Or just Grand Central Station?

   Both, says Bronsther.

   "We are the biggest, busiest liver transplantation center in the world -and
we are the best," he says.

   Pitt medical center president Jeffrey Romoff is equally boastful.

   "The proof of the pudding is, there is only one Pittsburgh," says Romoff,
citing the medical center's still-leading number of liver transplants, its $ 25
million transplant research budget, and its other advanced programs, from gene
therapy to cancer treatment to the unprecedented transplant of baboon livers
into humans.

   Elsewhere in the nation, though, other doctors express irritation at what
they perceive as a haughty attitude by Pittsburgh and its complaints about being
burdened with the sickest transplant candidates.

   "Pittsburgh does not have a monopoly on people who die while on the waiting
list," says Dr. Douglas Norman, who runs the transplant program at the Oregon
Health Sciences Center and is currently serving as president of the United
Network for Organ Sharing, which oversees the national transplant system.

   "I worked at Pittsburgh for four years, and I know the patients they
transplanted there," adds Dr. Byers Shaw, who runs the University of Nebraska's
liver transplant program.

   "Our patient population is virtually the same as Pitt's. If you look at
severity of illness, I would submit that patients here are just as sick as any
patient transplanted in Pittsburgh."

   But there may be one area where Pitt's doctors are different, their
competitors say.

   Too often, they contend, Pittsburgh surgeons are willing to take an
eleventh-hour risk on patients who are too far gone for help, wasting organs in
the process. After all, they note, Pittsburgh's program was founded by a man who
always referred to his transplant cases as "rescues."

   Starzl's philosophy -- that "urgency of need" should be the defining
principle behind liver allocation -- is not necessarily shared by his colleagues
outside Pitt.

   Starzl "never gives up. His philosophy is always to try, to never draw the
line. And if Tom Starzl hadn't tried, we never would have developed liver
transplantation as a science," says Goran Klintmalm, who trained with Starzl in
Denver and Pittsburgh and went on to run one of the top five liver centers in
the country at Baylor Medical Center in Dallas.

But there are times when Starzl "went farther than I would go" in his choice of
transplant patients, Klintmalm says.

   Cowboys with a scalpel

   Today, says Pitt Chief of Transplantation John Fung, the medical center does
turn down some patients, and in fact, is beginning to encourage some of them to
register at other centers in regions of the country with shorter waiting lists.

   But that cowboys-with-a-scalpel reputation has stuck.

   While Starzl is retired from active surgery, his successors at Pitt are
afflicted with just as much hubris, critics say.

   "It is just fallacious for them to have this attitude that they understand
this art and no one else does," says a transplant surgeon who asked not to be
named. "There is just this incredible arrogance that nobody can do this but
them."

   Another prominent surgeon who trained at Pittsburgh says the secret to
Pittsburgh's high volume isn't the quality of its care, which isn't
substantially better than at other large centers.

   Instead, he says, a decade-old referral system and Pittsburgh's name
recognition prompt many doctors who are unfamiliar with newer centers to send
their patients to Pittsburgh, even though other facilities come close in terms
of survival rates and quality of care for a much lower price.

   While these kinds of complaints were repeatedly voiced by transplant surgeons
outside Pittsburgh, no one wanted to be quoted on the record for fear of
retaliation by Starzl, who wields a lot of clout in medical circles around the
world.

   When they are pressed on specifics, the critics point to three areas: Too
many patients are retransplanted, depriving others of a first-time chance; too
many alcoholics are transplanted who haven't proved they are rehabilitated; and
too many foreign patients receive livers, exceeding guidelines set by UNOS.

   Fung, a boyish, enthusiastic surgeon with a mop of black hair that he's
constantly shaking out of his eyes, calmly responds to the accusations.

   Too many alcoholics? They're carefully screened on a case-by-case basis, and
Pittsburgh's recidivism rates are in line with the rest of the country's.

   Too many foreign patients? While the limit on foreigners was slightly
exceeded in 1992, Fung says closer monitoring will ensure it won't happen again.

   Too many retransplants? While about 20 percent of all liver transplants
nationally are retransplants, the figure at Pittsburgh has declined from a high
of 31 percent in 1987 to 17 percent in 1992, he says.

   All this criticism of Pitt must mean the critics are envious, says medical
center president Romoff.

   "When you have an institution that is pre-eminent in anything, it is resented
by most of the others. That's the name of the game," Romoff says with a shrug.

   But he sits up straight in his chair when confronted with the complaint that
Pittsburgh transplants too many hopeless cases.

In fact, he counters, those "hopeless" cases are being dumped by other centers
at Pittsburgh's door.

   Treating castoffs?

   Are other transplant centers saving livers for their less sick patients and
sending the worst cases to Pittsburgh?

   When pressed for documentation, Romoff, Fung and other Pittsburgh officials
can come up with nothing except strong suspicions.

   "I've had doctors call me up on the telephone and say, 'Look, I can't really
do this patient here because he's too sick'," Fung says. "And the question is,
are some of those patients really too risky? And are they sent here as a way for
those hospitals not to have to tell the patient, 'I'm sorry, we can't transplant
you?' Do they want us to do their dirty work for them?

   "It may not be like emergency room dumping, but indirectly it boils down to
that," he adds.

   Romoff agrees.

   "One of the reasons our waiting list is the longest in the country, one of
the reasons ours is one of the most sought-after programs by patients who go on
this waiting list is," Romoff says, barely pausing for breath, "one, that they
understand and believe that we're the finest, and two, they're not accepted for
candidacy in their local transplant programs, and those reasons are many and
varied.

   "When other centers say we take patients we shouldn't take ... how do they
know that?" he asks, glaring at a reporter. "How do they know we're doing those
cases? They know that because those cases came to their door and they looked at
those cases and they told the patient, we can't help you, and the patient then
is sent to Pittsburgh.

   "They may say to themselves that the patient is too sick to be treated, but
their true reason is they don't want the responsibility of taking care of such a
patient," he says.

   LIB3

   THE TRANSPLANT LIST DAY FOUR Tomorrow: One lives, one dies.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, John Kaplan/Post-Gazette: Dr. Thomas Starzl, now retired from;
surgery, is pictured in 1985 preparing a donor liver.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1999


                             903 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            February 1, 1994 Tuesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1157 words

HEADLINE: MIRACLE GIRL;
Cystic fibrosis patient, 13, has new lungs and rare resilience

BYLINE: LEONARD NOVARRO, LEONARD NOVARRO is a San Diego-based free-lance writer.

BODY:

   Right about the time a new life was delivered to Alexis Ross of Encinitas, it
seemed as if it would be snatched away. Last August, 13-year-old Alexis, or Lexi
as she is known to family and friends, became the youngest cystic fibrosis
patient in Southern California to undergo a double lung transplant. Two weeks
shy of going home, however, her body began rejecting the new lungs, forcing
doctors to induce a coma to conserve oxygen. Lexi was placed on a respirator so,
as the machine worked, her body's energy could be spent fighting rejection and
healing itself, according to doctors. It worked. However, limited oxygen may
have caused nerve damage to her feet and ankles, creating still another setback
in a young life already fraught with tragedy and frustration. Though the surgery
was a success, enabling her to breathe as she never had before, she now spends
most of her time in a wheelchair, struggling through physical therapy to walk
again. And only last week, she was back in the hospital, this time battling
pneumonia.

   She is recovering, however, and expected to return home this week. Setbacks,
yes.

   But, then again, at UCSD Medical Center, where the approximately 10-hour
operation was performed, they call Lexi "the miracle girl." "I still can't
believe all she's been through," said her mother, Collette Van Reusen, 41.

   "She shouldn't even be alive." "There's a very strong person inside that
little body," added Dr. Ivan Harwood, one of Lexi's doctors and the director of
the Cystic Fibrosis Center in San Diego. o o o A few months ago, Lexi addressed
an assembly of students, teachers and parents of Mission Estancia Elementary
School in Encinitas, where she graduated from in 1992. "I'm in a wheelchair now.

   But I promise you're going to see me walking," she told them. Reading from
"Monsters, Angels and Me," an essay written a year ago about the battle raging
within her tiny body, her message was simple: Never give up. Lexi and her
sister, Sharlee, 15, were born with CF, the most common of newborn genetic
disorders.

   According to the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, the disease causes more
childhood deaths than multiple sclerosis, muscular dystrophy and diabetes
combined, and victims rarely survive to see their 20s. All their lives, the Ross
sisters have longed to breathe without laboring for every breath.

   While Sharlee may someday be a candidate for still-experimental gene therapy,
Lexi's lungs were too scarred by years of stress to benefit from it, leaving
surgery as her only option. The waiting took on another dimension for Lexi last
summer when she became a transplant candidate. Then one afternoon, the call
came. "They said, `We got your lungs,' " she recalled. `I just dropped the
phone.

   I ran to my mom, who was on another phone, and she dropped her phone." Lexi
was rushed to UCSD Medical Center in Hillcrest, where, less than two hours
later, she was in surgery. Ten days after the operation, however, she suddenly
began panting.

   As she gasped to breathe, nothing was happening.

   Her new lungs were shutting down. "I thought I was going to die right there.

   I said, `Do something for me.' They put a big, black thing on my face (an
oxygen mask). It was breathing for me.

   The next thing I knew, I was gone." `Keep on fighting' The coma lasted three
weeks, a nether time of very little memory except for two things: Collette Van
Reusen's lullabies and her words to her daughter: "Keep on fighting.

   Keep on fighting." When Lexi finally came out of the coma, her eyes that had
been closed for so long were now shielded from the harsh light of day by a small
cloth. "I couldn't see, but I could tell when my mom was coming," said Lexi.

   "I would hold out my hand, and she was there." But to have come so far -- and
yet not far enough -- has taken a physical and, in a lesser sense, emotional
toll on Lexi. To ward off rejection, doctors suppressed her immune system with
medication, but after developing an infection, she had to be placed on
antibiotics. "The doctors said there was this brushfire in her body that could
jump the line any minute," said her mother.

   "Several times they said that was all they could do.

   Her body had to decide at that point." Her legs finally grew stronger, but
because of the paralysis in her feet, she couldn't stand up. And the lungs.

   While they felt different, Lexi kept asking herself: "When are they going to
breathe better?" That's when her stepfather, Gerald Van Reusen, 46, intervened.
The week before Halloween, Lexi recalled, "I couldn't do anything.

   I guess my attitude had changed.

   I said, `I'm never going home.' "Gerry talked to me Monday night.

   I was having a bad day.

   He told me, `Listen to yourself.

   Believe in yourself.

   You make the call when you're going home.' "I told myself, `I'm going home
Friday.' No one believed me.

   My mom said, `Don't get your hopes up.' But I said I'm going home Friday, and
I did." The day after Van Reusen's visit, Lexi's new lungs began working the way
they're supposed to. "That was my best day," she said.

   "I never thought you could breathe so easily.

   I never knew.

   I think back to before, when I had to think to take a breath -- just to get
one teeny, little breath. "Now I was taking a breath, and it was filling up my
lungs." Small steps are big Now she wants to fill her life with things she has
never done before: gymnastics, tennis, biking, skiing.

   "I haven't been able to ride a bike since I was 8 years old," she said. Last
winter, she had a little taste of what that would be like, when her mother and
stepfather took her skiing, accompanied by her oxygen tank. With Lexi on skis by
his side, Van Reusen held onto the tank.

   "I wanted to go faster, but the tank kept yanking on my nose," she said. The
difference now is that "she has these great lungs," said her mother. "Now, she
says, `If my legs would only work, I could do all these things.' " To regain
strength in her feet and ankles, Lexi undergoes physical therapy daily at
Scripps Memorial Hospital in Encinitas, where progress is measured in minutes.
She's been at it for 2 1/2 months. Only recently has she been able to walk a few
steps at a time with a cane. Still, the nerves are regenerating. In November,
she couldn't move her ankles at all.

   Now she can raise them 90 degrees. Not too long ago, as she labored in pain
to roll over on her stomach to stretch the muscles in her hips, Jean Massicotte,
her physical therapist, observed, "All she does right now is five minutes at a
time.

   We hope to get it up to 15 minutes.

   Now, it's whatever she can tolerate." "Pull hard, pull hard.

   Relax," said Massicotte, as she coached Lexi, now almost prone on her
stomach. Finally, the pillow beneath Lexi's stomach for support was taken away.
As the patient grunted, Massicotte asked, "Is it being mean today?" "It's really
tight," answered Lexi. Two minutes more and Lexi rolled over, ever so slightly,
on her back and began raising one leg at a time, inch by inch. And one more
miracle began to unfold.

GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Slow progress: Amy Steed, Scripps Memorial
physical therapist, guides Lexi Ross as she stretches her leg muscles. She
suffered nerve damage to her feet after her lung transplant. 2. New steps:
Lexi's mother, Collette Van Reusen (left), and Lexi's sister, Sharlee, 15, watch
as Lexi takes some steps without the aid of a cane. At UCSD, the Encinitas
youngster is known as "the miracle girl." 3. Building endurance: One of the
things Lexi does during her twice-daily rehab sessions is spend time in a
"standing frame," which supports her back and knees to increase her standing
endurance. To pass the time, she plays solitaire. (E-3); PHOTOBY: 1,2,3.
Union-Tribune photos / SCOTT LINNETT

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             904 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            January 31, 1994 Monday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 630 words

HEADLINE: New `antisense' drug sector has its pros, analyst reports

BYLINE: DON BAUDER

BODY:

   The exciting new "antisense" sector of biotech may make sense for some
investors who carefully study a new report from Kidder Peabody's Mary Ann Gray.
Antisense drugs treat disease origins, not just symptoms, she explains.
"Antisense drugs are a new class of genetic medicine (the other being gene
therapy) that has the potential for activity with a high level of specificity in
many types of diseases," she says. Isis Pharmaceuticals has been issued eight
U.S. patents, and its ISIS 2105 "was the first antisense drug to enter
broad-scale clinical trials," says the analyst.

   Isis has several other projects in various development stages, and has
partnerships with high-powered pharmaceutical firms. Genta, which is
concentrating near-term on dermatology and drug delivery, is also working on a
number of possible products.

   It has been issued eight U.S. patents and has another 50 pending. Her report
is scientific, not financial, and does not include recommendations on the
stocks.

   Leedom's San Diego Stock Report gives Isis a rating of 81, which is a hold
with a positive bias.

   Genta gets a 74, or neutral with a negative bias. Burnham a buy Irvine's
Cruttenden & Co. has a new buy recommendation on the real estate investment
trust (REIT), Burnham Pacific Properties.

   The REIT filed a $200 million shelf registration in 1993, and that "will
enable it to continue its 2-year-old program of taking advantage of buying
opportunities in Southern California's still-depressed real estate markets,"
says analyst Sheri Cameron.

   Retail properties comprise 69 percent of the portfolio and are 94 percent
leased.

   Office-industrial properties are 99.5 percent leased.

   With 111 straight quarters of never skipping or reducing a dividend, Burnham
has "one of the longest dividend records in REIT history," she says.

   Burnham is improving its balance sheet by reducing its exposure to variable
interest rates.

   The stock has been hit over the past three months, and a rebound is in order,
she says.

   The total return (price appreciation plus income) on the stock can top 25
percent this year, says the analyst. Club consolidation Advanced Marketing
Services, which supplies books to membership warehouse clubs, has had
indigestion from the consolidations among the clubs, says David N. Allen of
Torrey Pines Securities.

   Advanced's third-quarter earnings per share were 22 cents, down from 52
cents, on a 10 percent revenue decline.

   The merger of Price and Costco and Sam's acquisition of some Pace outlets
hurt Advanced Marketing.

   By 1995, the worst should be over, and earnings can bounce back to 1993
levels, says Allen.

   Long-range, the company will benefit from new warehouse openings.

   However, earnings-per-share growth will be in the 8 percent to 10 percent
range, down from the 11 percent to 12 percent that Allen earlier anticipated.

   "To boost earnings growth potential, stringent cost controls or outright cuts
will be necessary," warns Allen.

   The company has a wad of cash.

   The stock has been trading below $5, and book value is $7.59. Allen expects
the stock to trade around its current level for six months.

   He would hold it for a potential earnings recovery. Leedom's San Diego Stock
Report gives the company a 74 rating, or neutral with a negative bias. Estimates
shaved Smith Barney Shearson has dropped earnings estimates on two local
companies.

   The 1994 earnings-per-share estimate for integrated-circuit designer
Brooktree dropped to 45 cents from 70 cents.

   The 1995 prediction dropped to 80 cents from $1.10. Analyst James Barlage
cites "lower gross profit margin expectations." Estimates for computer component
maker Pulse Engineering were also dropped to 67 cents from 75 cents for 1994,
and to 85 cents from 95 cents for 1995. Analyst Shao Wang notes there are
"specific product quality problems."

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             905 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                January 29, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 47; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 7403 words

HEADLINE: Uncovered Short Sales on Nasdaq Rise to Record

BYLINE: By LESLIE EATON

BODY:

   As the stock market surges to new highs, so do bets that shares will fall.

   Short interest in Nasdaq stocks hit a record in the month that ended on Jan.
4, the National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday. Last week, the
New York Stock Exchange reported that its short-interest level was at a record.

    On Nasdaq, short interest edged up 1.6 percent, to 682 million shares, an
increase of 10 million shares. Though that rise was small, short interest has
been climbing steadily for the last year and has jumped almost 50 percent in the
last 12 months.

   Stocks, meanwhile, have soared. The Nasdaq composite index, which hit a new
high of 796.53 yesterday, zoomed about 15 percent in the year that ended on Jan.
4.

   Short interest represents the number of shares that investors have borrowed
and sold without covering their positions by buying shares.

   While there are several reasons someone might sell a stock short, the most
common is the expectation that the stock's price will fall.

   Shorting is the flip side of buying a stock in the hope it will go up; a
short-seller borrows shares, sells them and later buys them back to return to
the original owner. If the share price has dropped in the meantime, the
short-seller pockets the difference.

   Traditionally, a high short-interest level has indicated that lots of
investors are bearish. But some analysts say big short positions are a positive
sign because the shorts will eventually have to buy shares. Over the last year,
the bulls have been right.

Apple Computer Tops List

    The short-sellers' newest favorite is Apple Computer, whose shares top the
list of largest increases with a 3.6 million gain, to 6.2 million shares. The
company's plunging profits, slipping margins and problems with the first Newton
product, the Messagepad, no doubt whetted the shorts' appetite.

   Comcast's regular class A shares registered the biggest drop in short
interest, plunging from 6.8 million shares to 1.4 million shares. But short
interest rose a bit in the company's special nonvoting class A shares, to 11.8
million from 10.4 million. Traders often make bets on price differentials among
Comcast's various securities.

   As it has since October, American Power Conversion continues to be the stock
that shorts most love to hate. Though the company's short interest level remains
the largest on Nasdaq, it nevertheless edged down slightly last month, to 12.2
million shares from 12.9 million. The company continues to reap record revenues
and profits from its devices that protect computers from power surges, but bears
say its competition will soon heat up.

Largest Positions

Security Name                          01/15/94     12/15/93       Change

Amer Power Convers                   12,237,284   12,883,448     -646,164   T
Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl                 11,824,126   10,434,624    1,389,502   T
MCI Comm Cp                           9,855,975    7,618,711    2,237,264   T
Snapple Beverage Cp                   9,522,428    9,840,694     -318,266   T
Mobile Telecomm Tech                  8,429,578    8,622,268     -192,690   T
Dell Computer Cp                      8,325,190    7,591,395      733,795   T
Food Lion Inc Cl A                    6,623,649    4,447,208    2,176,441   T
Noble Drilling Cp                     6,252,122    5,820,568      431,554   T
Apple Computer Inc                    6,203,715    2,616,287    3,587,428   T
Synoptics Commun Inc                  5,459,275    6,519,436   -1,060,161   T
Casino Magic Cp                       5,443,204    5,528,031      -84,827   T
Cott Cp                               5,413,243    3,671,321    1,741,922   T
+LDDS Commun Inc                      5,366,914    2,352,400    3,014,514   T
Seagate Tech                          5,184,137    2,819,812    2,364,325   T
Grand Casinos Inc                     4,925,454    4,974,614      -49,160   T
Intel Cp                              4,885,400    3,545,310    1,340,090   T
Checkers Drive-In                     4,846,134    5,494,079     -647,945   T
TPI Enterprises                       4,707,363    4,768,809      -61,446   T
Southland Cp                          4,658,857    2,479,667    2,179,190
Stryker Cp                            4,444,964    3,879,027      565,937   T
Picturetel Cp                         4,248,926    3,814,421      434,505   T
Quantum Cp                            4,189,601    3,425,746      763,855   T
Electronic Arts Inc                   4,165,458    3,648,453      517,005   T
DSC Commun Cp                         4,086,587    4,007,376       79,211   T
US Healthcare Inc                     4,016,567    3,968,851       47,716   T



Largest Cover Ratios

Security Name                          01/15/94    Avg. Vol.         Days Mkt

Dibrell Brothers Inc                  2,547,889       40,744           63   T
TPI Enterprises                       4,707,363       97,657           48   T
Hollinger Inc                         2,245,000       51,384           44   T
Littelfuse Inc                        1,034,626       26,095           40   T
Fortune Bancorp                         919,396       28,194           33   T
United Gaming Inc                     1,735,616       53,813           32   T
Noble Drilling Cp                     6,252,122      205,049           30   T
Schuler Homes Inc                     1,377,102       48,246           29   T
Fastenal Co                           1,602,843       60,515           26   T
Rochester Comm Sav                    1,181,193       45,074           26   T
Circon Cp                             1,706,395       67,162           25   T
Savoy Pict Entertnmt                  1,271,255       51,231           25   T
Westwood One Inc                      2,416,586       95,818           25   T
Copytele Inc                          2,250,858       94,003           24   T
Tokos Med Cp Del                      3,817,817      175,752           22   T
Transamerican Waste                     577,742       27,357           21   T
Bindley Wstn Ind                        504,794       25,395           20   T
UST Corp                              1,008,229       49,894           20   T
Zoll Medical Cp                       1,622,571       80,882           20   T
Amer Power Convers                   12,237,284      635,548           19   T
Casino Magic Cp                       5,443,204      285,668           19   T
Snapple Beverage Cp                   9,522,428      500,042           19   T
Aphton Corp                             483,830       26,773           18
Casino America Inc                    1,431,193       78,422           18   T
Medicine Shoppe Intl                    745,743       41,704           18   T



Largest Increases

Security Name                          01/15/94     12/15/93       Change

Apple Computer Inc                    6,203,715    2,616,287    3,587,428   T
LM Ericsson Tel Add                   3,553,462       11,455    3,542,007
+LDDS Commun Inc                      5,366,914    2,352,400    3,014,514   T
Seagate Tech                          5,184,137    2,819,812    2,364,325   T
MCI Comm Cp                           9,855,975    7,618,711    2,237,264   T
Southland Cp                          4,658,857    2,479,667    2,179,190
Food Lion Inc Cl A                    6,623,649    4,447,208    2,176,441   T
Cott Cp                               5,413,243    3,671,321    1,741,922   T
Zenith Labs Inc                       2,392,122      748,995    1,643,127   T
QVC Network Inc                       2,773,383    1,297,596    1,475,787   T
Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl                 11,824,126   10,434,624    1,389,502   T
Intel Cp                              4,885,400    3,545,310    1,340,090   T
Aura Systems Inc                      3,025,792    2,022,842    1,002,950   T
Centocor Inc                          3,292,325    2,396,935      895,390   T
AGCO Corp                             2,680,251    1,811,022      869,229   T
Reuters Hldg Plc ADR                  2,271,816    1,403,044      868,772   T
Compumed Inc                            891,097      106,441      784,656
Gateway 2000 Inc                        882,314       98,467      783,847   T
Ornda Healthcrp                       1,642,555      869,986      772,569   T
Quantum Cp                            4,189,601    3,425,746      763,855   T
Dell Computer Cp                      8,325,190    7,591,395      733,795   T
Amer West Airline                     2,456,477    1,796,749      659,728
Scimed Life Sys Inc                   2,722,362    2,108,006      614,356   T
Omega Environment                     1,612,489    1,010,851      601,638   T
Players Intl Inc                      3,007,707    2,427,240      580,467   T



Largest Decreases

Security Name                          01/15/94     12/15/93       Change

Comcast Cp A                          1,414,618    6,787,169   -5,372,551   T
Oracle Systems Cp                     2,086,002    5,174,961   -3,088,959   T
ECI Telecom Ltd                       1,221,092    3,215,501   -1,994,409   T
Geotek Inds                             239,847    1,511,351   -1,271,504   T
Synoptics Commun Inc                  5,459,275    6,519,436   -1,060,161   T
Valuevision Intl A                      202,803    1,075,678     -872,875   T
Sun Microsystems Inc                  2,404,853    3,212,986     -808,133   T
Natl Vision Assoc                       607,970    1,413,647     -805,677   T
Informix Cp                           1,918,620    2,645,289     -726,669   T
First Alabama Bcshs                     331,693    1,026,233     -694,540   T
Advanta Cl-A                            948,055    1,636,440     -688,385   T
Checkers Drive-In                     4,846,134    5,494,079     -647,945   T
Amer Power Convers                   12,237,284   12,883,448     -646,164   T
US Trans System                       1,479,104    2,114,174     -635,070
Signet Gp Ord ADR                        19,235      637,423     -618,188   T
Amtech Cp                             2,442,522    3,056,343     -613,821   T
Gupta Corp                              313,611      922,269     -608,658   T
Adobe Systems Inc                     1,742,290    2,343,902     -601,612   T
Mail Boxes Etc                          181,114      720,617     -539,503   T
Compression Lab Inc                   1,945,041    2,468,076     -523,035   T
Somatogen Inc                         2,694,825    3,209,174     -514,349   T
Coho Energy Inc                          18,067      529,436     -511,369   T
Acclaim Entertainmnt                  2,707,864    3,202,553     -494,689   T
Hollywood Casino A                      257,021      739,345     -482,324   T
News Commun Inc                           7,993      488,926     -480,933



Nasdaq

Security Name                            01/15/94       12/15/93

3Com Cp                                 1,778,764      1,855,391
#4th Dimen Sftwar Ltd                      95,513         28,594
50-Off Stores Inc                       1,887,015      2,054,359
Advanta Cl-A                              948,055      1,636,440
Advanta Cl-B                              232,253        150,285
AES Cp                                    234,905        323,709
AGCO Corp                               2,680,251      1,811,022
ASK Group                                 406,765        513,162
AST Research Inc                        1,817,733      1,308,245
Abbey Healthcare Gp                     1,143,597        886,294
Acclaim Entertainmnt                    2,707,864      3,202,553
Actel Cp                                  181,248        259,206
Adaptec Inc                               576,792        493,457
Adobe Systems Inc                       1,742,290      2,343,902
Advanced Polymer Sys                      273,023        349,137
Advanced Promotions                       964,078        773,725
Advanced Tissue Sci                       218,999        296,055
#AG Svcs of Amer                           57,698          2,984
Airsensors Inc                            150,851        104,162
#Akzo N V ADR                             180,766         46,475
Aldila Inc                                361,155        330,611
Aldus Cp                                  266,932        187,094
Alexander Baldwin                          70,862        118,646
Alias Research Inc                        132,550        229,893
Alkermes Inc                               61,904        205,151
Alliance Pharm Cp                         765,884        742,740
Allied Capital Cp                         126,357         84,411
Alpha 1 Biomedicals                       645,515        616,527
#Alpha Microsystems                         6,310        110,260
#Alpha-Beta Tech Inc                      284,613        160,192
Altera Cp                                 422,017        280,515
Altron Inc                                 53,402        104,909
Amer Biogenetic Cl A                      294,782        291,196
#Amer Business Info                       371,425        207,052
Amer Dental Techs                         232,089        308,955
Amer Film Tech Inc                        318,967        382,175
Amer Greetings Cp A                       139,717        384,262
Amer Intl Petro Inc                        75,434        120,925
Amer Mobile Systems                        90,702        146,595
Amer Pacific Cp                           746,756        764,205
Amer Power Convers                     12,237,284     12,883,448
Amer Rec Co Hlds Inc                      161,110           N.L.
Amer Software Inc A                       258,236        222,506
Amer Superconductor                        42,340        108,485
#America Online Inc                       587,244        324,925
Amgen                                   1,852,309      2,059,859
Ampex Inc Cl-A                            140,792        340,566
Amtech Cp                               2,442,522      3,056,343
#Apple Computer Inc                     6,203,715      2,616,287
Applebee's Intl Inc                       738,052        680,474
Applied Bioscience                        237,860        195,443
Applied Materials                         864,979      1,071,265
#Applied Sci & Tech                       288,125          1,100
#Arctco Inc                               394,826        185,602
Argosy Gaming Co                        1,648,832      1,533,639
Arkansas Best Cp                          358,431        390,049
Artisoft Inc                              381,085        371,334
#Asante Tech Inc                          292,378           N.L.
Aspect Telecomm Cp                        690,881        537,488
#Assoc Commun Cl A                          5,620        109,671
Atlantic SE Airlines                      138,331        232,110
Atmel Cp                                  589,568        608,831
Au Bon Pain Cl A                        1,264,660      1,212,698
Aura Systems Inc                        3,025,792      2,022,842
Auspex Systems Inc                        205,359        324,155
Autodesk Inc                            2,992,281      2,719,460
Autotote Corp Cl A                      1,760,110      1,551,332
Avid Tech Inc                             952,592        910,901
#BBT Finl Cp                               61,932         16,473
BMC Software Inc                          695,623      1,057,744
BPI Packaging Tech                        313,121        323,195
Bally Gaming Intl                         599,540        707,066
#Banco de Galicia Ads                     128,109         44,742
Bank South Cp                             172,085        284,455
Banyan Systems Inc                        167,407        569,228
Baybanks Inc                               87,876        135,123
#BE Aerospace Inc                         126,692         36,835
BED Bath & Beyond                         954,496      1,094,929
Bell Sports Cp                          1,243,987      1,245,204
Ben Franklin Retail                       395,439        372,240
Benton Oil & Gas                           62,248        158,281
Bertucci's Inc                            175,940        260,222
Best Power Tech Inc                        94,096        237,030
BIG B Inc                                 857,108        715,545
Bindley Wstn Ind                          504,794        505,795
Bio Tech Gen Cp                           272,450        251,185
Biochem Pharm Inc                         547,697        546,162
Biogen Inc                              1,776,355      1,862,046
Biomedical Waste Sys                      310,118        296,210
Biomet Inc                                550,995        640,248
#Bird Cp                                  102,433         27,750
Blyth Holdings Inc                        283,020        234,108
Boatmen's Bancshares                    1,061,483      1,153,815
Bob Evans Farms Inc                       318,972        299,232
#Bollinger Inds                             1,270         45,000
Boomtown Inc                            1,325,787      1,411,186
Borland Intl Inc                        3,895,844      3,774,735
#Boston Chicken Inc                       601,647        239,074
Boston Tech Inc                           670,676        549,394
Box Energy Cl B NV                        937,089        922,184
#Breakwater Res Ltd                       179,533          4,333
Brite Voice Systems                        90,982        162,841
Broadband Techs Inc                       993,583        939,153
Broderbund Software                       861,256      1,121,124
Buffets Inc                             2,642,238      3,019,807
Burnup & Sims Inc                         439,911        439,542
CBL Medical Inc                           165,400        241,293
#CCA Inds                                  27,836        124,693
CIS Tech Inc                              614,616        745,314
+Cabot Medical Cp                         490,995        467,569
#CAL Microwave Inc                        593,502        281,586
Calgene Inc                               214,214        342,816
Cambex Cp                                  55,587         98,640
#Canandaigua Wine A                        89,640         40,298
Canyon Resources Cp                       573,764        570,151
#Care Gp Inc                              192,249         24,077
#Carson Pirie Scot Il                     211,518         26,224
Casey's Gen Stores                        619,423        507,316
Casino America Inc                      1,431,193      1,379,605
Casino Magic Cp                         5,443,204      5,528,031
#Castle Energy Cp                         152,442         24,089
#Cato Cp The Cl A                         118,482         46,086
Celestial Seasonings                      297,595        338,678
Cell Com Puerto Rico                    1,275,840        857,416
Cellpro Inc                                24,900         72,108
Cellular Comm Cl A                        438,556        424,160
#Cellular Inc                             102,716         44,650
Centocor Inc                            3,292,325      2,396,935
#Cephalon Inc                              33,802        303,124
Charming Shoppes Inc                      329,653        323,278
Checkers Drive-In                       4,846,134      5,494,079
Chipcom Cp                                664,019        523,918
Chips & Tech Inc                           67,294        200,307
Chiron Cp                               1,880,364      1,734,429
Cholestech Cp                             452,797        497,471
Chronimed Inc                             249,564        168,457
Cincinnati Financial                      341,959        333,522
Cintas Cp                                 175,295        327,134
Circon Cp                               1,706,395      1,689,654
Cirrus Logic Inc                          929,338        769,387
Cisco Sys Inc                           3,576,797      3,022,327
Clearly Canadian Bev                      328,546        664,680
#Clinicom Inc                              80,645         21,630
#Clothestime Inc The                       93,645         13,347
Coastal Healthcare                        132,211        174,819
#Cobra Golf Inc                           213,301         91,363
#Coda Energy Inc                           88,400         31,108
#Coho Energy Inc                           18,067        529,436
Collagen Cp                               409,729        505,938
#Colonial Bancgroup A                       3,858        220,988
Comair Hldgs Inc                           19,082         74,787
#Comcast Cp A                           1,414,618      6,787,169
ComcAst Cp Cl A Spcl                   11,824,126     10,434,624
#Commun Entertainment                     114,297         63,450
#Community Hlth Sys                       367,580         12,265
Compression Lab Inc                     1,945,041      2,468,076
Comptronix Corp                           325,057        389,344
Compucom Systems Inc                      523,483        500,500
#Compuware Corp                            66,695        422,950
Comverse Tech Inc                         590,996        566,201
Concord Camera Cp                         504,756        663,442
Cons Papers Inc                           331,487        359,164
Cooker Restaurant Cp                      462,752        490,111
Coors Adolph Co B                         209,592        137,045
#Copley Pharm Inc                         688,587        374,924
Copytele Inc                            2,250,858      2,290,940
Coral Gables Fedcorp                      134,541        180,542
Cordis Cp                                 266,481        300,273
Corel Cp                                  668,155        538,126
Cott Cp                                 5,413,243      3,671,321
Coventry Cp                               374,734        418,234
Cracker Barrel Old                      1,195,101      1,351,787
#Cragin Finl Cp                           117,196         60,529
Cray Comp Cp                              667,362        754,346
#Creative Biomolecule                     254,632         56,497
Creative Tech Ord                         911,927        733,776
Crop Genetic Intl Cp                      442,036        401,185
Crosscomm Cp                              802,885      1,023,628
Crown Resources Cp                        304,548        304,339
Cryomedical Sci                         1,201,925      1,243,950
#Curaflex Hlth Svcs                       304,489         64,257
Cygnus Therapeutic                         67,599        173,642
Cyrix Cp                                  779,602        529,507
Cytocare Inc                              116,487        166,045
Cytogen Cp                                789,510        913,937
Daka Intl Inc                             327,978        316,618
#D & N Fin Cp                              24,332        138,898
#DBA Systems Inc                           45,293        191,230
DNA Plant Tech Cp                         617,701        739,793
DSC Commun Cp                           4,086,587      4,007,376
#Damark Intl Inc Cl-A                      76,300        443,001
Danka Business ADR                        305,637        246,395
Data Race Inc                             360,080        374,669
#Data Systems Sftware                      23,130        332,768
Datascope Cp                               88,434        146,305
#Dauphin Deposit Corp                      10,862         60,173
Davidson & Associate                      352,727        340,386
Dell Computer Cp                        8,325,190      7,591,395
Dentsply Intl Inc                         418,688        371,915
Deprenyl Research                         267,523        268,151
Dial Page Inc                             317,549        285,899
Dibrell Brothers Inc                    2,547,889      2,501,427
Digi Intl Inc                             166,445        107,379
Digital Microwave Cp                      518,769        655,973
#Digital Prods Cp                         308,158        142,563
Discovery Zone Inc                      1,152,325      1,258,190
Dixie Yarns Inc                           115,774         67,109
Dollar General Cp                         480,228        597,714
#Donnkenny Inc                             13,191         81,002
ECI Telecom Ltd                         1,221,092      3,215,501
Ezcorp Cl-A                               466,840        510,648
Eagle Hardware & Gdn                    1,253,502      1,643,051
Ecogen Inc                                149,835        242,300
Education Alternativ                    1,392,998      1,236,759
#Egghead Inc                            1,096,661        561,291
Elec Imaging Inc                          768,653        800,975
Electro Sci Inds Inc                       25,291         81,393
Electromagnetic Sci                        44,315         95,913
Electronic Arts Inc                     4,165,458      3,648,453
Emisphere Tech Inc                        543,936        615,888
Empi Inc                                1,241,072        754,031
Engle Homes Inc                           577,956        493,708
Envoy Cp                                  534,429        611,447
Enzon Inc                                 170,387        257,498
Exabyte Cp                                227,916        297,349
#Exar Corp                                151,429         44,616
#Executive Telecard                       234,476        110,904
FHP Intl Cp                               148,696        200,357
Farm & Home Fin Cp                        610,052        605,348
Fastcomm Comm Cp                        1,176,840      1,097,411
Fastenal Co                             1,602,843      1,605,502
Fifth Third Bncp                          723,397        919,321
Filene's Basement Cp                       23,863         67,633
First Alabama Bcshs                       331,693      1,026,233
+First Commerce Cp La                     810,553        799,183
First Pacific Ntwks                     1,095,510      1,158,446
#First Tenn Natl Cp                        71,093         17,112
Flagstar Cos Inc                          841,707        790,409
Food Lion Inc Cl A                      6,623,649      4,447,208
Food Lion Inc Cl B                         98,454        150,904
Foremost Cp of Amer                        62,232        111,800
Forest Oil Cp                           2,341,678      2,425,387
Forschner Group The                        19,707         77,704
Fortune Bancorp                           919,396        884,984
Fourth Financial Cp                       450,997        426,883
#Frame Tech Cp                             48,482        365,802
Fresh Choice Inc                          339,662        328,096
#Funco Inc                                405,055        220,772
Gantos Inc                                138,367        221,458
#Gartner Group Inc                         50,819          6,603
#Gateway 2000 Inc                         882,314         98,467
Gen Nutrition Cos                         597,846        704,559
Genetic Therapy Inc                       307,593        317,225
Genetics Inst Dep Sh                      334,789        336,133
Gensia Inc                              2,713,642      2,743,889
#Gensia Inc Wts                             5,223         93,200
Gentex Cp                                 360,571        354,972
Genzyme Cp                              1,838,825      2,223,652
#Geotek Inds Inc                          239,847      1,511,351
#Gibraltar Pkg Gp Inc                       1,593        162,308
Giddings Lewis Inc                        558,348        610,454
Glenayre Techs Inc                        389,300        367,644
Golden Systems Inc                        131,150        377,150
#Good Guys Inc The                        326,663        143,806
#Govt Tech Svcs                             5,362         50,250
Grand Casinos Inc                       4,925,454      4,974,614
Great Amer Rec Inc                      1,427,597      1,071,251
#Greenfield Inds                           12,997         59,744
Greenwich Pharm Inc                     3,193,376      2,962,703
Gupta Corp                                313,611        922,269
Gymboree Cp                               769,523        802,542
HBO Co.                                   230,696        305,631
Haggar Corp                               133,410         78,444
Hauser Chem Research                       23,367         72,566
#Haverty Furniture                         22,140        104,232
Healthcare Compare                        221,743        315,997
#Healthcare Imaging                        66,967         19,460
Healthcare Svcs Gp                        622,965        756,627
Healthdyne Inc                             55,175        191,882
Healthinfusion Inc                        751,088        745,919
Healthwise of Amer                         38,177        130,903
Heart Tech Inc                          1,091,965      1,236,771
Herbalife Intl Inc                        331,374        370,827
#High Plains Cp                            54,151          4,360
Hollinger Inc                           2,245,000      1,933,600
Hollywood Casino A                        257,021        739,345
Hollywood Park Inc                        537,929        624,829
#Holophane Corp                            31,482        152,172
#Home State Hldgs Inc                     263,000         83,618
Homecare Mgmt Inc                       1,176,904        846,551
Hornbeck offshore                         296,173        256,117
#Huntington Bcshs                          81,275        487,664
Hutchinson Tech Inc                       291,185        358,963
#ICO Inc                                   72,844         14,386
#ICO Inc Dep Shr                                0        180,000
Icos cp                                   491,253        490,965
IDB Commun Gp Inc                       1,229,265      1,172,556
Idexx Labs Inc                            536,161        858,812
IHOP Corp                                 838,724        782,098
I-Stat Cp                                 485,731        463,230
Image Entertainment                       263,975        267,950
#Immulogic Pharm Cp                       122,055          2,363
Immune Response Cp                      1,742,174      2,056,040
Immunex Corp                            1,198,687        798,622
Immunomedics Inc                          470,344        541,100
Imperial Bancorp                          451,501        480,871
Infinity Broadcast A                      380,701        529,879
Info Resources Inc                        250,035        289,432
Informix Cp                             1,918,620      2,645,289
#Ingles Markets Inc A                       9,387         80,126
#Innodata Cp                                4,565         45,168
Innovex Inc                                29,885         73,354
#Input Output Inc                         103,859          6,324
Ins Auto Auctions                         413,613        391,137
Insituform Techs A                        541,293        441,631
Integrated Devic Tec                      478,599        427,333
Intel Cp                                4,885,400      3,545,310
Intel Cp Wts                              933,102        755,070
#Intelligent Elec                         350,246        105,361
Interactive Network                     1,728,990      2,011,667
Interface Inc A                           840,889        749,982
Intergraph Cp                             357,228        461,425
Interleaf Inc                             246,547        176,200
Intermedia Commun Fl                      237,568        473,731
Intermet Cp                               301,846        269,990
Interneuron Pharm                         795,576        835,714
Intl Cabeltel Inc                         853,019        768,661
Intl Totalizator Sys                      181,368        265,893
Intuit Inc                                176,543        395,740
Iwerks Entertain Inc                      568,636        410,657
JB Hunt Trans Svcs                        570,770        565,034
JB Restaurants Inc                         96,407        181,461
J Baker Inc                             1,968,313      1,801,487
#JMAR Inds                                 54,849         10,388
Jennifer Convertible                      236,731        288,395
Johnstown Amer Inds                       194,537        153,400
Jones Intrcable A                         591,061        579,846
KLA Instruments                           199,156        267,484
Kelley Oil Cp                           1,457,340      1,444,893
Kendall Square Res                      1,443,000      1,686,637
#Keystone Fin Inc                          40,320        250,990
#Kinder Care Learning                      34,920        260,066
Kinetic Concepts Inc                      115,765         74,722
Knowledgeware Inc                         626,491        894,636
Koll Real Est Cl A                         56,870        169,624
Komag Inc                                 685,663        843,282
Kopin Cp                                  452,890        381,938
#Kulicke And Soffa                        352,230        192,421
#+LDDS Commun Inc                       5,366,914      2,352,400
LM Ericsson Tel ADR                       932,298      1,383,898
Lady Luck Gaming Cp                       720,241        736,824
LAM Research Cp                         1,211,981      1,286,102
Lance Inc                                 279,177        225,285
#Landair Services Inc                     155,437          6,205
Lattice Semiconduct                       200,741        259,854
Lawyers Title Cp                          161,601        234,192
#Learning Co                              525,650        168,896
Lechters Inc                              340,242        262,113
Legent Cp                                 400,107        332,394
Liberty Media A                           132,591        179,898
Lidak Pharm Cl A                          360,527        367,958
Linear Technology Cp                      319,905        260,080
Liposome Co Inc                           656,230        614,548
Liposome Tech Inc                         722,765        703,100
Littelfuse Inc                          1,034,626      1,091,520
Lo Jack Cp                                187,951        128,573
Lodgenet Entertain                        382,110        269,800
#Lomak Petroleum Inc                       10,931         55,692
Lone Star Steakhouse                    3,187,699      3,656,203
#Lone Star Tech Inc                       170,128         69,376
Longhorn Steaks Inc                       176,906        618,303
#Lottery Enterprises                      118,423         55,660
Lotus Development Cp                    3,461,878      3,876,217
#MARC Inc                                       0         58,344
#MB Comm Inc                                3,997        422,398
MCI Comm Cp                             9,855,975      7,618,711
MFS Comm Co Inc                           137,912        529,329
MS Carriers Inc                            30,892         84,875
MTC Elec Tech Ltd                         340,274        437,287
Magma Power Co                            569,950        690,336
Mail Boxes Etc                            181,114        720,617
Marcam Cp                                 457,574        332,385
#Marine Drilling Co                       140,966         34,619
Marshall And Ilsley                     1,902,464      1,883,798
Maxicare Hlth New                       1,286,303      1,282,416
Maxtor Cp                                 413,969        776,635
McAfee Associates                         296,248        236,679
McCaw Cellular A                          426,235        576,035
McCormick Co NV                           390,091        461,097
McGaw Inc                                 480,199        409,059
Medaphis Cp                               540,931        575,432
Media Vision Tech                       2,615,926      2,428,556
Medical Marketing Gp                       68,161        218,408
Medicine Shoppe Intl                      745,743        650,765
Medicis Pharm Cl A                        802,231      1,125,574
Medimmune Inc                           1,039,408      1,398,492
Megahertz Corp                            909,203        800,187
Mentor Graphics Cp                        487,863        805,814
Merrill Cp                                257,328        237,052
Mesa Airlines Inc                       1,111,563      1,119,007
Metricom Inc                              257,481        236,350
#Metrocall Inc                             55,685          5,810
Michael Foods Inc                         241,264        376,460
Michaels Stores Inc                     1,645,664      1,527,947
Michigan Natl Cp                          331,982        356,511
Micro Healthsys Inc                       146,520        226,668
#Micro Warehouse Inc                      102,912         23,592
+Microage Inc                             201,340        153,039
Microchip Tech Inc                        135,307        274,721
#Microcom Inc                             102,510         12,938
Micronics Computers                        75,671        123,699
Micropolis Cp                             275,543        433,191
#Microprobe Cp Wts 98                           0        182,700
Microsoft Cp                            3,151,768      3,166,148
#Microtest Inc                             79,712         12,427
Mid Atlantic Medical                      308,556        355,322
Midlantic Cp                              608,568        735,051
Millicom Intl Cell                        169,083           N.L.
#Mitek Surgical Prods                     472,927         29,764
Mobile Telecomm Tech                    8,429,578      8,622,268
Mohawk Inds Inc                           139,524        234,176
Molex Inc                                 112,843        192,361
Molten Metal Tech                       1,136,808        713,913
#Monaco Finance Cl-A                       80,937        393,005
Nac Re Cp                                 276,606        268,726
Nextel Commun A                         2,938,940      2,740,576
NS Bancorp Inc                            284,493        307,358
#NSC Corporation                              689        179,300
#Nationwide Cell                           53,582        246,663
#Natl Comp Sys Inc                        167,882          8,811
Natl Gypsum Co                            472,081        487,466
Natl Vision Assoc                         607,970      1,413,647
Nature's Bounty Inc                       363,899        394,698
#Neorx Cp                                  13,333        216,113
NET F R A M E System                    1,051,569        959,828
Network Imaging Cp                        312,381        224,600
Network Systems Cp                        395,898        510,218
Neutrogena Cp                             499,494        434,924
New Image Inds Inc                      1,004,664        914,170
Newbridge Netwks Cp                     1,008,561        717,840
Noble Drilling Cp                       6,252,122      5,820,568
Noise Cancellation                        932,857      1,061,040
#Norand Cp                                155,363         44,501
Nordstrom Inc                           1,502,111      1,588,954
#Norstan Inc                               64,200            435
Northern Tr Cp                            221,993        173,842
Novell Inc                              3,076,469      3,141,400
Novellus Systems Inc                      169,425        257,982
Nutramax Prods Inc                        167,050        219,900
#Opti Inc.                                 20,800         95,178
Octel Commun Cp                           378,270        230,462
#Old America Stores                           300         42,429
Old Natl Bncp                             298,331        248,964
Olicom A/S    E                           414,857        509,206
Olympic Finl Ltd                          323,594        289,824
Omega Environment                       1,612,489      1,010,851
#Omni Films Intl Inc                      241,400          7,707
Onbancorp Inc                             312,642        366,429
Oncor Inc                                  59,455        106,734
Oracle Systems Cp                       2,086,002      5,174,961
Orbital Sciences Cp                     1,455,388      1,480,040
#Ornda Healthcrp                        1,642,555        869,986
#Oshmans Sporting                           7,811         52,445
Outback Steakhouse                      2,771,321      3,063,658
Oxford Health Plans                     1,580,985      1,835,798
PDK Labs Inc                              658,916        644,648
#PDK Labs Wts B 97                         62,796         20,390
Pet Smart Inc                             636,434        502,638
+Paccar Inc                               118,198        163,984
#Pacific Bank Natl Ca                      14,319        131,105
Pacific Dunlop ADR                        263,854        189,274
#Pacific Physician                        348,441         75,936
Pacific Telecom Inc                        26,475         93,973
Pacificare Hlth Cl B                      609,563        658,350
Paging Network Inc                      1,328,763        850,357
#Pairgain Tech                            451,787        249,573
Parametric Tech Cp                      1,498,981      1,449,559
Park Commun Inc                           285,747        300,412
#Paul Harris Store                         58,091          5,536
Pentech Intl Inc                           75,810        157,537
Penwest Ltd                               251,974        238,507
Peoples Bk (Conn.)                        493,761        490,177
Peoples Heri Fin Gp                       324,838        315,585
Peoples Telephone                         424,492        436,193
Peoplesoft Inc                          1,167,789        771,775
Perrigo Company                           499,659        723,608
Petroleum Geo Sv Ads                      230,138        457,459
#Petstuff Inc                              95,450         31,825
#Philly Cons Hlds                          47,148          4,000
Phoenix Re Cp                           1,135,288      1,158,147
#Photonics Corp                           177,983         13,381
Phycor Inc                                878,753        899,870
#Physician Comp Ntwk                      231,081         63,054
Physicians Clinical                       238,107        169,257
Picturetel Cp                           4,248,926      3,814,421
Pioneer Hi Bred Intl                      186,582        281,159
Pittencrieff Commun                       572,968        597,874
Platinum Software Cp                      389,918        273,244
Players Intl Inc                        3,007,707      2,427,240
#Plaza Home Mtge Cp                        76,845          8,740
#Plexus Cp                                  1,724         51,431
#Positron Cp                              233,725         29,100
Powersoft Corp                            672,880        901,316
Preferred Entertain                       124,013        170,995
Pres Riverboat Casin                    3,278,068      3,359,728
Presidential Life Cp                      927,443        925,814
Presstek Inc                              580,469        562,715
Price/Costco Inc                        2,546,728      2,886,016
Primadonna Resorts                        432,003        342,913
Primedex Health Sys                       374,812        229,999
Procyte Cp                                 46,299         90,849
#Progress Software Cp                     243,225         72,753
Proteon Inc                                63,670        115,902
Pure Tech Intl                            245,388        305,658
#Purepac Inc                              599,005        293,266
Puritan Bennett Cp                      1,154,803      1,380,609
Pyramid Technology                        350,277        321,234
Pyxis Cp                                1,467,956      1,571,589
Qualcomm Inc                            1,552,087      1,598,721
#QVC Network Inc                        2,773,383      1,297,596
Quadrex Cp                                254,850        247,624
Quality Food Centers                      804,048        693,044
Quantum Cp                              4,189,601      3,425,746
Quantum Hlth Res Inc                    1,005,924      1,069,565
Quickturn Design Sys                      524,173           N.L.
Quiksilver Inc                             73,816        132,974
RPM Inc                                   774,726        725,193
#Railtex Inc                                7,996         49,269
Rally's Hamburger                       3,493,981      2,959,401
Rasterops                                 228,549        337,975
Raymond Corp                              195,476        133,643
RE Capital Cp                             470,600        452,220
Read-Rite Cp                              214,889        281,037
Regal Comm Cp                             715,285        714,140
#Renal Treatment Ctr                      105,349         38,753
Repap Enterprises Cp                      410,435        539,622
Resound Corp                            1,335,545      1,179,452
Retix                                     202,231        358,744
Reuters Hldg Plc ADR                    2,271,816      1,403,044
#Rhodes Inc                                46,212          4,940
Riggs Natl Cp The                         204,815        270,252
Roadway Services Inc                      746,714        935,485
Roberts Pharm Cp                          401,046        424,872
Rochester Comm Sav                      1,181,193      1,204,928
#Roosevelt Finl Group                     547,724        292,137
#Roper Inds                               391,152        193,611
Rouse Co                                  951,490        965,137
Ryan's Family Steak                        21,365         64,065
SCI Systems Inc                         1,958,657      1,972,478
Seacor Hldgs                              340,402        362,434
SGI International                         910,454        984,483
SHL Systemhouse                           169,358        114,433
SLM Intl Inc                              508,944        541,399
Steri's Cp                              1,596,274      1,795,684
+S3 Inc                                 1,671,652      1,937,788
+Sage Tech Inc                          1,724,678      1,319,312
#Sands Regent The                         122,111         63,878
Sanmina Cp                                455,866        318,731
Sapiens Intl Cp N V                     1,172,444      1,119,509
Savoy Pict Entertnmt                    1,271,255      1,261,051
#Scholastic Corp                          177,230         47,833
Schuler Homes Inc                       1,377,102      1,395,893
Schulman A Inc                            112,989        251,051
Sciclone Pharma Inc                       300,909        418,972
Scimed Life Sys Inc                     2,722,362      2,108,006
#Scios Nova Inc                            76,561         35,640
Scitex Cp                                 556,117        521,298
Score Board Inc                         1,974,823      2,080,206
Scotts Co Cl-A                             72,985        114,812
#Seagate Tech                           5,184,137      2,819,812
Sequent Computer Sys                    2,434,120      2,369,378
#Shaman Pharm Inc                          38,597        168,000
#Sholodge Inc                              51,008          2,029
Sigma Aldrich Cp                          377,402        398,030
Sigma Designs Inc                         218,381        283,987
#Signet Gp Ord ADR                         19,235        637,423
Silver King Comm Inc                       37,749         81,957
#Siskon Gold Cp A                          94,842         52,744
Skybox Intl                               549,118        582,440
Smithfield Foods Inc                    1,451,733      1,338,292
Snapple Beverage Cp                     9,522,428      9,840,694
Software Toolwks Inc                    1,897,282      1,442,052
#Somatix Therapy Cp                       155,385         80,602
Somatogen Inc                           2,694,825      3,209,174
Sonoco Products Co                      1,204,182      1,178,274
Spartan Motors Inc                        487,525        509,132
Spectranetics Cp                           59,452        167,320
Spectrum Info Tech                      2,160,517      2,478,307
Sports & Recreation                     1,995,069      1,818,340
Sports Heroes Wts 95                       56,566        165,209
Sports/Leisure Inc                         50,785         99,032
St Jude Medical Inc                       511,392        504,083
+St Paul Bancorp Inc                       36,077         80,063
Staff Builders (Del)                      407,512        274,833
#Standard Mgmt Corp                       372,360         26,292
Standard Microsystem                      441,683        576,505
Staples Inc                             2,314,834      1,740,606
Starbucks Cp                            3,829,501      3,618,467
Starsight Telecast                        399,871        317,057
State Street Boston                       224,540        398,927
Station Casinos Inc                       341,652        364,558
Stein Mart Inc                            199,068        282,475
#Stewart Enterpr Cl A                      65,992          4,707
Stewart Stevenson                         123,917        172,136
Stratacom Inc                             928,811        981,132
Structural Dynamics                     1,338,818      1,534,058
Stryker Cp                              4,444,964      3,879,027
#Sumitomo Bank of Cal.                     13,058         68,300
Summa Four Inc                            221,516        179,476
Summit Care Cp                            407,614        374,704
Summit Tech Inc                         3,490,007      3,261,948
Sun Microsystems Inc                    2,404,853      3,212,986
Sun Television & App                      290,288        406,717
Sunglass Hut Intl                         598,962        446,238
Sunrise Tech Intl                         501,877        401,279
Supermac Tech Inc                          92,198        159,801
Sybase Inc                              1,675,484      2,006,135
Symantec Cp                               532,627        449,443
Synetic Inc                               187,919        250,055
Synopsys Inc                              601,324        515,872
Synoptics Commun Inc                    5,459,275      6,519,436
System Software                         1,030,453      1,122,765
Systemed Inc                              475,454        460,077
Systems Comp Tech Cp                      791,791        689,897
#T Cell Sciences Inc                       32,462        138,745
TJ Intl Inc                               527,933        391,871
TPI Enterprises                         4,707,363      4,768,809
T Rowe Price Assoc                        741,766        672,207
Telco Systems Inc                         254,126        291,394
Tele Commun Inc A                       3,255,643      3,400,627
#Telebit Cp                                 6,494         74,588
#Tellabs Inc                              549,798        280,363
Telxon Cp                                 657,487        784,240
#Temtex Inds                                6,625         58,957
The 3Do Co                                970,571        924,862
The Men's Wearhouse                       164,022        105,641
Thomas Nelson Inc                         490,896        438,454
Todays Man Inc                            280,373        485,503
Tokos Med Cp Del                        3,817,817      3,926,981
Topps Co                                  207,851        264,417
Transamerican Waste                       577,742        556,735
Transmedia Ntwk Inc                       251,348        245,312
Tricord Systems Inc                       480,186        327,614
Trimble Navigation                        504,974        462,271
Tristar Corp                              388,156        400,574
Tseng Labs Inc                          3,385,469      3,464,921
Tyson Foods Inc Cl A                      355,779        408,607
US Bancorp Oregon                         693,701        686,282
US Healthcare Inc                       4,016,567      3,968,851
US Long Distance Cp                       733,900        678,879
US Robotics Inc                           699,422        769,667
UST Corp                                1,008,229      1,016,613
United Cos Finl Corp                       29,784         95,598
United Gaming Inc                       1,735,616      1,679,938
#United Retail Gp Inc                     104,360         42,843
Universal Elect Inc                       458,625        373,435
VLSI Tech Inc                             244,502        480,019
Valence Tech Inc                          408,119        467,923
#Valuevision Intl A                       202,803      1,075,678
Vanguard Cellular A                       273,923        318,426
#Vans Inc                                  34,167        167,219
Varlen Cp                                 392,309        303,426
Ventritex Inc                             828,313        545,541
Viewlogic Systems                         635,313        641,680
#Visx Inc                                 108,800         28,827
WPP Gp Plc ADR                            526,884        556,654
WRT Energy Corp                           259,022        201,843
Wang Labs Inc Wts Wi                       79,920           N.L.
#Warehouse Club Inc                             0         42,169
#Washington Fed Sv Ln                      48,028          4,271
Washington Mut Sv Bk                    1,575,617      1,337,930
#Watson Pharm Inc                         944,547        407,027
Wellfleet Commun Inc                    2,332,260      2,032,606
West One Bancorp                        1,491,768      1,652,233
Westcott Comm                           1,330,230      1,046,625
Western Publishing                        252,994        306,862
Westpoint Stevens A                       152,275        104,427
Westwood One Inc                        2,416,586      2,218,384
Whole Foods Market                        783,810        851,714
Willamette Inds Inc                       313,669        334,256
#William Sonoma Inc                       520,736        175,816
Wordstar Intl Inc                         199,069        139,092
Worthington Inds Inc                      211,828        150,929
Xoma Corp                                 933,959        538,630
#Xircom Inc                               281,578        111,600
#Xyplex Inc                                78,194         18,117
York Research Cp                          821,666        910,047
Younkers Inc                              140,057         80,694
Zale Corp                                 309,431        382,524
Zebra Tech Cp Cl-A                        351,554        386,873
#Zenith Labs Inc                        2,392,122        748,995
Zeos Intl Ltd                             810,720        823,661
Zilog Inc                                  89,665        176,653
#Zions Bancorp                             49,206            514
Zoll Medical Cp                         1,622,571      1,216,687
#Zoom Telephonics Inc                     250,964         78,083
Zycad Cp                                   33,310         86,211
Other Nasdaq
#AGP& Co Inc                                2,500         47,234
#Alpnet Inc                                51,784          4,720
#Acorn Venture Cap Cp                     167,600         71,745
Advanced Enviro A                          57,124        128,479
Alter Sales Co                            219,215        488,915
Amer Bus Comp Cp                          320,361        274,806
Amer West Airline                       2,456,477      1,796,749
#American Complex                         172,472         18,143
Ames Dept Stores Inc                      243,306        348,430
#Anglo Swiss Inds                          17,668        107,299
Aphton Corp                               483,830        478,550
Applied Laser Wts A                       142,369         99,999
#Applied Laser Wts B                       97,760         52,600
#Aquanatural Co                           121,641         11,000
Bio-Refer Labs Wts A                      120,030         74,512
Bio-Refer Labs Wts B                       36,010        141,825
#Bio-Reference Uts                         14,345        124,780
Biocontrol Tech Inc                       405,032        352,520
Biomechanics Cp Amer                      322,038        558,026
#Blue Chip Comptrware                      57,175          8,200
Blue Dolphin Energy                        45,329         96,022
CCAir Inc                                  94,456        164,499
#CNS Inc                                   75,379         10,717
#Cadiz Land Co                            118,073             99
Capital Gaming Intl                       628,152        607,196
#Cellex Biosciences                        29,722        160,840
Cellular Tech Svcs                        322,378        215,414
#Centurion Mines Cp                        95,692         41,699
#Command Credit Corp                      128,050         67,900
Comp Mktplace Inc                         263,120        257,600
#Compumed Inc                             891,097        106,441
#Cortex Pharm Inc                         176,355         57,170
Crown Casino Corp.                        154,338         95,159
#De Beers Cons ADR                        153,871         54,000
Diamond Entertain                         410,773        477,399
#Digital Solutions                        159,124          6,920
#Diplomat Cp                               17,880        178,015
#Direct Connect Intl                        2,154        114,750
Direct Connect Wts A                       67,353        117,553
Dollar Time Inc.                           54,280        126,258
Dresdner Ag Sp ADR                      1,242,585      1,162,105
#Driefontein Cons ADR                      72,566         18,600
#Elec Clearing House                       11,221         63,139
Electrosource Inc                          36,752         87,285
Embrace Systems Cp                        221,499        278,612
#Facelifters Home Sys                      90,933         30,748
#Family Bargin  S2s3                        8,000         51,631
#Fiberchem Inc                            300,871         55,942
#Florida West Air Inc                      57,213            193
#Food Integrated Tech                     156,500         10,000
#Food Integrated Wts                      149,350          2,000
GB Foods Cp                               395,229        384,226
Gaming Cp of Amer                         261,775        256,768
#Gamma Intl Ltd Wt 95                      61,457          6,785
Gentner Commun Cp                         282,345              0
#Gerant Inds Inc                           65,105          3,468
#Glendale Fed Bk Wts                      113,264          1,000
#Global Spill Mgmt Co                      95,646         52,542
#Great Amer Mgmt Inv                        6,272        105,575
Great Cntr Spon ADR                       273,058        197,210
Gunther Intl Inc Uts                       77,525           N.L.
#H&S Treat & Relse                         92,207         12,829
#Harcor Energy Inc                          5,203         47,345
#Healthcare Tech Ord                       69,664         20,520
ICC Techs Inc                             333,234        295,700
#Infinite Machines Cp                      57,000         10,000
#Insta Cool Inc                           124,268         62,129
#Interlink Electronic                      54,851          1,000
Internet Commun Cp                         61,978        148,619
Interscience Comp Cp                       64,410              0
Intl Gaming Mgmt Inc                      540,842        353,806
Invitro Intl                              435,936        602,238
Irvine Sensors Cp                         262,336        209,057
#Jockey Club Inc                            1,167         63,073
#Kineret Acq Cp Uts                        65,878             60
#LM Ericsson Tel Add                    3,553,462         11,455
Las Vegas Enter Ntwk                       81,332        138,000
Laser Video Ntwk                           76,984        288,818
#Laser Video Wts B 97                       5,000        230,620
#Lasertechnics Inc                         22,165        103,145
#Licon Intl Inc                            46,443        233,115
#Lone Star Casino                         251,551         53,426
#Lucille Farms Inc                          5,180        130,180
#Magellan Restr Sys                       137,115         34,561
Management Techs Inc                      123,165        221,170
Marcum Natural Gas                        106,918        401,049
#Master Glazier Uts                       135,360         11,000
#Master Glaziers Kar                      125,450         21,300
Medical Dynamics Inc                      303,538        265,109
#Metalclad Cp                              78,923         25,798
Micros to Mainframe                        38,252        102,161
Microterra Inc                            301,110        187,800
#Minorco ADR                                9,561         59,395
N-Viro Recovery Inc                       320,850        249,046
#Natl Registry Inc                        174,437         17,000
#New Day Beverage Inc                      15,735         83,235
#News Commun Inc                            7,993        488,926
News Commun Wts A 95                      101,759              0
#Nytest Environmental                      17,556        212,056
#Pantheon Inds                            276,330          2,694
#Petromet Res Ltd                         103,575          3,500
#Plasma Therm Inc                          45,585          3,365
#Producers Entertain                       46,500            497
Projectavision Inc                        617,500        491,317
Quality Product Inc                       831,866        484,650
#Ramtron Intl Cp                           98,674         34,200
#Rent-Way Inc                               4,419         45,175
Research Frontiers                        136,241        179,019
+Royce Labs Inc New                       113,536        161,094
#SSE Telecom Inc                           71,571         14,070
#Satcon Tech Cp                            24,664        119,005
Scorpion Tech Cl A                         35,824        104,512
Senetek Plc ADR                           327,412        401,490
#Shuffle Master Inc                       319,839        172,046
Site Based Media Inc                      434,867        342,440
Skolniks Inc                              304,445        313,771
#Sky Scientific Inc                        46,000          2,000
Solv Ex Corp                              268,900        327,193
#Southland Cp                           4,658,857      2,479,667
Steven Maddens Ltd                        115,000           N.L.
#Submicron Systems                         11,078        157,578
#Telefonos de Mexico                      423,191        160,370
#Teltronics Inc                            23,093        151,254
Touchstone App Sci                         71,602        137,338
US Lan Systems Cp                          87,100           N.L.
US Trans System                         1,479,104      2,114,174
Urethane Techs Inc                        667,426        659,977
VSI Enterprises                           218,040        135,001
#Ventura Entertain                        111,618         42,971
#Vimrx Pharm Inc                           32,635        139,967
Voice Powered Tech                        201,888        244,374
Williams Controls                          44,036        129,523
#Winners Entertn Inc                       81,084         38,634
Wisconsin Pharmacal                       424,828        351,324
Work Recovery Inc                         305,637        332,437


Short Sales Tables Explained

    These tables show issues with a short interest position in the current month
of at least 250,000 shares or a change up or down from the previous month of at
least 40,540 shares.

    Cover ratio represents the number of days, at average volume level, that it
would take to purchase the number of shares sold short.

    T -- National Market System.

    N.L. -- Not listed.

    + -- Stock split.

    * May have been affected by arbitrage transactions resulting from any one or
more of the following: proposed or pending acquisitions; convertible securities
of the same company; rights offerings; stock splits or distributions; tenders;
other special situations.

    Short interest may also be affected by options positions.

    # indicates a change of 75 percent or more from the previous month.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1994


                             906 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    January 28, 1994, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Dan Dorfman; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 1401 words

HEADLINE: Steinberg bullish on stocks, long on confidence

BYLINE: Dan Dorfman

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

    Want to make big bucks in the stock market? If you want sure-fire,
can't-miss advice on how to do it from the son of a most successful daddy, just
heed the advice of self-anointed investment guru Jonathan "Jono" Steinberg.

   And the cocky, fast-talking would-be publishing and investment mogul isn't
about to mince words about how great a stock-picking genius he is.

   "I'm very unique; you can make more money reading me than reading The Wall
Street Journal," brags the 29-year-old publisher of Individual Investor
magazine, a monthly publication for stock players.

   "There's no way anyone can spend $ 29.95 a year (the cost of his magazine)
and make as much money as reading us. We're just a better mousetrap."

   Steinberg - ultra serious, self absorbed and rarely smiling - runs Individual
Investor Group, a company he started in '85. In '88, he bought the Penny Stock
Journal, now called Individual Investor magazine. And in December '90, he
launched the monthly Special Situations Report newsletter ($ 165 a year).

   The two publications - both focus on small-company stocks - are the backbone
of the parent company, a money-losing business that became a public company in
December '91.

   Steinberg is the son of Saul Steinberg, 54, a one-time notorious corporate
raider who is worth an estimated $ 360 million. He now runs big insurer Reliance
Group Holdings. Jono is one of six children from the first of Steinberg's three
marriages.

   Thanks to Dad's help - Reliance owns 19% of the parent - Jonathan was able to
pull off the public stock offering. Jono owns about 845,000 shares, or 18% of
the stock.

   "My father has made 130% on his investment in my company; he's done worse,"
Steinberg says.

   If Jono is as good as he says, these are among the stocks to own:

   - Toll Brothers, a builder of single-family upscale homes.

   - Jennifer Convertibles, a chain of stores selling sofabeds.

   - Xircom, a maker of portable computer-networking equipment.

   Likewise, he pitches a bunch of other names, including some biotechs, that he
predicts will be big money makers the next 12 months (see chart).

   An obvious question: How good is Jono? Pretty darn good if you look at the
record.

   For starters, Jono tells me, "I'm the most successful participant ever in The
Wall Street Journal's money managers vs. dart board stock-picking contest. I've
won it more times than anyone else, and I've also had the three best stock picks
ever."

   Investment newsletter tracker Mark Hulbert of Hulbert Financial Digest also
tells me the Special Situations Report is wowing 'em. In the last three years,
readers who followed its advice would have had nifty gains of 92% in '91, 47% in
'92 and 14% in '93.

   Significantly, among 112 leading newsletters monitored by Hulbert, Special
Situations Report - over the past three years - turned in the third best
showing, with a 221% gain. That's more than double the 108% rise in the Nasdaq
composite index the same period.

   Steinberg credits it all to super stock analysis by his firm. In fact, he
doubts that anyone, including mutual fund giant Fidelity Investments, has done
the work on small-cap stocks that he has.

   "We're a truly unique information source; the country needs me," he says.

   Obviously, a lot of folks also think he's needed. Circulation the past year
shot up from 55,000 to 170,000 for Individual Investor magazine and from 4,500
to 7,500 for Special Situations Report.

   All of this, of course, is benefiting the parent company's stock price. It
has jumped from a 52-week low of $ 1 7/8 to a high of $ 5 3/4. Thursday's close:
$ 5.

   Not unexpectedly, Steinberg sees better days ahead for the parent company. He
sees a '94 revenue gain of 70% from '93's estimated $ 4.5 million. And he says
the company should show its first profit in the first half, as well as for all
of '94.

   He also tells me the Dreyfus New Leaders mutual fund has bought $ 1 million
worth of his company's stock. "It was a very good decision by Dreyfus," he says.

   If you manage money and read this column, a word of warning: You're getting a
new rival - Jono. Or, as he calls his new money management company - WisdomTree
Associates.

   That's the name of a new hedge fund - to be part of the parent company - that
he'll kick off in March with starting assets of $ 1.5 million to $ 2 million.

   A hedge fund both buys stocks and sells short (a bet on lower prices) in an
effort to lessen risk.

   "We've made a lot of money for our readers, and it's time for our company to
share in the spoils," Steinberg says. "I expect we'll perform significantly
above average."

   How does he handle the obviously sensitive issue of buying stocks in his fund
and recommending them later on in his magazine or newsletter?

   "Sometimes, we'll buy the stocks before we publish, and sometimes, we'll buy
after we publish," he says. "We're not going to abuse the privilege. And we'll
say, like they do in research reports, that we may or may not have a position in
the stock."

   His outlook for the market?

   "I'm bullish, the same as I've been for five years," Steinberg says. "You've
got tremendous demand for stocks from both baby boomers and older people. You've
got a good slow-growth, low-inflation environment. America seems much more
competitive. And people want better returns."

   Of his 10 best ideas for the next 12 months, five are biotechs. Steinberg
says the industry is oversold because of health-care concerns. But he sees a lot
more product approvals - more over the next 18 months than at any time in the
past. Likewise, more biotechs are earning money.

   "It's one of the most exciting stock groups around, but I'd buy a package to
reduce the risk," he says.

   His No. 1 stock pick: Cheyenne Software, a company that develops software for
microcomputers and computer systems, with a focus on local area networking. The
stock was up 39% last year, but Steinberg says there's a lot more to come. Chief
reasons he likes the stock:

   - Prospects of a big increase in market share in computer networking.

   - Big revenue pluses from collaborations with Microsoft and Novell, which
will incorporate some Cheyenne software in some of their products.

   - Technologically superior products.

   - Excellent balance sheet.

   Steinberg's earnings outlook: $ 1.30 a share in the current June 30 fiscal
year vs. 80 cents last year, and on to at least $ 1.85 in '95. Earlier this
week, Cheyenne reported fiscal second-quarter earnings of 33 cents a share, up
nearly 100% from last year's 17 cents.

   What are Steinberg's business goals? A million subscribers to his
publications and hundreds of millions of dollars under management.

   "It'll happen," he says. "Like I said before, I'm unique."

   Steinberg never finished college. He went to Wharton School of Business at
the University of Pennsylvania but never returned after a summer internship at
Bear Stearns. He spent a couple of years in its mergers-and-acquisitions
department, then left in '88 to get into publishing.

   In the early '70s, his equally brash dad boasted to me: "You watch. Like the
Rockefellers, I'll own the world. I could even be the first Jewish president."

   Saul hasn't made it - yet. But don't sell Jono short. Who knows? The way he's
going, he could very well wind up as our country's first emperor.

    Hey Dad, here's what's hot! Hot stock hand Jonathan Steinberg lists his best
ideas for the next 12 months.

    Est. earnings
                    Thur.   12-mo.  Pctg.    per share
Company              close   target  gain    '94     '95
Vical              $ 15        $ 30   +100%  -$ 0.16  -$ 0.45
DNA Plant Tech.     $ 5 3/8    $ 10    +86%  -$ 0.93  -$ 0.59
Seitel             $ 15        $ 27    +80%  +$ 0.80  +$ 1.20
Ecogen              $ 6 5/8    $ 11    +66%  -$ 0.33  +$ 0.03

Jennifer
Convertibles      $ 14 1/4    $ 23    +61%  +$ 0.70  +$ 0.88
Toll Brothers      $ 19        $ 30    +58%  +$ 1.25  +$ 1.70
Xircom             $ 19 1/2    $ 30    +54%  +$ 0.85  +$ 1.10
Cheyenne Software  $ 36 3/4    $ 51    +39%  +$ 1.30  +$ 1.85
Interneuron Pharm. $ 11 5/8    $ 16    +38%  -$ 0.46  +$ 0.08
Genetic Therapy    $ 18 3/4    $ 25    +33%  -$ 0.90  -$ 1.40

Source: Jonathan Steinberg, Individual Investor

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, b/w, Jim Cooper, USA TODAY


                             907 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                     January 24, 1994, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1802 words

HEADLINE: In war on cancer, one battle is over who gets funds;
Lack of progress spurs call from leukemia, lymphoma researchers for shift in
spending

BYLINE: By Richard A. Knox, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Amid new concerns that America is losing its $ 2 billion-a-year war on
cancer, researchers who specialize in blood and immune-system malignancies argue
that their field deserves a big push as the best hope for fresh answers to the
cancer puzzle.

   Their bid has opened a window on a larger debate within the cancer
establishment on how the war on cancer is going, and whether a change in
strategy is needed.

   Last year, advocates for breast-cancer research demanded and got an extra $
200 million in federal support. Others agitate for a big boost in prostate
cancer funds, charging that the male cancer has been ignored.

   Leukemia and lymphoma researchers point out that cancers of the blood and
immune systems kill 50,000 Americans a year, more than either breast or prostate
cancer. Among all cancers, they rank fifth in incidence and third in mortality,
"every bit on an equal footing with breast cancer," says Dr. Judith E. Karp of
the National Cancer Institute.

   In their bid to recapture center stage, leukemia specialists are rallying
behind a "Cure 2000" slogan, holding out hope for big breakthroughs by the turn
of the century - if only the money is forthcoming. But federal officials, wary
of disease-of-the-month agendas, are trying to draw the line.

   "There's no way Congress can keep up with our demands if we compartmentalize
each disease," Dr. Samuel Broder, director of the National Cancer Institute,
warned a group of leading leukemia researchers this month, many of whom sported
black-and-red "Cure 2000" lapel pins. "We'll end up with a fight among the
groups and we'll forget the science."

   The pulling and tugging reveals much about the current politics of cancer. It
is a field torn between scientists' enthusiasm over recent laboratory advances,
the public's impatience for cures and strategists' efforts not to overpromise -
again - how fast the gap can be bridged. Broder and his lieutenants are still
trying to back away from the unachievable goal set 10 years ago by his
predecessor, Dr. Vincent T. DeVita, to cut US cancer deaths in half by the year
2000.

   In 1971, when President Nixon inaugurated the National Cancer Program,
successes in treating leukemia and lymphoma during the previous two decades
contributed to the naive view that steady progress against cancer was just a
matter of time and money.

   Twenty-two years and $ 25 billion later, scientists and the public alike are
frustrated about the state of the war, if not the battle plan. Cancer warriors
can proudly point to dramatic reductions in cancer mortality among children (a
38 percent drop between 1973 and 1990) and young adults (a 21 percent decline),
thanks largely to advances in treating certain leukemias, Hodgkins disease, bone
cancer, kidney cancer and a few others.

   But Americans in these younger age categories account for only 11 percent of
all cancer cases. A look at the overall picture reveals that US cancer incidence
jumped 18 percent between 1973 and 1990, while cancer deaths increased by 7
percent, when the figures are adjusted for the aging population.

   Research has somewhat improved survival odds for some adult cancers,
including colorectal, stomach, bladder and testicular cancers and Hodgkins
disease. But for many types of the disease, cancer is not much more curable than
it was in the early 1970s. Even subtracting the contribution of lung cancer, the
second most common malignancy after breast cancer and one of the deadliest, US
cancer mortality has remained essentially unchanged.

   "Our decades of war against cancer have been a qualified failure,"
statistician John C. Bailar 3d of McGill University recently told the
President's Cancer Panel. "Whatever we have been doing, it is not working."

   Enter the leukemia/lymphoma specialists, who argue that cancer research
should return to its roots to find "new paradigms" of cancer treatment.

   Treatment of blood and lymph system malignancies have played a seminal role
in cancer research. Such cancers cannot be removed surgically, so they had to be
attacked with drugs and radiation. And the early successes in treating such
systemic cancers demonstrated a crucial point: It was possible to attack tumors
that had spread beyond their initial site.

   "Leukemia has been in many ways the Rosetta stone to understand cancer," says
Dr. Ronald P. McCaffrey of Boston University, who is the Leukemia Society of
America's vice chairman for medical and scientific affairs. "If we can make
progress in leukemia, we can make progress in other cancers. Historically that's
been the case."

   Blood and lymph cancers have one big advantage over solid tumors as a window
on cancer, specialists say. Because they circulate in the blood stream and
lymphatic system, the malignant cells can be readily sampled and studied closely
throughout the course of the disease.

   "You can get to the tumor," says Karp, special assistant to Broder and a
specialist in adult leukemia. "It's ripe for the picking, and it's there
throughout various stages of the therapy. If you remove a breast tumor, you
can't go back and look at it until it metastasizes to bone."

   The case for accelerating leukemia and lymphoma research rests in large part
on recent progress in understanding some of the basic genetic mechanisms that
give rise to cancer, and in devising precise ways to block these molecular
missteps.

   At a two-day workshop this month in Rockville, Md., convened by the Leukemia
Society and the cancer institute, several dozen researchers summarized the most
beguiling leads. Many come under the heading of understanding the genetic
regulation of cells' cycle of life and death.

   For instance, scientists are discovering how blood cells can escape a genetic
"suicide" mechanism called apoptosis (aye-poe-TOE-siss) that normally programs
them to die on schedule so fresh cells can take their place. The mechanism is
especially important in blood cells, which have enormous turnover rates.

   "There are six billion cell divisions an hour in the bone marrow and six
billion cell deaths through apoptosis," explains Dr. M. Judah Folkman of
Children's Hospital in Boston. "It's a very carefully balanced system. If it's
off by 1 percent, you're dead in a week."

   In the past year or two, scientists have begun to understand how mutations in
a gene called p53 throw this cellular life cycle awry by interfering with
apoptosis. Mutations in p53 have been found in 51 different cancer types - half
of all cancers - including a number of leukemias and lymphomas.

   Now researchers are busily dissecting other links in the chain that leads to
programmed cell death. John Reed of the LaJolla Cancer Research Foundation in
California notes that one gene called bcl-2, originally identified in a
lymphoma, protects cells from the apoptosis-inducing effects of many anticancer
drugs - possibly by giving cells a longer time to repair the DNA damage wrought
by these drugs.

   Reed and others say that blocking bcl-2 should sensitize cancer cells to
traditional chemotherapy agents.

   One technology to do such gene-blocking is already being tried in leukemia
patients. For instance, Dr. Patrick Iversen of the University of Nebraska has
made strings of "antisense" genetic code that seek out and bind to the mutant
p53 gene, preventing it from making its protein product.

   In early trials with 15 relapsing leukemia patients, Iversen has shown that
this "antisense" molecule gets into leukemia cells and is nontoxic, but it is
too soon to tell whether it induces them to self-destruct in response to
anticancer drugs.

   This is just one of dozens of new ideas in "molecular medicine" that,
according to leukemia researchers, justify a big new push in their field. "What
we want now is a new beginning so leukemia can continue to provide insights,"
McCaffrey pleaded at the workshop's conclusion. "We need a new paradigm in
cancer. We're stuck. We've been stuck for three or four years."

   Broder, beset by disease-specific pleas on every hand, remained skeptical. "I
guess what you're saying," he quipped, "is, 'Brother, can you paradigm?' "

 Some beat the odds, but lymphoma resists cure

    Cancer of the lymph glands struck Beatrice Frey, now 70, in 1971, the same
year President Nixon inaugurated the war on cancer.

   Frey's doctor said he would try to provide her with "a gentle death." But the
Grafton woman, who had lost her husband to lung cancer five years earlier,
decided to fight back, undergoing experimental therapy that raised blisters
under her fingernails, triggered throat spasms and made her violently ill.

   Frey's gamble paid off. Specialists at Boston's Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
cured her lymphoma, and she has outlived the 10-year danger period when
secondary malignancies sometimes arise as a cruel side effect of cancer
treatment. "I really do feel very fortunate," she says.

   More than 22 years later, progress against the type of lymphoma Beatrice Frey
suffered - which accounts for nearly half of the almost 100,000 blood and lymph
gland malignancies that will be diagnosed this year - is nothing to crow about.
Instead of a five-year survival rate of 47 percent when Frey was diagnosed, the
current rate is 52 percent.

   A recent study of 1,138 patients with non-Hodgkins lymphoma, Frey's type,
concluded that all the new chemotherapy recipes devised in the past two decades
produced no survival advantage over the first-generation regimen.

   Meanwhile, incidence of non-Hodgkins lymphoma has risen by more than 65
percent since 1973. Mortality rose 8 percent between 1973 and 1990.

   Researchers are pinning their hopes on new laboratory advances that identify
precise new targets for gene therapy, anticancer vaccines and Trojan-horse
molecules that block cancer-causing chemicals within the cell. But no one can
tell how soon such wizardry will budge the stubborn statistics on cancer
incidence and survival.

   Dr. David Shalloway, a Cornell University cancer researcher who was diagnosed
with non-Hodgkins lymphoma in 1954 at the age of 6 - and cured by Dr. Sidney
Farber at Boston's Jimmy Fund clinic - pleads for the public to take the long
view of cancer research.

   "This is one of the few things we're doing for the benefit of future
generations," Shalloway said last week. "You look around and see the ways we're
ripping off future generations - the national debt, the environment. But basic
knowledge is something we can give our children and grandchildren. Either you
give up and say we're never going to solve this problem, or you commit yourself
to just slogging along, whether it's a 10-year road or a 20-year road."

 Cancer scorecard: How the war is going

   US cancer mortality by year Incidence of cancer Cancer cure rates: How are we
doing? Leukemia and lymphoma Other major cancer types GLOBE STAFF GRAPHIC

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Beatrice Frey was cured of lymphoma diagnosed in 1971, but
general success in treating the disease hasn't progressed much since then. /
GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / THOMAS LANDERS

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1994


                             908 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1994 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                    January 18, 1994, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: LIFESTYLES; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1547 words

HEADLINE: TO LOSE WEIGHT, CHART A STEADY COURSE

BYLINE: By CAROLE BULLOCK, American Heart Association

BODY:

    If you want to risk heart disease and diabetes, go on a diet.
 Loved ones may be dropping subtle hints that you can improve your health by
losing weight. But some new research findings indicate this advice could be
dangerous.

   This research, discussed at an American Heart Association meeting, shows that
dieting -- especially yo-yo dieting -- can take more years off your life than
being overweight.

   Yo-yo dieting is an all too familiar routine for most dieters. They lose
weight by reducing calories, but once the diet is stopped, the pounds return.

   Dr. John Brunzell, who is on the executive committee of the Council of
Arteriosclerosis at the American Heart Association, says: "Study after study has
shown that variation of weight is associated with an increase in mortality. Even
though the cause and effect has not been proven, the evidence is such that we
should pay attention."

   In one study, 10,529 men were tracked for six to seven years as part of the
Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial. According to Dr. Steven Blair, of the
Cooper Institute in Dallas, higher rates of cardiovascular disease and death
occurred among those who had weight changes -- either gaining or losing weight
-- of 5 percent or more.

   A second study, the Harvard Alumni Study, found similar results when weight
variation was measured among 12,025 men from the time they entered college until
they reached their 60s. Men with greater weight variation had higher rates of
coronary heart disease, heart attack, hypertension, diabetes and cancer.

   Dr. Xavier Pi-Sunyer, director of endocrinology at St. Luke's-Roosevelt
Hospital Centers in New York City, calls the study results "disquieting."
However, he cautions that more research is needed to rule out the possibility
that individuals who developed cardiovascular disease had some other health
problem that placed them at risk.

   Blair says the findings could be related to the effects of yo-yo dieting on
body physique. In some animal studies, there is evidence that losing and gaining
weight repeatedly might lead to a gradual shift in fat accumulation to the
abdomen.

   Dozens of population studies in humans have shown that individuals who are
apple-shaped (have "abdominal adiposity"), as compared to those who are
pear-shaped, have higher blood levels of insulin and triglycerides and lower
levels of HDL, all culprits for diabetes, heart disease and high blood pressure.
Yo-yo dieting could lead to the same pattern of fat accumulation in humans,
explaining the link with cardiovascular and other diseases, Blair says.

   Pi-Sunyer says even if this were true, it doesn't mean people should stop
trying to lose weight.

   He, like other researchers such as Blair, believe that the answer to the
"diet dilemma" may be low-fat diets that contain 20 to 25 percent of calories
from fat.

   One of the major selling points of a low-fat diet is that a person can lose
weight just by cutting down on fat, without restricting calories. Not having to
count calories may keep dieters from falling into the the yo-yo trap.

   Dr. David Levitsky, professor of nutrition at Cornell University, says the
reason dieters seem destined to yo-yo may not be simply a lack of willpower.
Appetite and satiety, a feeling of being full, are regulated in the brain by
dietary carbohydrates. If fewer carbohydrates are taken in, the brain sends a
signal to eat more.

   "It's clear that humans cannot overcome these signals," Levitsky says.

   However, so far there is not any indication that a person on a low-fat diet
will crave calories. "Satiety systems appear to be insensitive to dietary fat,"
Levitsky says.

   He demonstrated this in a landmark study in which 13 women were given a
low-fat diet (20 to 25 percent of calories from fat) or a control diet (30 to 40
percent of calories from fat) for 11 weeks. The diets were switched for another
11 weeks.

   Each diet consisted of 41 similar items, but every food in the control diet
contained 35 to 40 percent of calories as fat, whereas every food in the low-fat
diet contained 20 to 25 percent of calories as fat. Unlike most diet study
subjects, Levitsky's volunteers were allowed to freely choose the types and
portions of food and still keep the percentages of fat the same.

   The meals were served in a cafeteria, where the total intake of food was
measured daily. At the end of the study, the low-fat diet led to weight loss of
about three to five pounds. Even though the number of calories was reduced on
the low-fat diet, the women did not compensate by eating more.

   "When people freely consume low-fat foods, their total intake is
significantly reduced, and weight loss ensues," says Levitsky.

   There are other pluses to consuming calories from carbohydrates as opposed to
fat. Carbohydrates require more energy to store than those from fat.  Although
there is still disagreement, some researchers have found that carbohydrates will
satisfy a person's hunger better than fat, leading to less overeating.

   All these reasons may explain why low-fat, high-carbohydrate diets have been
very successful in causing sustained weight loss.

   Even modest reductions in fat -- switching to low-fat products -- can reduce
the caloric intake by 200 calories a day. This type of diet is easy to sustain,
may lead to a more steady weight loss and is more likely to help the dieter
avoid dangerous weight variations.

   Those who want to try losing weight with low-fat cuisine (Levitsky prefers
not to call it a diet) should not try to make a lot of changes at once.

   Levitsky says, "Read labels and choose low-fat food products, use meat as a
condiment instead of a main dish, and don't eat out so much." The average
restaurant meal contains 45 percent of calories from fat, far exceeding the
recommended goal of less than 30 percent.

   Exercise can add to the effect of any diet, including a low-fat one.
Exercise, in addition to burning calories, helps build muscle, which burns off
calories more quickly than other tissues.

   Low-fat diets may be especially helpful for those who have an inherited
tendency toward obesity.

   Studies of twins indicate that up to 50 percent of obesity may be genetic,
according to Dr. Robert Eckel, professor of medicine at the University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center in Denver. A low-fat diet may weaken the effects
of the inherited susceptibility.

   There is also hope that the genes for obesity may be identified, leading to a
more lasting treatment. Though no one has isolated an obesity gene in humans,
researchers are close to identifying the gene that contributes to obesity in
several strains of rodents.

   Once the genes are identified in rodents, it may be easier to begin probing
the human chromosomes for the "obesity genes." However, only rare forms of human
obesity are due to defects in only one gene.

   Eckel says it's not unreasonable to assume that in the future some forms of
obesity may be amenable to gene therapy that can alter the expression of genes
and prevent or treat "familial obesity."

   If any lessons have been learned, it is that long-term weight loss is not
easily attainable, but that low-fat diets may, for now, provide the most
sensible approach.

   And the best words of advice are familiar: Develop healthful eating habits
while you are still young, be more physically active and reduce fat intake as
much as possible.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1994


                             909 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1994 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     January 16, 1994, Sunday, Home Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 2794 words

HEADLINE: COLUMN ONE;
PROTECTING HUMAN GUINEA PIGS;
RADIATION TESTS RAISE THE CHILLING QUESTION; CAN IT HAPPEN AGAIN? PROBABLY NOT,
EXPERTS SAY, CITING A WAVE OF REFORMS. BUT ETHICAL GRAY AREAS REMAIN WHENEVER
PEOPLE EXPERIMENT ON PEOPLE.

BYLINE: By SHERYL STOLBERG, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   The experiment would have proceeded quietly had Ernest Prentice not put a
stop to it. He thought it was immoral, maybe even illegal.

   The concept was simple: A University of Nebraska pediatrician wanted to test
human growth hormone on girls with Turner syndrome, a genetic defect that causes
retardation, stunted sexual development and extreme shortness. Half the girls
would get three hormone injections a week for 18 months. The other half, the
"controls," would get placebo shots of saline solution.

   In the annals of scientific horrors -- a legacy that includes the grotesque
medical experiments of the Nazis, the deliberate failure of U.S. doctors to
treat poor black men for syphilis and, now, shocking revelations about human
radiation testing -- this study, proposed in 1988, would hardly merit a
footnote.

   Nonetheless, it troubled Prentice. As vice chairman of the review board that
approves all research at Nebraska, the cell biologist did not think the
pediatrician's plan complied with stringent federal regulations designed to
protect child research volunteers. He was uncomfortable with the idea of
children in the placebo group getting so many injections that would do them no
good.

   He urged his board to turn down the request. The experiment was canned before
it began.

   At the same time the Nebraska experiment was scuttled, an ethics panel at the
National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., confronted the same decision but
reached a very different conclusion. The NIH approved the human growth hormone
experiment, placebo injections and all, saying it did not pose a danger to the
children. The study is under way.

   Today, Prentice remains dumbfounded by the ruling.

   "What it comes down to," he said, "is can you ask kids, particularly kids who
are retarded, to have hundreds of injections, which are obviously painful, for
benefit to society? There's an ethical question and a regulatory question and my
answer to both is no."

   *

   The Nebraska controversy illustrates the delicate, and extremely subjective,
ethical choices that accompany any experiment in which people are the subjects.
Yet the fact that the debate occurred -- and that Prentice had the authority to
halt a study he believed was improper -- is testimony to dramatic advances made
in the past two decades to protect Americans who serve as guinea pigs in
thousands of scientific studies each year.

   While the nation confronts the chilling disclosures of Cold War radiation
testing conducted on children, prisoners and others without their knowledge,
many are shaking their heads and asking the obvious question: Could this happen
today?

   The answer, according to medical ethicists, is probably not -- at least not
easily, or in as egregious a fashion. Clearly, gray areas exist in interpreting
ethical codes. And there still is room for abuse. Although scientists might be
able to dance around the edges of ethics, experts say that moral breaches on a
grand scale are unlikely.

   No longer is science left up to the conscience of individual scientists.
After a series of scandals that broke in the mid-1970s -- including the
radiation tests, which first became public then albeit in much scantier detail
than now -- a web of federal regulations and ethics boards was established to
govern nearly every research endeavor in the nation.

   Scientists who flout the rules may lose their privilege to conduct future
research, have their funding slashed and, if the violation is severe enough,
face criminal prosecution. "We've already had our public response (to the
radiation experiments)," said Robert J. Levine, a medical ethicist at Yale
University, "and we have taken corrective action."

   Even so, as a congressional inquiry into the radiation experiments began last
week, Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), who is chairing the hearings, indicated
that further legislation may be necessary, particularly to protect those who
were often victimized -- children, pregnant women, the mentally retarded and
prison inmates.

   Already, experiments involving these groups come under especially intense
scrutiny. Research on prisoners is an area with vast potential for abuse, as
Oregon and Washington scientists demonstrated in the 1960s when they dipped
inmates' testicles in irradiated water in exchange for $5 per month.

   Prison experimentation is now so tightly regulated that it rarely occurs.
Many states, including California, ban the practice. And in a curious backlash,
some AIDS-infected inmates have called for a loosening of the rules so they can
participate in tests for experimental drugs.

   "People say ethics is fuzzy and that it doesn't get us anywhere," said Arthur
L. Caplan, a University of Minnesota ethics professor and author of "When
Medicine Went Mad: Bioethics and the Holocaust." "If you want to see a place
where ethics has gotten somewhere, human experimentation is a good place to
look. I'm not going to tell you that everybody comes to the right answer and
that everything is rosy, but it is much better."

   Even Dr. Neal Barnard, president of the Physicians Committee for Responsible
Medicine, which frequently criticizes biomedical research, concurs -- up to a
point.

   "We have come a long way, there's no doubt about that," Barnard says. "We
have rooted out every egregious abuse that we could find. But what we are left
with are those abuses that we don't find, because they are done by the military
and are secret for that reason. And we haven't rooted out the abuses that are
subtle, that have not yet become the substance of ethical discussions."

   Science, however, did not accomplish this transformation on its own. It took
a sordid history, public outrage, a crusading anesthesiologist and, ultimately,
an act of Congress to do it.

   *

   There is inherent tension in biomedical research; each study is like a tug of
war, with the researcher's quest for knowledge on one side and the rights of the
subjects on the other. Medical literature is punctuated with cases in which the
rope got pulled too far in the wrong direction.

   "Human curiosity is such a powerful force," Barnard said. "It is the driving
force behind science. The history of science is the history of curiosity often
running amok."

   Moral matters often shape modern science. Take the case of AZT. When
government researchers first tested this drug on AIDS patients, they pulled the
plug on the experiment when they discovered that the medicine seemed to be
working -- it would have been unethical to withhold the drug from the patients
who were getting a placebo. Doctors would no doubt have learned much more had
the study continued, but as is often the case, the research had to be stopped
before they answered all their questions.

   The most basic principle of medical ethics -- and the one most often violated
when science does run amok -- is that of "informed consent." The idea is simple:
researchers must obtain the consent of the people who participate in their
experiments, and inform them of the risks.

   This concept -- clearly ignored by some scientists who conducted the
radiation research -- dates back at least to the turn of the century, to a
series of classic experiments performed by Army Maj. Walter Reed.

   In 1900, Reed, a physician, was asked to head a commission to investigate the
cause of yellow fever, which killed thousands every year. He suspected
mosquitoes played a role in transmitting the deadly tropical disease, and so he
asked his soldiers if they would permit themselves to be bitten by insects that
had bitten yellow fever patients.

   "The soldiers were told they could die from it, and at least one did," said
James Whorton, a medical historian at the University of Washington. "This was a
very unusual situation. You were intentionally giving somebody a disease which
had no treatment. That stirred doctors' consciences."

   The experiment proved that mosquitoes do carry yellow fever, and it won Reed
a page in the history books. Yet it would never have been permitted today. Nor,
for that matter, would some other famous experiments, including Jonas Salk's
pioneering research on a polio vaccine, in which thousands of schoolchildren
volunteered to be injected with a killed form of the virus before tests had
proved it was safe.

   Moreover, by current standards, Reed's methods of obtaining consent were
crude at best. Says Whorton: "It's never been clear to me how much pressure
there might have been from the Army for people to volunteer."

   It was not until four decades later, when Nazi doctors went on trial at
Nuremberg, that the notion of informed consent was formalized. The trial
disclosed the grisly medical legacy of the Third Reich: To study hypothermia,
doctors dumped concentration camp prisoners in icy vats of water and watched
them freeze to death. To see what would happen to pilots at high altitude, they
put inmates into high-pressure tanks and let them decompress; the subjects'
lungs exploded. They shot people to examine wounds with different bullets.

   The Nazis advanced three defenses: They said they were justified because the
subjects were doomed to die, because the experiments were necessary for national
defense, and because the participants were a drain on society.

   "Those arguments all got rejected in 1947 when the Nuremberg tribunal issued
the Nuremberg Code," Caplan said. "So when somebody says that the ethics were
different in 1950 (when many of the U.S. radiation tests took place) than they
were in 1994, forget it. We knew exactly what the Germans had argued at the
trial and we knew exactly what we had put forward as a response, which was to
say that none of those arguments were persuasive."

   Still, serious abuses continued long after Nuremberg. Many were documented by
Dr. Henry K. Beecher, a Harvard Medical School anesthesiologist who wrote a
landmark 1966 article in the New England Journal of Medicine outlining 22 of
what Caplan calls "the most miserable, rotten experiments" that took place after
World War II. All endangered subjects without their knowledge.

   Beecher's revelations -- including one study in which penicillin was
intentionally withheld from military men who had rheumatic fever and another in
which healthy babies were X-rayed so doctors could study their bladders --
rattled the American medical community. But it was not until the 1970s that the
issue of ethics in medicine exploded, with a series of newspaper and television
exposes.

   One of the most notorious cases was cited in Beecher's article: In 1955, at
the Willowbrook State Hospital in Staten Island, N.Y., mentally retarded
children were deliberately infected, without their knowledge, with hepatitis as
part of an experiment to develop a vaccine. At the Jewish Chronic Disease
Hospital in New York, terminally ill elderly patients were not informed that
they were being injected with live cancer cells.

   But the experiment that outraged Americans more than any other was the
"Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male," a breach of ethics
that lasted 40 years.

   In 1932, doctors for the U.S. Public Health Service set out to research
syphilis in 400 poor, illiterate black men in Tuskegee, Ala. They lured their
subjects with the false promise of free therapy; among the "treatments" were
spinal taps with no anesthesia.

   Most horrifying was that these men were denied penicillin -- after it became
clear in the 1940s that the antibiotics would have cured them -- so the
researchers could study the natural progression of the disease. This went on
until July, 1972, when a whistle-blower blew the lid off the experiment.

   In 1974, the disclosures prompted Congress to create the National Commission
for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research.
After countless public hearings, the panel issued a litany of regulations
governing research paid for with taxpayer dollars.

   Although the Department of Defense, which underwrote many of the radiation
experiments, now must comply with those rules, the agency initially resisted and
operated under its own guidelines until 1991.

   "They said: 'Look, a lot of our research has to do with classified stuff and,
therefore, how can we put it under public view the way biomedical research has
to be done?' " said Albert R. Jonsen, an ethicist at the University of
Washington and commission member. "And we essentially said: 'Well, you've got to
do it.' "

   The commission changed the culture of medical research in two ways. First, no
longer could scientists simply claim that their work would benefit society; it
had to benefit those subjects involved.

   The second was that all research would be subject to the approval of a
so-called Institutional Review Board, such as the one Prentice serves on at
Nebraska. Today, there are thousands of these "IRBs" across the nation, from the
tiniest community hospital to the best-known universities to huge federal
agencies.

   *

   But no system is fail-safe, and these boards are only as diligent as the
people who serve on them. At a hearing held in a Boston suburb Thursday, Kennedy
said he is considering a recommendation made by Dr. Kenneth Ryan, a Harvard
University ethicist, to institute site visits by federal regulators to review
boards that sign off on research.

   Scientists can -- and have -- flouted their rules, although not without
consequences. As Caplan said: "There's not an ethics cop at every lab."

   Consider the case of Martin J. Cline, a UCLA professor of medical oncology
who in 1980 proposed a gene therapy experiment on people with beta-thalassemia,
a genetic blood disorder. At the time, gene therapy was highly controversial,
and the review board at UCLA turned down Cline's proposal, telling him to
conduct further studies on animals first.

   So Cline went to Italy and Israel and performed the experiment --
unsuccessfully -- on patients there. The UCLA board insisted that Cline needed
its approval to conduct the research, even overseas, and the National Institutes
of Health disciplined the researcher by requiring him to undergo a more
cumbersome review when he applied for grant money.

   The episode, Cline said, derailed his career. He abandoned gene therapy, a
field of science that today is booming. Instead, he researches leukemia.

   "Basically, it was very difficult to retain a laboratory, to retain funding,"
Cline said. He added that he believes his experiment was ethical. The
participants were fully informed and the research was intended to benefit them.

   But as the Nebraska case and others illustrate, once bottom-line questions
such as informed consent are settled, the business of ethics can grow murky. One
scientist's honorable pursuit is another's dance with the devil.

   At the NIH, controversy continues to rage over experiments with human growth
hormones. In addition to the Turner syndrome studies, NIH scientists are now
testing the hormones on so-called "short-stature" children who have no medical
problems, but are simply short.

   This has provoked an intense ethical debate, as well as a lawsuit. In the
wake of the suit, which claims that the hormones could expose healthy youngsters
to the risk of disease, the NIH temporarily suspended the research and appointed
an independent panel to investigate. The panel found nothing wrong, and the
studies resumed in June.

   "This is outrageous," said Jeremy Rifkin of the Washington-based Foundation
for Economic Trends, which brought the lawsuit. "Everyone is talking about these
radiation experiments. . . . Why is this any different?"

Questioning Experiments

   A University of Nebraska review board turned down a study involving human
growth hormone for mentally retarded girls who have a genetic defect called
Turner's syndrome. Although the research was approved by the National Institutes
of Health, Nebraska rejected it after considering the following questions raised
by federal regulations adopted in the 1970s to protect people who serve as human
guinea pigs in medical experiments. Here are the university's answers:

   * 1: Does the research involve only minimal risk?

   Answer: No.

   * 2: Does the research involve greater than minimal risk but offers direct
benefit to the subjects?

   Answer: No, because girls who got injections of placebo would not benefit.

   * 3: If the research offers no direct benefit, is it likely to benefit
society by yielding general knowledge about the disorder being studied?

   Answer: Yes.

   * 3A: If the above answer is yes, does the research pose only a minor
increase over minimal risk?

   Answer: No

   * 3B: Are the procedures involved in the experiment reasonably similar to
what the subjects would undergo in their actual medical treatment?

   Answer: No.

   * 3C: Is the experiment of vital importance to understanding the disorder?

   Answer: No.

CORRECTION-DATE: January 25, 1994, Tuesday, Home Edition

CORRECTION:
FOR THE RECORD

   Genetic defects -- A Jan. 16 Times article on human experimentation stated
that Turner syndrome, a genetic defect that afflicts some girls, causes mental
retardation. Though experts previously believed this to be the case, recent
research suggests otherwise. While some Turner patients exhibit problems with
math, sense of direction and manual dexterity, these are now considered specific
learning disabilities, not signs of retardation.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1994


                             910 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1994 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                          January 12, 1994, Wednesday

SECTION: EDITORIAL & COMMENT; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 865 words

HEADLINE: NEW GENETIC KNOWLEDGE GIVES PARENTS PAINFUL CHOICES

BYLINE: Liz Marshall

BODY:


   I read Brave New World back in high school, around the time that my mother
discovered she was unexpectedly pregnant at age 39. I can't remember much of
Aldous Huxley's novel - none of the futuristic plot - but it doesn't matter.
Enough of that book remains in my head that I know what the words brave new
world stand for when I see them. They're shorthand for assembly-line embryos,
for human beings bred in test tubes, for medicine so thirsty for knowledge that
all other sensibilities are drowned.

   I've seen brave new world quite a bit recently. The words are often found
attached to news stories about scientific advances in genetics and molecular
biology. First the exciting news of the discovery of another important gene and
then the solemn warning: Will today's breakthrough lead to tomorrow's brave new
world?

   A recent issue of Newsweek is a good example. On the cover, three women -
grandmother, mother and daughter - anxiously stare out. Members of a family
stricken by hereditary breast cancer, they yearn for ''brave new cures'' that
will fix the deadly gene they have passed from generation to generation.

   The December issue of Life magazine, devoted to ''miracle births,'' has an
essay by medical ethicist Arthur Caplan titled ''The Brave New World of
Baby-making.'' In it, Caplan raises hard questions about the future. As our
knowledge of human genetics increases, so will our options. Should parents be
permitted to choose the hair color and height of their children? What about
changing their race? Caplan's essay is unsettling, overwhelming - and ultimately
reassuring. These are questions we'll confront some day, but that day isn't here
yet.

   Or is it? Fifteen years ago, my parents elected amniocentesis to determine
the health of my unborn sibling. All is well, they were told, and a bouncing
baby was born five months later. An appreciation for Beavis and Butt-head aside,
my brother is now a healthy teen-ager. And if the test results had been bad? We
didn't talk about it.

   Recently, a pregnant acquaintance confided that the results of her prenatal
tests showed a normal, healthy boy. That's great, I said. Then she volunteered
this bit of information: If the tests had revealed genetic abnormalities, she
would have terminated the pregnancy and then claimed to have had a late
miscarriage. Why? In that worst-case scenario, she didn't want to be forced to
talk about a painful decision.

   We need to talk about it. The brave new world of genetic engineering is with
us now, and it's not what we expected. We have private agonizing instead of
government policing. Undesirable genes discovered during pregnancy can be
rejected but not repaired. But we shouldn't let the lack of full-fledged gene
therapy delay us from taking stock of where we stand.

   Now is the time to start searching our souls about the way we condemn certain
genetic combinations. Can we agree that prenatal testing for sex selection is
wrong? And that aborting a fetus with the gene for Tay-Sachs, an incurable
condition that kills children by the age of 3, is right? What about terminating
a pregnancy when tests reveal Down syndrome, a chromosomal defect that causes
mental retardation?

   Since 1989, Congress has been funding a massive scientific effort known as
the Human Genome Project. The goal of the project is to locate and identify the
function of every human gene, 100,000 of them in all. We have already identified
the genes for many diseases, including cystic fibrosis, sickle-cell anemia and
Huntington's disease, and prenatal tests for those genes have followed. Soon we
may know the genes not only for genetic diseases but for inherited behaviors as
well.

   The mind reels at the possibilities. Visions of the future seduce and
distract. Suppose we discover a gene for intelligence? For sexual preference?
For obesity? In the case of the hypothetical obesity gene, according to a study,
11 percent of couples would abort. This worries me. It also worries Dr. Francis
S. Collins, director of the Human Genome Project, who discussed the study in a
recent New York Times interview.

   It's good that Collins is thinking about these things. It's also good that
the Human Genome Project is setting aside 3 percent of its $3 billion budget to
study ethical issues. But this is too important an arena to leave for the
experts. We need to hear the stories of pregnant couples who are making
difficult choices today. We need to hear from families who have borne the burden
of a devastating childhood illness. And we need to hear from the people
themselves who live with cystic fibrosis or Down syndrome or Huntington's
disease.

   Some day, prenatal testing may lead to therapies that repair the undesirable
genes of very young fetuses. Until then, prenatal testing allows us to decide
only whether to terminate or continue a pregnancy. It's a very crude form of
gene therapy, true, but it's no good pretending that it's anything but that.

   Brave new world? New, it's not. Brave, we will have to be.

   Liz Marshall is a free-lance science writer from Clintonville. She is writing
a young adult book on the Human Genome Project for Millbrook Press in Millbrook,
Conn.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1994


                             911 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1994 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     January 10, 1994, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 1291 words

HEADLINE: Help coming for some on costly diets;
Health Sense / BETSY A. LEHMAN

BYLINE: By Betsy A. Lehman, Globe Staff

BODY:

    When 7-year-old Whitney Sisto ate lunch at school one recent day, this is
what came out of her pink and purple flowered lunch box: 11 grapes, a juice box,
one-third cup of black olives and a mustard sandwich on special low-protein
bread.

   The bread cost more than $ 6 a loaf.

   Whitney has phenylketonuria, or PKU, a rare, inherited disorder requiring a
diet extremely low in protein. She eats no meat, chicken, eggs, fish or dairy
foods, and only small, carefully measured amounts of fruit, vegetables and
starches. Regular bread contains so much protein that two slices would exceed
her entire day's allotment for food. For the protein she needs to grow, Whitney
relies on an unpleasant-tasting liquid formula that costs $ 435 a month.

   Without her special diet, Whitney, a bright second grader in Duxbury, would
already have suffered brain damage and inexorably would become mentally
retarded. Children with untreated PKU, common before testing of newborns became
universal beginning in Massachusetts in 1962, eventually have an IQ of about 20
or 30, so low that they cannot walk, talk or care for their most basic
functions. They may be extremely hyperactive or psychotic and suffer severe
seizures.

   With the diet, they can grow up perfectly healthy and functioning. "It's one
of the beautiful success stories in pediatrics," says Dr. Mary G. Ampola,
director of the PKU clinic at New England Medical Center.

   But the PKU diet, like the diets for several related disorders, can be
extremely costly, running into thousands of dollars a year. Money that many
families don't have. One financially strapped college student from the Boston
area has nightmares about becoming retarded because she can't control her PKU
diet.

   Millions of Americans must follow special diets to control various health
conditions, including high cholesterol, diabetes and lactose intolerance, and
those diets demand sacrifice and painstaking attention to detail. But few
require the huge outlays of cash that PKU and certain other metabolic and
digestive diseases do. PKU and related conditions affect only 100-200 people in
the state, many of them insured. But for those without money or insurance
coverage for special foods, the result is permanent damage to their health,
damage that ultimately is far more costly in financial and human terms.

   To address this problem, Gov. Weld last week signed into law a bill for which
Whitney's mother, Jane, fought two years, guaranteeing insurance coverage of the
low-protein foods needed by children with PKU and similar disorders. The law
mandates coverage for a one-year-trial period for up to $ 2,500 a year, but only
for those with private insurance. It won't help those without insurance or those
on Medicaid. During that year, the state will study the problem of paying for
expensive but medically necessary diets.

   It's not just PKU foods that are costly but often not covered by insurance.
Hearing aids, diabetes monitoring equipment and eyeglasses usually aren't
covered either. And of course, many families have no insurance at all. It is
this precise phenomenon, the spottiness of coverage in the face of real need,
that is the driving force behind health care reform, says state public health
commissioner David Mulligan.

   Somehow, says Mulligan, we need to balance responsibility to human needs with
budgetary constraint. "There clearly are limits to what can be spent on health,"
says Mulligan. "The question is, every time we spend dollars, we ought to think
there's a really good return for this. On the PKU issue, we're saying, 'Yes,
there's a really good return.' "

   Whitney Sisto gets all the nutrients she needs from her liquid formula,
already covered by her family's health insurance. But if she ate only that, she
would be constantly hungry, not to mention being left out of a wide array of
social events, from school lunch to birthday parties to family meals.

   So Jane and Arthur Sisto have spent thousands each year to buy low-protein
pasta and flour to make bread, cookies and cupcakes for their daughter. When she
is invited to a pizza party, Jane Sisto sends along a home-made crust spread
with a small amount of tomato sauce. Their flour costs $ 5.70 a pound and
spaghetti costs $ 5.45 for a 17-ounce box, not including shipping and handling,
from a medical speciality company. All the foods are made without the amino acid
phenylalanine, a building block of protein.

   Those born with PKU lack an enzyme necessary to metabolize phenylalanine.
Without the enzyme, phenylalanine builds up throughout the body, but it causes
damage most noticeably in the brain. Ampola believes PKU and similar amino acid
metabolism disorders may be cured in a matter of years with gene therapy. Until
then, her goal is to keep her patients healthy.

   To do that, Ampola adds, the special foods are a necessity. "The alternative
is the child is so hungry he is always cheating and the disease is out of
control. These special foods are an integral part of treatment."

   Families unable to afford the low-protein foods fill their kids up on junk
food, things like soda and certain candies that, because they contain little
more than sugar, don't contain protein. Apples, too, are safe because they
contain little phenylalanine.

   Many families buy some of the special foods but use sugary treats, too, to
help fill up their children. Jennifer Mullaley, a 4-year-old in Mansfield, for
instance, consumes seven packages a day of Berry Bears, a fruit-flavored snack,
in addition to home-baked low-protein bread and cookies.

   Until the mid-1980s, many specialists thought that children safely could stop
the diet at age 5, when much of their brain development was complete. Since
then, however, it has become clear that brain damage occurs whenever the diet is
stopped, so it must be continued indefinitely.

   Unfortunately, the law Sisto fought for only goes part way; she was advised
that trying to get Medicaid funding for the low-protein foods would sink her
effort. So the foods will remain out of reach for J., a 19-year-old college
student from the Boston area who has PKU and doesn't want her name published.

   J.'s illness has been out of control for years because she and her parents,
who are unemployed, cannot afford special foods. Without them, J. says, she
cannot resist "picking" at regular food. Her body's level of phenylalanine is
dangerously high. Because she is insured by Medicaid, not private insurance, the
new PKU law won't help.

   When she was younger and her parents had jobs, J. tried the special foods and
liked them. "They have a lot of things that are better for me to eat because
they would lower my proteins, but I can't afford to get them because they are so
expensive.

   "At times, I'll feel real hungry," says J., whose college is being paid for
through financial aid and loans. "Then there are days I won't feel hungry at
all. The formula helps, but it doesn't help that much. When I was little, I just
had the formula and I would have a full stomach. Now, the formula is just like
having a cup of water. It gives me protein I need but it doesn't give me any
fulfillment."

   J. says she feels grateful that the state pays for her doctors' visits and
liquid formula, but wonders how much good either will do if she can't stay on
her diet. "All that stuff's no good if I don't have the speciality foods to help
me," she says. "It's like giving a baby a bottle with nothing in it."

   J. says she is "real scared" that because she can't stop eating regular
foods, she eventually will become retarded. "I try not to think about it, but at
night I know at certain times you can feel that you feel different. You feel
maybe a little lazier. And sometimes I'll have nightmares about it."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Jane Sisto and daughter Whitney, whose special diet has cost the
family thousands of dollars a year. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / TOM LANDERS

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1994


                             912 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 January 10, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 618 words

HEADLINE: Compassion Is the Best Medicine

SERIES: HEALTH CARE: SECOND OPINIONS -- An occasional series

BYLINE: By David Spiegel;  David Spiegel, professor of psychiatry at Stanford
University School of Medicine, is author of "Living Beyond Limits," about coping
with serious illness.

DATELINE: STANFORD, Calif.

BODY:

   We don't have a health care system but rather a disease cure system. The
public believes and many doctors behave as if most illnesses are curable. We
think of the body as if it were a machine with replaceable parts: defects can be
identified, removed and replaced through treatments such as organ transplants,
drugs and gene therapy. With a few exceptions, this is not the case.

   The expectation of cure has led to an explosion of invasive, expensive and
often risky interventions that have at best marginal effects on survival. We
have focused too much on diseases and too little on the people who have the
diseases.

    Most Americans die of chronic and progressive illnesses: heart disease,
stroke and cancer. Cure is the exception, not the rule. What these patients need
is health caring. Compassionate care should help people live with illness by
relieving suffering, managing symptoms and coping with the uncertainty and fear
of further illness.

   Several recent studies -- of metastatic breast cancer patients, lymphoma and
malignant melanoma patients, and patients recovering from heart attacks -- have
shown that participating in support groups not only improves peoples' mood and
coping skills but may help them live longer.

   Unfortunately, many inexpensive group interventions are not part of standard
treatment. They are offered as adjuncts to medical care. They are not reimbursed
by insurance plans, although they cost a small fraction of fully covered
invasive procedures.

   Moreover, many of these procedures produce only marginally greater benefits
than the risks they incur. Insurance companies regularly pay huge bills for
in-patient and surgical procedures regardless of efficacy, whereas little or
nothing is paid for time spent helping patients to cope with illness.

   Mental health benefits, including psychotherapy, have been singled out for
benefit caps in President Clinton's health plan. This ignores the complex
interaction of mind and body that we are beginning to understand as a result of
recent research on the effects of social support and stress on health.

   Humane care costs less than high-tech care and is what patients want and
need: Americans spent $12 billion last year out of pocket on alternative medical
care.

   Depression is three times as common among medical in-patients and twice as
common among medical out-patients as in the general population. Depression and
anxiety, in turn, make medically ill people heavier users of medical services. A
study in Canada demonstrated that the least well-adjusted medically ill patients
cost the health care system 75 percent more than do the best adjusted ones,
largely through unnecessary primary care visits, hospital days and laboratory
services.

   Stress-related symptoms account for about 60 percent of all primary care
visits. If we can provide comprehensive supportive health services, not only
will costs be cut but patient care will improve dramatically.

   Surgical and other medical procedures have made an enormous difference in
people's lives. But our health care system overvalues procedures at the expense
of the old-fashioned medical compassion and concern that used to be taken for
granted by doctors and patients.

   Medicine's oldest adage is "to cure rarely, to relieve suffering often and to
comfort always." In this century, we have twisted that job description: many
doctors think their task is to cure rather than care. We need more compassion
and counseling and less cutting and testing. The myth of cure is costly in human
and financial terms; the price of dashed hopes is high. With a focus on care,
many individuals with serious diseases can lead longer, happier and more
productive lives.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1994


                             913 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1994 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             January 7, 1994 Friday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 760 words

HEADLINE: Costly drug offers some relief as boy battles cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: BARRY M. BLOOM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   When Pat and Jan Villani heard last week that a new drug had been approved by
the Food and Drug Administration in the fight against cystic fibrosis, their
expectations leaped. Their 9-year-old son, John, has been plagued with the
suffocating disease since birth. Wednesday , the Villanis were told John fit the
criteria for taking the drug Pulmozyme.

   The mucus buildup in his lungs is thick enough and John is old enough for the
breakthrough drug to have the desired effect of liquefying the sticky,
life-threatening mucus. Now, the prescription is hanging on the refrigerator in
the Villanis' El Cajon home.

   The drug is being packaged and shipped by Genentech, the company that
researched and produced the product, more commonly known as DNase. John hopes to
begin inhaling the drug into his lungs through a spray mist by the end of the
month. The Villanis, though, were slapped with a huge dose of reality.

   Not only is the drug expensive -- estimated to cost from $3,000 to $10,000 a
year -- but it is not a cure-all. The disappointing news came from Dr. Ivan
Harwood, a physician at the Cystic Fibrosis Center at UCSD Medical Center.
"Hopefully (the drug) will improve the quality and quantity of John's life, but
it is not a miracle drug," Harwood told the couple, whose hearts sank. John has
been in serious jeopardy his entire life.

   The family is waiting for the day when genetic research allows the
replacement of the defective cystic fibrosis gene that is passed on only when
both parents are carriers. But that therapy, now being tested in some CF
patients, is at least two years away from fruition. "There has been so much hype
about this drug in the media," Jan Villani said about DNase.

   "I really thought it was going to help stop some of the mucus.

   But it won't do that at all. "It's a good drug, it's still going to help him
. . . but I really want the cure." John became so sick last summer the family
had to rush home from vacationing in Reno. His breathing capacity had
deteriorated to a dangerously low 40 percent.

   Having lost eight pounds, his weight hovered near 50 pounds. After numerous
tests revealed a fungus growing in his lungs, he was given huge doses of
steroids and antibiotics.

   That mixture brought John back from the brink of lung transplant
consideration. He began the new year at 61 pounds, having just played in his
first golf tournament and preparing for the spring Little League season. Though
DNase may not eliminate the bacteria that causes infections, at the least, it
may prolong the life of many CF patients, Harwood said. Of the 250 CF patients
now being treated in San Diego County, Harwood estimates as many as 70 percent
will probably have the drug prescribed. Harwood added that 10,000 to 20,000 of
the 30,000 people suffering from CF nationally, "will ultimately try it and
benefit from it." The news of the drug's approval heartened people involved in
the funding and development of a cure for CF. "It's so exciting," said Kae
Meyer, executive director for San Diego's chapter of the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation.

   "It's the most significant advance in 30 years.

   It gives me new hope, new enthusiasm and new drive." Said Dr. Harwood: "In a
number of patients it will improve pulmonary functions -- the amount of air
coming in and out of the lungs -- by 10 to 15 percent." Harwood advised John to
maintain his aerobic activity.

   The more active he is, the easier it is to break up the ever-present mucus in
his system. But DNase does not replace the myriad number of pills, enzymes and
vaporizers that John must digest and inhale every day.

   He must also continue to undergo the daily massages that help break up the
mucus in his lungs. "(The drug) is an adjunct to everything else going on,"
Harwood said. The liquid medicine is fed through a nebulizer, turned into vapor
and inhaled.

   That process will be added to John's regimen once a day for every day of his
life. Harwood said John should recognize the difference within 24 hours of his
first dosage as the mucus liquefies and becomes much easier to expel. In test
groups, most patients experienced an increase in breathing capacity.

   But there are always people who cannot be helped, Harwood warned. "It made
some people feel worse, so they stopped taking it," he said. For the Villanis,
the drug's approval is just another milestone in their fight for John's
survival.

   They will accept the positives even while they lower their expectations. "It
isn't exactly what it was made out to be," Jan Villani said.

   "But it will give him a chance to stay alive until gene therapy comes."

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: John Villani (B-1:7,8,9; B-2:1)

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             914 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1994 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    January 4, 1994, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z12

LENGTH: 366 words

HEADLINE: The World's Most Complicated Map

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Rick Weiss

BODY:

   Scientists around the world are collaborating in a massive undertaking to
create detailed maps of all 23 pairs of human chromosomes, showing the location
of every gene on each chromosome. Called the Human Genome Project, the job is
scheduled for completion around 2010.

   Genes are strung along chromosomes like cities on a cross-country highway,
and mapping can be likened to the process of finding the location of every city
along Route 80. There are three kinds of maps the Human Genome Project hopes to
complete, each providing more information than the last.

   "A "genetic map" tells scientists, in essence, "the gene you're interested in
is near Chicago." That proves somewhat helpful, but it says nothing about where
Chicago is on the long road from New York to San Francisco. Scientists published
a fairly complete genetic map in 1992, linking many genes of interest to known
chromosomal landmarks.

   "A "physical map" tells much more. It shows where each of the landmark genes
are relative to each other. It's the equivalent of taking 100-mile stretches of
highway and lining them up, end to end, to see for the first time the order in
which all of the major cities lie from east to west. Most important, this map is
more than just a drawing; it consists of actual chromosomal pieces -- the
stretches of road -- that have been cloned, or duplicated. These can be
distributed to scientists interested in filling in the details of particular
stretches they are interested in. Scientists are now mapping the locations of
small towns (genes) that are nestled between the larger, better known cities.
Last month, French researchers made news when they published a fairly complete
physical map of every chromosome, an accomplishment that's expected to speed the
discovery of many more disease-causing genes.

   "A "sequence map" will not only show the location of every gene but will
spell out the chemical building blocks that each gene is made of -- the
equivalent to showing every building in every city. It will let scientists tell
at a glance what exactly is wrong with a disease-causing gene -- what building
has collapsed -- and point the way toward fixing it with gene therapy.



GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, GENES AND INHERITED ILLS

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1994


                             915 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1993 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      December 31, 1993 Friday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-13

LENGTH: 344 words

HEADLINE: Children's Hospital took part in trials 39 cystic fibrosis patients
joined study in Denver

BYLINE: Jeffrey A. Roberts, Denver Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The cystic fibrosis center at Children's Hospital in Denver was one of 50
centers nationwide that tested a newly approved drug to treat the fatal lung
disease.

   Thirty-nine Colorado patients participated in clinical trials for genetically
engineered DNase, the first drug-therapy weapon against cystic fibrosis in 30
years.

   Results here were mostly positive, generally mirroring results in more than
1,500 patients around the country, said Dr. Kevin Kirchner, a pediatric lung
specialist and assistant professor of pediatrics at the University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center.

   'Not a cure-all'

   "I hope this is the first of many breakthroughs we'll see over the next five,
10, 15 years," said Kirchner, who conducted the trials.

   "Unfortunately, it's not a cure-all. But it's one (treatment) that we'll add
into the ongoing regimen that many patients already are getting. For a lot of
patients, it's going to provide some benefits."

   For 23-year-old Kristin Berry, diagnosed with cystic fibrosis when she was 2
months old, DNase has been a godsend.

   Before her drug treatments began in March 1992, the CU-Denver student was
hospitalized three to four times a year with life-threatening infections.

   Now it's once or twice a year.

   Life enhancement

   "It's definitely enhanced the quality of my life," said Berry, who has lived
much longer than doctors predicted. The drug helps her tolerate daily activities
that most people take for granted, such as walking around campus and climbing
stairs.

   "DNase has allowed me to keep walking around easier and make it to my classes
without getting totally out of breath," Berry said.

   The average life expectancy for cystic fibrosis patients is 30 years.
Although Kirchner said it's not yet known whether DNase will extend lives, Berry
suspects she might be dependent on an oxygen tank without the drug.

   "I'm not sure I'd still be around," she said. "Or I'd be really, really ill."

   Kirchner said more advancements in treating cystic fibrosis are on the
horizon, the most promising of which is gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 1994


                             916 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   December 31, 1993, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 623 words

HEADLINE: New drug to help area CF patients;
Therapy is first OK'd in 30 years

BYLINE: RAD SALLEE; Staff

BODY:

   A genetically engineered drug, given federal approval
Thursday as the first new cystic fibrosis therapy in nearly 30
years, promises to help about 350 Houston-area patients, among
30,000 nationwide, to breathe easier and live longer.

   CF is inherited from genes carried by both parents and is
incurable but not contagious.  It produces a thick, sticky mucus
that leads to chronic lung infections and a life expectancy of 29
years -- about twice what it was 15 years ago.

   The leading inherited killer of children and young adults, it
occurs in about one of every 2,500 live births among whites, one in
25,000 among blacks and one in 100,000 among Asians.

   The drug dornase alfa, also called DNase, will be marketed in
January under the trade name Pulmozyme by Genentech, the California
firm that developed it with help from the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation, U.S. Food and Drug Administration and numerous doctors
and patients.

   The latter included 25 children and young adults treated
through the Houston area's only CF center, in Texas Children's
Hospital.

   Attorney Beth Sufian, 28, diagnosed with CF at age 9 and who
took part in the clinical trials here, says Pulmozyme helped her
""in a major way'' by thinning the mucus in her lungs so she could
cough it out.

   At least twice a day, she and many other CF patients endure a
treatment regimen that starts with a session of ""clapping,'' in
which they get pounded on the chest, side and back to loosen the
mucus.

   For Sufian, this is followed by 15 minutes of breathing
Proventil, an asthma medication, through a mask connected to a
""nebulizer'' machine that mixes it with air.  Then comes 20 to 30
minutes of breathing Pulmozyme through the device.

   For about two hours afterward, she says, it is easy to cough.

   That's enough to clear her lungs for about half a day.

   No other therapy has helped her so much, she says.

   Pulmozyme is intended for use with other treatments, which
can include antibiotics and other drugs, as well as nutritional
supplements.

   Genentech credited the drug's rapid development -- ""five
years from test tube to CF patients, about half the industry
average'' -- to intense collaboration among the company, FDA, CFF
and doctors.

   Genentech has not announced what Pulmozyme will cost, but a
company spokesman said it will be provided for six months to
patients who can't afford it, and a foundation will be set up to
continue such funding.

   CFF officials hope insurance will pay for the drug.  Sufian
said she was denied health coverage through the State Bar of Texas,
but her husband's insurance pays 80 percent of her bills, which
exceeded $ 20,000 for a 12-day hospital stay in October.

   Jim Board, president of the local CFF chapter, said a recent
13-day hospital stay for his daughter, Jennifer, 14, cost nearly
$ 38,000, and annual bills have run about $ 100,000.

   Board said his insurance premiums are ""about $ 650 a month
and keep going up,'' but even with coverage, the family pays about
$ 20,000 a year out-of-pocket.

   National CFF director Robert Beall said insurers ""would have
a very hard time denying this to patients. '' Even an expensive drug
can be cheap, he said, compared to the cost of a lung transplant or
the value of a life.

   Dr. Dan Seilheimer of Baylor College of Medicine, who directs
the CF center at Texas Children's, said Pulmozyme is not a cure but
is intended to slow CF's progress and help patients live more
productive and satisfying lives.

   Eventually, they may be able to benefit from gene therapy and
other techniques under study, Beall said.

   ""I'm always reluctant to use words like "breakthrough,' ''
he said, ""but I think you can call this a medical milestone. ''

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 1994


                             917 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    DECEMBER 31, 1993, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 709 words

HEADLINE: Cystic Fibrosis Treatment Wins FDA Go-Ahead
 Genentech can begin selling its bioengineered drug

BYLINE: Alex Barnum, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    The Food and Drug Administration gave approval yesterday to Genentech Inc.
to start selling its bioengineered treatment for cystic fibrosis, the first new
treatment in 30 years for the life- threatening lung disease.

   The drug, a gene-spliced version of a natural human enzyme, for the first
time offers hope to 30,000 people in the United States who are afflicted with
the disease, the most common genetic ailment among white people. Half of them
die by the age of 30.

   While stressing that the drug is not a cure, FDA Commissioner Dr. David
Kessler said it is ''the first treatment that specifically improves lung
function in cystic fibrosis patients'' and ''can make a real difference in the
quality of life for many patients.''

   The FDA had put the drug, which will be sold as Pulmozyme, on a fast-track
review because of its promise. Partly as a result of that classification, which
had previously been used only for new AIDS and cancer treatments, Pulmozyme was
developed and approved in five years -- half the time it typically takes to
bring a new drug to market.

   The drug will be made available by mid-January, Genentech said yesterday.

   The South San Francisco-based biotechnology company is not expected to
announce the drug's price until next week, but Wall Street analysts said they
are expecting it to fall in the range of $ 10,000 to $ 12,000 for a year's
supply.

   The approval provides a welcome boost for Genentech and the biotechnology
industry, which has been hurt by disappointing product results in the past year.
The drug is Genentech's first new product since its clot-busting heart attack
drug Activase was approved in 1987.

   ''Pulmozyme . . . is another example of biotechnology's ability to create a
new treatment for a problem that medical researchers have struggled with for
decades,'' said G. Kirk Raab, Genentech president and chief executive officer.

   RESULTS OF STUDY

   In a six-month study involving 968 cystic fibrosis patients, Pulmozyme was
effective at breaking up the thick, infected mucus that clogs the lungs of
people with the disease, and it reduced severe lung infections by up to 29
percent.

   Patients also had fewer hospitalizations to treat infections, missed less
time at work and school and reported an improved quality of life. Minor side
effects of the drug included inflammation of the throat, chest pain, voice
alteration and laryngitis.

   Anna Stenzel, a Stanford University senior who suffers from the disease, said
Pulmozyme ''totally turned things around for me'' when she and her twin sister,
Isa, started taking it as part of a clinical trial in February 1992.  ''It
allowed me to live a student life again,'' Stenzel said.

   HOPE FOR A CURE

   Although Pulmozyme only treats the symptoms, lung specialists hope that it
will keep patients alive until a cure is found. Experts say the best hope for a
cure is gene therapy, which involves replacing a patient's defective genes with
healthy new ones.

   ''We hope this puts patients in a holding pattern so that they can benefit
from all the new therapies coming down the pike that treat the underlying cause
of the disease,'' said Robert Beall, medical director of the Cystic Fibrosis
Foundation in Maryland.

   Experimental trials are under way at several research universities to test
the gene therapy approach.

   Cystic fibrosis results from a genetic mutation that causes cells lining the
lungs to absorb too much water, drying out mucus and making it thick and hard to
cough up. Bacteria thrive in the mucus, causing chronic infections that damage
lung tissue.

   The body's immune system dispatches white blood cells to fight the bacterial
infection. But when the white blood cells die, they disintegrate and release
DNA, making the mucus even thicker.

   The results can be profound. Patients wheeze instead of breathe and cough
when they want to laugh. Their breathlessness often prevents them from going to
work, climbing stairs or even walking. Death usually is the result of repeated
infections that destroy the lungs.

   Until now, the only treatment has been antibiotics to fight the infections.
Patients also undergo regular pounding on their chests and backs to help clear
their lungs -- a process that can take four or five hours a day.


LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1993


                             918 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                     Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)

                          December 29, 1993, Wednesday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 849 words

HEADLINE: The Genetic 'Genie'

SERIES: MORAL ISSUES Of Our Times. Part 4 of an occasional series.

BODY:

    AS scientists chalked out equations and conducted experiments in
their study of the atom during the first half of this century, they
saw that under the right conditions, vast amounts of energy could
be tapped, even harnessed. But they also saw that uncontrolled, the
atom's energy could wreak unimaginable destruction. It took the
incineration of Hiroshima and Nagasaki to focus public attention on
the moral dimensions of the nuclear age.

   Nearly 50 years later, science is pulling society in another
direction that researchers say has the potential to benefit
humanity. Just as the advances in nuclear research enabled
scientists to exploit the fundamental building blocks of matter,
advances in molecular biology are allowing scientists to manipulate
and exploit the fundamental building blocks of organic life.
Society urgently needs to consider how far to let applied genetic
research run its course and what strictures to place on the
application of genetic engineering, particularly to human beings.

   These issues came into sharp focus earlier this year when
scientists from George Washington University reported cloning
several two- to eight-cell human embryos, two of which the
researchers continued to grow in test tubes for several days. The
the nominal motive behind the experiment was to improve in vitro
fertilization techniques, used by many couples who have difficulty
conceiving children. But in a subsequent article in Science
magazine, Dr. Jerry Hall, who led the effort, added: ''It was
clearly just a matter of time until someone was going to do it, and
we decided it would be better for us to do it in an open manner and
get the ethics discussion moving.''

   Some applications of current or predicted genetic-engineering
methods should prompt not only discussion but clear guidelines. For
example:

   * Genetic screening. As medical researchers have pinpointed an
increasing number of genes that they identify with various
diseases, companies have developed tests to detect the presence of
those genes in humans. Unfortunately, according to a report
released last month by the National Academy of Sciences (NAS), some
workers have lost jobs and others health insurance coverage based
on genetic screening. Such discrimination is faulty on several
accounts: Test results can be inaccurate; according to many
biologists, the mere presence of a ''suspect'' gene is no
indication that the traits it carries will ever be expressed; and
in an age of data banks and computer networks, test results -
faulty or not - could make it difficult for people to shed a
dubious label of ''vulnerable,'' despite anyone's best efforts at
maintaining confidentiality.

   Despite these drawbacks, public support for confidentiality is
lacking. In a 1992 survey conducted by Louis Harris and Associates
for the March of Dimes, 57 percent of the respondents answered
''yes'' when asked if someone other than the patient has a right to
know whether a patient has a genetic ''defect.'' Yet as the number
of companies manufacturing the tests expand their range and
aggressively promote their use, the opportunities for abuse of such
information will multiply. Hence, the NAS was correct to recommend
laws tightly circumscribing the use of genetic screening for
employment and a ban on the use of screening results as a factor in
extending coverage and pricing health insurance.

   * Gene therapy. This prospect of modern-day genetics has
generated the most public interest. When Harris asked respondents
whether they approved of such techniques, 89 percent said they did,
although 60 percent acknowledged that they had heard ''almost
nothing'' about it. Not surprising, since this is the least
developed aspect of biotechnology. Such therapies, specialists say,
could involve alterations to a person's genes that then get passed
to descendants. Some researchers foresee a time when a
''defective'' gene can be identified and altered either before or
after conception to prevent the manifestation of particular
diseases.

   Yet as knowledge about human genetics expands, so does the
temptation to label as abnormal or as a maladies traits that today
are seen as ''normal'' physical variations. The issue is not
theoretical: Genetically engineered human growth hormones not only
have been used for the intended medical purpose, they also have
been sought by people unhappy with the size of their children.
Indeed, 43 percent of the respondents to the Harris poll said they
''somewhat'' or ''strongly'' approve of using gene therapy to
improve the physical characteristics or intelligence levels that
their children would inherit.

   The idea that genetics can explain and address many of
humanity's physical and behavioral ills threatens to reinforce a
notion that humans are merely the sum of exchangeable molecules.
Such reductionism invites intolerance and social engineering, and
it denies man's spiritual nature. Well-considered boundaries on
biotechnology's applications must help serve as bulwarks against
this outcome.

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1993, Thursday


                             919 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                     Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)

                          December 29, 1993, Wednesday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 849 words

HEADLINE: The Genetic 'Genie'

SERIES: MORAL ISSUES Of Our Times. Part 4 of an occasional series.

BODY:

    AS scientists chalked out equations and conducted experiments in
their study of the atom during the first half of this century, they
saw that under the right conditions, vast amounts of energy could
be tapped, even harnessed. But they also saw that uncontrolled, the
atom's energy could wreak unimaginable destruction. It took the
incineration of Hiroshima and Nagasaki to focus public attention on
the moral dimensions of the nuclear age.

   Nearly 50 years later, science is pulling society in another
direction that researchers say has the potential to benefit
humanity. Just as the advances in nuclear research enabled
scientists to exploit the fundamental building blocks of matter,
advances in molecular biology are allowing scientists to manipulate
and exploit the fundamental building blocks of organic life.
Society urgently needs to consider how far to let applied genetic
research run its course and what strictures to place on the
application of genetic engineering, particularly to human beings.

   These issues came into sharp focus earlier this year when
scientists from George Washington University reported cloning
several two- to eight-cell human embryos, two of which the
researchers continued to grow in test tubes for several days. The
the nominal motive behind the experiment was to improve in vitro
fertilization techniques, used by many couples who have difficulty
conceiving children. But in a subsequent article in Science
magazine, Dr. Jerry Hall, who led the effort, added: ''It was
clearly just a matter of time until someone was going to do it, and
we decided it would be better for us to do it in an open manner and
get the ethics discussion moving.''

   Some applications of current or predicted genetic-engineering
methods should prompt not only discussion but clear guidelines. For
example:

   * Genetic screening. As medical researchers have pinpointed an
increasing number of genes that they identify with various
diseases, companies have developed tests to detect the presence of
those genes in humans. Unfortunately, according to a report
released last month by the National Academy of Sciences (NAS), some
workers have lost jobs and others health insurance coverage based
on genetic screening. Such discrimination is faulty on several
accounts: Test results can be inaccurate; according to many
biologists, the mere presence of a ''suspect'' gene is no
indication that the traits it carries will ever be expressed; and
in an age of data banks and computer networks, test results -
faulty or not - could make it difficult for people to shed a
dubious label of ''vulnerable,'' despite anyone's best efforts at
maintaining confidentiality.

   Despite these drawbacks, public support for confidentiality is
lacking. In a 1992 survey conducted by Louis Harris and Associates
for the March of Dimes, 57 percent of the respondents answered
''yes'' when asked if someone other than the patient has a right to
know whether a patient has a genetic ''defect.'' Yet as the number
of companies manufacturing the tests expand their range and
aggressively promote their use, the opportunities for abuse of such
information will multiply. Hence, the NAS was correct to recommend
laws tightly circumscribing the use of genetic screening for
employment and a ban on the use of screening results as a factor in
extending coverage and pricing health insurance.

   * Gene therapy. This prospect of modern-day genetics has
generated the most public interest. When Harris asked respondents
whether they approved of such techniques, 89 percent said they did,
although 60 percent acknowledged that they had heard ''almost
nothing'' about it. Not surprising, since this is the least
developed aspect of biotechnology. Such therapies, specialists say,
could involve alterations to a person's genes that then get passed
to descendants. Some researchers foresee a time when a
''defective'' gene can be identified and altered either before or
after conception to prevent the manifestation of particular
diseases.

   Yet as knowledge about human genetics expands, so does the
temptation to label as abnormal or as a maladies traits that today
are seen as ''normal'' physical variations. The issue is not
theoretical: Genetically engineered human growth hormones not only
have been used for the intended medical purpose, they also have
been sought by people unhappy with the size of their children.
Indeed, 43 percent of the respondents to the Harris poll said they
''somewhat'' or ''strongly'' approve of using gene therapy to
improve the physical characteristics or intelligence levels that
their children would inherit.

   The idea that genetics can explain and address many of
humanity's physical and behavioral ills threatens to reinforce a
notion that humans are merely the sum of exchangeable molecules.
Such reductionism invites intolerance and social engineering, and
it denies man's spiritual nature. Well-considered boundaries on
biotechnology's applications must help serve as bulwarks against
this outcome.

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1993, Friday


                             920 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 28, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 7364 words

HEADLINE: Uncovered Short Sales on Nasdaq Set a New High

BYLINE: By FLOYD NORRIS

BODY:

   The shorts ganged up on Oracle Systems just as it was poised to tumble.

    The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the
short position in Oracle, a computer software company, more than doubled in the
month that ended Dec. 8, rising 2.9 million shares, to 5.2 million. It was the
largest gain for any stock. During the period, the price of Oracle rose from
$29.375 to $37.50.

   But since then, the price has fallen to $29.875 as investors reacted to the
company's quarterly profit report, which showed income up nicely but indicated
that revenue growth was more sluggish than expected.

    The figures on short position show the number of shares that have been
borrowed and sold short, but not yet covered, by the cutoff date.

    Over all, the total for all stocks traded on Nasdaq edged up by 600,000
shares, to a record 672 million. The increase was a scant one-tenth of 1
percent, making it the smallest gain of 1993. During the last year, the figure
has risen 42.8 percent.

    While there are several reasons to sell a stock short, the usual one is to
bet that its price will decline, enabling a speculator to buy it back later for
less than its sale price. As Nasdaq stocks have risen, more and more speculators
have been making such bets.

    A loser for short-sellers was Tele-Communications class A stock, which had
the largest decline in its short position. Its stock price rose after its Oct.
14 announcement that it had agreed to be acquired by Bell Atlantic in a stock
swap, and its short position fell 5.9 million shares, to 3.4 million.

    Short-sellers also bailed out of positions in the 3Com Corporation, a maker
of computer peripherals that leaped on Dec. 2 when it said profits would be
better than expected. With the price at $32.125 in early November, the short
position had been 3.3 million shares. By early December, with the price at
$45.25, the short position was down to 1.9 million shares. Those who took their
losses feel better than those who did not. Yesterday the stock closed at $48.

    American Power Conversion, which makes uninterruptible power supply products
for computers, continued to hold down the dubious honor of having the most
shares sold short, at 12.9 million. Still, that was down from 13.7 million a
month earlier. Some shorts had been showing profits in the stock, which fell
from a late-September high of $24.75 to as low as $16.75 in late November. But
it has since rallied to $22.875.


Largest Increases

Security Name                          12/15/93     11/15/93       Change

Oracle Systems Corp                   5,174,961    2,255,363    2,919,598   T
ECI Telecom Ltd                       3,215,501    1,119,500    2,096,001   T
U.S. Trans System                     2,114,174      220,526    1,893,648
Cott Corp                             3,671,321    2,237,799    1,433,522   T
Seagate Tech                          2,819,812    1,402,876    1,416,936   T
Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl                 10,434,624    9,111,597    1,323,027   T
Synoptics Commun Inc                  6,519,436    5,487,515    1,031,921   T
Autotote Corp Cl A                    1,551,332      603,269      948,063   T
Corestates Fin Corp                   4,085,614    3,281,479      804,135   T
Valuevision Intl A                    1,075,678      333,467      742,211   T
Chiron Corp                           1,734,429    1,008,071      726,358   T
Hollinger Inc                         1,933,600    1,212,700      720,900   T
Ornda Healthcorp                        869,986      170,348      699,638   T
Noble Drilling Corp                   5,820,568    5,138,116      682,452   T
Broadband Techs Inc                     939,153      259,230      679,923   T
Lotus Development Cp                  3,876,217    3,206,045      670,172   T
Sage Tech Inc                           879,541      245,050      634,491
Komag Inc                               843,282      248,054      595,228   T
Wellfleet Commun Inc                  2,032,606    1,449,542      583,064   T
S3 Inc                                  968,894      414,798      554,096   T
Coho Energy Inc                         529,436          747      528,689   T
Comverse Tech Inc                       566,201       50,426      515,775   T
Omega Environmental                   1,010,851      525,846      485,005   T
Intl Cabeltel Inc                       768,661      292,218      476,443   T
Microsoft Corp                        3,166,148    2,693,473      472,675   T



Largest Decreases

Security Name                          12/15/93     11/15/93       Change

Tele Commun Inc A                     3,400,627    9,255,607   -5,854,980   T
LM Ericsson Tel Add                      11,455    2,331,734   -2,320,279
3Com Corp                             1,855,391    3,273,796   -1,418,405   T
Greenwich Pharm Inc                   2,962,703    4,349,986   -1,387,283   T
First Pacific Ntwks                   1,158,446    2,459,034   -1,300,588   T
Checkers Drive-In Rest                5,494,079    6,732,353   -1,238,274   T
MCI Comm Corp                         7,618,711    8,834,282   -1,215,571   T
Novell Inc                            3,141,400    4,092,798     -951,398   T
Structural Dynamics                   1,534,058    2,474,777     -940,719   T
Adaptec Inc                             493,457    1,373,734     -880,277   T
Amer Power Convers                   12,883,448   13,718,410     -834,962   T
Comcast Cp A                          6,787,169    7,615,929     -828,760   T
Price/Costco Inc                      2,886,016    3,592,395     -706,379   T
Spectrum Info Tech                    2,478,307    3,152,512     -674,205   T
Washington Mut Sv Bk                  1,337,930    1,906,057     -568,127   T
Kendall Square Resch                  1,686,637    2,252,152     -565,515   T
Medical Marketing Gp                    218,408      756,811     -538,403   T
Amtech Corp                           3,056,343    3,565,331     -508,988   T
Informix Corp                         2,645,289    3,148,061     -502,772   T
Starbucks Corp                        3,618,467    4,118,733     -500,266   T
Boatmen's Bancshares                  1,153,815    1,649,302     -495,487   T
Applied Materials                     1,071,265    1,551,424     -480,159   T
McCaw Cellular A                        576,035    1,053,029     -476,994   T
Verifone Inc                            144,475      611,587     -467,112   T
+Staples Inc                          1,740,606    2,188,925     -448,319   T



Largest Positions

Security Name                          12/15/93     11/15/93       Change

Amer Power Convers                   12,883,448   13,718,410     -834,962   T
Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl                 10,434,624    9,111,597    1,323,027   T
Snapple Beverage Cp                   9,840,694   10,247,541     -406,847   T
Mobile Telecomm Tech                  8,622,268    8,774,788     -152,520   T
MCI Comm Cp                           7,618,711    8,834,282   -1,215,571   T
Dell Computer Cp                      7,591,395    7,603,875      -12,480   T
Comcast Cp A                          6,787,169    7,615,929     -828,760   T
Synoptics Commun Inc                  6,519,436    5,487,515    1,031,921   T
Noble Drilling Cp                     5,820,568    5,138,116      682,452   T
Casino Magic Cp                       5,528,031    5,246,571      281,460   T
Checkers Drive-In Res                 5,494,079    6,732,353   -1,238,274   T
Oracle Systems Cp                     5,174,961    2,255,363    2,919,598   T
Grand Casinos Inc                     4,974,614    4,769,901      204,713   T
TPI Enterprises                       4,768,809    4,668,158      100,651   T
Food Lion Inc Cl A                    4,447,208    4,542,141      -94,933   T
Corestates Fin Cp                     4,085,614    3,281,479      804,135   T
DSC Commun Cp                         4,007,376    3,770,676      236,700   T
U.S. Healthcare Inc                   3,968,851    4,246,952     -278,101   T
Tokos Med Cp Del                      3,926,981    3,922,905        4,076   T
Stryker Cp                            3,879,027    3,765,760      113,267   T
Lotus Development Cp                  3,876,217    3,206,045      670,172   T
Picturetel Cp                         3,814,421    4,099,885     -285,464   T
Borland Intl Inc                      3,774,735    4,218,040     -443,305   T
Cott Cp                               3,671,321    2,237,799    1,433,522   T
Lone Star Steakhouse                  3,656,203    3,690,906      -34,703   T



Largest Cover Ratios

Security Name                          12/15/93    Avg. Vol.         Days Mkt

Dibrell Brothers Inc                  2,501,427       42,021           60   T
Smithfield Foods Inc                  1,338,292       25,501           52   T
Circon Corp                           1,689,654       49,145           34   T
Copytele Inc                          2,290,940       66,892           34   T
Fortune Bancorp                         884,984       25,799           34   T
Fastenal Co                           1,605,502       50,522           32   T
Littelfuse Inc                        1,091,520       36,140           30   T
UST Corp                              1,016,613       35,066           29   T
Tokos Med Cp Del                      3,926,981      141,420           28   T
Tseng Labs Inc                        3,464,921      122,474           28   T
Summit Tech Inc                       3,261,948      125,681           26   T
Presidential Life Cp                    925,814       37,389           25   T
Au Bon Pain Cl A                      1,212,698       53,757           23   T
Boomtown Inc                          1,411,186       67,256           21   T
Cell Com Puerto Rico                    857,416       40,134           21   T
Noble Drilling Corp                   5,820,568      279,036           21   T
Puritan Bennett Corp                  1,380,609       64,983           21   T
Rally's Hamburgers                    2,959,401      142,146           21   T
United Gaming Inc                     1,679,938       81,876           21   T
Quality Food Centers                    693,044       34,318           20   T
TPI Enterprises                       4,768,809      239,672           20   T
Advanced Promotions                     773,725       41,276           19   T
Biochem Pharm Inc                       546,162       28,317           19   T
Cooker Restaurant Cp                    490,111       25,624           19   T
Fifth Third Bncp                        919,321       48,810           19   T



Short Sales

Security Name                            12/15/93       11/15/93

3Com Corp                               1,855,391      3,273,796
50-Off Stores Inc                       2,054,359      2,245,055
ADC Telecommun Inc                        201,474        162,759
Advanta Cl-A                            1,636,440      1,820,598
AES Corp (The)                            323,709        303,599
AGCO Corp                               1,811,022      1,413,097
Albank Finl Cp                             13,466         50,153
ASK Group (The)                           513,162        558,263
AST Research Inc                        1,308,245        868,582
Abbey Healthcare Gp                       886,294        759,968
Acclaim Entertainmnt                    3,202,553      2,837,997
Actel Corp                                259,206        425,070
Adaptec Inc                               493,457      1,373,734
Adobe Systems Inc                       2,343,902      2,653,820
ADV Tech Labs                             186,632        261,900
Advanced Polymer Sys                      349,137        371,046
Advanced Promotions                       773,725        861,968
Advanced Tissue Sci                       296,055        328,858
#Aerovox Inc                                9,448         55,447
Agnico Eagle Mines                         27,721        109,532
Aldila Inc                                330,611        455,300
#Alias Research Inc                       229,893        110,186
Alkermes Inc                              205,151        242,924
#All Amer Semiconduct                      25,519        343,331
Alliance Pharm Corp                       742,740        817,059
#Alpha 1 Biomedicals                      616,527        162,911
Alteon Inc                                176,104        212,368
Altera Corp                               280,515        375,248
Altron Inc                                104,909        297,052
Amer Bankers Ins Gp                        38,296        102,688
Amer Biogenetic Cl A                      291,196        291,341
Amer Business Info                        207,052        138,290
Amer Dental Techs                         308,955        312,447
Amer Film Tech Inc                        382,175        407,887
Amer Greetings Corp A                     384,262        259,584
Amer Intl Petro Inc                       120,925        156,418
Amer Pacific Corp                         764,205        681,866
Amer Power Convers                     12,883,448     13,718,410
#Amer Software Inc A                      222,506        118,956
#America Online Inc                       324,925         72,040
Amgen                                   2,059,859      2,315,690
Ampex Inc Cl-A                            340,566        341,583
#Amrion Inc                                 9,350        293,251
Amtech Corp                             3,056,343      3,565,331
#Antec Corporation                         53,955         17,644
Apple Computer Inc                      2,616,287      2,803,342
Apple South Inc                           121,423        189,814
Applebee's Intl                           680,474        742,259
#Applied Bioscience                       195,443        107,964
Applied Materials                       1,071,265      1,551,424
#Arch Commun Gp                            89,642         19,579
#Arctco Inc                               185,602         69,077
#Arethusa Limited                          39,100        183,300
Argosy Gaming Co                        1,533,639      1,829,718
Arkansas Best Corp                        390,049        386,427
Artisoft Inc                              371,334        356,110
Aspect Telecomm Cp                        537,488        512,475
#Athena Neurosciences                       5,982        170,044
Atlantic SE Airlines                      232,110        468,395
Atmel Corp                                608,831        606,817
Au Bon Pain Cl A                        1,212,698      1,291,385
Aura Systems Inc                        2,022,842      1,704,429
Auspex Systems Inc                        324,155        458,264
Autodesk Inc                            2,719,460      2,556,097
#Autotote Corp Cl A                     1,551,332        603,269
Avid Tech Inc                             910,901        823,982
#Bisys Gp The                              67,654         31,110
BMC Software Inc                        1,057,744      1,116,630
BPI Packaging Tech                        323,195        372,054
Bally Gaming Intl                         707,066        713,241
#Bank South Corp                          284,455         98,161
#BankAtlantic FSB                             803        288,552
Banyan Systems Inc                        569,228        768,958
#Barefoot Inc                              51,040         13,899
#BE Aerospace Inc                          36,835        152,061
Bed Bath & Beyond                       1,094,929      1,239,258
Bell Sports Corp                        1,245,204        840,854
Ben and Jerry's Cl A                      124,241        165,274
Ben Franklin Retail                       372,240        380,283
Bertucci's Inc                            260,222        299,646
Best Power Tech Inc                       237,030        273,008
Big B Inc                                 715,545        662,424
Bindley Wstn Ind                          505,795        564,077
Bio Tech Gen Corp                         251,185        206,944
Biochem Pharm Inc                         546,162        553,686
Biogen Inc                              1,862,046      1,782,416
Biomagnetic Tech Inc                       35,625        131,275
Biomedical Waste Sys                      296,210        299,090
Biomet Inc                                640,248        906,735
Boatmen's Bancshares                    1,153,815      1,649,302
Bob Evans Farms Inc                       299,232        268,237
Bollinger Inds                             45,000           N.L.
Boomtown Inc                            1,411,186      1,461,007
Borland Intl                            3,774,735      4,218,040
#Boston Bncp                               57,632         13,470
#Boston Chicken Inc                       239,074           N.L.
Boston Tech Inc                           549,394        444,885
Box Energy Cl B NV                        922,184        922,216
#Braun's Fashions                          16,225         71,064
#Brite Voice Systems                      162,841         68,901
#Broadband Techs Inc                      939,153        259,230
Broderbund Software                     1,121,124      1,244,694
Brooktree Corp                            160,379        332,805
Buffets Inc                             3,019,807      3,337,422
Burnup And Sims Inc                       439,542        444,000
#CBL Medical Inc                          241,293        120,962
#CCA Inds                                 124,693          7,876
CIS Tech Inc                              745,314        771,607
#COR Therapeutics                          11,302         55,560
Cabot Medical Corp                        425,063        425,332
Caere Corp                                198,539        123,548
#CAL Microwave Inc                        281,586         90,490
Calgene Inc                               342,816        335,129
Cambridge Biotech Cp                      198,757        244,282
#Canandaigua Wine A                        40,298        275,978
#Canandaigua Wine B                        41,456          1,271
Canyon Resources Cp                       570,151        626,084
#Carson Pirie Scot Il                      26,224        194,479
Casey's Gen Stores                        507,316        506,528
Casino America Inc                      1,379,605      1,344,796
Casino Data Systems                       122,262        158,073
Casino Magic Corp                       5,528,031      5,246,571
#Catalyst Semicond                         75,025        365,723
Cato Cp The Cl A                           46,086        126,598
Celestial Seasonings                      338,678        248,742
#Celgene Corp                               7,822         57,883
Cell Com Puerto Rico                      857,416        755,497
Cellpro Inc                                72,108        160,317
Cellular Comm Cl A                        424,160        357,623
Cellular Inc                               44,650        158,007
Centocor Inc                            2,396,935      2,256,652
Cephalon Inc                              303,124        407,809
Charming Shoppes Inc                      323,278        539,524
Checkers Drive-In                       5,494,079      6,732,353
#Chico's F A S Inc                        169,430         43,626
Childrens Dis Ctrs A                       36,474         75,949
Chipcom Corp                              523,918        516,614
Chips & Tech Inc                          200,307        264,478
Chiron Corp                             1,734,429      1,008,071
Cholestech Corp                           497,471        434,556
Cincinnati Financial                      333,522        356,577
Cincinnati Microwave                       36,934        108,253
Cintas Corp                               327,134        280,611
Circon Corp                             1,689,654      1,786,112
Cirrus Logic Inc                          769,387        620,506
Cisco Sys Inc                           3,022,327      2,662,319
#Civic Bancorp                              2,399         75,376
#Clean Harbors Inc                         72,109         29,785
Clearly Canadian Bev                      664,680        782,496
#Coastal Healthcare                       174,819         54,923
#Cobra Golf Inc                            91,363         36,200
#Coho Energy Inc                          529,436            747
Collagen Corp                             505,938        497,725
Comair Hldgs Inc                           74,787        138,657
Comcast Cp A                            6,787,169      7,615,929
Comcast Cp Cl A Spcl                   10,434,624      9,111,597
Commun Intelligence                        61,647        173,699
Compression Lab Inc                     2,468,076      2,587,932
Comptronix Corp                           389,344        373,747
Compucom Systems Inc                      500,500        500,000
Computer Ntwk Tech                         35,122         98,029
#Compuware Corp                           422,950         23,816
#Comverse Tech Inc                        566,201         50,426
Concord Camera Corp                       663,442      1,052,983
Cons Papers Inc                           359,164        406,355
#Consilium Inc                            156,845         76,404
Cooker Restaurant Cp                      490,111        476,509
Coors Adolph Co B                         137,045        202,080
#Copley Pharm Inc                         374,924         64,705
Copytele Inc                            2,290,940      2,300,822
Cordis Cp                                 300,273        325,628
+Corel Cp                                 538,126        486,998
Corestates Fin Cp                       4,085,614      3,281,479
Cott Cp                                 3,671,321      2,237,799
Coventry Cp                               418,234        334,285
Cracker Barrel Old                      1,351,787      1,453,556
Cray Comp Cp                              754,346        745,928
Creative Tech Ord                         733,776        806,664
Crop Genetic Intl Cp                      401,185        387,873
Crosscomm Cp                            1,023,628      1,030,578
Crown Resources Cp                        304,339        303,172
Cryomedical Sci                         1,243,950      1,272,586
#Culp Inc                                  39,901          4,049
Cygnus Therapeutic                        173,642        243,778
Cyrix Cp                                  529,507        665,358
Cytocare Inc                              166,045        116,570
Cytogen Cp                                913,937      1,003,509
Cytrx Cp                                  126,837        194,485
Call-Net Enterprises I                     39,000           N.L.
Cellstar Corporation                       44,616           N.L.
Daka Intl Inc                             316,618        326,518
#D & N Fin Cp                             138,898         43,175
#DM Management Co                           2,115        287,496
DNA Plant Tech Cp                         739,793        745,327
DSC Commun Cp                           4,007,376      3,770,676
#Damark Intl Inc Cl-A                     443,001         21,261
#Danka Business ADR                       246,395        110,438
Data Race Inc                             374,669        318,621
#Data Systems Sftware                     332,768         50,708
Datascope Cp                              146,305        531,648
Dataware Techs Inc                         41,167         82,148
#Dauphin Deposit Cp                        60,173          4,936
Davidson & Associates                     340,386        457,521
Dell Computer Cp                        7,591,395      7,603,875
Dentsply Intl Inc                         371,915        389,053
Deprenyl Research                         268,151        268,600
Dial Page Inc                             285,899        372,161
Dibrell Brothers Inc                    2,501,427      2,556,585
Digital Microwave Cp                      655,973        579,721
Discovery Zone Inc                      1,258,190      1,233,440
#Dixie Yarns Inc                           67,109         29,891
Dollar General Cp                         597,714        559,369
#Donnkenny Inc                             81,002          5,930
#Dreyers Grand Ice                        105,693         30,777
Dual Drilling Co                           38,700        103,000
#ECI Telecom Ltd                        3,215,501      1,119,500
Ezcorp Cl-A                               510,648        565,939
Eagle Hardware & Gdn                    1,643,051      1,905,308
Easel Cp                                  218,975        176,958
#Eaton Vance Cp                            60,865          1,280
Education Alternative                   1,236,759      1,138,698
Egghead Inc                               561,291        652,659
Elec Imaging Inc                          800,975        753,621
#Electromagnetic Sci                       95,913         10,352
Electronic Arts Inc                     3,648,453      3,191,393
Emisphere Tech Inc                        615,888        622,881
Empi Inc                                  754,031        583,830
Emulex Cp                                  95,678         57,019
Engle Homes Inc                           493,708        519,698
Envoy Cp                                  611,447        615,359
Enzon Inc                                 257,498        322,352
Evergreen Media Cp A                      143,247        289,150
Exabyte Cp                                297,349        624,015
#Executive Telecard                       110,904         61,083
FHP Intl Cp                               200,357        471,528
FTP Software Inc                           49,348           N.L.
Farm & Home Fin Cp                        605,348        573,129
Fastcomm Comm Cp                        1,097,411        944,700
Fastenal Co                             1,605,502      1,755,635
Fifth Third Bncp                          919,321        827,531
Filene's Basement Cp                       67,633        223,210
First Alabama Bcshs                     1,026,233        690,310
First Commerce Cp La                      639,346        571,323
First Hawaiian Inc                        107,201        238,574
First Pacific Ntwks                     1,158,446      2,459,034
First Security Utah                        24,705         69,294
First Team Sports                         235,740        181,389
#First Tenn Natl Cp                        17,112        196,133
First United Bk Grp                       591,532        582,623
#Flagstar Cos                             790,409        402,748
Food Lion Inc Cl A                      4,447,208      4,542,141
Foremost Cp of Amer                       111,800         72,522
Forest Oil Cp                           2,425,387      2,648,739
Forschner Group The                        77,704        159,265
Fortune Bancorp                           884,984        854,660
Fourth Financial Cp                       426,883        446,594
Frame Tech Cp                             365,802        617,127
Framingham Savs Bk                         96,167        134,442
#Fresh Choice Inc                         328,096        159,408
Fritz Cos Inc                              48,324         96,043
#Funco Inc                                220,772         30,626
GTI Corp                                   97,764         55,916
Gantos Inc                                221,458        419,916
Gen Nutrition Cos                         704,559        464,884
Genetic Therapy Inc                       317,225        513,858
Genetics Inst Dep Sh                      336,133        313,975
Gensia Inc                              2,743,889      2,942,742
#Gensia Inc Wts                            93,200          3,000
Gentex Cp                                 354,972        709,175
Genzyme Cp                              2,223,652      2,621,978
Geotek Inds                             1,511,351      1,574,132
Gibson Greetings Inc                       38,851         82,333
Giddings Lewis Inc                        610,454        625,359
+Glenayre Techs Inc                       367,644        260,534
Glycomed Inc                               99,776        156,549
Golden Systems Inc                        377,150           N.L.
#Good Guys Inc The                        143,806         59,473
Goody's Family Cloth                       87,332        173,372
Goulds Pumps Inc                          151,338        110,412
Grand Casinos Inc                       4,974,614      4,769,901
#Grant Geophysical                          7,913         47,290
Great Amer Rec Inc                      1,071,251      1,321,061
#Greenfield Inds                           59,744         12,775
Greenwich Pharm Inc                     2,962,703      4,349,986
Groundwater Tech Inc                      158,608        204,616
Gupta Corp                                922,269        861,933
Gymboree Cp (The)                         802,542        958,153
Gateway 2000, Inc.                         98,467           N.L.
HBO Co                                    305,631        275,996
#Haggar Cp                                 78,444          4,306
Harry's Farmers A                         222,389        140,280
Healthcare Compare                        315,997        522,367
#Healthcare Imaging                        19,460        219,589
Healthcare Svcs Gp                        756,627      1,142,919
Healthdyne Inc                            191,882        287,150
Healthinfusion Inc                        745,919        744,078
Healthwise of Am Sr                       130,903           N.L.
Heart Tech Inc                          1,236,771      1,118,820
Hechinger Co Cl A                         219,139        641,550
Herbalife Intl                            370,827        366,747
Hollinger Inc                           1,933,600      1,212,700
Hollywood Casino A                        739,345        864,536
Hollywood Park Inc                        624,829        792,144
#Holophane Cp                             152,172          3,830
#Home State Hldgs Inc                      83,618          3,500
Homecare Mgmt Inc                         846,551        651,769
#HON Inds                                  59,898         17,058
Hornbeck Offshore                         256,117        215,286
#Huntington Bcshs                         487,664        236,319
Hutchinson Tech Inc                       358,963        341,112
Human Genome Scis                          43,021           N.L.
ICO Inc Dep Shr Se                        180,000           N.L.
ICOS Corp                                 490,965        518,803
IDB Commun Gp Inc                       1,172,556      1,138,837
Idexx Labs Inc                            858,812        986,185
IHOP Corp                                 782,098        781,540
I-Stat Cp                                 463,230        434,491
Image Entertainment                       267,950        269,356
Imclone Systems Inc                        97,072        153,978
Immune Response Cp                      2,056,040      1,942,230
Immunex Corp                              798,622        738,248
Immunomedics Inc                          541,100        554,731
Imperial Bancorp                          480,871        510,707
#Independence Bncp Pa                     110,389         22,255
#+Infinity Broadcast A                    529,879        142,140
Info Resources Inc                        289,432        451,066
Informix Cp                             2,645,289      3,148,061
INS Auto Auctions                         391,137        420,809
#Insite Vision Inc                          5,137         73,400
Insituform Techs A                        441,631        472,535
Integrated Devic Tec                      427,333        569,136
Intel Cp                                3,545,310      3,849,319
Intel Cp Wts                              755,070        904,649
Intel Surg Wts A                           36,618           N.L.
Intelligent Elec                          105,361        192,870
Interactive Network                     2,011,667      1,756,781
Interface Inc A                           749,982        719,203
Intergraph Cp                             461,425        647,639
#Interleaf Inc                            176,200         55,139
#Intermedia Commun Fl                     473,731         39,337
#Intermet Cp                              269,990        116,528
Interneuron Pharm                         835,714        842,998
#Intl Cabeltel Inc                        768,661        292,218
Intl Semi-Tech A Sr                        53,510           N.L.
Intl Totalizator Sys                      265,893        221,799
Intuit Inc                                395,740        534,041
#Itron Inc                                 10,993         64,327
#Iwerks Entertain Inc                     410,657        123,548
JB Hunt Trans Svcs                        565,034        603,431
J Baker Inc                             1,801,487      2,038,979
#Jefferies Group Inc                        2,669         97,915
Jennifer Convertible                      288,395        381,985
Johnstown Amer Inds                       153,400        202,336
Jones Intrcable A                         579,846        530,658
KLA Instruments                           267,484        366,910
Kelley Oil Cp                           1,444,893      1,498,019
Kendall Square Resch                    1,686,637      2,252,152
#Kenetech Cp                              103,653         13,280
#Keytronic Corp                            83,510         29,756
Keystone Fin Inc                          250,990        246,570
Kinder Care Learning                      260,066        283,549
Kinetic Concepts Inc                       74,722        153,588
Knowledgeware Inc                         894,636      1,015,531
#Komag Inc                                843,282        248,054
Kopin Cp                                  381,938        246,684
Kulicke And Soffa                         192,421        494,260
LCI Intl                                  220,511        129,155
LDDS Commun Inc                         1,176,200      1,174,806
LM Ericsson Tel ADR                     1,383,898      1,107,734
Lady Luck Gaming Cp                       736,824        651,517
Lam Research Cp                         1,286,102      1,306,614
Lancaster Colony Cp                        20,688         70,112
Lannet Data Comm Ord                       65,558        182,025
Lattice Semiconduct                       259,854        368,630
Lechters Inc                              262,113        325,479
Legent Cp                                 332,394        381,913
Liberty Natl Bncp                         118,165        190,864
Lidak Pharm Cl A                          367,958        436,871
LIN Broadcasting Cp                       179,913        133,849
Linear Technology Cp                      260,080        363,917
Liposome Co                               614,548        606,250
Liposome Tech Inc                         703,100        717,617
Littelfuse Inc                          1,091,520      1,095,037
#Lodgenet Entertain                       269,800         27,344
#Lomak Petroleum Inc                       55,692          9,162
Lone Star Steakhouse                    3,656,203      3,690,906
Longhorn Steaks Inc                       618,303        641,354
Lottery Enterprises                        55,660        133,325
Lotus Development Cp                    3,876,217      3,206,045
#MB Comm Inc                              422,398        181,617
MCI Comm Cp                             7,618,711      8,834,282
MFS Comm Co Inc                           529,329        594,259
#MS Carriers Inc                           84,875         21,029
MTC Elec Tech Ltd                         437,287        701,771
Macmillan Bloedel                          81,809        185,613
Magma Power Co                            690,336        783,326
#Magnetech Corp                            70,625         24,074
Mail Boxes Etc                            720,617        832,866
Marcam Cp                                 332,385        246,838
Marsh Supermarkets B                      112,945        149,472
Marshall & Ilsley                       1,883,798      1,437,438
Masland Cp                                 30,890         73,014
Maxicare Hlth New                       1,282,416      1,291,921
Maxtor Cp                                 776,635        651,361
McCaw Cellular A                          576,035      1,053,029
McCormick Co NV                           461,097        504,016
McGaw Inc                                 409,059        408,939
#Medalist Inds                             57,696         10,050
Medaphis Cp                               575,432        515,252
Media Vision Inc                        2,428,556      2,470,010
Medical Marketing Gp                      218,408        756,811
Medicine Shoppe Intl                      650,765      1,012,456
Medicis Pharm Cl A                      1,125,574        685,705
Medimmune Inc                           1,398,492      1,000,463
#Medisys Inc                               67,479          9,376
Megahertz Corp                            800,187        488,934
#Memorex Telex NV ADR                       1,798         80,917
Mentor Cp The                             217,247        266,626
Mentor Graphics Cp                        805,814        748,116
#Mercer Intl Inc Sbi                      110,869         22,662
#Meris Labs Inc                             8,356        167,310
Merisel Inc                               154,375        222,837
#Merrill Cp                               237,052         37,840
Mesa Airlines Inc                       1,119,007      1,166,920
Metricom Inc                              236,350        194,420
Michael Foods Inc                         376,460        818,486
Michaels Stores Inc                     1,527,947      1,427,267
Michigan Natl Cp                          356,511        375,242
#Micro Component Tech                       9,000         74,730
#Microage Inc                             102,026         10,766
Microchip Tech Inc                        274,721        283,700
#Microcom Inc                              12,938        152,722
Micronics Computers                       123,699        243,961
Micropolis Cp                             433,191        257,042
Microprose Inc                            262,048        274,709
Microsoft Cp                            3,166,148      2,693,473
+Mid Atlantic Medical                     355,322        379,292
Midlantic Cp                              735,051        890,968
Miller Herman Inc                          38,513         84,236
Millicom Inc                              263,876        185,130
Mobile Telecomm Tech                    8,622,268      8,774,788
Molex Inc                                 192,361        256,960
Molten Metal Tech                         713,913        532,225
Monaco Finance Cl-A                       393,005        343,599
Monterey Pasta Co Se                       59,699           N.L.
Mutual Sav Bk Fsb                          32,791        119,895
NAC Re Cp                                 268,726        275,649
Nextel Commun A                         2,740,576      2,662,013
NS Bancorp Inc                            307,358        368,907
#NSC Corporation                          179,300          7,557
Natl Gypsum Co                            487,466        492,262
Natl Vision Assoc                       1,413,647      1,845,988
Natural Wonders                           261,077        232,105
Nature's Bounty Inc                       394,698        402,848
Nellcor Inc                               206,878        287,336
#+Neorx Cp                                216,113         67,534
NetF R A M E Systems                      959,828        742,505
#Network General Cp                       192,212        107,886
Network Systems Cp                        510,218        681,782
Neutrogena Cp                             434,924        494,429
New Image Inds                            914,170        981,252
Newbridge Netwks Cp                       717,840        963,942
Noble Drilling Cp                       5,820,568      5,138,116
Noise Cancellation                      1,061,040      1,080,084
Norand Cp                                  44,501         82,980
Nordstrom Inc                           1,588,954      1,658,784
#Northrim Bank                                486         90,036
Novell Inc                              3,141,400      4,092,798
Novellus Systems Inc                      257,982        406,780
#OM Group Inc                              15,942        175,261
#Ohio Casualty Cp                         109,098         53,341
Olicom A/S    E                           509,206        860,446
#Olympic Finl Ltd                         289,824          6,122
#Omega Environment                      1,010,851        525,846
Onbancorp Inc                             366,429        311,514
Optical Data Systems                       36,172         76,921
#Oracle Systems Cp                      5,174,961      2,255,363
Orbital Sciences Cp                     1,480,040      1,437,898
#Ornda Healthcrp                          869,986        170,348
Oshkosh B Gosh Cl A                       178,457        249,261
#Oshmans Sporting                          52,445          5,653
Outback Steakhouse                      3,063,658      2,981,291
Oxford Health Plans                     1,835,798      2,116,473
PDK Labs Inc                              644,648        545,680
Pet Smart Inc                             502,638        397,214
Paccar Inc                                142,595        179,069
#Pacific Bank Natl Ca                     131,105         19,917
#Pacific Physician                         75,936         16,680
#Pacific Telecom Inc                       93,973         33,795
Pacificare Hlth Cl A                      108,757        270,959
Pacificare Hlth Cl B                      658,350        526,863
Paging Network Inc                        850,357        816,383
#Pairgain Tech                            249,573         73,673
Parametric Tech Cp                      1,449,559      1,651,447
Park Commun Inc                           300,412        292,748
#Partnerre Hlds Ltd                       202,664         92,518
#Paychex Inc                              171,890         85,095
#People's Choice TV                        85,552         23,533
Peoples Bk (Ct)                           490,177        470,971
Peoples Heri Fin Gp                       315,585        281,707
Peoples Telephone                         436,193        434,520
Peoplesoft Inc                            771,775        839,142
Perrigo Company                           723,608      1,060,915
#Petersburg Long Dist                      10,983         48,104
Petroleum Geo Sv Ads                      457,459        438,621
Pharmaceutical Mktg                       186,441        368,029
Phoenix Re Cp                           1,158,147      1,153,088
Phycor Inc                                899,870        822,062
#Physician Comp Ntwk                       63,054         19,116
Physicians Clinical                       169,257        133,436
Picturetel Cp                           3,814,421      4,099,885
Pioneer Hi Bred Intl                      281,159        347,107
Pittencrieff Commun                       597,874        463,367
Pjtffitt's Inc                            170,718        232,614
Platinum Software Cp                      273,244        275,057
Players Intl Inc                        2,427,240      2,377,548
#Pollo Tropical Inc                        53,659          5,205
Powersoft Corp                            901,316        952,610
#Preferred Entertain                      170,995         54,355
Premier Anesthesia                        209,022        267,713
+Pres Riverboat Casin                   3,359,728      3,795,600
Presidential Life Cp                      925,814        860,249
Presstek Inc                              562,715        604,404
Price/Costco Inc                        2,886,016      3,592,395
Primadonna Resorts                        342,913        232,132
Primedex Health Sys                       229,999        357,747
Production Oper                           174,480        219,128
Proteon Inc                               115,902        156,498
#Protocol Sys Inc                          88,548         44,750
Pure Tech Intl                            305,658        289,437
#Purepac Inc                              293,266         18,990
Puritan Bennett Cp                      1,380,609      1,417,461
Pyramid Technology                        321,234        325,735
Pyxis Cp                                1,571,589      1,285,819
Qualcomm Inc                            1,598,721      1,684,748
QVC Network Inc                         1,297,596      1,590,838
Quadrex Cp                                247,624        358,930
Quality Food Centers                      693,044        755,127
Quantum Cp                              3,425,746      3,118,053
Quantum Hlth Res Inc                    1,069,565        897,328
Quantum Restaurant                        410,275        644,036
Queens County Bncp                         48,842           N.L.
RPM Inc                                   725,193        748,162
Railtex Inc                                49,269           N.L.
Rally's Hamburger                       2,959,401      2,638,522
Rasterops                                 337,975        304,378
#Raymond Cp The                           133,643          1,829
Re Capital Cp                             452,220        416,688
Read-Rite Cp                              281,037        309,810
Regal Comm Cp                             714,140        676,858
Reno Air Inc                              101,433        176,417
Repap Enterprises Cp                      539,622        542,515
Resound Corp                            1,179,452      1,157,804
Retix                                     358,744        331,848
Reuters Hldg Plc ADR                    1,403,044      1,675,933
Ribi Immunochem                            60,179        114,381
Riggs Natl Cp The                         270,252        366,851
Roadway Services Inc                      935,485      1,023,690
Roberts Pharm Cp                          424,872        355,952
Rochester Comm Sav                      1,204,928      1,127,478
#Roosevelt Finl Group                     292,137        135,665
#Roper Inds                               193,611         49,444
Rouse Co                                  965,137        949,223
Safeco Corp                               221,727        142,936
SCI Systems Inc                         1,972,478      2,260,411
Seacor Hldgs                              362,434        336,008
SGI International                         984,483        977,894
SHL Systemhouse                           114,433        189,191
+SLM Intl Inc                             541,399        523,868
Softima G E                               179,774        235,624
Steri's Cp                              1,795,684      1,430,056
#S3 Inc                                   968,894        414,798
Sanmina Cp                                318,731        238,565
Sapiens Intl Cp N V                     1,119,509        935,886
Savoy Pict Entertnmt                    1,261,051        886,864
Scholastic Cp                              47,833         84,895
Schuler Homes Inc                       1,395,893      1,407,270
Schulman A Inc                            251,051        293,604
Sciclone Pharma Inc                       418,972        448,460
Scimed Life Sys Inc                     2,108,006      2,120,844
#Scios Nova Inc                            35,640        239,848
Scitex Cp                                 521,298        415,835
+Score Board Inc The                    2,080,206      2,185,658
#Seagate Tech                           2,819,812      1,402,876
Sepracor Inc                              214,257        148,485
Sequent Computer Sys                    2,369,378      2,699,589
Shared Medical Sys                         46,084         94,898
Shorewood Pkging Cp                        22,473         59,876
Sierra On Line Inc                        268,443        326,954
Sigma Aldrich Cp                          398,030        410,701
Sigma Designs Inc                         283,987        172,904
#Signal Tech Corp                           7,051        278,856
Signet Gp Ord ADR                         637,423        668,893
#Silver King Comm Inc                      81,957         42,807
Simpson Inds Inc                           17,921         64,389
#Siskon Gold Cp A                          52,744          5,037
Skybox Intl Inc                           582,440           N.L.
Smithfield Foods Inc                    1,338,292      1,340,847
Snapple Beverage Cp                     9,840,694     10,247,541
Sodak Gaming Inc                          108,445        156,405
Software Toolwks Inc                    1,442,052      1,537,588
Somatogen Inc                           3,209,174      3,133,196
Sonoco Prod Co Pfd A                       49,880         87,270
Sonoco Products Co                      1,178,274        965,133
Southtrust Cp                              22,972         62,353
Spartan Motors Inc                        509,132        533,746
Spectranetics Cp The                      167,320        271,685
Spectrum Info Tech                      2,478,307      3,152,512
#Spiegel Inc A NV                         188,720         55,111
Sports & Recreation                     1,818,340      1,760,875
Sports/Leisure Inc                         99,032         62,171
St Jude Medical Inc                       504,083        625,556
#Staff Builder Del                        274,833         67,227
Standard Microsystem                      576,505        571,575
#Stanford Telecommun                      117,504         65,070
#Staodyn Wts Ser II                         2,200         52,670
+Staples Inc                            1,740,606      2,188,925
Starbucks Cp                            3,618,467      4,118,733
Starsight Telecast                        317,057        300,768
#State of The Art Inc                      85,452         48,656
State Street Boston                       398,927        498,351
Station Casinos Inc                       364,558        386,072
Stein Mart Inc                            282,475        277,388
Stewart Stevenson                         172,136        112,540
Stokely U S A Inc                         112,147        206,580
Stratacom Inc                             981,132      1,017,858
Structural Dynamics                     1,534,058      2,474,777
Stryker Cp                              3,879,027      3,765,760
#Summa Four Inc                           179,476         54,705
Summit Care Cp                            374,704        296,166
Summit Tech Inc                         3,261,948      3,201,962
Sun Microsystems Inc                    3,212,986      3,612,864
Sun Television & App                      406,717        386,367
Sunglass Hut Intl                         446,238        587,650
Sunrise Tech Intl                         401,279        388,948
+Sybase Inc                             2,006,135      2,143,294
Symantec Cp                               449,443        467,088
Synetic Inc                               250,055        265,397
Synopsys Inc                              515,872        439,612
Synoptics Commun Inc                    6,519,436      5,487,515
System Software                         1,122,765      1,255,716
Systemed Inc                              460,077        371,775
Systems Comp Tech Cp                      689,897        584,778
#TAT Techs Ltd                              9,829         48,901
#Tekelec                                   12,992         79,519
TJ Intl Inc                               391,871        356,706
TPI Enterprises                         4,768,809      4,668,158
TRM Copy Ctrs Cp                          252,662        237,906
+T Rowe Price Assoc                       672,207        583,238
#Tanknology Environ                         8,151         64,898
Telco Systems Inc                         291,394        398,836
Tele Commun Inc A                       3,400,627      9,255,607
#Telebit Cp                                74,588         12,701
+Tellabs Inc                              280,363        210,539
Telxon Cp                                 784,240        789,566
The 3Do Co                                924,862        615,880
#The Money Store Inc                       49,169          3,694
Thomas Nelson Inc                         438,454        419,571
#Titan Wheel Intl Inc                     180,233          4,031
Todays Man Inc                            485,503        720,139
Tokos Med Cp Del                        3,926,981      3,922,905
Tom Brown Inc                              22,915         76,878
Topps Co                                  264,417        390,086
#Tops Appliance City                      192,384         78,771
Tracor Inc                                177,786        265,360
Transamerican Waste                       556,735        507,210
Tricord Systems Inc                       327,614        308,544
Trimble Navigation                        462,271        515,183
Tristar Corp                              400,574        515,531
Tseng Labs Inc                          3,464,921      3,520,274
Tyson Foods Inc Cl A                      408,607        373,493
US Bancorp Oregon                         686,282        425,278
US Healthcare Inc                       3,968,851      4,246,952
US Long Distance Cp                       678,879        421,104
US Robotics Inc                           769,667        501,286
UST Corp                                1,016,613      1,012,646
Unilab Cp New                              96,394        191,684
United Gaming Inc                       1,679,938      1,386,829
United Retail Gp Inc                       42,843        166,346
Universal Elect Inc                       373,435        242,255
#Usbancorp Inc Pa                          48,880            656
VLSI Tech Inc                             480,019        616,224
Valence Tech Inc                          467,923        463,880
#Valuevision Intl A                     1,075,678        333,467
Vanguard Cellular A                       318,426        428,996
Varlen Cp                                 303,426        240,918
#Ventritex Inc                            545,541        271,794
#Verifone Inc                             144,475        611,587
Vestar Inc                                218,841        170,036
Videocart Inc                           1,658,660      2,065,262
Viewlogic Systems                         641,680        652,822
Vision Sciences Inc                       107,650        232,103
#Vital Signs Inc                           26,306        134,516
WPP Gp Plc ADR                            556,654        520,510
WRT Energy Cp                             201,843        153,848
#Walker Interactive                        63,684          9,638
Washington Mut Sv Bk                    1,337,930      1,906,057
#Watson Pharm Inc                         407,027         82,247
Wellfleet Commun Inc                    2,032,606      1,449,542
West One Bancorp                        1,652,233      1,456,978
+Westcott Comm                          1,046,625        993,890
Western Publishing                        306,862        391,177
Westwood One Inc                        2,218,384      2,537,743
+Whole Foods Market                       851,714        874,620
Willamette Inds                           334,256        380,079
#William Sonoma Inc                       175,816         65,736
#Wind River Sys Inc                           200         74,998
Wang Laboratories Inc                      36,000           N.L.
XOMA Corp                                 538,630        471,818
#Xicor Inc                                  1,952         39,000
Xilinx Inc                                257,494        195,594
#Xyplex Inc                                18,117        180,240
Yellow Cp                                 191,860        301,938
York Research Cp                          910,047        941,733
Zale Corp                                 382,524        762,341
Zebra Tech Cp Cl-A                        386,873        400,665
#+Zenith Labs Inc                         748,995        350,580
Zeos Intl Ltd                             823,661        924,161
Zilog Inc                                 176,653        135,392
Zoll Medical Cp                         1,216,687        982,182
Zoom Telephonics Inc                       78,083        205,306
Zycad Cp                                   86,211        125,369
Other Nasdaq

ACS Enterprises                           224,500        169,300
#ASEA AB ADR Spons                         25,632        148,055
#Acorn Venture Cap Cp                      71,745          5,125
Advanced Enviro A                         128,479        185,576
Advantage Life Prods                       29,605         66,405
Alanco Envirnmtl Res                      239,681        167,663
All-Pro Prod Inc Uts                       42,044           N.L.
Alter Sales Co                            488,915        436,572
Amer Bus Comp Cp                          274,806        327,492
Amer West Airline                       1,796,749      1,494,190
Ames Dept Stores Inc                      348,430        317,706
Anglo Swiss Inds                          107,299              0
Aphton Corp                               478,550        419,704
Bio-Refer Labs Wts A                       74,512           N.L.
Bio-Refer Labs Wts B                      141,825           N.L.
Bio-Reference Lab                          91,243           N.L.
Bio-Reference Uts                         124,780           N.L.
Biocontrol Tech Inc                       352,520        303,558
Biomechanics Cp Amer                      558,026        666,657
#Biosource Intl                                70         95,019
#Blue Dolphin Energy                       96,022         33,851
Capital Gaming Intl                       607,196        595,573
Cellex Biosciences                        160,840        295,489
#Cellular Tech Svcs                       215,414        111,674
Chefs Intl Inc                             32,613        109,771
Command Credit Corp                        67,900              0
Comp Concepts Cp New                       31,922         69,041
Comp Mktplace Inc                         257,600        258,620
#Compumed Inc                             106,441         18,362
Cortex Pharm Inc                           57,170        200,531
#Crown Casino Cp                           95,159         28,897
DRS Inds                                   51,631        157,458
#DeBeers Cons ADR                          54,000          7,390
Diamond Entertain                         477,399        594,986
#Diplomat Cp                              178,015          5,800
Direct Connect Intl                       114,750         67,150
Dresdner Ag Sp ADR                      1,162,105      1,134,100
#Educational Dev Cp                           863         38,640
Embrace Systems Cp                        278,612        208,707
Energy Conversion                         435,978        389,609
#Europa Cruises Cp                          6,407        144,907
Fiberchem Inc                              55,942        106,491
Firetector Inc                             50,783        110,782
GB Foods Cp                               384,226        384,330
Gaming Cp of Amer                         256,768        255,508
#Gamma Intl Ltd Wt 95                       6,785         91,477
#Gerant Inds Inc                            3,468         41,010
#Great Amer Mgmt Inv                      105,575         60,000
#Great Cntr Spon ADR                      197,210         24,500
Graff Pay-Per-View                         38,826           N.L.
#Harmony Holdings Inc                      14,125         95,646
ICC Techs Inc                             295,700        309,675
#Intel Surg Laser New                      42,749            592
Internet Commun Cp                        148,619        290,397
Intl Gaming Mgmt Inc                      353,806        363,590
Invitro Intl                              602,238        758,207
Jockey Club Inc                            63,073         99,335
#LM Ericsson Tel Add                       11,455      2,331,734
Laser Video Ntwk                          288,818        409,503
#Laser Video Wts B 97                     230,620          8,887
Lasertechnics Inc                         103,145         61,020
Latex Resources Inc                        39,060        133,523
Licon Intl Inc                            233,115        398,615
#Lone Star Casino                          53,426         15,081
#Malvy Tech Inc                             8,468         50,065
Management Techs Inc                      221,170        269,788
Marcum Natural Gas                        401,049        499,001
Medical Dynamics Inc                      265,109        233,772
#Micros to Mainframe                      102,161         55,750
Microterra Inc                            187,800        313,797
#Minorco ADR                               59,395         23,483
#N-Viro Recovery Inc                      249,046         12,095
Neolens Inc                               159,349        227,250
Network Imaging Cp                        224,600        136,276
#New Day Beverage Inc                      83,235         23,735
#News Commun Inc                          488,926         80,242
Noxso Cp                                  137,600        173,108
Nytest Environmental                      212,056              0
Nastech Pharmaceutical                     41,328           N.L.
#Out-Takes Inc                              9,900         47,635
Princeton Dent Wt                          37,218              0
Projectavision Inc                        491,317        463,183
Quality Product Inc                       484,650        652,118
Royce Laboratories                        483,330        493,420
#SA Hldgs Inc                              11,045         50,675
#SMT Health Svcs                           57,495         17,760
#Sage Tech Inc                            879,541        245,050
#Scorpion Tech Cl A                       104,512         47,934
Senetek Plc ADR                           401,490        634,906
#Shuffle Master Inc                       172,046         93,760
Site Based Media Inc                      342,440        618,915
#+Skolniks Inc                            313,771        129,825
Solv Ex Corp                              327,193        328,260
Southland Cp                            2,479,667      2,636,988
#Sports Media Inc                          40,000            800
TJ Systems Cp                             122,984        209,384
TJ Systems Wts                             68,350        167,650
#Telefonos de Mexico                      160,370         71,669
#Telescan Inc                               2,500         52,145
#Teltronics Inc                           151,254          7,136
#Temtex Inds                               58,957            316
Tmbr/Sharp Drill Inc                       36,500           N.L.
#Touchstone App Sci                       137,338         23,000
#US Trans System                        2,114,174        220,526
Union Switch & Signl                       54,940           N.L.
Urethane Techs Inc                        659,977        643,465
Voice Powered Tech                        244,374        201,784
Williams Controls                         129,523        299,081
Wisconsin Pharmacal                       351,324        329,287
Work Recovery Inc                         332,437        314,488


Short Sales Tables Explained

    These tables show issues with a short interest position in the current month
of at least 250,000 shares or a change up or down from the previous month of at
least 35,379 shares.

    Cover ratio represents the number of days, at average volume level, that it
would take to purchase the number of shares sold short.

    T -- National Market System.

    N.L. -- Not listed.

    + -- Stock split.

    * May have been affected by arbitrage transactions resulting from any one or
more of the following: proposed or pending acquisitions; convertible securities
of the same company; rights offerings; stock splits or distributions; tenders;
other special situations.

    Short interest may also be affected by options positions.

    # Indicates a change of 75 percent or more from the previous month.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1994


                             921 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                    December 20, 1993, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 375 words

HEADLINE: Biotech firm gets loan for a new plant

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. has lined up $ 1.5 million in financing from
Bank of Boston that the small biotechnology company will use to construct a
manufacturing facility.

   The financing comes after Bank of Boston and other local banks have been
criticized by the biotech industry for not helping young companies get the loans
they need to build production facilities.

   K. Michael Forrest, Transkaryotic's president said, the manufacturing space
would be used to produce the company's nonviral gene therapy products for
clinical trials. He said the company, which now employs 65 people, could add 65
to 100 people in the next three years to staff the facility.

   Forrest declined to reveal the size of the facility or terms of the agreement
with Bank of Boston, except to say it is a combination of debt and warrants. A
warrant is a right to purchase a certain amount of capital stock at a under
certain conditions.

   "We think Bank of Boston wanted to finance our facility because they are
comfortable with our technology progress and our business prospects as well as
the good group of investors we have," said Forrest.

   Transkaryotic is one of the better-financed, early-stage biopharmaceutical
companies in New England, having raised $ 35 million. Nearly half that amount
came from the investment group Warburg Pincus Capital Co. Other major investors
include Hambrecht & Quist, BEA Associates, Medical Portfolio Management and
Scanidfund of Stockholm.

   Last summer the company postponed an initial public stock offering, citing
poor market conditions. Last month it raised $ 8.1 million from its existing
investors, bringing total cash on hand to about $ 11 million, said Forrest.

   Transkaryotic's gene therapy is for the treatment of certain cancers and
hemophilia. It requires taking a biopsy and sample of a patient's skin and
sending it to Transkaryotic's lab, which isolates the diseased genes.

   New cells are grown that are capable of delivering needed therapeutic
proteins, which are put into a syringe and returned to the physician who
performed the biopsy. The doctor inserts the new material under the patient's
skin to begin manufacturing human growth hormone for cancer treatment and Factor
VIII protein for hemophiliacs.

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1993


                             922 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   December 19, 1993, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: ZEST; New in paperback; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 572 words

HEADLINE: New in paperback

BYLINE: From staff, wire reports

BODY:

   "Chicago Loop" by Paul Theroux (Ivy Books, $ 5.99).  Parker
Jagoda is a successful businessman with a wife and family.  But
he also leads another life, prowling the streets for lonely
souls who can feed his twisted sexual obsessions.  In this
novel, a New York Times Notable Book, Theroux has produced a
riveting portrait of character disintegration.

   A War Among the Tombstones by Lawrence Block (Avon,
$ 4.99).  Block's Matthew Scudder series has matured over the
years to the point where fans no longer apologize for ranking
Block with Dashiell Hammett and Raymond Chandler.  In this book
Scudder, ex-cop, private eye and Alcoholics Anonymous regular,
whose girlfriend still works as a call girl, is needed to
solve a double-ugly crime.  Someone is kidnapping the relatives
of rich drug dealers, demanding a huge ransom and returning
the victim in pieces wrapped in plastic.  With the help of
police friends, a couple of young Asian computer experts and a
black teen-ager, Scudder solves the case, but not before 300
pages of nail-biting suspense relieved only by some dazzling
set pieces and laugh-aloud humor.

   Places of Greater Safety by Hilda Hollingsworth
(Zenobia Press/RDR Books, $ 12.95).  When the Blitz began
destroying London, thousands of British schoolchildren were
moved to ""places of greater safety'' in the countryside.

   Hollingsworth and her sisters were sent to an ugly Welsh
mining town, where they became the reluctant guests of a
succession of families.  A few of their hosts were kind, but
the majority were self-righteously pious and often emotionally
and physically abusive.  Hollingsworth's wrenching descriptions
of her struggle to survive this lonely, unnatural childhood
serve as a reminder of one of the forgotten sorrows of World
War II.

   Why Nothing Can Travel Faster Than Light, and Other
Explorations in Nature's Curiosity Shop by Barry E.
Zimmerman and David J. Zimmerman (Contemporary Books, $ 12.95).

   The authors are brothers who teach science and, to judge from
this book, teach it very well.  Their chapter titles are
questions: Did an Asteroid Really Wipe Out the Dinosaurs?

   (Maybe.) Can We Win the War Against Cancer? (Probably, through
gene therapy, but not all at once or any time soon.) At times
they venture inappropriately firm conclusions - they accept
global warming via the greenhouse effect as a fact, though it
is far from proven by the young science of climatology - but
even then they explain how things work.

   The English Patient by Michael Ondaatje (Vintage
International, $ 11).  Four people are left in an abandoned
Italian villa used as a hospital toward the end of World War
II: a thief turned military spy, an emotionally scarred nurse,
the Sikh soldier who is her lover and, finally, a dying pilot
burned beyond recognition, who may or may not be the
Englishman he claims to be.  This novel won Britain's Booker
Prize and was chosen as one of the best books of 1992 by The
New York Times Book Review, whose reviewer called it ""a tale
of many pleasures - an intensely theatrical tour de force, but
grounded in Michael Ondaatje's strong feeling for distant
times and places. '' This feeling is also reflected in
Ondaatje's 1982 memoir, Running in the Family (Vintage
International, $ 10), which describes the author's
Dutch-Ceylonese ancestry and his return in the 1970s to Sri
Lanka, where he was born.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Book Chicago Loop by Paul Theroux

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1993


                             923 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   December 19, 1993, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: ZEST; New in paperback; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 572 words

HEADLINE: New in paperback

BYLINE: From staff, wire reports

BODY:

   "Chicago Loop" by Paul Theroux (Ivy Books, $ 5.99).  Parker
Jagoda is a successful businessman with a wife and family.  But
he also leads another life, prowling the streets for lonely
souls who can feed his twisted sexual obsessions.  In this
novel, a New York Times Notable Book, Theroux has produced a
riveting portrait of character disintegration.

   A War Among the Tombstones by Lawrence Block (Avon,
$ 4.99).  Block's Matthew Scudder series has matured over the
years to the point where fans no longer apologize for ranking
Block with Dashiell Hammett and Raymond Chandler.  In this book
Scudder, ex-cop, private eye and Alcoholics Anonymous regular,
whose girlfriend still works as a call girl, is needed to
solve a double-ugly crime.  Someone is kidnapping the relatives
of rich drug dealers, demanding a huge ransom and returning
the victim in pieces wrapped in plastic.  With the help of
police friends, a couple of young Asian computer experts and a
black teen-ager, Scudder solves the case, but not before 300
pages of nail-biting suspense relieved only by some dazzling
set pieces and laugh-aloud humor.

   Places of Greater Safety by Hilda Hollingsworth
(Zenobia Press/RDR Books, $ 12.95).  When the Blitz began
destroying London, thousands of British schoolchildren were
moved to ""places of greater safety'' in the countryside.

   Hollingsworth and her sisters were sent to an ugly Welsh
mining town, where they became the reluctant guests of a
succession of families.  A few of their hosts were kind, but
the majority were self-righteously pious and often emotionally
and physically abusive.  Hollingsworth's wrenching descriptions
of her struggle to survive this lonely, unnatural childhood
serve as a reminder of one of the forgotten sorrows of World
War II.

   Why Nothing Can Travel Faster Than Light, and Other
Explorations in Nature's Curiosity Shop by Barry E.
Zimmerman and David J. Zimmerman (Contemporary Books, $ 12.95).

   The authors are brothers who teach science and, to judge from
this book, teach it very well.  Their chapter titles are
questions: Did an Asteroid Really Wipe Out the Dinosaurs?

   (Maybe.) Can We Win the War Against Cancer? (Probably, through
gene therapy, but not all at once or any time soon.) At times
they venture inappropriately firm conclusions - they accept
global warming via the greenhouse effect as a fact, though it
is far from proven by the young science of climatology - but
even then they explain how things work.

   The English Patient by Michael Ondaatje (Vintage
International, $ 11).  Four people are left in an abandoned
Italian villa used as a hospital toward the end of World War
II: a thief turned military spy, an emotionally scarred nurse,
the Sikh soldier who is her lover and, finally, a dying pilot
burned beyond recognition, who may or may not be the
Englishman he claims to be.  This novel won Britain's Booker
Prize and was chosen as one of the best books of 1992 by The
New York Times Book Review, whose reviewer called it ""a tale
of many pleasures - an intensely theatrical tour de force, but
grounded in Michael Ondaatje's strong feeling for distant
times and places. '' This feeling is also reflected in
Ondaatje's 1982 memoir, Running in the Family (Vintage
International, $ 10), which describes the author's
Dutch-Ceylonese ancestry and his return in the 1970s to Sri
Lanka, where he was born.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Book Chicago Loop by Paul Theroux

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1993


                             924 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           December 18, 1993 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 991 words

HEADLINE: New colon-cancer tack to be tried here

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Doctors who attempted to eradicate a La Mesa woman's brain tumor with genetic
therapy plan to use the same strategy to treat colon cancer. Physicians at the
San Diego Regional Cancer Center expect specific genes injected into a patient's
bloodstream to boost a natural immune response to attack colon cancers, the
second most common cause of cancer deaths. The trial primarily will test the
safety of the genetic injections, although the doctors have permission to
continue the treatments beyond the trial in any patients who seem to be
improving. "People don't have a good immune response against their own tumors,
so there needs to be a little help," said Dr. Ivor Royston, the cancer center's
scientific director. Earlier this month, the physicians received permission from
a National Institutes of Health (NIH) review panel to become one of two groups
approved to attempt a genetic treatment for colon cancers.

   Before beginning, the La Jolla group still must receive Federal Drug
Administration approval, which doctors expect in the first quarter of next year.
The patients entered in the safety trial will be seriously ill people in whom
conventional treatments have failed to eradicate the disease, said Dr. Robert
Sobol of the cancer center. They will receive three injections of cells that
have been genetically altered to carry a gene that produces interleukin-2, a
substance doctors think may stimulate the immune system's killer T-cells to
attack the tumor.

   Each injection has about a teaspoon's volume, and patients will receive them
two weeks apart. The trial will be limited to nine people, and treatments will
be administered through Sharp Healthcare facilities here, Sobol said. About
50,000 Americans die of colon cancer or its spread each year, and 100,000 new
cases are reported annually.

   Only lung cancers kill more people. The procedures for administering this
test are significantly different from those in an instance earlier this year in
which the same physicians treated Clemma Hewitt, 53, the La Mesa woman who was
suffering from a large brain tumor.

   She died in October. The scientists believe they stand to learn much more
from this trial about how effective the gene transfers are at inhibiting cancer.
Because the brain treatment involved only one person who was receiving other
types of treatments at the same time, doctors had difficulty determining what
effect the genetic treatment actually may have had.

   The new trial involves only the one type of therapy, and the larger group
will yield a more accurate representation of how people might be expected to
respond to the injections. Hewitt's case represented an unusual application of
gene therapy because the doctors had received a special, "compassionate"
exemption to treat her after other treatments had failed.

   Her case established a precedent for compassionate use of gene therapy. The
patients considered will be those who have advanced cancer in which tumor cells
have spread to their lymphatic system, liver or lungs -- even though surgery has
removed most if not all of the tumor from the colon. Once the cancer has spread
extensively, it does not respond well to chemotherapy and is usually fatal,
Sobol said. The patients will be injected with cells that have been taken from
their own skin and then had a gene added that makes the interleukin-2. The
injection also will include cells that have been taken from each person's own
tumor and irradiated so they are no longer cancerous. Sobol and Royston hope
that the interleukin-2 together with the tumor cells will attract the immune
system's killer T-cells -- and perhaps other immune cells.

   Release of interleukin-2 into the bloodstream is a natural step in eliciting
killer T-cells against disease. Even though cancer cells are mutant and have
structures that the body should recognize as foreign and should reject, for some
reason the immune system usually does not, Royston said.

   They hope the stimulated immune system will have a better chance of
identifying and attacking the cancers, Royston said. If it works, doctors would
imagine using the treatment in earlier stages of colon tumor development to "mop
up" remaining cells after a tumor removal surgery, Royston said. They also would
hope to use it for advanced disease where the tumor had spread to other organs,
but they imagine it would likely be most effective in instances where only a
small amount of the tumor had infected the other organs, Sobol said. Doctors
already are considering patients for the trial, in part because it takes several
weeks to grow a large number of a patient's skin cells and add the new genes. At
the NIH review Dec. 2, Sobol reported that the genetic technique had shown some
success in experiments in mice. When the therapy was injected into 16 mice that
had colon tumors, the malignancy was eradicated in seven of them and slowed in
the other nine, Sobol said. When 34 mice were injected with the gene transfer,
then afterward injected with tumor cells, 22 developed no tumors, while 12 did,
he said. "These were very encouraging results," Sobol said. If the gene
treatments show no harmful side effects in the first patients, the doctors plan
to seek federal permission for a second test in which they alter doses in hopes
of actually slowing or eradicating the cancer. Any patient in the initial safety
test who appears to benefit will continue to receive more treatments as long as
his condition seems to improve. "It's our decision," Sobol said. Doctors at the
University of Michigan also are trying genetic intervention to treat colon
cancer that has spread to the liver.

   That strategy, used by Alfred Chang, involves injecting genetic material
directly into the liver tumor. The genetic material serves to "tag" the tumor so
that it might appear as a foreign body that the immune system would attack. The
NIH panel has to date approved 70 different experimental uses of gene therapy
for a range of conditions.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             925 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                          December 16, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; Section F; Page 4

LENGTH: 631 words

HEADLINE: Health Watch Study: Moderate drinking cuts heart attack risk

BYLINE: By Amanda Husted STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Drinking alcohol daily cuts heart attack risks in half by raising the amount
of "good" cholesterol in the body, a study found, adding to evidence that
moderate use of alcohol could be good for you.

   Drinkers have about 15 percent more high-density lipoproteins (HDL), the
"good" cholesterol, circulating in their blood, researchers said in today's New
England Journal of Medicine. HDL cleanses the blood vessels of fatty buildups,
scientists believe.

   Lead researcher J. Michael Gaziano of Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston
said his team believes "we have found the mechanism by which alcohol protects
against heart disease."

   The researchers asked 340 heart attack victims about their drinking habits,
then matched them with healthy people of the same age and sex. One to three
drinks per day halved the heart attack risk for drinkers compared to people who
never drink. Those who had a drink at least once a month reduced their heart
attack risk by 17 percent.

   While an editorial in the journal supported alcohol's protective effect
against heart disease, the researchers didn't recommend that nondrinkers imbibe
or that occasional drinkers start having a glass a day.

   Consuming too much alcohol can lead to devastating health effects, including
cirrhosis of the liver, high blood pressure and strokes, even heart disease.
Other studies have linked alcohol consumption to higher risks for colon and
breast cancers.

   Map of human DNA developed

   Scientists now have a comprehensive map of human DNA, the strands of material
that hold some 100,000 genes, researchers reported in today's issue of the
journal Nature.

   The map, which covers almost 90 percent of some 10,000 DNA strands stored in
laboratory refrigerators nationwide, eventually may help researchers find
disease-causing genes faster.

   The map doesn't pinpoint the 100,000 genes. Researchers must determine
roughly where the gene they are hunting lies in the DNA strands; then they'll be
able to use the map to discover which fragments of DNA in lab refrigerators
likely contain the gene they are seeking. They can then work with those
fragments to isolate the gene. Isolating a disease-causing gene is necessary
before developing a gene therapy to treat it.

   Officials at the National Center for Human Genome Research in Bethesda, Md.,
said the map should eliminate one of the steps that has slowed researchers
hunting genes. The report in Nature called the effort a "first-generation" map,
saying it probably contains some mistakes in its thousands of pages.

   4 contract HIV through surgery

   The virus that causes AIDS has been transmitted from one patient to four
others in a surgeon's office in Australia because of a breakdown in standard
infection-control practices, Australian health officials reported Wednesday.

   All five patients had minor surgery for removal of skin lesions on the same
day in November 1989, officials from the New South Wales Health Department
announced.

   The officials said one patient, a gay man who has since died of AIDS, was the
source of the infection to the other patients, all women with no known risk
factors for AIDS.

   Dr. Harold Jaffe, a senior AIDS official at the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, said in an interview that the Australian cases were believed to
be the first in which HIV was transmitted from patient to patient in a health
care setting.

   The surgeon, whose name and location were not disclosed, performed the
surgeries without assistance. Blood tests showed that he was not infected with
the virus, HIV.

   Although Australian health officials said they did not know precisely how the
virus was transmitted, they said an investigation had found that the doctor did
not sterilize all his equipment.

   -From staff, wire and published reports

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1993


                             926 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  December 15, 1993, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 607 words

HEADLINE: Dow drops 21.80 on inflation fears

BYLINE: Donna Rosato

BODY:

    Rising interest rates Tuesday pushed stock prices off record highs.

   The Dow Jones industrial average, which had set two straight highs Friday and
Monday, slid 21.80 points - just the second time the past 10 days the average
has fallen. The Dow transportation average, which also set a record Monday, fell
5.34 points to 1766.61.

   Among other indexes falling, the Standard & Poor's 500 dropped 2.64 points to
463.06 and the Nasdaq composite index sank 8.25 points (1%) to 751.47. Losers
led gainers 1,376 to 696 on the New York Stock Exchange.

   The Dow had climbed to records four times since Dec. 7, while other indexes
had faltered. Stronger economic growth propelled the Dow, which is made up of
cyclical stocks that benefit from a strong economy. The latest evidence:
November retail revenue climbed 0.4%. (Story, 1B).

   The report ignited inflationary fears, driving yields on 30-year Treasury
bonds to 6.28% from 6.23% Monday. Higher rates make investments in stocks less
attractive than fixed-income investments such as bonds. "The weak bond market
finally exerted some pressure on stocks," says Larry Rice, strategist at
Josephthal Lyon & Ross.

   The economy should continue to gain steam next year, pushing interest rates
even higher. That could set the stock market up for a correction early next
year, says Tony Dwyer, portfolio manager at Sherwood Securities.

   Tuesday, Dwyer cut his portfolio's investment in stocks to 50% from 60%,
raising its cash stake to 25% and keeping fixed income at 25%.

Market highlights: Initial public stock offerings were among the most active
issues, but unlike past IPOs that have soared their first day of trading, three
Tuesday IPOs stumbled.

   - Real estate investment trust Simon Property sold 37.75 million shares at $
22.25 a share. Simon closed at $ 22 1/2 (Spotlight, above). American Mobile
Satellite, which provides communications services via satellite, offered 8.5
million shares at $ 21 a share. It closed at $ 20.

   - Mexican media giant Grupo Televisa closed at $ 63 3/4 after offering 15.45
million shares at $ 64 a share.

   - Database software companies fell after Informix said it planned to cut
prices, raising concerns about industry profits. Informix fell 7/8 to $ 17 5/8;
Oracle Systems lost 1 1/2 to $ 34 1/2; Sybase dropped 1 3/4 to $ 38 1/4 and
Microsoft eased 1 3/8 to $ 80.

   - Anheuser-Busch dropped 1 1/8 to $ 49 1/4. The brewer says it plans to cut
beer prices to revive sales in its largest market, California, according to
Advertising Age.

   - Anthem Electronics slid 1 7/8 to $ 26 1/2. The semiconductor distributor
says fourth-quarter income would be below third-quarter results.

   - Shanghai Petrochemical dropped 4 1/4 to $ 43 7/8, giving up nearly all of
Monday's 5 1/4 point gain. Merrill Lynch cut its rating on the Chinese chemical
company to neutral from above average. Merrill says the stock has risen 50% the
past two weeks and may be in for more profit-taking.

   - Paramount rose 3/4 to $ 81 1/8 after the media giant said it would put
itself up for sale. (Story 1B.) Also Tuesday, it reported second-quarter
earnings fell 5 cents its second quarter.

   - Vical surged 1 1/2 to $ 12 1/2. The biotechnology company signed an
agreement with Baxter International to develop Vical's gene therapy technology
for hemophilia treatment.

   - Electronics retailer Good Guys tumbled 2 to $ 11 3/4 on negative comments
by Goldman, Sachs.

   - Arvin Industries climbed 2 to $ 30 1/8 after Oppenheimer & Co. began
coverage of the auto-parts maker with a buy recommendation.

   - Golden West Financial gained 5/8 to $ 38 3/4. Salomon Bros. raised it to a
buy.


                             927 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   DECEMBER 14, 1993, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 580 words

HEADLINE: Study of Low-Cholesterol Types Determines It's All in the Genes

BYLINE: Charles Petit, Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:

    As the season of overeating rolls on, consider and envy the lucky few people
stuffing all the heavy cream, eggnog and well- marbled roast beef they want into
their faces while their arteries remain clean as whistles.

   A new Kaiser health plan study is shining a powerful light on the genetic
factors that bless those people with cholesterol levels that stay low and give
them few risks of heart disease, no matter what they eat.

   ''We wanted to know why some people eating traditional high-fat diets had
very low cholesterol. . . . These people get fat if they eat a lot, but their
arteries seem to stay clear,'' said Dr. Steven Snyder, a metabolism specialist
at Kaiser's South San Francisco medical center, and leader of a study that
relied mainly on patients and facilities in Oakland.

   The study's results, published in the November issue of the American Journal
of Medicine, provide no direct way as yet for most people to overindulge safely
on saturated fats and cholesterol- loaded foods.

   However, the results add to growing information about the biochemistry of
heart disease and clogged arteries and the genes that largely determine how the
body handles diet. Such knowledge could some day lead to medications, chemically
altered foods, or even gene therapies that would make more people almost immune
to heart disease.

   All people need some cholesterol, a vital ingredient in certain tissues, but
excessive amounts are correlated with buildup of deposits in the arteries to the
heart. The body can make cholesterol, but diets high in saturated fats, or
cholesterol itself, can push the blood level well past the safety point.

   The average American has a cholesterol count of more than 200. Although the
count has dropped by about 30 points since the 1950s, when bacon-and-egg
breakfasts and steak dinners were the ideal, doctors say levels under 160 are
needed to keep heart disease risk low.

   At the same time, for many years doctors have observed that about 1 percent
of the population has extremely low cholesterol counts of less than 130, and in
a few cases less than 100. This is so low that it is regarded as a medical
condition, called hypocholesterolemia.

   Many specialists assumed that many or most of them either had some underlying
liver disease or other ailment that altered blood chemistry, or ate very low fat
diets.

   A careful scrutiny of 200 East Bay residents in the past 10 years by Kaiser
Permanente doctors has now found that these people are generally healthy and eat
exactly like a matched group with more typical cholesterol levels. However, they
have clear differences in the precise chemical structures of certain blood fats
grouped under the name apolipoprotein E, or Apo E.

   The Apo E, it turns out, comes in three versions, controlled by the kinds of
genes people inherit from their parents. Doctors give them the names 2, 3 and 4.
The new study shows that people who have Apo E2 genes from both parents tend to
have the lowest cholesterol, those with a mix of 2s and 3s are in the middle,
and those with only Apo E4s are at the highest risk.

   Snyder said major victories over heart disease may beckon once medical
scientists understand exactly how Apo E and other related blood proteins and
fats work. ''One could easily look forward to some kind of gene therapy'' in the
next decade or so, he said.

   But in the meantime, the best way remains to lay off the fat and cholesterol,
and load up on grains, fruits, and vegetables.


LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1993


                             928 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   December 14, 1993, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 783 words

HEADLINE: Tenacious gene team behind colon cancer breakthrough

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Who could have known in the 1970s, when Richard Kolodner began to study how
bacteria correct genetic errors in their cells, that such work would lead to
this month's discovery of a colon cancer gene?

   That's the beauty of basic science. No one knows what breakthroughs will come
from research conducted for research's sake - experiments with no goal except to
answer fundamental questions in biology.

   Kolodner's efforts were devoted only to understanding a piece in a big
research puzzle called genetic recombination - the ability of cells to compare
copies of genes.

   "I gradually worked through different parts of the project over the years,"
says Kolodner, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston. In 1991 and 1992, he says,
"we isolated two yeast genes that have a cellular spell-checking function. Then
I became intrigued with finding a similar human gene because I thought it might
be involved in human disease."

   Kolodner, who then collaborated with Richard Fishell, University of Vermont,
says the yeast genes repair genetic errors that occur as copies of genes are
made during cell division.

   Knowing from experience as a basic scientist that nature rarely reinvents the
wheel, Kolodner deduced that humans must have a similar gene. At the same time,
a team led by Bert Vogelstein, The Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Baltimore,
arrived at the same conclusion. Both groups found the human gene, which when
mutated, leads to colon cancer.

   "It would have been hard 10 years ago to explain how the correction of
genetic errors in bacteria was going to be important in deciding who will have
colon cancer," says Harold Varmus, director, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Md.

   "This is a prime example of how curiosity-driven research leads to an
incredibly important discovery that's going to change the way medicine is
practiced," says Varmus, who shared a Nobel Prize in 1989 for fundamental
research on cancer genes.

   With this colon cancer gene identified, scientists can develop a test to
determine who is a carrier.

   Carriers can then undergo regular check-ups for early detection. Because
colon cancer is curable when detected early, millions of lives may be saved,
says Francis Collins, director of the National Center for Human Genome Research
at NIH.

   "This really emphasizes the value of funding basic research and shows that
there is a big payoff for clinical medicine," says Collins, who as a basic
scientist has co-discovered genes for cystic fibrosis, neurofibromatosis and one
involved in leukemia.

   NIH, which funded Kolodner's research, is spending $ 5.6 billion of its $
10.3 billion budget this year on basic science. That money permits scientists to
explore a tremendous variety of basic questions, such as how genetic errors are
fixed in bacteria or how wings develop on a fruit fly.

   Indeed, fruit fly research and bacterial genetics, sometimes criticized by
Congress as arcane, have laid the foundation for modern human genetics, and
paved the way for new gene discoveries and a future in which society will
someday take gene therapy for granted.

   But, says Varmus, the public rarely hears about the years of lab work on
basic research questions, and he laments that headlines are usually only
generated when medical doctors can make use of a discovery.

   "The way NIH has made an investment in basic research, on the premise that it
would ultimately pay off and benefit human health, is something people and
Congress probably don't appreciate," says Varmus. "What's missed is the huge
amount of iceberg below the water - the investment in fundamental science that
ultimately pays off with a spectacular announcement."

    Anatomy of a gene The cell's nucleus contains genetic material, which
consists of two tightly coiled strands of DNA known as the double helix. These
strands would stretch about 6 feet long if uncoiled; they comprise the 50,000 to
100,000 genes that define a human being.

    The alphabet of genes The most fundamental units of DNA are called
nucleotide bases. There are four nucleotides, and they are always paired: G with
C, A with T. The order in which the pairs are arranged determines the gene's
function. These sequences can be hundreds to millions of pairs long. A mistake,
or disruption, in the sequence is commonly called a mutation.

    Correcting 'spelling' errors in the gene As part of ordinary cell division,
the DNA segment begins to make an exact copy of itself. At this time, "spelling
errors" in the genetics code can occur. A repair gene, called MSH2, acts like a
spell checker on a computer. After an error is detected, the gene makes a repair
protein to "erase" the G and insert the correct letter for the pair.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, color, Julie Stacey, USA TODAY, Source: USA TODAY Research
(Diagram); PHOTO, color, Julia Malakie, AP


                             929 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    December 9, 1993, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1425 words

HEADLINE: Hospitals expect merger to save millions;
MGH, Brigham super-hospital deal would change face of Boston medical
establishment

BYLINE: By Richard A. Knox, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Announcing a historic merger between the two flagships of the Boston
teaching hospital fleet, the chiefs of Massachusetts General and Brigham and
Women's hospitals declared yesterday they intend to achieve huge savings in the
new super-hospital's combined $ 1.2 billion operating budget.

   "Put it this way," said Dr. J. Robert Buchanan, general director of
Massachusetts General Hospital. "We're pretty sure we've got to save 20 percent
at minimum, and our ambitions go well beyond that."

   A 20 percent reduction would mean annual savings of $ 240 million, a goal
Buchanan said could be reached "within two or three years" through
administrative consolidations. Officials declined to predict what kind of
layoffs this might entail among the hospitals' combined staffs of 17,500.

   Trustees of the two Harvard-affiliated teaching hospitals yesterday morning
approved a formal letter of intent to merge the venerable institutions, which
have a combined history of nearly four centuries. The merger requires the
approval of Attorney General Scott Harshbarger, who is required to examine
whether the combination would stifle competition.

   Officials at the two hospitals and other leaders of Boston's medical
establishment said the merger, which came as a surprise even to most insiders,
inaugurates a new phase in the city's long medical history. It is expected to
touch off a feverish new round of combinations among major in-town institutions
and surrounding community hospitals.

   "This really is the giant domino that will rapidly accelerate the pace of
change in the whole system," said Stephen J. Hegarty, president of the
Massachusetts Hospital Association.

   "I consider this the first in a series of constructive rearrangements" among
Boston hospitals, agreed Dr. Daniel C. Tosteson, dean of Harvard Medical School.
Asked how many hospitals would be left in three or four years, Tosteson shrugged
and answered in French, "Je ne sais pas I don't know."

   James W. Segel, an attorney who chairs a mayoral task force on the future of
Boston City Hospital, said the MGH-Brigham merger "affects every hospital in
Boston, especially Boston City Hospital, which is a high-cost institution."

   Saying that "the status quo is not viable" for BCH, Segel said "possibly
drastic changes" will be needed for the city hospital to survive, such as
"changes in governance and possibly talks with other hospitals."

   The new institution, which is still unnamed, will achieve savings initially
from consolidating management and purchasing functions, officials said. This
will occur rapidly, they said, with longer-term economies coming from combining
clinical services that are currently duplicated at the two institutions.

   While officials insisted that the two hospitals will become one institution,
they also said patients would not perceive much difference. "There will be two
hospitals," said H. Richard Nesson, the Brigham's chief executive officer.  "For
the patient requiring service, they will look the same, they will be staffed by
the same people, there will be the same familiar entities. The hospitals won't
change names."

   Nesson and Buchanan said it was too early to discuss who would head the new
institution. Dr. Samuel Thier, president of Brandeis University, said last night
that he will announce to his faculty today his intention to take Buchanan's job
as general director of MGH when Buchanan retires next June.

   The two hospitals' chief executives "will carry on" for the time being,
Nesson said, while the joined board will be cochaired by John MacArthur and
Ferdinand Colloredo-Mansfeld, who currently chair the Brigham and MGH boards,
respectively.

   Beyond mergers, the new super-hospital may well get into the health insurance
business sometime in the future. Officials at the two institutions said they are
interested in the possibility of becoming a new type of institution combining
the health insurance functions of health maintenance organizations with the
service-delivery functions of "vertically integrated" hospital and physician
networks.

   While these hospitals have been part of the growing trend toward such
"network building," their directors said they intend to move rapidly to develop
extensive new relationships with other hospitals and doctors.

   The strategy reminded some of developments in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area,
northern California and Detroit. Minneapolis, like Massachusetts an area of high
enrollment in HMOs and other managed-care health plans, has seen drastic
consolidation of hospital and doctor groups into a few huge "provider systems,"
which negotiate with several large health care purchasers.

   Principals in the intensive, five-month negotiations that led to the
Brigham-MGH marriage said the deal was driven by severe financial pressures on
teaching hospitals, excess capacity in the Boston-area market for hospitals and
the certain prospect of mutually damaging competition.

   "We recognize one thing. With or without merger, there would be some pain in
downsizing," Buchanan said.

   Tosteson pointed out in an interview that the Boston region, with its
nationally unique dependence on teaching hospitals, hospitalizes people at four
times the rate of the Kaiser-Permanente Health Plan of Northern California.

   The Harvard medical dean, who precipitated the merger by convening
discussions among five leading Harvard teaching hospitals earlier this year,
said Boston hospitals "would be in big trouble" if they didn't pursue such
consolidations.

   The alternative to merging, Buchanan and others said, was a no-holds-barred
competition for patients that would damage both institutions, which are not only
the region's largest but, financially, its strongest.

   "These institutions are quite able to compete with one another and to damage
one another," Buchanan said at a press conference announcing the merger. "We
want to demonstrate the good we can do rather than just fighting with one
another."

   Nesson said the merger "isn't primarily about cost reduction. It's about how
we can better serve the community and serve our mission. . . . It's about how we
can preserve the vital role of academic health centers as the intellectual
center of our health care system."

   However, Nesson also said the merger "will allow us to rationalize, to
consolidate, not duplicate."

   Dr. Eugene Braunwald, the Brigham's physician in chief, pointed out that
teaching hospitals face tough times as the health care system moves to elevate
primary care and deemphasizes specialty and subspecialty care - the mainstay of
teaching hospital staffs.

   "We have an overabundance of specialists nationally - particularly in
Boston," Braunwald said. "Merged programs should be able to shrink, yet maintain
high-quality care." He said the combined institution will also be better able to
compete for research funds to do "large, expensive projects," such as gene
therapy and molecular treatments for cancer.

   "This is the most exciting day of my professional life," Braunwald said.

   Brigham and Massachusetts General officials ducked questions of what clinical
services either institution might one day cede to the other - for instance,
whether there might be a single cardiac surgery unit, a joint department of
medicine, or only one bone marrow transplant unit.

   Asked if MGH would proceed with its plan to launch a new obstetrical unit,
which has been widely criticized as unnecessary in a city where other birthing
units, including the Brigham's, have falling caseloads, Buchanan replied: "Plans
to open an obstetrical unit are not changed as of this date."

   Nesson said he couldn't predict how soon the hospitals would begin to merge
departments or eliminate services. But he said that "everything is on the table"
and insisted that the merger will be more than skin-deep. "This isn't some
temporary joint venture to see if we like it," he said in an interview.

   The hospitals' leaders acknowledged that merging the two institutions into
one will be a lengthy and difficult process. "Most mergers don't work," said
Harvard Business School dean MacArthur, chairman of the Brigham and Women's
board, who nudged the two institutions into merger discussions.

   "But if anything was going to happen in Boston, these two institutions had to
be involved," MacArthur added in an interview. "This isn't aimed to drive anyone
out of business but to get at least part of the thing moving so others would
follow. If we're just sitting here with two merged hospitals five years from
now, that wouldn't be much of an achievement."

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1993


                             930 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1993 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                     December 6, 1993, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 680 words

HEADLINE: GENE-INJECTION TESTS SHOWING PROMISE IN FIGHT AGAINST CANCER

BYLINE: By LAURA BEIL, Dallas Morning News

BODY:

    A new method of cancer treatment that provokes the body's immune system into
attacking tumors appears promising in early tests.

   For the experiments, researchers injected a new gene into the cancer cells of
five patients with malignant melanoma. The gene contains the instructions for
making a molecule that acts like a beacon to get the attention of the cells of
the immune system.

   "It's kind of like drawing bees to honey," said Gary Nabel, a scientist at
the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor and lead author of the study.

   In this early experiment, Nabel and his colleagues weren't trying to rid the
patients of their cancer. They were only looking to see whether the gene
functioned inside the cell, and if the therapy caused any side effects. On those
two counts, Nabel said, the experiment was successful.

   The idea behind the therapy is to get the immune system to target the tumors
but leave other cells untouched. The molecule that Nabel uses is the same one
that triggers the rejection of transplanted organs.

   "The immune system uses this molecule to discriminate self from non-self,"
said Nabel, whose study appeared last week in the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences.

   One of the reasons tumors grow uncontrollably is that the immune system,
which normally protects against invasive cells, is somehow paralyzed when it
comes to cancer cells. Nabel is trying to change the cancer cells so that the
immune system will recognize them.

   "We've tried to stimulate the process of organ rejection, but within the
confines of the tumor," he said.

   Nabel is one of the scientists doing early research on gene therapy, an
experimental technique to transfer new genes into people's cells. People are
born with about 100,000 genes, which are, in a sense, like the computer program
that runs the body. The still experimental technique of gene therapy tries to
add new programming to the system.

   Most gene therapy experiments use disarmed viruses to slip genes into cells.
Viruses are a likely courier because they inject genetic material into cells for
a living.

   However, Nabel is one of a few scientists using a different method. He gets a
gene made up of DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, into a cell by surrounding it
with special fatty bubbles called liposomes. These molecules are positively
charged, and they cling to DNA because it has a negatively charged backbone.
The gene, packaged in the liposomes, is injected directly into the tumor cells.

   Nabel said the liposome method eliminates one concern about gene therapy:
that a virus might somehow reactivate itself and start haphazardly infecting
tissues in the body.

   "Even when you're very good at crippling viruses, there are often ways that
small amounts of virus can leak through," he said.

   "I think we've taken a major step forward," he said.

   Since the experiment demonstrated the cancer-fighting strategy is at least
possible, other researchers will probably start duplicating the experiment and
refining the method, said Albert Deisseroth, chief of hematology at the
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston. Deisseroth is
working on experiments using gene therapy in treating ovarian cancer.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1993


                             931 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                            December 5, 1993, Sunday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Section A; Page 2

LENGTH: 703 words

HEADLINE: Q & A on the News

BODY:

   Do you have a question about the news - local, national or international?
Betty Parham with Gerrie Ferris will try to get an answer for you. Call 222-2002
on a Touch-Tone phone and follow the instructions.

   Q: Please explain Volume 1, Chapter 12, Page 5 of the North American Free
Trade Agreement, which says, "Each party shall within two years of NAFTA . . .
eliminate any citizenship and permanent residency requirements." What exactly
does this mean?

   -Elizabeth Ramsey, Epworth, Ga.

   A: That section is from NAFTA's land transportation chapter, which deals with
people driving trucks or other delivery vehicles across the borders. It has
nothing to do with illegal aliens or residency requirements.

   Its purpose is to open up the trucking markets. For instance, before NAFTA
takes effect, a Mexican trucker could deliver a load to San Diego, but he
couldn't pick up a load in San Diego and take it to Los Angeles or back to
Mexico. That's because in order to get the necessary licenses to pick up and
convey goods here, he must have residency or, in some cases, citizenship.

   Over two years, these residency and citizenship requirements will be lifted
and he will be able to get the licenses and operate freely, a NAFTA spokesman
said.

   Q: I want to know about a federal project costing billions of dollars called
the genome project. What exactly is it? And what good will it do the public?

   -James Kreil, Doraville

   A: The Human Genome Project is a $ 3 billion, 20-year government effort whose
aim is nothing less than to decipher the entire human genetic code. Although
it's been called "one of the major scientific undertakings of the 20th century,"
it, along with the superconducting supercollider, recently was suggested as a
possibility for being thrown on the trash heap.

   Five years into the project, the genes that cause nearly 5,000 genetically
based diseases have been located. Genetic testing is available for at least 250
disorders, and gene therapies to replace defective genes with "normal" ones are
being tested on people. And dozens of new drugs made through genetic engineering
have been created.

   But the project's critics cite, among other things, a fear of discrimination
against a new underclass based on genetic makeup. Who will control all that
genetic information about individuals? And what about privacy rights?

   It's been called "the civil rights issue of the next century."

   Congress is considering a DNA identification law that would formally restrict
access to data banks and provide standards for states to follow in DNA
collection and analysis.

   Q: Is the poinsettia plant poisonous?

   - Brad Schmidt, Alpharetta

   A: The Agriculture Department put out a pamphlet about 15 years ago that
erroneously said the poinsettia was poisoious and that one leaf could kill a
small child. Since then, the Christmas plant has been shown often with a skull
and crossbones, with many people thinking it's deadly.

   The fact is, it's not poisonous and never has been, according to Paul Thomas
of the University of Georgia Cooperative Extension Service. The most dangerous
thing about the plant is the sap, which can cause irritation if it gets in your
mouth or nose. But because the plant tastes absolutely awful, the chance of a
child or pet chewing it is slim to none.

   Q: I've heard radio commercials saying that for $ 30 an organization - I
believe it's the International Star Registry - will name a star after you. Is
this recognized by any scientific body or government agency?

   -Russell Moon, Norcross

   A: It's not recognized by the International Astronomical Union, which is the
only body authorized to name celestial objects, according to a spokesman at the
U.S. Naval Observatory. Figuring there are about 200 billion stars, at $ 30 a
pop this sounds like one of those classic "I wish I had thought of this first"
ideas.

   Q: How old a city is Jacksonville, Fla.?

   -Bernard Malcolm, Atlanta

   A: Pretty darn old when you consider that Europeans settled briefly in 1564 a
t Fort Caroline, an area between downtown and the beach. Those French Huguenots,
though, lasted only a year. The Spanish wiped them out, then moved down the road
to St. Augustine, the first permanent settlement.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1993


                             932 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                            December 5, 1993, Sunday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Section A; Page 2

LENGTH: 703 words

HEADLINE: Q & A on the News

BODY:

   Do you have a question about the news - local, national or international?
Betty Parham with Gerrie Ferris will try to get an answer for you. Call 222-2002
on a Touch-Tone phone and follow the instructions.

   Q: Please explain Volume 1, Chapter 12, Page 5 of the North American Free
Trade Agreement, which says, "Each party shall within two years of NAFTA . . .
eliminate any citizenship and permanent residency requirements." What exactly
does this mean?

   -Elizabeth Ramsey, Epworth, Ga.

   A: That section is from NAFTA's land transportation chapter, which deals with
people driving trucks or other delivery vehicles across the borders. It has
nothing to do with illegal aliens or residency requirements.

   Its purpose is to open up the trucking markets. For instance, before NAFTA
takes effect, a Mexican trucker could deliver a load to San Diego, but he
couldn't pick up a load in San Diego and take it to Los Angeles or back to
Mexico. That's because in order to get the necessary licenses to pick up and
convey goods here, he must have residency or, in some cases, citizenship.

   Over two years, these residency and citizenship requirements will be lifted
and he will be able to get the licenses and operate freely, a NAFTA spokesman
said.

   Q: I want to know about a federal project costing billions of dollars called
the genome project. What exactly is it? And what good will it do the public?

   -James Kreil, Doraville

   A: The Human Genome Project is a $ 3 billion, 20-year government effort whose
aim is nothing less than to decipher the entire human genetic code. Although
it's been called "one of the major scientific undertakings of the 20th century,"
it, along with the superconducting supercollider, recently was suggested as a
possibility for being thrown on the trash heap.

   Five years into the project, the genes that cause nearly 5,000 genetically
based diseases have been located. Genetic testing is available for at least 250
disorders, and gene therapies to replace defective genes with "normal" ones are
being tested on people. And dozens of new drugs made through genetic engineering
have been created.

   But the project's critics cite, among other things, a fear of discrimination
against a new underclass based on genetic makeup. Who will control all that
genetic information about individuals? And what about privacy rights?

   It's been called "the civil rights issue of the next century."

   Congress is considering a DNA identification law that would formally restrict
access to data banks and provide standards for states to follow in DNA
collection and analysis.

   Q: Is the poinsettia plant poisonous?

   - Brad Schmidt, Alpharetta

   A: The Agriculture Department put out a pamphlet about 15 years ago that
erroneously said the poinsettia was poisoious and that one leaf could kill a
small child. Since then, the Christmas plant has been shown often with a skull
and crossbones, with many people thinking it's deadly.

   The fact is, it's not poisonous and never has been, according to Paul Thomas
of the University of Georgia Cooperative Extension Service. The most dangerous
thing about the plant is the sap, which can cause irritation if it gets in your
mouth or nose. But because the plant tastes absolutely awful, the chance of a
child or pet chewing it is slim to none.

   Q: I've heard radio commercials saying that for $ 30 an organization - I
believe it's the International Star Registry - will name a star after you. Is
this recognized by any scientific body or government agency?

   -Russell Moon, Norcross

   A: It's not recognized by the International Astronomical Union, which is the
only body authorized to name celestial objects, according to a spokesman at the
U.S. Naval Observatory. Figuring there are about 200 billion stars, at $ 30 a
pop this sounds like one of those classic "I wish I had thought of this first"
ideas.

   Q: How old a city is Jacksonville, Fla.?

   -Bernard Malcolm, Atlanta

   A: Pretty darn old when you consider that Europeans settled briefly in 1564 a
t Fort Caroline, an area between downtown and the beach. Those French Huguenots,
though, lasted only a year. The Spanish wiped them out, then moved down the road
to St. Augustine, the first permanent settlement.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1993


                             933 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 December 5, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Page 42; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1221 words

HEADLINE: METHOD AND MADNESS;
The Dinosaur Within

BYLINE: By Nicholas Wade

BODY:

   'To my mind, it is likely that what we now understand as the mass media will
be gone within 10 years. Vanished without a trace."

   That's the novelist Michael Crichton writing in the current issue of Wired, a
magazine that hopes to usher in the digital revolution with as clean a sweep as
the journal Iskra did the Russian.

    "The next great American institution to find itself obsolete and outdated,"
he suspects, will be "The New York Times and the commercial networks."

   Since those who deny they could ever become dinosaurs invite just such a
metamorphosis, Crichton makes a wife-beating charge that is hard to answer. The
Savonarola role may seem surprising from so entertaining a novelist. Most
readers think of him as the science fiction writer who added "Andromeda strain"
to the language as a generic term for any sinister plague. But his two most
recent books have taken a different turn; woven into them is a stern social
commentary.

   In "Jurassic Park" he suggests how scientists can liberate mayhem from
genetic material if left to play unsupervised. A forceful moral of "Rising Sun"
is that America will pay dearly for having yielded its technological supremacy
to Japan.

   At least the first message is well timed. Week by week, a whirlwind of
genetic advances displays the unlimited reach of the tools now at molecular
biologists' disposal. The secret of life is out: there is no secret, no black
box that protects the biological machinery from manipulation nor a soul
undefilable in the chemist's retorts.

   To biologists who have to plead for the permission of half a dozen committees
for each new experiment in human genetic therapy, it's the untrammeled freedom
of the "Jurassic Park" dinosaur makers that sounds too good to be true. Probably
Washington will never completely relax its grip on so protean a technology. Yet
even with a full apparatus of committees and regulations, control is far from
assured.

   Major technologies have been approved or accepted before their drawbacks
became apparent. From drugs to guns to automobiles liable to accident, things
that people want can prove hard to constrain. And the new biotechnology will
probably be accessible to small operators throughout the world, to anyone able
to buy a few instruments and reagents and to tap into the fast-growing DNA data
bases. If the hope of not creating anything foolish rests in the end on human
wisdom, the dinosaurs of "Jurassic Park" may have the last laugh.

   In "Rising Sun," Crichton presents a different sort of spine-tingler, the
exertion of Japanese economic and political power over a decadent and declining
America. This prospect looks distinctly less likely than it did three or four
years ago, now that Japan is in the throes of a painful recession, companies
likeHitachi are cutting back their research budgets and Fujitsu's 20-year
struggle to emulate I.B.M. has succeeded only too well.

   But these are fleeting ripples on a deeper tide, the steady passage of the
world's center of economic gravity from mid-Atlantic to mid-Pacific. Crichton
sides with those who believe Japan's style of capitalism differs from that of
Western democracies and may prove superior.

   "Rising Sun" deftly presents this theme through a plot centered on an
American call girl, addicted to bizarre sex, who is murdered at the opening
party of a Japanese corporate building in Los Angeles. Through the mouth of a
Japanophile detective, John Connor, Crichton proposes the meta-Clausewitzian
thesis that Japan views business as the extension of war by other means.

   Connor expresses puzzlement at America's passive response to so serious a
challenge. The Japanese, he says, see the United States as "a country that's in
deep trouble. That's filled with strange individualistic people who talk
constantly. Who confront each other constantly. Who argue all the time. People
who aren't well educated, who don't know much about the world, who get their
information from television. People who don't work very hard, who tolerate
violence and drug use and who don't seem to object to it. The Japanese have
billions of dollars invested in this peculiar land and they would like a decent
return on their investment."

   Much of the specific evidence of American economic folly cited in "Rising
Sun" is ill founded. True, Americans sold a lot of buildings to Japanese
companies, but it was at the peak of the commercial real-estate market, which
promptly collapsed. Even Mitsubishi's share of Rockefeller Center is probably
now worth less than the company paid in 1989. Japan's threatening foray into the
three linked markets of computers, computer chips and the machines that make the
chips has been blunted, at least for the moment.

   Even American auto makers, having tried everything else to fight off Toyota,
Nissan and Honda, have fallen back on the desperate expedient of making better
cars.

   But if Crichton overinterpreted certain business trends, he was on surer
ground in supporting the revisionist theory of Japanese polity. The revisionists
hold that though Japan has the outward appearance of a Western democracy, its
parliament and prime minister are fronts for the real power brokers, a coterie
of elite bureaucrats in alliance with business and political factions.

   This mandarinate, in the revisionist view, has tilted the Japanese economy
toward business interests at the consumer's expense. Citizens are forced to save
and businesses are induced to favor long-term investment and market share over
quick profits. Ordinary Japanese have no redress, since the courts are tilted,
the parliament rigged and the press controlled.

   Set in this special political framework, the revisionists note, Japan's
economy works with a fierce efficiency denied to real democracies. Western
economic advisers can preach economic virtue, but cannot force companies to
invest, consumers to save or governments to live within their means. Japan's
mandarin-managers can insure all these things, gaining a deep strategic
advantage for their economy.

   The revisionists were for long repudiated by Japan and lumped in with
protectionists as "Japan bashers" by Japan's influential lobbyists in America.
But this August an extraordinary thing happened: the Liberal Democratic Party
lost its 38-year monopoly of power, and overnight the revisionists' analysis
became common wisdom. Even the new prime minister, Morihiro Hosokawa, criticized
Japan's narrow-minded pursuit of economic gain and the collusive institutions
that excluded outsiders and worked against the interests of Japanese consumers.

   After its current recession, Japan will still be a formidable economic
competitor, and the United States will still be burdened with poor education,
low savings, high crime and rampant violence. And Crichton's ant-and-grasshopper
fable may again make convincing reading.

   Science-fiction writers have often imagined the future with startling
success. Jules Verne foresaw the submarine and the spaceship. Arthur C. Clarke
forecast the communications satellite. But Crichton uses science as the stuff
for writing of a different genre. At heart he's a moralist. The hostile forces
he portrays are not implacable aliens; they emanate from the failings he sees in
ourselves.

   Unfortunately, the aliens, on the whole, would be easier to cope with.

GRAPHIC: Drawing

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1993


                             934 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      December 5, 1993 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: ARTS & LIVING; Pg. 7H

LENGTH: 1137 words

HEADLINE: A SCIENTIST RIGHT DOWN TO HIS LAST GENE

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA; NEW YORK TIMES

BODY:

   Dr. Francis S. Collins, the new director of the National Center for Human
Genome Research, is a man of exuberant enthusiasm.

   His parents are "wonderful, fascinating," people. His scientific colleagues
are "some of the most wonderful, smartest people in the world." The missionary
doctors he worked with while doing charity work in Nigeria are "remarkable
people," who have become his lifelong friends.

   And the Human Genome Project itself? Collins says this international effort
to map and identify every one of the 100,000 human genes, to determine the exact
sequence of the three billion nucleotides that form the building blocks of human
DNA, is "the most important and the most significant project that humankind has
ever mounted."

   Collins works very hard all the time, he said, describing himself as "very
intense," the very features that can grate on less successful colleagues. Yet in
the field of molecular genetics, where competition can be fierce and gushing
frowned upon, Collins wins the same sort of accolades from others that he
bestows upon them.

   A 43-year-old scientist who shot up through the ranks, going from being
virtually unknown to world famous in the last five years, he seems to have made
only friends as his reputation grew.

   "To begin with, he is a good person," said Dr. W. French Anderson, who
directs research on gene therapy at the University of Southern California in Los
Angeles. Collins, he added, "is a fine human being in addition to being very
intelligent and a good manager and a good scientist."

   Dr. David Housman, a molecular geneticist at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology in Cambridge, Mass., said that Collins had more than proved himself
as a researcher. He showed vision in pursuing scientific methods that led he and
his collaborators to find three important genes - for cystic fibrosis,
neurofibromatosis and Huntington's disease - when others said the effort was
almost doomed to failure.

   Dr. Jane Fountain, a molecular geneticist at the University of Southern
California who was a graduate student of Collins' in 1985, "when he was a
virtual unknown," said Collins is "extremely bright, very easy to get along
with, very organized and very politically savvy." She said he "has always
approached science with a passion for what he's doing, not with an attitude of
I'm going to get there first."

   Collins suggested that it was his unusual upbringing that imparted such a
thirst for knowledge. His father has a Ph.D. in English, but has wide-ranging
interests, including collecting folk music and staging medieval plays. His
mother is a playwright.

   His parents raised sheep on a farm in rural Virginia. "It was a hard life,"
he said, and his mother, distrusting the education provided in the rural schools
and "not about to relegate the early learning of her sons" to them, decided to
teach her four sons at home.

   "It was a bit disorganized," Collins said. "I'm sure it would not have been
deemed appropriate by today's standards." The Collins boys and their mother
would explore a topic, like the origins of words, for a week or two, doing
nothing else, then move on to another subject, like mathematics. As a result,
Collins said, he grew up with an unquenchable curiosity and love of learning.

   When Collins entered high school, in Staunton, Va., he discovered chemistry.
He ended up majoring in chemistry at the University of Virginia and then earning
a Ph.D. in physical chemistry at Yale University, using theory and mathematics
to discover the behavior of atoms and molecules.

   But he realized that the real excitement in science was in molecular biology.

   Because he was drawn to clinical medicine as well as to laboratory work, he
decided to go to medical school at the University of North Carolina and become a
doctor.

   Although it set him back years, Collins said he did the right thing.
"Research is so unpredictable," he said. "There are periods when nothing works
and all your experiments are a disaster and all your hypotheses are wrong." But
during those periods he can care for patients and get a different kind of
satisfaction as well as a new perspective on what is important and why, he said.

   When Collins began research at the University of Michigan, he was 35 and
nervous - panicked, he said, wondering if he was really any good, whether he was
going to make any sort of contribution in this intensely competitive field. But
when, a few years later, he was part of a team that found the cystic fibrosis
gene, his reputation was made.

   Now he exudes confidence, even though at times, he says, the responsibilities
of his job still seem intimidating.

   He is a deeply religious man who is not afraid to talk about his faith, even
though, he says, it makes some scientists uneasy. "They suspect that I'm really
here because I'm on a crusade," he said. "But there is no conflict between being
an absolutely rigorous scientist and being a person of faith."

   Collins, who was not raised with any religious training, said he became a
Christian at age 27, when he was an intern in medical school. "I came at this
from a position of ignorance," he said. "I came at it from an intellectual point
of view."

   He is "sort of a non-denominational type," and has been, at various times, a
Lutheran, a Baptist and a Presbyterian. He is looking for a church to join in
Washington.

   Four years ago, Collins and his daughter Margaret, who had just completed her
freshman year in college, went to Nigeria for a summer to work with missionary
doctors.

   "I had never been to a Third World country," Collins said, adding that he and
his daughter were deeply moved by their experience. He said he felt spoiled by
life in the United States when he saw the severe illnesses and lack of medical
facilities in this impoverished country. He also was touched by his ability to
help.

   Now, as head of the Human Genome Project, Collins said he was working
100-hour weeks, recruiting scientists to work at the National Institutes of
Health in Bethesda, Md., collaborating with researchers who are closing in on
the breast cancer gene, going to scientific meetings, trying to establish a new
institute in the NIH to focus on genome research and administering the Human
Genome Project.

   Once they have found all the genes in the human body and learned their
genetic sequences, scientists will have the blueprint, an instruction book, for
people, he says. Even now, with the work in its early stages, advances have
greatly speeded up the search for genes that cause hereditary diseases.

   Collins predicts that within 10 years everyone will have the opportunity to
find out his or her own genetic risks, to know if cancer or heart attacks or
diabetes or Alzheimer's disease, for example, lie in the future.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY: NEW YORK TIMES ; Dr. Francis S. Collins with a chart of the
human genome at the National Institutes of Health.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1993


                             935 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1079 words

HEADLINE: Market Place;
The Allure of New Biotechnology Stocks

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER,  Special to The New York Times

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Dec. 2

BODY:

   Has the window for biotech stocks opened? The answer from Wall Street is a
qualified yes.

   Analysts speak of a window being open whenever biotechnology companies, short
on wonder products but thirsty for research dollars, can satisfy their
persistent cash needs through stock issues to the public. The window tends to
open and shut with unnerving irregularity and uneven results for investors.

    Still, biotechnology stocks are some of the most enticing investments of the
modern age -- updating the allure of the wonder drugs of the 1950's with the
latest in such techniques as molecular modeling, in which drugs are designed on
a computer, and gene- splicing, in which fabricated genes instruct simple
organisms to produce desired proteins.
 Some investors betting on the right biotechnology stock have won big when the
biotech window opened previously, with such equities as Amgen, Biogen and
Chiron.

   "I don't think there's any question that the window has opened, at least
partially," James McCamant, publisher of the Medical Technology Stock Letter,
said.

   Other analysts are more cautious. Jeffrey Casdin, an analyst with Oppenheimer
& Company, said: "It's a little premature to say the window is opening. It's
unfolding the right way, but I don't think it's been broad enough and the
participation is limited," to relatively few institutional investors.

   And a word of warning for any individual investor thinking of jumping through
the window. "Many of these deals are successful at persuading people to come in
early and participate at a stage I can only call 'hype, hope and prayer,' "
Viren Mehta, an analyst with Mehta & Isaly, said.

   The warning is justified. Public investors lost more than $10 billion on
biotech stocks, most of it in the first six months of this year. In addition,
analysts point out, the continuing volatility of these stocks means one need not
buy at the initial offering to own the stock at an attractive price.

   In the first quarter, clinical, and therefore investor, disappointments with
Synergen and Centacor's drugs to treat septic shock, a deadly systemic bacterial
infection, and slowing growth at Amgen, wiped away a third of the value, as a
group, of publicly held biotech companies.

   Nonetheless, four biotech companies filed initial public offerings in
November:

   *Incyte Pharmaceuticals Inc., $15 million.

   *Arris Pharmaceuticals Inc., $17.5 million.

   *Human Genome Sciences Inc., $27 million.

   *Viagene Inc., at least $27.5 million.

   Three of the deals -- Incyte, Arris and Human Genome -- have already been
completed. Analysts say the offerings are a natural follow-up to a rebound in
the shares of existing publicly traded biotech companies.

   Analysts also say these four deals test the waters for a new round of public
biotech financing, and they are watching them closely.

   While health care reform remains a worry, what the market really dreads is
uncertainty, so the recent publication of the Clinton health care proposals
provided some relief, said Mr. McCamant of Medical Technology Stock Letter.

   Mr. Mehta, the analyst, said that the initial move into existing biotech
stocks came about because the group had remained at a low while the Dow Jones
industrial average had reached new highs. "Everyone had been sitting on the
sidelines," Mr. Mehta said, "waiting to see if the bottom had been reached, so
when a few people put in $10 million to $20 million, that was enough" to lift
the entire group .

   A key ingredient was two large investments by major pharmaceutical companies
in joint projects. The first was an agreement in which Boehringer Mannheim of
Germany invested up to $206 million in Protein Design Labs, a company that has
been working in antibody engineering for several years. But the second
investment, worth $125 million over several years, was paid by SmithKline
Beecham to Human Genome.

   Human Genome is developing techniques for the sequencing of human genes, a
method for possibly identifying the genes that play a role in disease. The
company sold 2.25 million shares at $12 a share today.

   The investments "reinforced a feeling that not only is the technology moving
in the right direction, but that there are people willing to pay for it," Mr.
Mehta said.

   Human Genome's offering follows that of Incyte, which is also a
gene-sequencing company. Incyte sold 2 million shares at $7.50 a share on Nov.
4.

   The larger, and now profitable, biotech companies are now themselves
investing in and lending credibility to some of the start-ups.

   For example, Chiron last month entered into a joint development agreement
with Viagene, one of several companies pursuing gene therapy. Viagene aims to
treat diseases like cystic fibrosis by replacing deficient genes in the body.

   The Chiron-Viagene agreement is for targeting cancer treatments. Chiron made
investments and commitments that analysts estimate at about $74 million.
Simultaneously, Viagene announced an initial public offering of 2.5 million
shares at $11 to $13 a share.

   "Viagene has been struggling for years, and Chiron has been very quietly but
aggressively investing in gene therapy," Mr. Casdin of Oppenheimer said. "Chiron
has endorsed Viagene with that investment."

   Similarly, Arris, a company using computer modeling to design new drugs, has
benefited from a previous private investment by Amgen; Arris recently sold 2.5
million shares priced at $7 a share.

   In addition to endorsements from larger companies, investors had been
reassured by the performance of a number of secondary offerings and private
placements of biotech stocks over the last nine months, Mr. Casdin said. Of 25
such offerings, only four had subsequently declined, and the average gain was 39
percent, he said.

   The limited participation of institutional investors, however, means that
companies going public at this time face a buyers' market, in which institutions
are likely to seek and receive significant discounts from the price in the
prospectus, analysts say.

   Mark Simon, an analyst with Robertson, Stephens & Company, said, "We would
not expect the market to fully open until investors can perceive significant
revenues from new biotech products."

   The likely candidates are Chiron's Betaseron, for multiple sclerosis, and
Genentech's Pulmozyme, for cystic fibrosis, both of which were approved earlier
this year. Mr. Simon estimates both will begin contributing significantly to
their makers' earnings in the second half of 1994.

GRAPHIC: Chart: "Opening the Biotech Window"

    Sketches of four biotechnology companies that are selling stock to the
public for the first time.

INCYTE PHARMACEUTICALS, Menlo Park, Calif.

    Went public Nov. 4 with 2 million shares at $7.50

TOTAL SHARES OUTSTANDING 6.1 million
MARKET CAPITALIZATION $49.6 million
UNDERWRITER D. Blech & Company
TECHNOLOGY FOCUS Gene sequencing, with emphasis on organ transplant rejection
and inflammatory disorders like rheumatoid arthritis.

HUMAN GENOME SCIENCES, Gaithersburg, Md.

    Went public yesterday with 2.25 million shares at $12

TOTAL SHARES OUTSTANDING 14 million
MARKET CAPITALIZATION $168 million
UNDERWRITERS Lehman Brothers, Bear Stearns and Smith Barney Shearson.
TECHNOLOGY FOCUS Gene sequencing, with $125 million investment in equity and
research from SmithKline Beecham.

ARRIS PHARMACEUTICALS, South San Francisco

    Went public Nov. 19 with 2.5 million shares at $7

TOTAL SHARES OUTSTANDING 8.5 million
MARKET CAPITALIZATION $59.5 million
UNDERWRITERS Montgomery Securities and Paine Webber
TECHNOLOGY FOCUS Developing small molecule drugs with computer modeling and
artificial intelligence software. Collaborations with Kabi Pharmacia and Amgen.

VIAGENE, San Diego

    Offering 2.5 million shares at $11 to $13

TOTAL SHARES OUTSTANDING 10.8 milion
MARKET CAPITALIZATION $14 million
UNDERWRITERS Alex. Brown & Sons, CS First Boston and Nomura Securities
TECHNOLOGY FOCUS Gene therapy, with primary emphasis on AIDS. Collaboration with
Chiron.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1993


                             936 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            December 3, 1993 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1:1,2,3,4,5,6,7; A-31:8,9

LENGTH: 722 words

HEADLINE: NIH rejects bid by cancer center;
Panel irked by publicity over San Diego group's experiment

BYLINE: MARCUS STERN, Copley News Service

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   BETHESDA, Md. -- Publicity surrounding a La Mesa woman's experimental genetic
cancer treatment prompted the National Institutes of Health yesterday to reject
a request by San Diego researchers to do a follow-up study with similar
brain-tumor patients. In turning down the request by a team led by Robert Sobol
of the San Diego Regional Cancer Center, members of the NIH advisory panel
charged that Sobol had made exaggerated statements about the benefits of his
experimental genetic efforts on behalf of the now-deceased patient, Clemma
Hewitt. However, the panel did approve a separate request by Sobol's research
group to do a preliminary study that could lead to the use of gene-therapy
techniques in fighting colon cancer. The Hewitt case received national attention
because it marked a shift in federal research policy by allowing the researchers
to try an experimental gene technique, about which little is known, in a
last-ditch effort to treat a terminal cancer patient. Hewitt died in October.

   Since then, Sobol has stated publicly that her tumor was destroyed while she
was receiving injections of a special gene designed to stimulate her immune
system to fight the tumor.

   The tumor returned during a break in the treatments and she lapsed into a
coma, he said. Sobol acknowledged that other earlier experimental treatments
Hewitt had received clouded his assertion that the gene treatment had a
therapeutic effect.

   He nonetheless said the results of the genetic effort were promising. "An
immune response was demonstrated," he told the NIH panel in arguing for
permission to do a follow-up study involving several patients. But his request
was rejected by NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, which considers such
research requests. Several panel members complained bitterly about the way the
Hewitt case had been handled, taking particular exception to Sobol's earlier
comments to reporters suggesting that the genetic treatment may have been
responsible for killing her tumor and prolonging her life. "I'm angry over the
way this previous patient was handled," said Brigid G. Leventhal, a member of
the panel and a cancer physician at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore,
referring specifically to Sobol's comments. "We got jerked around," she told
Sobol.

   "I think you should have waited before you came in with this proposal because
if everybody (on the panel) is as mad as I am, I don't know how anyone could
vote for this." The panel voted 10-5 to reject Sobol's proposal. Many of the
critical comments by Leventhal and other panel members centered on Sobol's
published comments that the gene implanted in Hewitt, interleukin-2, had a
therapeutic effect. They rejected his assertion that the size of Hewitt's tumor
had been reduced, stating that tumor size cannot be reliably measured by the
device Sobol used -- an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) technique. In an effort
to rebut complaints about his comments to reporters, Sobol read quotes of his
from one news report in which he said it remained unclear whether the
interleukin-2 had helped Hewitt. Despite his careful comments to reporters, he
said, the news reports had tended to stress the possible therapeutic benefits.
"I can't control what a reporter writes," he said. Members of the committee
argued that a single-patient study like Hewitt's was an insufficient basis for
justifying expanded human trials. They said tests should be done on animals
before humans. In addition to Sobol's gene injections, Hewitt had undergone
radiation treatment and had received a cancer medicine called Tamoxifen. The
five panel members who supported Sobol's new experimental proposal minimized the
questions surrounding the Hewitt case, saying that additional studies involving
human patients would be necessary at some point anyway. Gene therapy, still in
its infancy, has been tried on an experimental basis with a number of different
forms of cancer, but Hewitt marked the first time it had been tried with her
type of cancer -- a highly fatal brain tumor known as glioblastoma. The panel's
angry reaction reflected to some degree the lingering split within the panel
over the question of whether the Hewitt experiment should even have been tried.
The same committee had approved the exemption for the Hewitt experiment last
December after being lobbied by her family.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             937 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               December 1, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Page 10; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 754 words

HEADLINE: Injections of Genes Found to Shrink Skin Tumors

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   The injection of new genes directly into a patient's tumor tissue is a safe
procedure that can help impel the immune system to destroy the malignancy,
scientists have reported.

   The results from the first phase of a clinical trial suggest that the use of
DNA as a drug, a radical new approach to battling cancer and other disorders,
may eventually supplement if not supplant standard tumor treatments like
radiation or chemotherapy.

    Dr. Gary J. Nabel of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at the University
of Michigan and his colleagues reported their findings today in The Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences. They found that when they injected DNA into
the tumors of five patients with advanced skin cancer, the genes slipped deep
inside the malignant cells and switched on, as the scientists had hoped.

   All five patients tolerated the novel therapy well. In one patient, a
68-year-old man for whom conventional and experimental therapies had failed, the
treatment caused many widely disseminated tumors to shrink and in some cases
disappear.

General Use Not Imminent

    But the researchers cautioned that one success story does not begin to rank
as a cure for metastatic melanoma, a fatal skin cancer. They stressed that much
more research and fine-tuning remained to be done before the method can be
introduced on a wide scale for the treatment of melanoma and other tumors.

   Nevertheless, they said, they were very encouraged by the findings, the first
to be published on this particular variation of human gene therapy.

   "In my view, what happened in the trial exceeded our expectations," Dr. Nabel
said. "This is the first time that genes were given directly to patients. We
wanted to know if the genes would be expressed, or switched on, and if there
would be any toxicity to the patients."

   The news was good on both counts, he added, and the fact that one patient
responded to the highly preliminary approach was more heartening still.

   In previous gene therapy experiments, researchers have used deactivated
viruses to deliver new DNA to patients' tissues. But that method is risky
because the altered cargo viruses could become reactivated and virulent once
they are settled in the human tissue.

Fat Bubbles as Carriers

    To circumvent the risk, the Michigan scientists encased their genetic
material in liposomes, microscopic bubbles of fat that can slide through the
outer membranes of cells to drop off their DNA once inside.

   The gene that they chose to enclose in the liposomes is called HLA-B7, which
oversees the production of a protein able to stimulate the immune system. The
scientists picked HLA-B7 because it is known to be a protein that is the target
of attack when a person's immune cells strive to reject a transplanted organ.

   By introducing the gene into cancer cells, the scientists sought to persuade
the patients' immune guardians to treat the malignancy like a foreign object,
worthy of destruction. They also hoped the galvanized immune system would then
seek out other tumor cells in the body that while lacking the introduced HLA-B7
protein, nonetheless bore other earmarks of melanoma cells.

Effect of Injections

    In the newly reported trial, the patients each received three injections
over two months either in obvious tumors on the skin or in lymph nodes known to
harbor malignant cells. Every inoculation contained many millions of copies of
the HLA-B7 gene, and Dr. Nabel estimated that about 5 percent of the cells in an
injected tumor ended up absorbing the fat-coated DNA.

   In several of the patients, aroused white blood cells responded to the call
of the foreign protein, aggregating around the tumor tissue. And in the
68-year-old man, that arousal had a dramatic impact: during the eight-week
study, the cancerous lesions on his lungs and elsewhere appeared to vanish. But
even he was not cured of his disease, and he has since tried other therapies.

   Now the scientists are trying to improve the technique so that it will
deposit far more of the HLA-B7 DNA into the patients' tissues and thus have a
chance of arousing more torpid immune systems. They are planning to start a new
round of clinical trials soon.

'It May Be Enough'

    "This is a very interesting approach," said Dr. Alan N. Houghton, chief of
clinical immunology at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan. "It
could be argued that liposomes are a less efficient means of delivering DNA
compared to viruses, but for their strategy it may be enough."

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1993


                             938 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  December 1, 1993, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. A1

LENGTH: 581 words

HEADLINE: NEW GENE THERAPY SIMPLER, PROMISING IN FIGHTING CANCER;
DNA IS INJECTED INTO TUMORS; PITT RESEARCHER PLAYS PART

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   Genetic material wrapped inside tiny spheres developed by a University of
Pittsburgh researcher has shown promise as an anti-cancer drug, scientists
report in today's Proceedings of the National Academy of Science.

   Doctors injected the specially prepared DNA directly into the tumors of five
cancer patients at the University of Michigan Medical Center. In this first use
of DNA as a drug, they found the technique was safe and that the injected genes
functioned as intended.

   The tumor size shrunk in one of the five patients, all of whom suffered from
terminal cases of the deadly skin cancer called malignant melanoma.

   The report marks the latest twist in the young, burgeoning field of gene
therapy. Previous attempts at using genes to treat disease have required
laborious preparations -- removing cells from the patient, using viruses to
genetically modify the cells and then injecting or infusing the modified cells
back into the patient.

   The direct injection approach used by the team headed by Michigan's Dr. Gary
Nabel could make gene therapy simpler and safer, said Leaf Huang, a team member
and a Pitt pharmacologist.

   The experiment marked not only the first use of DNA as a drug, but also the
first gene therapy that did not use viruses to deliver the therapeutic genes to
the target cells.

   The genes were instead enclosed in liposomes, microscopic spheres made of the
same type of molecules that form cell membranes. Huang supplied the liposomes,
which can be designed to be absorbed only by certain cells.

   Once inside the tumor cells, the gene, called HLA-B7, began functioning and
caused the patients' immune systems to recognize the tumor cells as foreign.
This recognition triggers the immune system to attack the tumor.

   In previous attempts at gene therapy, viruses have been used to carry
therapeutic genes to their targets. But this necessitates either first removing
the cells from the patient or taking the risk of placing viruses directly into
the patient, Huang said. The latter approach has been shown to cause
inflammation in one patient thus far, he added.

   Huang also is supplying liposomes for English researchers attempting gene
therapy to treat cystic fibrosis.

   The Michigan experiment was intended to demonstrate that the liposome-
packaged DNA could be safely administered and that, once in place, the genes
functioned. That only one of five patients saw a tumor shrink does not reflect
the ultimate effectiveness of the technique. ''In this type of study,'' Huang
noted, ''any type of efficacy is a bonus.''

   Nabel and his colleagues are continuing the study, which will eventually
involve 24 patients. New patients will be injected either with Huang's liposomes
or another type of liposome developed by Vical Inc. of San Diego.

   Nabel will be in Pittsburgh today in his role as a scientific adviser to a
gene therapy trial at the Pittsburgh Cancer Institute. In that trial, Drs.
Michael Lotze and Joshua Rubin attempt to activate the patient's immune system
to fight cancer by removing tumor cells, genetically altering them and then
injecting them as a ''tumor vaccine'' into the patient.

   A man with melanoma became the first patient at Pitt to receive the tumor
vaccine on Sept. 7. Two women, one with melanoma and the other with kidney
cancer, joined the study three weeks ago. Lotze said he expected 20 patients
with melanoma, breast, colon or kidney cancers to be treated in the project by
the end of January.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             939 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1993 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       December 1, 1993 Wednesday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 547 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS TAKE THEIR FIRST STAB AT INJECTING GENES

BYLINE: By ROBERT COOKE Newsday

BODY:

   In the first attempt to use genes as a directly injected drug, scientists
said Tuesday they have put genes into people to fight disease, without using
potentially dangerous viruses to deliver the treatment.

   According to a research team at the University of Michigan Medical Center,
genes enclosed in tiny balls of fat, liposomes, were injected into skin tumors
in four cancer patients. The liposomes were absorbed by the cancer cells, and
the genes, which stimulate the immune system, became active.

   Most other experiments rely on disabled viruses, such as the mouse mammary
tumor virus, or cold-causing adenoviruses, to insert new genes into living
cells. Although the viruses are disarmed, there may be some danger they can
revert to virulence.

   The new tests were performed to see if the gene-delivery system works, and to
test for safety. No signs of toxicity were observed, the researchers said.

   The goal is to use gene therapy to supplement or replace chemotherapy or
other drugs with dangerous side effects. It should allow doctors to work from
the cell's insides, causing the cell to produce drugs, hormones or proteins that
stimulate an immune response.

   "We're trying to see whether this is an appropriate way to treat a human
disease," said Gary Nabel, leader of the research team. "It was the first direct
gene-transfer trial" in humans, and the first time a non-viral carrier was used
to insert genes into humans, he said.

   Nabel explained that his 10-member research team did not expect the treatment
to be effective in their cancer patients, who had failed all other treatments,
and were end-stage patients with advanced tumors. "But we were surprised that
one of the patients actually did respond to the treatments," Nabel said.

   "He had an injection in one tumor nodule, which regressed entirely, and there
were about five other tumor nodules that disappeared," Nabel said. This
indicated that the new gene stimulated an immune attack on tumor cells.

   "The bad news is that he had some lesions that did not respond," Nabel said.
None of the patients was cured.

   The gene the team inserted is called B-7. It is known to play a role in the
immune system, especially in recognizing and rejecting tissues such as donated
organs that the body sees as "foreign."

   "By putting it into someone who doesn't have B-7, it makes their tumor cells
seem foreign, and sets the cells up for attack" by the patient's immune system,
Nabel said.

   Because of the encouraging results, Nabel said, more patients are being
recruited, and the liposomes are being improved so they can carry and transfer
more genes.

   The important point, however, is that any gene - such as those making
hormones, growth factors or even anti-cancer genes - probably can be injected,
each aimed at a specific disease in a specific organ, Nabel said.

   The first gene-therapy experiments already have been successful. In 1990,
doctors at the National Institutes of Health used a virus to insert an
enzyme-making gene into the white blood cells of two young girls born with ADA -
adenosine deaminase deficiency - a total lack of immunity to disease. When the
engineered cells were reinfused into the girls, both gained functional immunity
for the first time in their lives.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1993


                             940 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   December 1, 1993, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 212 words

HEADLINE: DNA shots 'open way' to easier gene therapy

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Gene therapy got a shot in the arm when DNA was administered to a small
group of patients by injection, just like an ordinary drug.

   A study reported today in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
shows that genes can be delivered without complicated, time-consuming
procedures, says researcher Gary Nabel.

   Ordinarily, gene therapy involves removing cells from the body, modifying
them with new DNA, multiplying them in the lab and returning them to the patient
later.

   For their study, Nabel and colleagues encapsulated new DNA in microscopic
spheres of fat that were injected directly into the body. Because the spheres
are so small, they can slip inside target cells and deliver the DNA.

   "This opens the way for a variety of applications, such as heart disease,
cancer and cystic fibrosis," says Nabel, of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute
at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor.

   In the study, researchers injected DNA into the tumors of five advanced-stage
melanoma patients. Results:

   The genes, which can trigger the immune system to attack tumor cells, were
active inside the tumors.

   They caused no toxicity.

   Although the study was not designed to treat the cancer, one patient who had
failed all other therapy showed improvement.


                             941 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                November 30, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NAME: Francis S. Collins

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2150 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTIST AT WORK: Francis S. Collins;
Unlocking the Secrets of the Genome

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   DR. FRANCIS S. COLLINS, the new director of the National Center for Human
Genome Research, is a man of exuberant enthusiasm. His parents are "wonderful,
fascinating," people. His scientific colleagues are "some of the most wonderful,
smartest people in the world." The missionary doctors he worked with while doing
charity work in Nigeria are "remarkable people," who have become his lifelong
friends.

   And the Human Genome Project itself? Dr. Collins says this international
effort to map and identify every one of the 100,000 human genes, to determine
the exact sequence of the three billion nucleotides that form the building
blocks of human DNA, is "the most important and the most significant project
that humankind has ever mounted."

    Dr. Collins works very hard all the time, he said, describing himself as
"very intense," the very features that can grate on less successful colleagues.
Yet in the field of molecular genetics, where competition can be fierce and
gushing frowned upon, Dr. Collins wins the same sort of accolades from others
that he bestows upon them. A 43-year-old scientist who shot up through the
ranks, going from being virtually unknown to world famous in the last five
years, he seems to have made only friends as his reputation grew. "To begin
with, he is a good person," said Dr. W. French Anderson, who directs research on
gene therapy at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles. Dr.
Collins, he added, "is a fine human being in addition to being very intelligent
and a good manager and a good scientist."

   Dr. David Housman, a molecular geneticist at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology in Cambridge, Mass., said that Dr. Collins had more than proved
himself as a researcher. He showed vision in pursuing scientific methods that
led him and his collaborators to find three important genes -- for cystic
fibrosis, neurofibromatosis and Huntington's disease -- when others said the
effort was almost doomed to failure.

   Dr. Housman added that in addition to his scientific expertise, Dr. Collins
brings a personal empathy to the study of genetic disorders. He has a "a very
intimate perspective," he said," adding: "He's seen patients with all those
diseases. That has an effect on you."

   Dr. Jane Fountain, a molecular geneticist at the University of Southern
California who was a graduate student of Dr. Collins's in 1985, "when he was a
virtual unknown," said Dr. Collins is "extremely bright, very easy to get along
with, very organized and very politically savvy." She said he "has always
approached science with a passion for what he's doing, not with an attitude of
I'm going to get there first," adding, "That's one of the things that people
admire about him."

   Dr. Collins suggested that it was his unusual upbringing that imparted such a
thirst for knowledge. His father has a Ph.D. in English, but has wide-ranging
interests, including collecting folk music and staging medieval plays. His
mother is a playwright. When Dr. Collins was growing up, his parents raised
sheep on a farm in rural Virginia. "It was a hard life," he said, and his
mother, distrusting the education provided in the rural schools and "not about
to relegate the early learning of her sons" to them, decided to teach her
children at home.

   Dr. Collins is the youngest of four boys. The two oldest brothers, 18 and 16
years older than Dr. Collins, were taught at home until they went to college.
Dr. Collins and a brother who was a year older than he were taught at home
through sixth grade.

   "It was a bit disorganized," Dr. Collins said. "I'm sure it would not have
been deemed appropriate by today's standards." The Collins boys and their mother
would explore a topic, like the origins of words, for a week or two, doing
nothing else, then move on to another subject, like mathematics. As a result,
Dr. Collins said, he grew up with an unquenchable curiosity and love of
learning.

   When Dr. Collins entered high school, in Staunton, Va., he discovered
chemistry. He recalls that his teacher made the subject come alive and that he
was drawn to its intellectual rigor. He ended up majoring in chemistry at the
University of Virginia and then earning a Ph.D. in physical chemistry at Yale
University, using theory and mathematics to discover the behavior of atoms and
molecules.

Discovery of Cystic Fibrosis Gene

    Although he loved the theories of physical chemistry, he realized that the
real excitement in science was in molecular biology. That was in the early
1970's, when scientists were just beginning to learn to find and manipulate
genes. Dr. Collins wrote to Dr. Walter Gilbert, a molecular biologist at Harvard
University who had successfully switched from a stellar career in physics to an
equally stellar one in molecular biology. Dr. Gilbert assured him that it was
easy to switch careers, that lots of people were doing it. So Dr. Collins took
the plunge. Because he was drawn to clinical medicine as well as to laboratory
work, he decided to go to medical school at the University of North Carolina and
become a doctor.

   Although it set him back years, Dr. Collins said he did the right thing.
"Research is so unpredictable," he said. "There are periods when nothing works
and all your experiments are a disaster and all your hypotheses are wrong." But
during those periods he can care for patients and get a different kind of
satisfaction as well as a new perspective on what is important and why, he said.

   When Dr. Collins began research at the University of Michigan, he was 35
years old and nervous -- panicked, he said, wondering if he was really any good,
whether he was going to make any sort of contribution in this intensely
competitive field. But when, a few years later, he was part of a team that found
the cystic fibrosis gene, his reputation was made. Now he exudes confidence,
even though at times, he says, the responsibilities of his job still seem
intimidating.

   He is a deeply religious man who is not afraid to talk about his faith, even
though, he says, it makes some scientists uneasy. "They suspect that I'm really
here because I'm on a crusade," he said. "But there is no conflict between being
an absolutely rigorous scientist and being a person of faith."

   Dr. Collins, who was not raised with any religious training, said he became a
Christian at age 27, when he was an intern in medical school. "I came at this
from a position of ignorance," he said. "I came at it from an intellectual point
of view." He read, and was persuaded by, the arguments of C. S. Lewis, who said
that faith could be a rational choice. And after struggling for months with the
decision to become religious, he said that "it became inescapable." He explained
that he is "sort of a nondenominational type," and that he has been, at various
times, a Lutheran, a Baptist and a Presbyterian. He is looking for a church to
join in Washington.

   Four years ago, Dr. Collins and his daughter Margaret, who had just completed
her freshman year in college, went to Nigeria for a summer to work with
missionary doctors. "I had never been to a third world country," Dr. Collins
said, adding that he and his daughter were deeply moved by their experience. He
said he felt spoiled by life in the United States when he saw the severe
illnesses and lack of medical facilities in this impoverished country. He also
was touched by his ability to help. The work was "intensely draining," but at
the same time so deeply satisfying that Dr. Collins said he found it hard to go
back to the United States. Last summer he and his daughter, who is now a medical
student, returned to Nigeria. Dr. Collins stayed three weeks; his daughter
remained all summer. "It really helps me to remember what matters," he said.

Ethical Dilemmas

    Now, as head of the Human Genome Project, Dr. Collins said he was working
100-hour weeks, recruiting scientists to work at the National Institutes of
Health in Bethesda, Md., collaborating with researchers who are closing in on
the breast cancer gene, going to scientific meetings, trying to establish a new
institute in the N.I.H. to focus on genome research and administering the Human
Genome Project. His schedule, he says, is "tiring but it doesn't seem
burdensome."

   And, Dr. Collins adds, there is nothing more important in science and
medicine than the project he heads. Once they have found all the genes in the
human body and learned their genetic sequences, scientists will have the
blueprint, an instruction book, for people, he says. Even now, with the work in
its early stages, advances have greatly speeded up the search for genes that
cause hereditary diseases. Researchers have put road marks on the human genome,
enabling others to quickly zero in on areas where particular genes must be
located, cutting years off the old timetables for finding genes.

   Dr. Collins predicts that within 10 years everyone will have the opportunity
to find out his or her own genetic risks, to know if cancer or heart attacks or
diabetes or Alzheimer's disease, for example, lies in the future.

   But with this detailed genetic information, he said, "the real question is
how you use it." He quotes Sophocles: "It is but sorrow to be wise when wisdom
profits not." Is there a point to knowing that you are likely to get Alzheimer's
disease if there is no way to prevent or treat it? So far, he said, there are
only a few diseases -- breast cancer, colon cancer, prostate cancer, diabetes
and some forms of heart disease -- for which there are "good arguments that
knowing you are at risk will make a difference," because early detection and
treatment allows people to live longer or even be cured.

   The coming genetic risk analyses pose difficult problems of privacy. Would
you want your employer to know that you are likely to develop Alzheimer's
disease? "Our medical system is a sieve," Dr. Collins said, and it is of utmost
urgency to find ways to assure that private information remains private.

   He is also concerned about prenatal diagnosis in the fast-approaching time
when the major disease-causing genes are easily detected. He cited with
trepidation one survey that showed 11 percent of couples would abort a fetus if
they knew it carried a gene for obesity. No such gene has been found; it was a
study designed to probe where couples would draw the line.

   "It is difficult to say you can't abort, but for overall cultural mores, you
run into problems," Dr. Collins said. "It's the classic slippery slope. You have
a gray scale going from diseases like Tay-Sachs disease that cause death in
early childhood all the way to the other end of the spectrum with abortions for
sex selection, which most people would say is a misuse of technology. In between
is a gray zone. Where do you draw the line?"

Early Detection of Cancer

    Another problem is that genetic risk assessment does not give absolutes, but
instead gives probabilities. It may tell you that you have an 80 percent chance
of getting Alzheimer's disease or a 70 percent risk of diabetes, for example.
"Do you abort a fetus based on a risk rather than a certainty?" Dr. Collins
asked.

   He said he wondered how much genetic information a couple should be entitled
to. If people can learn everything that science can tell them about fetuses, he
wonders, "will that move us toward homemade eugenics?" He worries also that
those who have money and resources will try to have the perfect baby, by
aborting fetuses with genetic defects, and those who are poor will have to take
what they get, creating a sort of genetic underclass.

   On the other hand, Dr. Collins said, the emerging genetic era also has the
potential to do enormous good. For example the breast cancer gene, which, he
confidently predicts should be isolated within three to six months, will
eventually change the lives of women in families whose members tend to get both
breast and ovarian cancers at a young age.

   In addition, Dr. Collins said, a large body of circumstantial evidence
indicates that the same gene also goes awry in women who do not have a family
history of breast cancer, and that the gene also causes prostate cancer in men.
It may be possible, for example, to screen women for the breast cancer gene and
then concentrate early-detection efforts on those who have it instead of
screening the entire population.

   Then again, even a discovery like a breast cancer gene will lead to new
dilemmas. Counseling women before and after they are tested to see if they have
the gene could strain, if not break, the nation's counseling capacities. This
issue is yet another one for the Human Genome Project.

   Sometimes, Dr. Collins said, he looks at all he is trying to do and sighs.
"It's daunting," he said. "The responsibilities are very great." But, he added,
he takes comfort in the fact that "in many ways, all the things I did in life
prepared me for this."

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Francis S. Collins and chart of human genome at National
Institutes of Health. He calls mapping its sequence of three billion nucleotides
the "most important and most significant project that humankind has ever
mounted." (Marty Katz for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1993


                             942 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1993 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           November 30, 1993 Tuesday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: WEST ZONER; Pg. B02

LENGTH: 572 words

HEADLINE: BEAVERTON MAN, JETS QB TEAM TO FIGHT CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: ROBIN FRANZEN, Correspondent, The Oregonian <

DATELINE: BEAVERTON

BODY:

   Tuesday, November 30, 1993 BEAVERTON MAN, JETS QB TEAM TO FIGHT CYSTIC
FIBROSIS

   Summary: Electrical distributor Harvey Platt begins his annual  fund-raising
effort with a little help from New York's Boomer Esiason

   Harvey Platt, mild-mannered president of an electrical distribution  company,
is on the same team as New York Jets quarterback Boomer Esiason.

   And no, he's not getting his lightbulbs knocked out.

   Platt, head of Beaverton-based Platt Electric Supply Inc., and Esiason are
leading an off-the-field fund-raising offensive, one they hope will lead to a
cure for cystic fibrosis. The fatal genetic disorder, which damages the lungs,
occurs in one of every 2,000 chidren born in the United States.

   Esiason's 2-year-old son, Gunnar, was diagnosed with the disease earlier
this year.

   Esiason will give autographed football gear to people who make sizable
donations to Platt Electric's fifth annual CF Holiday Dream fund-raising
campaign. Platt named the Oregon Chapter of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation as
the company's charity of choice about four years ago after learning that the
son of one of his employees had the disease.

   Persons who give $500 will receive a signed green and white, No. 7 Esiason
jersey. Contributors of $1,000 will get the jersey and a signed New York Jets
helmet.

   The giveaway is associated with a nationwide fund-raising program sponsored
by the national Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, NFL Properties and the Quarterback
Club, a charity organization Esiason leads. All donations made locally benefit
patient care and research programs of the Oregon Chapter of the Cystic  Fibrosis
Foundation.

   Platt, who has raised as much as $200,000 over the last several years,  began
this year's Holiday Dream effort in mid-October, when he mailed  fund-raising
requests to more than 500 of his company's clients and vendors.

   At the same time, his employees organized money-making schemes of their  own,
including the raffle of a weeklong trip for two to Mexico.

   Any tax-deductible contribution of $5 or more made at Platt Electric stores
in Oregon and Southwest Washington buys a raffle ticket, with the prize  drawing
to be held Dec. 16.

   Last year's Holiday Dream campaign netted $61,000 for the Oregon chapter,
and Platt hopes to present foundation officials with an even larger check Dec.
17. His goal is $65,000.

   Esiason's participation should help, he said. ``The fact that his child has
CF, in an unfortunate way, it helps the cause,'' Platt said. ``And it  increases
public awareness of the disease.''

   Platt likes to think that science already has the cure for cystic fibrosis
but just doesn't know it. Researchers are testing a recently discovered gene
therapy that Platt and others hope will be the answer.

   ``From what we can find out, we are real close,'' he said.

   ``I think the new gene therapy will be the cure,'' added Jeff Danielson of
Portland, whose 8-year-old son, Jason, has cystic fibrosis. ``That's what we
are all looking forward to now.''

   Donations to the holiday campaign may be sent to: CF Holiday Dream, in care
of Platt Electric Supply, P.O. Box 3167, Portland 97208. Platt Electric will
match the first $10,000 in contributions.

   Eligible contributors must specify if they want the Esiason memorabilia.
Football merchandise will be sent from the national Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
office and may take four to six weeks for delivery.

   ILLUSTRATION: BW photo by ROBERT BACH of The Oregonian staff

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             943 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   November 28, 1993, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: TEXAS MAGAZINE; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 3943 words

HEADLINE: CHEST CANCERS;
Cancer of the lung and esophagus kill 160,000 people a year, but a Houston
surgeon;
researcher calls them forgotten cancers

BYLINE: CLAUDIA FELDMAN; Staff

BODY:

   What Peggy Butler meant to do this Tuesday morning was to
paint decorative fruits and vegetables on her daughter-in-law's
kitchen tiles.

   She'd told her children that the little shadow on her chest
X-ray was nothing.  She'd just whiz by her doctor's office for a
quick check, she said, then she'd be up to her elbows in carrots
and plums.

   But the best-laid plans     Instead of cheering her on with
her art project, Dr. Jack Roth, chairman of the Department of
Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery at the University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, scheduled the 68-year-old painter for
surgery.

   The tumor that Roth had been watching for the past six months
was growing.  It could be benign.  It could be early lung cancer.  Or
it could be spreading esophageal cancer, the very disease Butler
thought she had beaten five years earlier.

   They had to find out.

   Butler was brave for that short amount of time she was awake
before surgery.  She'd been through a major operation before, but if
she remembered the feelings of being run through a sawmill, she
didn't let on.  In her soft accent, a combination of Mississippi and
Texas experience, she chatted with the anesthesiologist.  She
maintained the patter even when he poked her in the back with a
painkiller, then inserted a thin wire into her spinal canal.

   ""I'm going to be the best patient you ever had,'' she said.

   ""Just make sure I'm out. ''

   Roth made a quiet entrance a few minutes later, swathed in
surgical green.  In the international community of thoracic
oncologists, Roth is hailed as one of the best.  His reputation is
built not only on his hands, his skill as a surgeon, but also on
his work as a scientist and gene therapist.  Although he is the
first to say the work is still in its infancy, using genetic
intervention he has been able to cure mice of lung cancer.

   Around M.D. Anderson, Roth is something of an enigma.  He is a
thorough, patient doctor, and because he has saved the lives of
scores of patients, he has a built-in fan club.  Those who have
recovered from his surgery and lead normal lives place him second
only to God.

   Nonpatients, however, observe that he can be shy, withdrawn,
demanding.  Usually he maintains a neutral, balanced tone, but
occasionally he offers a bit of humor or a flash of anger.

   He hates the thought of pet diseases, the idea that Americans
whip out their checkbooks at the mere mention of some ailments
while others go begging.  Chest cancers, he says, are forgotten,
orphan cancers.  The solution, he says, is not to turn chest cancers
into pet diseases, too, but to increase funding for all cancer
research.

   Roth also hates it when society at large seems to blame chest
cancer patients for smoking.  Not all of them smoke, he says.  And,
he adds, don't blame those who do.  Cigarettes are highly addictive,
and smoking cessation programs have had only limited success, Roth
says.

   Want to blame someone for chest cancers?  Try the tobacco
companies, he says.  They aim millions of dollars in advertising at
young people, women, the economically disadvantaged.

   Roth says chest cancer patients desperately need advocates,
people who have survived the disease and are willing to speak out.

   But so many of them die, he says.  And survivors who are
reformed smokers tend to feel so guilty they barely acknowledge
their disease.

   Roth says esophageal cancer is the fastest-growing cancer in
the United States.  The American Cancer Society estimates there will
be a total of 10,200 deaths and 11,300 new cases in 1993.  The
survival rate after five years is 10 percent.

   Lung cancer is the most deadly cancer of all.  The cancer
society estimates 149,000 deaths and 170,000 new cases for 1993.

   The survival rate for all kinds of lung cancer after five years is
13 percent.  It's extremely hard to get money to fight either
cancer, Roth says.

   When Butler roused after surgery, she learned the little
ghost on her chest X-ray had been lung cancer.  Fortunately, Roth
thought he got it all.

   The five-year survival rate for lung cancer detected early is
46 percent.

   For Roth, Wednesday is clinic day, which means he spends the
afternoon visiting with a hodgepodge of chest cancer patients in
various stages of good and bad health.

   There's Charles Gray, 58, a barrel-chested restaurateur from
Branson, Mo.  Roth listens patiently while a thoracic surgery
resident briefs him on Gray: He had bladder cancer in '83 and '85,
then an abnormal chest X-ray this past spring.  Once a heavy smoker,
Gray quit one week before Roth examined him in June.

   Gray was lucky; he was spared the steely message Roth
delivers to his preoperative patients who smoke.  It goes something
like this: Stop.  Now.  Or I can't help you.

   Gray's surgery, which involved the removal of his upper right
lung, took place in July.  Now he is back for a checkup.

   Roth can find no signs of recurring cancer.  Gray is thrilled.

   After thanking the surgeon profusely, he can't get out of the
examining room or the Anderson hospital complex or even Houston
fast enough.

   Minnie Goldsmith, 59, is next, and Roth is delighted to see
her.  Esophageal cancer defeats so many patients, but she is
flourishing a year after surgery.

   Goldsmith is able to eat whatever she wants, even though Roth
removed her esophagus and replaced it with a part of her stomach.

   She's thinking about going back to work.  Before her surgery she
doubled as a high school physical education teacher and mother
confessor to her kids.  The indigestion, the food backups, the
difficulty in swallowing -- all those cancer symptoms are a distant
memory to Goldsmith now.  But she can't forget the scars that
crisscross her chest and back.  A nurse took one look at her after
surgery and said, ""Baby, they about cut you in two. ''
 Goldsmith also remembers the day she had her surgical staples
removed.  Each one seemed about 2 feet long and glued to her insides.

   Thomas Vessel, 40, is next on Roth's clinic list.  While the
other patients greet the doc with warm smiles, handshakes, even
hugs, Vessel watches Roth as if he might have a rattlesnake up his
sleeve.

   It's no surprise Vessel feels snakebit.

   Earlier this year he was laid off from his job as a
maintenance worker.  In the past few months he has had to swear off all solid
food.  Because of his esophageal tumor, he can't swallow
anything thicker than a milkshake.

   He's living on Ensure, a liquid diet supplement.

   During Vessel's second Wednesday in the clinic, Roth has a
couple of suggestions for him.  Yes, Roth says, he'll do the
surgery, the treatment of choice.  But he also recommends aggressive
chemotherapy before and after the surgery.  The before-and-after
method is still experimental, he says, but it seems to shrink
tumors and makes his job in surgery easier and more effective.

   Goldsmith took the chemo.  She didn't like it, but she
believes it was a factor in saving her life.

   Vessel's face clouds up at the mention of experimental
treatment.  He wants the surgery, he says, but no chemo.  That stuff
is risky, he says.  He does not want to be a guinea pig.

   The small examining room is full.  In addition to Roth, there
is clinic nurse Sherry Wright and junior faculty associate Dr. Paul
Morris.

   Both freeze.  Hardly anybody at Anderson says no to Roth.  The
doc waits a few beats.  He doesn't scream at patients to try to get
them to do what he wants, and he doesn't try to charm them, either.

   All right, Roth says to Vessel evenly, ""Let me explain the
surgery. ''

   He's going to cut out the diseased esophagus, chip off a bit
of the breastbone and rejigger the stomach so that it does double
duty as esophagus and stomach.  Vessel won't be able to eat as much
as he used to, but he should be able to return to his favorite
foods.

   The entourage leaves.  Shortly afterward, Morris returns.

   Vessel has lost almost 20 pounds on the Ensure.  What Roth would
like to do, Morris tells Vessel, is beef him up for surgery.

   Instead of losing weight, he wants Vessel to gain some.  And the
best way to do that, Morris explains, is to insert a feeding tube
down Vessel's nose and into his stomach.

   It's a nuisance and uncomfortable, Morris admits, but it
would allow Vessel to double or triple his daily intake of Ensure.

   Vessel thinks about the proposal a minute or two.  No feeding
tube, he says finally.  He will drink more of the stuff on his own.

   OK, Morris says.  ""You're the boss. ''
 Vessel looks like he wishes he were the boss.

   The surgery will take place in two weeks.  What Vessel wonders
angrily but doesn't ask is why he has to wait.

   Executive assistant Carol Torrence and surgeon Jack Roth, the
quintessential odd couple, have worked together five years.  She is
short and red-haired and given to saying exactly what is on her
mind.

   She decorates her office according to the seasons.  If she is
happy, she lets people know it.  If she is angry, they know that,
too.

   Torrence respects her boss, but sometimes she wishes he would
open the closed door between their two offices.  She wishes that if
he were angry, he would scream.  She wishes he occasionally would
make small talk.

   Instead, he is all business with Torrence and the four other
women who keep Anderson's thoracic surgery department going.

   Usually he forgets to ask how they're doing or inquire about their
families or mention that they look nice in the new dress.

   It wouldn't hurt, Torrence says.  It might ease the sometimes
tense atmosphere around the thoracic surgery department.

   Roth's two daughters make him laugh, his wife makes him
laugh, and returning patients who seem to have beaten their cancer
tickle him, too.

   Other than that, at work he's busy and doesn't make time for
chitchat.

   Here are some things on and off Roth's 84-page resume:
 He's 48 years old, 5-feet-9 and health-conscious.

   He drives in a car pool once a week.

   He makes his own lunch, usually yogurt and some fruit and
juice, and maybe a health cookie.

   He's Jewish.  He was born in La Porte, Ind.  His dad owned a
department store, and his mom worked there as a buyer.  He was a
studious kid, a straight-A student, the kind of person his
daughters would describe as a nerd, he says.

   He played the trumpet as a kid and excelled in debate.  He
figured he'd be a lawyer when he grew up.

   On the road to law school, Roth majored in economics at
Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.The summer after his junior
year, he worked as a scrub technician in a Boston hospital.  That's
when he got hooked on the operating room and fascinated by medicine.

   He went back to Cornell, crammed as many science courses into
his schedule as he could, then applied to medical school.  In 1967
he was accepted by Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in
Baltimore.

   In 1973, a full-fledged doctor, he moved to the University of
California at Los Angeles as a postgraduate research fellow.  He
wanted to pursue his dual interests in surgery and cancer research.

   As much as he loved the precision of surgery and the
immediate results, Roth had learned its limits.  Sure, surgical
techniques have improved over the years.  But significant
breakthroughs in cancer treatments, he decided, were going to have
to come from the laboratory.

   In a tumor biology lab at UCLA, Roth met Elizabeth Grimm.  She
was the lab manager then, and he says he admired her intelligence
and technical abilities.  She says she admired his strength of
character and purpose.

   It took them a year to start dating and several more before
she would entertain thoughts of marriage.

   Grimm, now an immunologist and professor of tumor biology at
Anderson, laughs at herself when she remembers back when.  She told
Roth she wasn't getting married, and she wasn't having kids, either.

   Their names are Johanna and Katherine, and they are 10 and 7.
One of Roth's greatest pleasures is helping them with their
homework.  He nods modestly when asked if he and Johanna have done
some bang-up science projects.

   Both girls were born in Maryland, when their folks worked at
the National Cancer Institute.  In 1986, the family moved to Houston
so Roth and Grimm could accept jobs at Anderson.

   The Houston cancer center is unique, Roth says, because of
the speedy way that fruitful lab discoveries are translated to
improved patient care.  Anderson also is special because of its size
and impact on Americans with cancer.  In 1971 it was one of the
first three federally designated cancer centers in the United
States.  In mid-November, the Anderson staff registered the
300,000th patient since opening in temporary quarters in 1944.

   Today, 8,400 employees patrol 3.2 million square feet, and a
building program under way will expand the center by 30 percent to
4.1 million square feet.

   Roth and Grimm quickly found themselves immersed in jobs that
could easily take up 20 hours a day.  With children, too, both are
experts at juggling schedules.

   Roth smiles ruefully when asked about free time and says he
likes to listen to Mahler on his way to and from work.  He admires
the classical musician because he was a technical and creative
genius.

   Grimm says she, Roth and the kids love to ski in Colorado,
but they don't get to go nearly enough.  In Roth's office is a
photograph of a Colorado ski slope at night.

   Grimm looks around her small office and says that one day she
will have time to finish all the professional articles she is
supposed to read, finish all those she is supposed to write and
clean off her desk.  In her lunch sack are leftovers from dinner.

   Her husband has learned not to take out professional
disappointments on his family, Grimm says, but sure, she and the
kids might be able to guess when a patient takes a turn for the
worse.  He gets a little quieter, she says.  He withdraws.

   When a patient dies, Roth says, a little chunk of him dies,
too.

   So that he is not devastated, he says, he tries to be
supportive of failing patients, yet maintain a professional
distance.

   Often, Roth says, that attempt to pull back doesn't work.

   The patients who haunt him the longest, he says, are those
who die right after surgery.  He's had a few who had early stage
cancer but died because of events during the operation that
couldn't be predicted or controlled.

   Roth told a preoperative lung cancer patient that the chances
of a life-threatening problem cropping up during surgery were 5
percent.

   ""Unexpected things can happen,'' he says.

   Sometimes Roth operates on Thursdays.  The man under the knife
this particular Thursday is Jimmy Adams, a 73-year-old retired
electrician from Rayville, La.

   If Adams is lucky, Roth will be able to remove his cancerous
right lung.  First, however, the surgeon has to test Adams' enlarged
lymph nodes.  If they show signs of lung cancer, too, Roth will have
to sew him up and refer him to an Anderson radiologist.

   In the clinic the day before, Roth didn't spell out Adams'
chances if the cancer proved to be inoperable.  But Adams understood
clearly they wouldn't be good.

   ""Let's get going, Doc,'' Adams had told Roth in his deep
Louisiana rumble.  ""We're already a month late. ''
 Like Peggy Butler, Adams is anesthetized almost as soon as he
arrives in the surgical suite.  His family -- wife Aline, son Jim
and daughter-in-law Sandy -- form a sad little knot in the waiting
room outside of the surgical intensive care unit.

   ""I think we had it worse than Jimmy,'' Aline says later.

   ""He was asleep.  We were petrified. ''

   From 7 a.m. until 2 p.m. the Adams family sits and waits.

   Sometimes they stare into space.  Sometimes they read.  Sometimes
they search for coffee or a bite to eat that won't irritate their
nervous stomachs.

   Until a bout with pneumonia in the spring, Jimmy hadn't been sick for as long
as any of them could remember.

   Aline and Jim are almost too scared to talk.  Sandy is scared,
too, but when her spouse and mother-in-law go for coffee, she gives
a thumbnail sketch of James C. Adams Jr

   He was born in the community of Winnsboro, 20 miles south of
Rayville, La.  He didn't graduate from high school, but he worked
long and hard to be a good electrician.

   Before he served in World War II, he and Aline ran away and
got married.  They didn't tell their parents, they simply lived
apart until the day the owner of the Winnsboro movie theater called
Aline's folks to congratulate them.

   Jimmy had left his billfold in the theater, and the marriage
certificate was neatly folded inside.

   Today, Aline is retired after working most of her life in a
management position for Louisiana Gas Service Co. ""She was kind of
a paradox,'' Sandy muses.  ""On the one hand, she was a professional
person who supervised 12 people.  She kept everything in balance and
the customers happy.  But at home, Jimmy was the head of the house.

   He made most of the decisions. ''

   It's still that way, after 53 years of marriage.

   ""I think the best part about my father-in-law is that you
don't have to worry about what he's thinking.  He'll tell you. ''

   Roth shows up happy.  He was able to remove the lung.

   Nobody in the family asks about the chance of recurrence.

   No, says Aline later, she's not going to ask, and she's not
going to worry once she gets home to Rayville, either.  Resolutely
she says, ""We will presume everything is OK.  And if it's not,
we'll do what we have to do. ''

   Last year, Roth became the first scientist in the world to
win permission from the National Institutes of Health to try gene
therapy on terminally ill patients with lung cancer.

   Two genes, he found, commonly malfunction in lung cancer.  One
is the K-ras gene, the other, p53.

   To control mutant K-ras genes, which allow tumor cells to
multiply out of control, he developed a technique called anti-sense
gene therapy.  In lab experiments, Roth has injected nude or
hairless mice with molecules that bonded with the mutant tumor
cells and turned them off.

   With patients, he hopes to shut down the K-ras gene in enough
cancer cells to make the tumors shrink or disappear.

   To control mutant p53 genes, which are supposed to suppress
tumors but can't in their mutated state, Roth has successfully
treated nude mice by injecting them with good copies of p53.

   He hopes to do the same with patients as soon as the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration gives him the go-ahead.  Word could
come any day now.

   Every cancer cell has at least 15 to 20 abnormalities.  What
first excited Roth about gene therapy, he says, was his discovery
that he had to correct only one abnormality, not 20, to prod the
cell back to normal behavior.

   Friday is a good news/bad news kind of day.

   Bill Logue, a state district judge from Waco, drops in to see
Roth in the morning.  It's been almost five years since Roth removed
Logue's cancerous esophagus, and he's been doing dandy ever since.

   Logue, 69, may be Roth's best-known patient.  He is the
juvenile court judge responsible for finding new homes for the
children who lived in the Branch Davidian cult compound before it
turned into a burning funeral pyre earlier this year.

   Logue thrives on his job, which is why he hasn't retired.  He
did have to take a few months off, though, after the cancer surgery.

   ""I'll still gag at the sight of a tongue depressor,'' he
says.

   Logue is an emotional man.  When he sees Roth, he usually hugs
him.

   ""In the very beginning,'' Logue says, ""I said, "Doc, is it
operable? ' Then I hopped off that examining table and gave him a
hug and haven't quit hugging him since.  I give him thanks that I am
still living. ''
 Roth turns red with pleasure and embarrassment.

   The bad news is for Roger Hein.  It's delivered by one of
Roth's colleagues, Dr. Dong Shin, a chemotherapy expert in the
department of head, neck and thoracic medical oncology.  Shin tells
the 61-year-old from Turner, Ore., that his rare chest cancer,
mesothelioma, is inoperable.

   Not only is it inoperable, but the available chemotherapies
are either highly experimental or don't work.  Shin tells Hein he is
welcome to participate in studies of the drug, taxol, but that
commuting from Oregon for the on-again, off-again course of
chemotherapy may be a problem.

   It's OK, Hein says quietly, he will find a way.

   Over the years, Hein has led a quiet life.  He doesn't drink
or smoke.  He takes vitamins.  He watches his diet and enjoys
shopping at health food stores.  He's religious, he loves his mother
and brothers and sisters, and in his entire 61 years, he's probably
hurt very few feelings.

   He likes to hunt deer and elk.  That's probably as
controversial as he's ever gotten.

   For years Hein worked for the phone company.  That job, he
says, was very stressful, so he retired and started doing
maintenance work for another company.  In the process, he was
exposed to asbestos, the substance that may have contributed to his
cancer.

   Hein says he's not mad at his employers for exposing him to
the asbestos -- he just wants to be sure his medical bills are paid
by his workman's compensation insurance.  But already, he says,
there are signs that he will have to fight for that.

   Hein just shakes his head.

   Like thousands of other out-of-towners who come to the
sprawling Texas Medical Center for diagnosis and treatment, Hein
had to find lodging while he waited between doctors' appointments.

   Dorothy Leedy, Hein's sister, stayed with him at the Econo
Lodge-Medical Center on South Main.  It would have been nice to rent
a car, but they knew they needed to save money.  They took the
motel's shuttle to get to Anderson and walked every place else.

   On that jumbled, commercial stretch of Main, their legs
didn't take them very far: to the grocery store, to Mary Ann's Old
Timey Hamburgers and to Mexican fast-food.  They even tried
breakfast at the nearby Target.

   ""It was hard to find our kind of food,'' Hein says.

   The spicy, greasy stuff upset his stomach.

   The most fun that he and Leedy had was visiting with a few
friends over the weekend.  They went to church services at Anderson
that Sunday morning.  Mostly, though, they played cards, walked and
waited.

   After the disappointing news from Shin, Hein and his sister
step into the reception area to collect their wits.  As if on cue,
Anderson social worker Sam Gomez appears in front of them.  He
shakes hands.  He reminds them of the medical discounts offered by
Continental Airlines.  There are a few free hotel rooms also offered
to patients, he says, and he promises to look into them.  The only
hitch, he says, is a six-week wait.

   Hein says he and one of his sisters, probably Leedy, will
return in three weeks.  Leedy is unengaged at the moment, Hein says,
patting his sister's knee.  ""She just lost her husband to cancer. ''

   Hein appears calm.  He says he is calm.  ""My heart did a
double flip when I first got the news.  After that, I put my life in
the hands of my Lord. ''

   Hein and Leedy plan to grab a hamburger at Mary Ann's for
supper, then catch a plane to Oregon in the morning.

   Both are looking forward to their mom's cooking and doing the
laundry.

   It's 3:45 on what's left of a gloomy, cold afternoon.  Shin
and Roth still have hours left on their Friday schedules.  Year in,
year out, working with so many critically ill patients takes its
toll.  Roth says staff burnout among cancer doctors is high.

   Maybe what keeps him from blazing out like a firecracker are
those blessed mice that he can cure of lung cancer.

GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. Dr. Jack Roth (color); 2. Peggy Butler, a lung cancer
patient, is cheered by grandsons Clint Butler, Jason Butler, and licensed
vocational nurse Dee Ellis (color); 3.Dr. Paul Morris and Dr. Jack Roth begin
exploratory surgery on Jimmy Adams, a retired electrician (color, p. 9); 4. Dr.
Jack Roth looks at lung cancer cells through a microscope (color, p. 10); 5.
Aline Adams helps her husband, Jimmy, practice blowing and coughing (color, p.
11); 6. Dr. Roth checks out one of his star patients, Bill Logue of Waco (color,
p. 11); 7. Cancer patient Roger Hein and his sister, Dorothy Leedy, playing
cards in their room at the Econo Lodge on South Main (color, p. 14); 8. Bill
Logue hugs Dr. Roth every time he comes in for an examination (color, p. 14); 9.
Dr. Roth as he operates on a lung cancer patient, with Dr. Morris by his side
(color, cover); 1, 3-6, 8-9. Betty Tichich, 2, 7. D.Fahleson/Chronicle

NOTES: Claudia Feldman is a Chronicle reporter. Betty Tichich is a Chronicle
photographer.

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1993


                             944 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Page 58; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5998 words

HEADLINE: Whatever Happened to AIDS?

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Schmalz

BODY:

   I have come to the realization that I will almost certainly die of AIDS. I
have wavered on that point. When the disease was first diagnosed in early 1991,
I was sure I would die - and soon. I was facing brain surgery; the surgeons
discovered an infection often fates in four months. I would shortly develop
pheumonia, than blood clots. I was hospitalized four times over five months. But
by the end of that year, I thought differently. My health rebounded, almost
certainly because of AZT. I was doing so well; I really might beat it. Now, it
is clear I will not. You can beat the statistics only so long. Mt T-cell count,
which was only 2 when I got my diagnosis, has never gone above 30 - a
dangerously low level. I have lived longer than the median survival time by 10
months. The treatments simply are not there. They are not even in the pipeline.
A miracle is possible, of course. And for a long time, I though one would
happen. But let's face it, a miracle isn't going to happen. One day soon I will
simply become one of the 90 people in America to die that day of AIDS. It's like
knowing I will be killed by a speeding car, but not knowing when or where.

    I used to be an exception in my H.I.V. support group, the only one of its
eight members who was not merely infected with the virus but who had advanced to
full-blown AIDS. Now, just a year and a half later, the exception in my group is
the one person who does not have AIDS. All the rest of us have deteriorated with
the hallmarks of the disease -- a seizure, Kaposi's sarcoma, pneumonia. Our
weekly meetings simmer with desperation: We are getting sicker. I am getting
sicker. Time is running out.

   Once AIDS was a hot topic in America -- promising treatments on the horizon,
intense media interest, a political battlefield. Now, 12 years after it was
first recognized as a new disease, AIDS has become normalized, part of the
landscape. It is at once everywhere and nowhere, the leading cause of death
among young men nationwide, but little threat to the core of American political
power, the white heterosexual suburbanite. No cure or vaccine is in sight. And
what small treatment advances had been won are now crumbling. The world is
moving on, uncaring, frustrated and bored, leaving by the roadside those of us
who are infected and who can't help but wonder: Whatever happened to AIDS? As a
journalist who has written about this disease for five years, and as a patient
who has had it for nearly as long, I went out looking for answers.

THE DISEASE AND THE DOCTORS

DR. ANTHONY S. FAUCI SPEAKS WITH A HINT of a Brooklyn accent, which is out of
sync with the elegance of his appearance -- well tailored, tidy, trim. At 52, he
is scientist-cum-celebrity, ridiculed by Larry Kramer in the play "The Destiny
of Me," lionized by George Bush in the 1988 Presidential debate as a hero.

   Being the Government's point man on AIDS has made Tony Fauci (rhymes with
OUCH-ee) famous. He professes to be solely the scientist. But in fact, he is
very much the star and the politician, one year defending modest Reagan-Bush
AIDS budget proposals as adequate, the next defending generous Clinton proposals
as necessary. He is the activist's enemy -- "Murderer!" Kramer once called him
in an essay published in The Village Voice. He is the activist's friend, a
comrade in arms, showing up last October at the opening of the Kramer play
wearing a red AIDS ribbon.

   Fauci's starring AIDS role comes from the many hats he wears -- among them
director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and
director of the National Institutes of Health's Office of AIDS Research.

   "Fauci deserves a lot of the blame for where we are on AIDS," said Peter
Staley of TAG, the activist Treatment Action Group. But others say that is not
fair. "You can't blame any one person," said Gregg Gonsalves, who wrote TAG's
report on the status of AIDS research. "We've gotten to the edge of a scientific
cliff."

   Whatever Fauci's faults, I have never doubted his commitment. Still, he is
the face of the AIDS scientific community, and 12 years into the disease there
are only temporary treatments that work for a few years at most. AIDS remains a
fatal illness. Approximately a million Americans are believed to be infected
with the human immunodeficiency virus, the key component of AIDS, and virtually
all of them are expected to develop the disease eventually. Close to half a
million Americans are expected to have full-blown AIDS by the end of next year;
more than 200,000 have already died. Roughly 350,000 will have died by the end
of 1994. The World Health Organization puts the number infected worldwide at
more than 13 million adults and an additional 1 million or more children.

   So far, the only treatments are nucleoside analogues, drugs like AZT, DDC and
DDI. A fourth nucleoside analogue, D4T, is expected to be approved by the
spring. Fauci has focused national research efforts on these analogues, which
slow the virus by fooling it with a decoy of genetic material it needs to
reproduce. But the analogues have problems. They are highly toxic, and the
virus, which mutates rapidly, eventually catches on to the deception.

   Everyone knew going into the international AIDS conference in Berlin in June
that the nucleoside analogues were of limited use, but the horrible surprise was
just how limited. A report issued just before the meeting -- the Concorde Study,
conducted in England, France and Ireland -- found that, contrary to the
recommendations of the United States Government, use of AZT before the onset of
AIDS symptoms did not necessarily prolong life. (In an extraordinary action, a
United States Government panel has since pulled back the earlier recommendation.
AZT is still recommended for those with full-blown AIDS. But the panel left it
for patients and their doctors to decide on earlier use.)

   A subsequent Australian study, published in July, found that AZT, used early,
did prolong life. I have always felt that it has prolonged mine. Still, what
makes the fuss over AZT so stunning is not just that the drug has shortcomings
-- almost everyone knew that from the start. It is that AZT, flawed as it was,
had become the Gold Standard of treatment, against which other therapies were
being measured. The chilling message of the AZT dispute is this: Things are not
just failing to get better; they are getting worse. We are losing ground.

   "The fallout from Berlin has been devastating," said Martin Delaney, founding
director of Project Inform, an AIDS treatment information and lobbying group.
"There were no surprises. But the risk now is that AIDS gets put up on the shelf
along with a lot of other long-term unresolved problems. We lose the urgency for
money and the scientific momentum." The bad news has left drug companies
scrambling. Last spring things were so desperate that a group of 15 announced
they would pool research data. Many scientists -- and activists -- are fed up
with the drug companies, which seem hellbent on pursuing more nucleoside
analogues when the real future of AIDS treatment probably lies with gene
therapy. The idea is to alter the genetic structure of cells to make them
inhospitable to H.I.V. But the problem is, no one knows how to translate the
occasional test-tube success into a workable treatment. In addition, most of the
gene therapies are being developed by small biotechnology companies that will
take years to get into full production.

   So, was all the time and money spent on the nucleoside analogues wasted?
Fauci, who obviously has an investment in the answer, was emphatic that it
wasn't. "People say the Berlin meeting was so depressing, nothing's happening,"
Fauci said in his office overlooking the N.I.H. campus in Bethesda, Md. "I say
that's not the way science works. There are little steps, building blocks.
What's important is whether you're going in the right direction, and I am
convinced that we are.

   "Was it grossly inappropriate to do the extensive studies of AZT and DDI?" he
continued. "No. Should we have done more with other drugs? If we had them, one
could say, yes.

   "Let's say a year and a half from now, nevirapine isn't working," Fauci said
of an experimental drug undergoing trials in combination with the nucleoside
analogues. "Somebody's going to say, 'Why did you waste all that time with it?'
But you don't know it doesn't work until you test it."

   If Fauci is defensive, it may be because he is still smarting from a
political bruising. His Office of AIDS Research has been reorganized by the
Clinton Administration and he has been, in effect, ousted -- done in by the AIDS
activists through their Democratic friends in Congress. And while some of his
time is being diverted to playing politics, in his own laboratory research he
has now returned to basics -- Square 1 -- where many AIDS researchers are
working. Fauci is studying the pathogenesis of the disease, its route through
the body.

   I asked him the obvious: 12 years into the disease -- shouldn't we know that
already? "More effort looking at pathogenesis might have been appropriate in
retrospect," Fauci responded. "But we were constantly being diverted -- by the
activists, by Congress. It was: 'What can you give me right now? Get those drugs
out there as quickly as you can.' "

   Not so long ago we believed that if we just could find enough money, we could
make the disease manageable, like diabetes. But in a further sign of how little
hope exists these days in the scientific community, money isn't seen as the main
issue anymore.

   "Certainly, there are more scientific opportunities than there are resources
to fulfill them," Fauci said, echoing the views of other scientists. "But should
we dump billions into AIDS research now? I think we'd reach a point of
diminishing returns."

   Fauci presents a front of optimism, at least for me. After all, there is no
cure for any virus, only vaccines to prevent them -- measles is an example. By
the year 2000, he predicted, "We'll be into vaccine trials that show a vaccine
is much more feasible than we thought, though we may not have the best vaccine
by then."

   Other scientists are unconvinced. They point out that the rapid mutation of
the AIDS virus and its many strains make development of a vaccine difficult.

   "The public is frustrated; it says, 'You've been working on this for 10
years,' " said Dr. Irvin S. Y. Chen, director of the AIDS Institute at the
University of California at Los Angeles. Chen bemoaned the lack of money for
biomedical research in general, which he said was discouraging the best and the
brightest from entering the field.

   "We're in that in-between stage," said Dr. Merle A. Sande, an AIDS expert at
the University of California at San Francisco; he was head of the Government
panel on AZT use. "We know a lot about the virus, but we just don't seem able to
translate that knowledge into significant treatment advances. It's incredibly
frustrating."

   Still, the frustration of the public and the scientists is nothing compared
with the frustration of those of us living with AIDS or H.I.V. Will people still
be dying of AIDS in the year 2000? Fauci didn't hesitate for a second before
replying, "I don't think there's any question that will be the case."

THE ACTIVISTS AND THE GOVERNMENT

TIM BAILEY WAS ONE OF THE MARYS, AND THAT'S AS close to Act Up royalty as
anybody can get.

   The Marys are a subgroup of Act Up, the group involved in the more radical
demonstrations, like disrupting services at St. Patrick's Cathedral. When Bailey
died in June at 35, stipulating that he wanted a political funeral in
Washington, Act Up was obliged to comply.

   So on a drizzly Thursday at 7 A.M., two buses filled with Act Up members set
out from New York. They were to rendezvous with the body in Washington, then
carry the open coffin through the streets from the Capitol to the White House.
They would show Bill Clinton the urgency of AIDS. They would bring one of its
carcasses to his doorstep.

   But it was not to be. The police would not let them march, and the day turned
into a sodden fiasco, as the police and activists quarreled over the body,
shoving the coffin in and out of a van parked in front of the Capitol. The rage
was there, but the organization was not. And when the police said no, where did
Act Up members run for help but the White House, the very target of their
protest, getting Bob Hattoy, a White House staff member with AIDS, to intervene.
In the end, Act Up members gave up and went home, taking the body with them.

   It was a perfect metaphor for the state of AIDS activism -- raging in
desperate but unfocused anger, one foot on the inside, one on the outside.

   The AIDS movement was built on grass-roots efforts. Now those efforts are in
disarray. Many Act Up leaders have died. The group's very existence was based on
the belief that AIDS could be cured quickly if only enough money and effort were
thrown at it -- something that now seems increasingly in doubt. Besides, it is
hard to maintain attacks against a Government that is seeking big increases in
AIDS spending. Much of the cream of Act Up has fled, forming groups like TAG and
joining mainstream AIDS organizations like the Gay Men's Health Crisis and the
American Foundation for AIDS Research.

   Those left behind are Act Up's hard core. Act Up was always part theater,
part group therapy. Now, sadly, Act Up is increasingly reduced to burying its
dead.

   To say all that is not to belittle the accomplishments of the group. One
reason for Act Up's decline is that it has got so much of what it wanted. Act Up
forced AIDS into the Presidential race, dogging candidates. Because of Act Up
the price of AZT is lower. Drugs are approved more quickly. Today it is a given
that the communities affected by a disease have a voice, and must be consulted.
To a great extent, Act Up deserves much of the credit for the increasing
political power of the entire gay rights movement. But now even the gay movement
has pushed AIDS to the sidelines.

   Anyone questioning how AIDS ranks as an issue among gay groups need only look
to the march on Washington on April 25. Six years earlier, in 1987, a similar
gay march had one overriding theme: AIDS. If there was a dominant theme last
April, it was homosexuals in the military. To be sure, AIDS was an element of
the march, but just an element. Speaker after speaker ignored it.

   "It's like they are waiting for us to die so they can get on with their
agenda," said Dr. Nicholas A. Rango, the director of New York State's AIDS
Institute, a gay man who himself has AIDS and watched the march on C-Span from
his Manhattan hospital bed. [He died on Nov. 10.]

   Torie Osborn, formerly executive director of the National Gay and Lesbian
Task Force, argued that the shift was inevitable with the election of a
Democratic President, renewed attacks from the right wing and just plain
burnout. Increasingly, many homosexuals, especially those who test negative for
H.I.V., do not want a disease to be what defines their community. "There is a
deep yearning to broaden the agenda beyond AIDS," she said. "There's a natural
need for human beings who are in deep grieving to reach for a future beyond
their grieving.

   "It's one thing to be fighting for treatment, believing you're going to get a
cure that will have everyone survive," continued Osborn, who recently buried
three friends who had died of AIDS. "But it's an incredibly depressing truth
that AIDS has become part of the backdrop of gay life."

   What is to some a broadening of the gay agenda, however, is to others
desertion. "It's one thing for the politicians to abandon AIDS," Kevin Frost, a
TAG member, said. "But for our own community to abandon the issue.  . . . Who
brought this issue of gays in the military out in the open? A couple of flashy
queers with checkbooks. Well, what about AIDS?"

   What about AIDS? Perhaps the greatest development affecting Act Up, the
activist community and the entire AIDS care world is the changing face of the
disease. Homosexual sex still accounts for the majority of cases, 57 percent.
But that number is dropping, down from 61 percent in 1989. Meanwhile, the
percentage of cases tied to intravenous drug use is beginning to climb. It is
now at 23 percent, up from 21 percent in 1989.

   Black and Hispanic groups are clamoring for a greater role in running AIDS
care organizations. Their intentions seem genuine -- what do gay groups know of
inner-city drug use? -- but also seem driven in part by a desire for money and
power. In an age of Government cutbacks, AIDS is where the money is -- "today's
equivalent of the Great Society programs of the 60's," as Rango put it.

   In Washington and Houston, gay groups and black and Hispanic groups are
bickering over who should control the money and the programs. In New York, the
largest AIDS care organization, the Gay Men's Health Crisis, is trying valiantly
to be all things to all constituencies -- it contributed $25,000 to the lobbying
effort to allow homosexuals in the military even as it was helping to expand
legal services in Harlem. Inevitably, focus is lost.

   G.M.H.C. has recently changed executive directors, as have many of the more
than 3,500 AIDS organizations in the United States. The average executive
director of an AIDS service group lasts less than two years, burned out by
depression and exhausted by the bickering among AIDS constituencies.

   "We should be fighting the virus, not each other," said Dan Bross, the
executive director of the AIDS Action Council. "We're eating our young."

   MARY FISHER, WHO ADDRESSED THE REPUBLICAN National Convention in Houston as a
woman infected with H.I.V., whom I interviewed at the time and who has since
become a friend, also believes the AIDS movement is adrift. She was sitting at
lunch in Manhattan with Larry Kramer, both of them bemoaning the state of AIDS
activism.

   "We need to agree on the goals," Fisher said.

   "That's just rhetoric," Kramer shot back. "The goal is to find a cure."

   Fisher sees AIDS entering a dangerous never-never land, with the day fast
approaching when no one will be carrying the AIDS banner.

   "The gay community is going to stop screaming," she said. "It is already
stopping."

   "I'm very despondent," Kramer said. "You don't know where to yell or who to
yell at. Clinton says all the right things, then doesn't do anything."

   Indeed, the Clinton Administration does say all the right things, at times
coming close to being patronizing about it.

   "I have a real understanding that the people who feel the strongest about
this, they don't have time," Carol H. Rasco, the President's top domestic policy
adviser, said in defense of the zealotry of Act Up. "When a bomb is ticking
inside you, you have to keep pushing."

   Where once Washington doors were closed to AIDS activists, they are now open.
Indeed, perhaps the single biggest AIDS change in Washington under the Clinton
Administration has been one of tone. AIDS sufferers are no longer treated as
immoral lepers. David Barr, director of treatment education and advocacy for the
Gay Men's Health Crisis, recalled a May meeting with Donna E. Shalala, the
Secretary of Health and Human Services.

   "She agreed to everything we wanted," Barr said. "I was amazed. We're so used
to doing battle. But is it a ploy?"

   Certainly Bill Clinton is a vast improvement over George Bush. The President
proposed a major increase in spending on AIDS research, about 20 percent, coming
up with an additional $227 million. That would raise the total N.I.H. spending
on AIDS research to $1.3 billion. In aid for outpatient care, the White House
proposed a giant increase in what is known as Ryan White money, named for the
Midwestern teen-ager who died of AIDS in April 1990. The current appropriation
is $348 million, which the Administration proposed to nearly double by adding
$310 million. The House didn't add the entire amount, just a $200 million
increase, but it still brought the total to $548 million. The Senate was
slightly more generous, and the final appropriation was $579 million.

   But is more money enough? AIDS activists say they want leadership, but they
are not sure anymore what that means.

   "It was much easier," said Torie Osborn, "when we could hate George Bush and
Ronald Reagan, when we thought we had evil genocidal Republican Presidents who
weren't doing what needed to be done to get a cure."

   Still, as is so often the case with Bill Clinton, he is a victim of his own
lofty campaign rhetoric. He spoke eloquently about AIDS in his pitches for the
gay vote. He insisted that people infected with the AIDS virus, Bob Hattoy and
Elizabeth Glaser, speak at the Democratic National Convention. On Election
Night, he mentioned AIDS high in his victory speech. It all seemed so promising.
David B. Mixner, a Clinton friend who helped rally the gay vote, exclaimed in
the flush of a Clinton victory, "I believe thousands of my friends who wouldn't
make it, who would die of AIDS, might make it now because Bill Clinton is
President."

   There it is: the man from Arkansas was to be not just President but savior.
He's not. Bogged down early on in a battle over homosexuals in the military,
Clinton has grown wary of anything that the public might perceive as a gay
issue. He delayed fulfilling his campaign pledge to name an AIDS czar, finally
naming her five months into his term -- and only when the National Commission on
AIDS was about to attack him for not providing leadership on the epidemic.

   More than anything else, what the AIDS community wants from Bill Clinton is a
sense of urgency. Carol Rasco maintains that Clinton is committed. "Health-care
reform and AIDS are the only things I've worked on every day since I got here,"
said the domestic policy adviser. But others, even in the Administration, think
Clinton is doing little to help.

   "Other than myself, who lives with AIDS every day, there's no one at the
White House for whom this is their first-tier issue," said Bob Hattoy, who,
after serving six months as a White House aide often critical of the
Administration's AIDS policies, was shifted to the Interior Department. He
praised the President and Mrs. Clinton for having "a profoundly sensitive
awareness about AIDS," but at the staff level, he said, "AIDS is not on the
radar screens at the White House every day." And the political advisers? Hattoy
scoffed. "I don't think they'll address AIDS until the Perot voters start
getting it."

THE CZAR AND THE PRESS

THERE WAS A TIME when it was thought that the solution to the AIDS crisis could
be found in two words: AIDS czar. One omnipotent public figure with the power to
marshal funds, direct research, cut through the bureaucracy -- in short, to lead
a Manhattan Project-size effort to force a cure for AIDS. Kristine M. Gebbie
doesn't look like a czar, and she doesn't think of herself as one, either.

   At 50, she has the air of the head nurse. There is something at once
no-nonsense and fussy about her -- her erect posture, her precise and proper
answers, her tendency to correct an interviewer's questions. She is what she is
-- a nurse who worked her way up through the public-health bureaucracy, a
divorced mother of three children, who has willed herself to a better lot in
life. In 1978 she became the chief health officer of Oregon and then, 11 years
later, the chief health officer of Washington State. Her experience with AIDS is
primarily as a bureaucrat, as chairman of the Centers for Disease Control's
advisory panel on H.I.V. prevention and as a member of the National Commission
on AIDS.

   Now, she is the AIDS czar -- a far cry from the stellar names that AIDS
activists had fantasized about: H. Norman Schwarzkopf, Jimmy Carter, C. Everett
Koop.

   "We wanted 'Jurassic Park,' and we got 'Snow White,' " Larry Kramer likes to
say.

   "The activists wanted a war on AIDS," Gebbie said, shaking her head. "I am
not one of the big names. I am someone who has struggled with systems around
this epidemic since the beginning. I think I have a feel for what it takes to
bring people together."

   Indeed, asked to give her job description, she responded, "consensus
builder."

   Gebbie, whose official title is national AIDS policy coordinator, sees her
job as exactly that -- coordinating the various Federal agencies like Defense
and Housing and Education in terms of prevention, care and research. Her goal is
to have the agencies themselves take over the assault on AIDS, so she sees hers
as a short-term job -- 3 or 5 years, "10 years tops." She expects to take no
role in research other than, again, as a coordinator, but not one who
independently sets priorities.

   And what happened to the eagerly awaited Manhattan Project?

   "Manhattan Project?" Gebbie said. "I don't know what that means. Both the
Manhattan Project and the Man-on-the-Moon project involved, I think, a much more
targeted goal. We know where we'd like to go -- fix AIDS -- but I'm not sure we
can conceptualize what it would take to do that. On the other hand, if what
'Manhattan Project' conveys is: 'The Government is behind you,' well, if I do my
job right, we will target and have energy and direction. What we won't have is
somebody in general's stripes who can walk around and order people, 'Drop what
you're doing and work on H.I.V.' "

   Gebbie advocates distributing condoms to sexually active teen-agers, though
not necessarily in the schools. She supports supplying clean needles to drug
addicts. She backs "in extreme cases and only as a very last resort" the
isolation of people infected with H.I.V. who continue to be sexually
irresponsible. "It might be in a hospital or a group home," she said. And she
advocates, in theory, and with full civil rights protection, the reporting of
names of those with H.I.V. as a public-health technique for making sure
connections are made to their partners for counseling and possible treatment.

   Kristine Gebbie was not at the top of the Administration's list of candidates
for AIDS czar. Most of the medical and private-sector leaders who were
approached said they had withdrawn their names for personal reasons. Yet it was
clear that they did not regard the post as the all-powerful one it might have
been.

   "There's this contradiction," said Dr. Mark D. Smith, a San Francisco AIDS
expert who discussed the job with the Administration but eventually withdrew,
"between the public perception of great responsibility and the reality of no
real organizational authority."

   Most of those considered said, however, that they might have taken the job as
AIDS adviser to the President if Clinton himself had called to convince them.
But he didn't. The $112,000-a-year position, which does not require Senate
confirmation, was offered to Gebbie in a phone call from Rasco. Gebbie never met
the President until the morning of the June 25 news conference to announce her
appointment.

   To be fair, on that sunny Friday in the Rose Garden when he announced the
appointment of Gebbie, the President sounded like the old Bill Clinton, the one
in the campaign. He finally did what the activists wanted -- he spoke out on
AIDS as President. He labeled the virus "one of the most dreaded and mysterious
diseases humanity has ever known" and "an epidemic that has already claimed too
many of our brothers and sisters, our parents and children, our friends and
colleagues."

   But the trouble was, no one was listening. Newspapers and the networks
reported the naming of Gebbie. But few carried the President's comments on AIDS.
Newsweek magazine, in a week-in-the-life-of-the-President piece, didn't even
mention the Gebbie announcement. At the news conference, there was only one
question on AIDS, and that was directed to Gebbie about her qualifications.
Reporters were eager to move on to the real news, like the budget and
homosexuals in the military.

   AIDS, it seems, had become old news.

   "In the early days of AIDS, when knowledge was expanding, there were lots of
very compelling things to write about," said Marlene Cimons, who covers AIDS and
Federal health policy out of the Washington bureau of The Los Angeles Times. "We
were in the infant stages of making policy decisions about AIDS that had unique
social and political ramifications. Now it's become harder to find angles. We've
written to death most aspects of the disease: AIDS in the classroom. AIDS in the
workplace. Testing. They filled the front pages. Now there's a vacuum."

   Stuart Shear, a reporter for "The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" who covers AIDS,
said the conflicts that had made for good stories -- the fights between
Republican Administrations and AIDS advocates -- were gone.

   "It's become a pure science story," he said. "When it gets down to the
clinical nitty-gritty, that's not what we look at. It's hard to get people to
come on and complain about an Administration that's increasing funding."

   For her part, Gebbie, who has a budget of just under $3 million and a staff
"of four or five" -- with 15 to 20 others, she said, in another office -- seems
to prefer being in the shadows. Her office will not be in the White House but in
a building across the street that houses a McDonald's. "My guess," she said, "is
that the choice of me makes clear that this isn't intended to be somebody who
spends all their time outside rousing people up, but somebody who is prepared to
spend a lot of time inside making it work.

   "It's very clear how many people really did expect miracles," Gebbie said.
"When I give what I know are appropriate answers, I know I sound like a
bureaucratic stick-in-the-mud: 'This lady is not worth two bits to us; she talks
about coordination and cooperation. Blah!'

   "But part of my mission," Gebbie said matter-of-factly, "is to help people
keep their expectations within reality."

   Gebbie needn't worry. Expectations could hardly be lower. "People are weary
and hopeless and sad -- the researchers, the activists, the care-givers," John
H. Templeton, director of AIDS educational services at Grady Memorial Hospital
in Atlanta, told me. "There is this sense that no matter what you do, it's all
going to turn out the same in the end."

THE PATIENT AND JOURNALIST

 IN MY INTERVIEWS FOR this article and others, I always ask people with AIDS if
they expect to die of the disease. One reason for that is a genuine reporter's
curiosity; the answer is part of the profile of who they are. But I am also
searching for hope for myself. Increasingly, the answers come back the same,
even from the most optimistic of Act Up zealots: Yes, we will die of AIDS.

   I thought about that the other day in the emergency room at Lenox Hill
Hospital. I had taken my boyfriend there for a blood transfusion to offset the
anemia caused by the chemotherapy for his Kaposi's sarcoma. I realized on that
Sunday morning in the emergency room that the moment of crisis wasn't coming
tomorrow or the next day for my boyfriend. It was here today. And it will soon
be here today for me, too.

   Does that make me angry? Yes. I had such hope when I interviewed Bill Clinton
about AIDS and gay issues for this magazine in August 1992. He spoke so
eloquently on AIDS. I really did see him as a white knight who might save me.
How naive I was to think that one man could make that big a difference. At its
core, the problem isn't a government; it's a virus.

   Still, in interviews with researchers and Administration officials, it was
clear that we are talking from different planets. I need help now, not five
years from now. Yet the urgency just wasn't there. Compassion and concern, yes;
even sympathy. But urgency, no. I felt alone, abandoned, cheated.

   I asked Gebbie what she says to someone with AIDS -- in other words, what she
says to me. And for one brief moment, there was a glimmer of realization that
delay means death.

   "I say, 'I hear you and I appreciate the frustration and the sorrow and the
loneliness,' " she said. "That can sound trite, but it is genuine. It's
inappropriate for me to hold out a false promise to you. It would be easy to
say: 'There, there. It will be better soon.' That's a disservice, so I have to
be honest with you. We don't have quick answers. I can't tell you when we're
going to have a cure."

   I am on the cutting edge of drug testing, in a trial at New York Hospital for
a new combination therapy: AZT, DDI and nevirapine. That is the combination that
drew so much publicity last February when researchers in Boston declared that
they had found the combination was effective in inhibiting the virus. But at the
Berlin conference, the formulator of the concept, Yung-Kang Chow, a Harvard
medical student, reported a flaw in part of the original study. Other
researchers challenged the findings after they were unable to confirm the
results.

   I was surprised at how jealous many of my fellow members of the support group
were when I got into the trial -- 1 of only 25 people accepted out of more than
400 applicants. The group members felt that I had used influence. I had not. Yet
admission to these trials is not purely luck, either -- a point driven home when
a number of leading researchers called, offering to get me into one of the
nevirapine trials. I did not take them up on it. If my doctors used influence to
get me in, it was not with my knowledge. But I am grateful if they did. The ship
is beginning to sink; the water is lapping onto the deck. I am eager for any
lifeboat, however leaky.

   The letters pour in from readers who know I have AIDS, which I wrote about in
this newspaper last December. A Florida woman wrote detailing her son's
agonizing death from AIDS. Halfway through the letter, she caught herself,
suddenly blurting out, "I don't know why I am writing this to you." Like so many
of the letters, it was really not so much for me as for the writer, an excuse to
open up her heart and let out the pain. She ended with a line I think of often,
a line as much for her dead son, also named Jeffrey, as for me. "I intend this
letter," she wrote, "as a mother's hug."

   Hardly a day goes by without my getting a letter or call from someone who has
the cure for AIDS. Many are crackpots. But others, I'm not so sure. Perhaps I
will soon be desperate enough to pursue them.

   More and more of the letters are nasty, even cruel. They are still the
minority, but they make clear how deep the resentment runs against the attention
given AIDS.

   "As an average American," a man from Brooklyn wrote in a letter to the editor
that made its way to me, "I cannot feel compassion for those who contracted AIDS
through the pleasures of homosexuality, promiscuity or drug injection. The
advent of the AIDS sickness in the world breaks my heart -- but only for those
who contracted it from blood transfusion, medical skin pricks or birth. The
insipid news stories and other media accounts of AIDS pain, pneumonias and
cancers attempt to reach me, but they only turn me off. And I, in turn, turn
them off, as I suppose that millions of your readers do. Let's permit these
pleasure seekers of the flesh to live out their years in hospices or homes at
minimal cost and then die."

   Am I bitter? Increasingly, yes. At the Act Up funeral for Bailey in
Washington, I thought of how much the anger of the activists mirrored my own. I,
too, wanted to shout -- at no one really, just to vent the rage. I am dying. Why
doesn't someone help us?

   I didn't shout. I couldn't. All I could think about on that rainy Thursday
afternoon was that a political funeral is not for me. It is at once very noble
and very tacky.

   What, then, is for me? I usually say that my epitaph is not a phrase but the
body of my work. I am writing it with each article, including this one. But
actually, there is a phrase that I want shouted at my funeral and written on the
memorial cards, a phrase that captures the mix of cynicism and despair that I
feel right now and that I will almost certainly take to my grave: Whatever
happened to AIDS?

GRAPHIC: Photos: Comrades in arms and, often, at odds: From left, the playwright
Larry Kramer, Dr. Anthony Fauci, who has been head of AIDS Research for the
National Institutes of Health, and Robert Hattoy, an Interior Department
official with AIDS. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARC ASNIN/SABA, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg.
59); President Clinton and Kristine Gebbe, the AIDS czar. "Part of my mission,"
she says, "is to help people keep their expectations within reality."
(PHOTOGRAPH BY JEFFREY MARKOWITZ/SYGMA)(pg. 60); Tim Bailey, an Act Up member
who died in June, wanted a political funeral, but the police turned away the
body at the Capitol's doorstep. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARC ASNIN/SABA, FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)(pg. 61); At the gay march on Washington in April, AIDS took a back seat
to the Campaign for Military Service. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARC ASNIN/SABA, FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. 85)

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1993


                             945 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     November 28, 1993 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: ARTS & LIVING; Pg. 2H

LENGTH: 469 words

HEADLINE: WILDLY WESTERN FOR CYSTIC FIBROSIS AID AT OLD MAY CO.

BYLINE: By FRAN HENRY; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

DATELINE: CLEVELAND

BODY:

   When a little kid tries to say "cystic fibrosis," what often comes out is "65
roses."

   That's why Connie Brown bought Western shirts embroidered with red roses for
herself and husband, Jim, to wear to the Neon Armadillo Stampede, a benefit Nov.
20 for cystic fibrosis research and patient care.

   "Twelve years ago when our granddaughter was diagnosed, nothing could be
done. Now there's the hope of gene therapy," said Connie of Piqua. "Life
expectancy then was 15 years, and now it's 27."

   Cystic fibrosis is the No. 1 genetic killer of children and young adults.

   The Browns, who are former Clevelanders, were among the 320 or so cowpeople
whooping it up on the third floor of the May Co. Who would have imagined that
the party site itself, empty since January, would stir up so much emotion?

   Not Mary Lou Scarcella, who admitted to having a lump in her throat as she
and her husband, Jim, drove up the parking garage ramp. She found herself
reminiscing about Christmas shopping expeditions with her mother and daughter,
Sharon. "Sharon never wanted to get off the little train," she recalled.

   "The closer we get to Gateway opening, the more they're going to wish that
the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame was here," speculated Cliff Vogt, his wife, Judy,
nodding in agreement.

   Linda Schlageter, who chaired the decorations committee, put a positive spin
on the location. "We thought it was happy that we're doing something happy
here." The May Co. donated the space, sparkling clean when Schlageter's
committee arrived with giant cutouts of armadillos and Western clothes to string
on washlines. Cute.

   More atmosphere came from the Lonesome Chill Band, which cooked up tunes for
the Texas Two-Step and line dancing, and the shoot-out staged by the Tumbleweed
Gunfighters. Lloyd Canterbury was The Law and John Delugas, the bad guy.
Miscellaneous death scenes were played by four others from the Lorain-based
troupe.

   Black tie was forbidden, much to the relief of inveterate partygoers Rena and
Michael Blumberg. "It's such a relief to see men out of suits," Rena noted.
Amen.

   Among the partygoers were honorary party chairwoman Farah Walters, president
and CEO of University Hospitals of Cleveland, and her husband, Stephen, who
filled five tables with hospital compatriots; Nordson Corp.'s Connie Haqq and
CEO Bill Madar and his wife, Amanda, who filled two tables; Mebby Brown and her
husband, Jack; Jim and Kathy Carney; John T. Feighan, president of the CF board,
and his wife, Lynn; Dot and Don Campbell, chairman of Kenny King Corp., which
donates food to the annual CF Sports Challenge; Bill and Pam Summers; Mary
Beckenbach; Mary Kay and Tim Carroll; Susan and Bill Minnich; Connie and Jack
Kappus; Meg and Scott Mueller; Carol and Graham Hall, and Pat and Bill Lake.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS BY: PD/DALE OMORI ; PHOTO 1: Scott Mueller chats with party
chairwoman Mebby Brown.; PHOTO 2: Mary Lou and Jim Scarcella and Linda and Bill
Schlageter.; PHOTO 3: Mike and Anna Adams and Betsy and John Feighan.

COLUMN: ABOUT TOWN

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1993


                             946 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     November 26, 1993 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: EDITORIALS & FORUM; Pg. 7B

LENGTH: 1129 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE AND VALUE JUDGMENTS

BYLINE: By ROSEMARY MUSACHIO

BODY:

   Natural science is supposed to be free of value judgments. Unlike social
scientists, natural scientists are supposed to handle their work with the
strictest objectivity, not manipulating results to anyone's advantage. But with
advanced knowledge and technology, particularly in genetics, scientists are
becoming involved with ethical dilemmas.

   They are torn between making the world better and making it perfect - between
finding cures and creating monsters.

   Genetic engineering is at the core of these ethical questions. By definition,
genetic engineering means the latest techniques of manufacturing recombinant DNA
and splicing genes to produce entirely new forms of life.

   In addition to splicing genes, scientists can also map them to determine the
exact location of each gene on a chromosome. These techniques help in the
treatment of diseases, ecological control and production of goods.

   By splicing bacteria genes, geneticists are able to produce insulin and
inferon. With the discovery of genetic patterns, medical scientists can detect
symptoms before a disease develops, in both adults and fetuses. Such diseases
include some types of cancers, diabetes, muscular dystrophies and heart
ailments.

   Accordingly, by identifying diseases beforehand, doctors can detect potential
risks and possible preventions. For instance, by pre-diagnosing muscular
diseases, doctors can prescribe therapy for the patient at an earlier stage,
possibly retarding its development.

   Or in pre-diagnosing heart disease, the doctor can prescribe certain medicine
or do an operation before the patient experiences actual symptoms.

   Prevention and treatment of diseases can also involve gene therapy, which is
replacing defective genes. By removing an extra 21st chromosome from babies, for
example, doctors could cure Down syndrome.

   Currently, 250 genetic defects have been discovered, of which 15% can be
corrected. If medical scientists could eliminate all those defects through
therapeutic genetics, the world would be a much better place. Obviously,
suffering would be reduced, insurance rates and hospitalization costs would
decrease dramatically, and medical staffs would be almost idle.

   No doubt genetic engineering will change the course of humanity. But will
that be entirely beneficial? Presently, when some parents discover their babies
will have birth defects, they choose abortions even though only a few of the
defects are really terrible.

   With regard to Down syndrome, a child will be mentally retarded and have
"mongoloid" features. Knowing that, parents feel responsible for the child's
future. They may fear they will bring up a child whom society will ridicule, who
will lead a life of confinement and frustration or will just curl up and die.

   But the Down syndrome may not be that serious, for the majority of children
grow up to lead content and productive lives.

   Parents may also abort even if there is just a potential of their baby having
a genetic disease. Babies who are born with the gene for Alzheimer's, for
instance, may never get it. Or if a child does develop a disease such as
Huntington's disease, which is a mental disorder that usually strikes after a
person reaches 40, it may remain dormant until he is well past his 40s.

   New technology will further allow parents to choose gender preferences by
aggregating sperm and inseminating the mother with either the X or Y chromosome.
Contrary to gene therapy, the latter is an example of eugenics, genetic
engineering to produce desirable characteristics.

   Here is where ethical considerations start to become complicated. Eugenics
can have disputed and undisputed benefits. An undisputed benefit is manipulating
a gene so a person can become more intelligent, for it would pose no harm to the
individual.

   On the other hand, if a certain type of gene is linked with ambition but also
with heart disease, the benefit becomes disputed. Is ambition more important
than a possible earlier death? Even if the gene was kept for the sake of
ambition, it would only guarantee increased frustration for the individual, not
necessarily success.

   Although there is little argument on eliminating life-threatening genetic
defects, there is a lot of indecision on what traits are considered "normal," or
tolerable to live with for an individual. More importantly, who will determine
what is "normal" or even "perfect"?

   Right now, scientists seem to be taking on that responsibility as though they
are playing God by controlling human destiny. They interfere and reshape the
environment in both good and bad ways. On one hand, they protect humanity by
developing antibiotics. On the other, they concentrate on the "Frankenstein
factor," trying to create a master race.

   Evidence of this has already occurred. Adolf Hitler tried to create a
"purified" race. He figured that if scientists could manipulate genes of Jews
among others, the world would become completely Aryan. Apparently he didn't know
that gene transplants couldn't allow patients to pass on genes to their
children.

   Certainly, if Hitler succeeded, humans would have lost their individuality.
They would also lack even more sensitivity and tolerance for "outcasts." This
intolerance already has been demonstrated in Scotland where men who had an extra
Y chromosome were assumed to be criminals.

   If scientists make rash claims, they will play into the hands of
narrow-minded officials and groups. If geneticists find a gene to alter skin
color, the KKK would surely try to eliminate the black population. Or suppose
geneticists discover a genetic pattern that is linked with homosexuality,
liberal thinkers, or devoted religious followers? Then we would definitely have
a technological tragedy. The Brave New World would come to life, transforming
the "wrong" eye color, hair color and level of intelligence into "correct" ones.

   Fortunately, we are not living in the Brave New world yet. The immediate goal
of medical scientists is not to create "perfection" - no matter how it is
defined - but to find cures for diseases.

   Nevertheless, the natural sciences are not devoid of value judgments.  Within
the realm of genetics, scientists must decipher the fine line between
therapeutic and eugenic genetic engineering. They must concentrate on how to
make people feel better, not how to make them better than one another.

   Like social scientists, natural scientists must decide what is right and
wrong, based on how it will affect the entire human race. Otherwise, if
curiosity and competitiveness reign over altruism and tolerance, we will not be
humans anymore. We will be intellectual, beautiful, strong zombies who won't
accept imperfections or understand human needs.

GRAPHIC: Drawing

COLUMN: FORUM/ESSAY & COMMENT

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1993


                             947 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   November 25, 1993, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: View; Part E; Page 14; Column 1; View Desk

LENGTH: 1386 words

HEADLINE: ON VIEW / MARY LOU LOPER:  THEY COME OUT IN FORCE FOR 'SUNSET BLVD.'
PREMIERE

BYLINE: By MARY LOU LOPER

BODY:

   The first "Sunset Blvd." starred Gloria Swanson with William Holden in the
1950 Billy Wilder film. The newest "Sunset Blvd." stars Glenn Close with Alan
Campbell in the 1993 Andrew Lloyd Webber musical.

   Tuesday night at the American premiere at the Shubert Theatre, Childrens
Hospital of Los Angeles starred too. It was the only Los Angeles institution
that attempted to sell out the Shubert's 1,751 seats during the myriad preview
nights. The evening was a sellout, with a waiting list -- a dream come true for
benefit chairwoman Brooke Young, granddaughter of the late Gloria Swanson.

   Post-show, Young said, "Glenn Close was incredible. And the set! She captured
the Norma Desmond personality. I really thought I was watching my grandmother."

   A who's who of the Southland crowded the theater. Pre-show, 1,200 of them
flocked across the street, most jaywalking, for a supper of beef stew, salmon,
Caesar salad, pastas and champagne.

   "This is a real body brush," said Robin Barker, meaning it was
people-perfect, the more the merrier. Charlie and Nancy Munger and Tom and
Margaret Larkin ate standing up. Stanton and Ernestine Avery, George Boone and
Rari and Frank Simmons and their family meshed on the crowded balcony. In the
bar, where some ate at the marble bar, the crush included the Henry Yost family.
On the patio Judson and Joyce Green found a table. Upstairs, Marion and Earl
Jorgensen had dibs on another, while Polly Goodan searched.

   Judge David Thomas, chairman of the hospital trustees, his wife, Peggy, and
trustees president Anne Wilson surveyed the crowd with pleasure, while committee
stalwarts Bonnie McClure and Sally Stewart devised traffic patterns and Tally
Mingst and Nancy Birdwell lent benefit expertise under the marquee lights.

   The musical has some poignant lines: "All you wonderful people out there in
the dark." "We taught the world a new way to dream." "Bound to be a little
suffering," and, "She's never known the meaning of surrender."

   For hospital devotees, there seemed to be double meanings. Among the
wonderful people out there, standing to applaud for curtain calls, were Stacey
Sewell and her parents, Barbara and Jim Sewell, and Dr. Vaughn Starnes and his
wife, Janet. He's the doctor at Childrens who performed the first double-lobe
lung transplant in January, when Stacey, a cystic fibrosis patient, received
lobes from both her parents.

   Also in the crowd were Stewart Smith and Jeanne and Russell Smith and the H.
Russell Smith Research Award winner, Dr. Donald Kohn, who made history this year
for his team's gene therapy procedure on a "bubble baby."

   "I had such a feeling of the audience being together," said John Welborne.

   The hospital is known for its massive numbers of volunteers and givers.
Honorary chairs Hannah and Edward Carter were in one row with former Ambassador
to the Vatican William Wilson with his wife, Betty, and Tom and Ruth Jones.
Nearby were Jean Smith and Ross Barrett, Marcia Hobbs and Martha and Glen
Mitchel.

   Families were happily clustered. Will and Libby Doheny, with his mother,
Onnalee Doheny, and sister Katrina Cord, in from Sun Valley, and their children,
Leigh and Megan, were there. More in the crowd: Rupert and Anna Murdoch, David
and Holly Davis with their daughter Jessica and his mother, Ruth Davis; Joan
Williams up from the desert, Sally Keller and attorney-daughter Sarah, Rich and
Megan Hernandez, Walt Rose, Bob and Faye Davidson, Janice and Bob Carpenter,
Betty Keatinge, Dr. Richard and Nancy Call, Scott Brittingham and Ella McCormick
(engaged to wed June 25 at Mauna Kea) and Pen and Mary Alice Tudor.

   Swanson's daughter Gloria Daly (Brooke Young's mother) flew in from Pebble
Beach. Brooke's brothers, Larry and Chris Anderson of Montecito, and her
daughter Ashley, 19, and son, Court, answered Swanson questions galore.

   Of her famous great grandmother, Ashley said, "She gave us big hugs."

   *

   EARTHSHAKING: Bills flew from a futuristic ATM on stage at the Beverly
Hilton. The ballroom roared with the crunching grind of a fake earthquake and
aftershock.

   The scene was the 36th annual California Scientist and Industrialist of the
Year awards banquet. Hiroo Kanamori, director of the Caltech seismological
laboratory, and Edward Carson, chairman and CEO of First Interstate Bancorp,
were both modest as they accepted the crystal awards presented by the California
Museum of Science and Industry.

   Kanamori, honored for his research into the waves and energy that earthquakes
produce, said his concern was to make people earthquake-prepared. Carson, who
received his award for transforming First Interstate into one of the
top-performing banks in the nation -- handling 11 million ATM transactions per
month -- said he dates from "the pen-and-ink era."

   Carson's wife, Nadine, and Kanamori's wife, Kay, looked on. Among those
lauding the recipients were museum President Roger Kozberg, emcee Franklin Ulf,
USC President Steven Sample, museum executive director Jeffrey Rudolph, Donald
Shellgren and Marvin Holen.

   *

   VOILA: More than 500 Francophiles (including L.A.'s new French Consul Gen.
Jean-Maurice Ripert) sipped the just-released 1993 Beaujolais Nouveau flown in
(compliments of Air France) for La Grande Affaire chaired by Sheldon Ausman
(with wife Sandy by his side) at the Biltmore.  The Crystal Ballroom was
converted into "A Night at Maxim's." Master Chef Jean-Pierre Chavant from
Grenoble supervised the French cuisine. John Gavin, former ambassador to Mexico,
and wife Connie led the festivities.

   A net of $100,000 is anticipated to aid the California Medical Center-Los
Angeles emergency department, which treats 31,000 patients a year.

   *

   CHRISTMAS FAVORITES: Hollygrove Home for Children presents "Santa on Ice," a
family ice show (with Diane Keaton as honorary chair) Dec. 4 at Pickwick Ice
Center . . . Angels Attic in Santa Monica celebrates its 10th Victorian
Christmas with a gala tea from noon to 4 p.m. Wednesday.

   *

   NEWEST: Chanel President Arie L. Kopelman heralded Chanel boutique's new
four-story home on Rodeo Drive at an American Film Institute affair.

   *

   TRIBUTES: Los Amigos del Pueblo, Merchants of Olvera Street, the Charros, Los
Amigos de Los Angeles and Mariachi Los Camperos hosted a mariachi Mass to honor
the memory of El Padrino John Bowles, who died this month . . . Roger and Erika
Greaves took kudos from the Valley Cultural Center at its Golden Horn Award
dinner at the Promenade in Woodland Hills.

   *

   ESCALATION: Cast members of "Guys and Dolls" joined the pony watchers at the
autumn opening of Hollywood Park . . . Junior League President Ann Zimmerman
headed the groundbreaking for the new Marjorie Hamlin Rainey league headquarters
in Hancock Park. She also hosted the league's President's Tea in Marina del Rey
. . . .

   Mary Hart sang the national anthem and Dennis Miller starred at "Jail House
Rock," chaired by Bruce Meyer for the Beverly Hills Police Officers Assn.
Supporters netted $240,000 . . . Christine Geller, Deedie Hudnut, Dayle Roath
and Mary Flaherty exulted in their holiday gift boutique and luncheon at the
Bel-Air Bay Club for Westside Guild of Childrens Hospital.

   *

   ON VIEW: Dr. Francis J. Moorehead presided over the opening reception of the
$4-million Methodist Hospital Radiation Oncology Center in Arcadia . . .
Rosemary Kramer brought the Southern California Council of the National Museum
of Women in the Arts together at the Armand Hammer Museum to view satirical
works by Daumier. Later everyone crossed Wilshire Boulevard for tea at the
Regency Club and a blow-out of candles on the group's third birthday cake . . .
.

   Ava and Chuck Fries hosted cocktails for supporters of People Assisting the
Homeless and handed out invitations to an imaginary feast supporters won't need
to attend (just send money) . . . Lynn Day and Molly Siefert chaired the
Metropolitan Opera National Council dinner for the Western Regional Auditions .
. . .

   Camp Ronald McDonald for Good Times is the beneficiary of the funds raised by
the Alpha Delta Pi luncheon chaired by Anne Hasserjian . . . Mary Bilich and
Marie Watte chaired the San Marino Guild for John Tracy Clinic fashion show . .
. Former U.S. Secretary of Labor Lynn Martin spoke at the Wish List reception at
the home of Margaret and William Grubman.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Nancy Birdwell, left, the Young family -- Ashley, Court, Jim,
Brooke -- and David A. Thomas and Tally Mingst are all smiles at the "Sunset
Blvd." premiere. Brooke Young, granddaughter of Gloria Swanson, who starred in
the film, raved about Glenn Close, the show's star.  JIM MENDENHALL / Los
Angeles Times; Photo, Chanel President Arie L. Kopelman, left, enjoys the
opening festivities at the Chanel boutique in Beverly Hills with his wife, Coco,
and Charlton Heston.  ALAN BERLINER / Berliner Studio; Photo, First Interstate
CEO Edward Carson celebrates his award from the California Museum of Science and
Industry with his wife, Nadine.  LEE SALEM / For The Times; Photo, La Grande
Affaire emcee Connie Gavin toasts release of the '93 Beaujolais Nouveau with
event chairs Sheldon Ausman, left, and Robert Rothbart.

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1993


                             948 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 18; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 7465 words

HEADLINE: Uncovered Short Sales Grow by 1.2% on Nasdaq

BYLINE: By FLOYD NORRIS

BODY:

   The bets that Nasdaq stocks will tumble continue to grow larger.

   The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that the
total short interest in Nasdaq stocks rose to a record 671.3 million shares for
the month that ended Nov. 5. The monthly increase was just 1.2 percent, the
smallest climb of 1993.

    The figure represents the number of shares borrowed and sold short, but not
yet covered by the cutoff date. It has risen every month of the year after
sustaining its last dip in the month that ended in early January, and it is now
44 percent above the January figure.

   While there are several reasons to sell a stock short, the usual one is to
bet that its price will decline, enabling a speculator to buy it back later for
less than its sale price. As Nasdaq stocks have risen, more and more speculators
have been making such bets.

   One stock in which many short-sellers evidently gave up was Apple Computer
Inc. Its short position declined to just 2.8 million shares from 7.6 million
shares. During the month, its share price surged after John Sculley stepped down
as chairman, to $35 from a low of $22.

   The largest increases in short positions came in the Comcast Corporation, a
developer of cable communications systems. Short-selling in its special class A
stock, which is nonvoting, rose 2.8 million shares, to 9.1 million, while its
regular class A stock, which has limited voting rights, rose 2.4 million shares,
to 7.6 million.

   John Reddan, an analyst with Moran & Associates, noted that Comcast had
issued bonds convertible into the special stock and that investors in those
issues might have hedged their positions by shorting.

   Salvatore Muoio, an analyst for Gabelli & Company, said the short position in
the class A stock probably reflected bets that the price spread between the two
stocks would narrow.

   The American Power Conversion Corporation, which makes uninterruptible power
supply products to be used with computers, continued to hold the dubious honor
of having the most shares sold short, at 13.7 million. That was down from 14.5
million a month earlier, as some shorts were cashed out. The shares, which
peaked in late September at $24.75 after a long climb, have since fallen to $19.

   The new holder of second place in the short derby is the Snapple Beverage
Corporation, a stock that has soared since its initial public offering last
December. But recently the shares have been slipping; they traded this week at
their lowest level since August. With a short position of 10.2 million shares,
up marginally from the previous month, Snapple moved in front of the class A
shares of Tele-Communications Inc., where the short position fell to 9.3 million
shares from 12.2 million. That was after it was announced that Bell Atlantic
would acquire Tele-Communications in a stock swap, which will mean losses for
the short-sellers.

Largest Increases

Security Name                          11/15/93     10/15/93       Change

Comcast Corp cl A Spcl                9,111,597    6,349,968    2,761,629   T
+Price/Costco Inc                     3,592,395    2,185,659    1,406,736   T
U.S. Healthcare Inc                   4,246,952    2,946,719    1,300,233   T
Grand Casinos Inc                     4,769,901    3,489,936    1,279,965   T
Geotek Inds                           1,574,132      688,686      885,446   T
Checkers Drive-In                     6,732,353    5,927,202      805,151   T
Hollinger Inc                         1,212,700      453,100      759,600   T
Marshall & Ilsley                     1,437,438      692,429      745,009   T
Mobile Telecomm Tech                  8,774,788    8,039,081      735,707   T
Somatogen Inc                         3,133,196    2,397,706      735,490   T
Sonoco Products Co                      965,133      238,656      726,477   T
Zale Corp                               762,341       43,257      719,084   T
Synoptics Commun Inc                  5,487,515    4,821,668      665,847   T
Lady Luck Gaming Corp                   651,517       43,796      607,721   T
TPI Enterprises                       4,668,158    4,080,322      587,836   T
Informix Corp                         3,148,061    2,561,255      586,806   T
+Corestates Fin Corp                  3,281,479    2,700,164      581,315   T
Amer West Airlines                    1,494,190      956,208      537,982
Software Toolwks Inc                  1,537,588    1,027,326      510,262   T
MCI Comm Corp                         8,834,282    8,340,435      493,847   T
AGCO Corp.                            1,413,097      950,356      462,741   T
Orbital Sciences Corp                 1,437,898      977,187      460,711   T
LM Ericsson Tel Add                   2,331,734    1,873,116      458,618
Senetek Adr                             634,906      176,787      458,119



Largest Decreases

Security Name                          11/15/93     10/15/93       Change

Apple Computer Inc                    2,803,342    7,623,179   -4,819,837   T
Tele Commun Inc A                     9,255,607   12,178,793   -2,923,186   T
Gen Nutrition Cos                       464,884    2,583,082   -2,118,198   T
Intel Corp                            3,849,319    5,850,805   -2,001,486   T
+Oracle Systems Corp                  2,255,363    3,943,180   -1,687,817   T
Sun Microsystems Inc                  3,612,864    5,133,352   -1,520,488   T
Biomet Inc                              906,735    2,324,374   -1,417,639   T
Lotus Development Corp                3,206,045    4,195,160     -989,115   T
Amer Power Conversion                13,718,410   14,536,663     -818,253   T
Bruno's Inc                              76,637      864,953     -788,316   T
Adobe Systems Inc                     2,653,820    3,441,019     -787,199   T
Nextel Commun A                       2,662,013    3,443,259     -781,246   T
Direct Connect Wts A                    149,748      902,999     -753,251
Canandaigua Wine A                      275,978    1,004,461     -728,483   T
Buffets Inc                           3,337,422    4,007,322     -669,900   T
Broderbund Software                   1,244,694    1,875,966     -631,272   T
Chiron Corp                           1,008,071    1,630,759     -622,688   T
Pres Riverboat Casinos                2,530,400    3,127,527     -597,127   T
Electronic Arts Inc                   3,191,393    3,731,737     -540,344   T
Stratacom Inc                         1,017,858    1,557,808     -539,950   T
Marcam Corp                             246,838      778,994     -532,156   T
Pyxis Corp                            1,285,819    1,785,670     -499,851   T
Biomechanics Corp Amer                  666,657    1,157,952     -491,295
Herbalife Intl                          366,747      840,352     -473,605   T



Largest Positions

Security Name                          11/15/93     10/15/93       Change

Amer Power Conversion                13,718,410   14,536,663     -818,253   T
Snapple Beverage Corp                10,247,541   10,137,888      109,653   T
Tele Commun Inc A                     9,255,607   12,178,793   -2,923,186   T
Comcast cl A Spcl                     9,111,597    6,349,968    2,761,629   T
MCI Comm Corp                         8,834,282    8,340,435      493,847   T
Mobile Telecomm Tech                  8,774,788    8,039,081      735,707   T
Comcast A                             7,615,929    5,193,776    2,422,153   T
Dell Computer Corp                    7,603,875    8,025,916     -422,041   T
Checkers Drive-In                     6,732,353    5,927,202      805,151   T
Synoptics Commun Inc                  5,487,515    4,821,668      665,847   T
Casino Magic Corp                     5,246,571    5,135,454      111,117   T
Noble Drilling Corp                   5,138,116    5,111,986       26,130   T
Grand Casinos Inc                     4,769,901    3,489,936    1,279,965   T
TPI Enterprises                       4,668,158    4,080,322      587,836   T
Food Lion IncA                        4,542,141    4,329,162      212,979   T
Greenwich Pharm Inc                   4,349,986    4,433,537      -83,551   T
U.S. Healthcare Inc                   4,246,952    2,946,719    1,300,233   T
Borland Intl                          4,218,040    4,637,400     -419,360   T
Starbucks Corp                        4,118,733    4,430,060     -311,327   T
Picturetel Corp                       4,099,885    3,943,137      156,748   T
Novell Inc                            4,092,798    4,215,826     -123,028   T
Tokos Med Corp Del                    3,922,905    3,783,764      139,141   T
Intel Corp                            3,849,319    5,850,805   -2,001,486   T
DSC Commun Corp                       3,770,676    3,424,296      346,380   T
Stryker Corp                          3,765,760    3,770,654       -4,894   T



Largest Cover Ratios

Security Name                          11/15/93    Avg. Vol.         Days Mkt

Dibrell Brothers Inc                  2,556,585       41,311           62   T
Summit Tech Inc                       3,201,962       75,772           42   T
Smithfield Foods Inc                  1,340,847       36,622           37   T
Circon Corp                           1,786,112       53,235           34   T
Amtech Corp                           3,565,331      107,006           33   T
Healthinfusion Inc                      744,078       27,722           27   T
Healthcare Svcs Gp                    1,142,919       43,889           26   T
Starbucks Corp                        4,118,733      164,400           25   T
Medical Marketing Gp                    756,811       33,168           23   T
Puritan Bennett Corp                  1,417,461       62,461           23   T
Littelfuse Inc                        1,095,037       48,969           22   T
Biochem Pharm Inc                       553,686       26,643           21   T
Fastenal Co                           1,755,635       85,318           21   T
Cell Com Puerto Rico                    755,497       38,116           20   T
Schuler Homes Inc                     1,407,270       70,194           20   T
Amer Power Conversion                13,718,410      712,273           19   T
Fortune Bancorp                         854,660       45,764           19   T
Presstek Inc                            604,404       34,136           18   T
Bindley Wstn Ind                        564,077       32,811           17   T
Idexx Labs Inc                          986,185       57,440           17   T
Rochester Comm Sav                    1,127,478       65,559           17   T
Tseng Labs Inc                        3,520,274      210,418           17   T
Engle Homes Inc                         519,698       32,813           16   T
Food Lion IncA                        4,542,141      279,145           16   T
Noble Drilling Corp                   5,138,116      323,624           16   T



Nasdaq

Security Name                            11/15/93       10/15/93

3Com Corp                               3,273,796      3,570,227
#4th Dimen Sftwar Ltd                      26,842        119,600
50-Off Stores Inc                       2,245,055      2,340,878
ACX Techs Inc                             102,544         69,699
+Advanta Cl-A                           1,820,598      1,881,306
+Advanta Cl-B                             131,252        183,587
#AER Enry Res Inc                          78,903             76
AES Corp                                  303,599        329,080
AGCO Corp                               1,413,097        950,356
ASK Group                                 558,263        647,477
AST Research Inc                          868,582      1,216,039
Abbey Healthcare Gp                       759,968        796,597
Acclaim Entertainmnt                    2,837,997      2,628,041
#Actel Corp                               425,070        240,101
Adaptec Inc                             1,373,734      1,315,450
Adelphia Commun A                          32,231         70,589
Adobe Systems Inc                       2,653,820      3,441,019
Adv Tech Labs                             261,900        240,248
Advanced Polymer Sys                      371,046        341,845
Advanced Promotions                       861,968        813,792
Advanced Tissue Sci                       328,858        316,279
Aerovox Inc                                55,447         89,905
#Airsensors Inc                            69,589         29,121
Aldila Inc                                455,300        360,266
Aldus Corp                                221,335        322,170
#Alias Research Inc                       110,186         34,724
All Amer Semiconduct                      343,331        757,947
Alliance Pharm Corp                       817,059        794,185
#+Alpha Microsystems                       91,959         40,516
Altera Corp                               375,248        322,422
Altron Inc                                297,052        445,278
Amer BiogeneticA                          291,341        266,055
#Amer Colloid Co                            5,951        111,732
Amer Dental Techs                         312,447        313,524
Amer Film Tech Inc                        407,887        266,880
Amer Greetings Corp A                     259,584        172,537
#+Amer Intl Petro New                     156,418         25,445
Amer Management Sys                        28,421         72,619
Amer Pacific Corp                         681,866        653,652
Amer Power Convers                     13,718,410     14,536,663
Amgen                                   2,315,690      2,117,826
Ampex Inc Cl-A                            341,583        426,882
Amtech Corp                             3,565,331      3,427,406
Amylin Pharma Inc                          94,349        207,287
#Anchor Bancorp Inc                         8,564         84,268
Anergen Inc                                82,513        156,279
Apple Computer Inc                      2,803,342      7,623,179
Apple South Inc                           189,814        136,684
Applebee's Intl Inc                       742,259        877,102
Applied Materials                       1,551,424      1,531,499
#Arethusa Limited                         183,300         32,600
Argosy Gaming Co                        1,829,718      1,829,502
Arkansas Best Corp                        386,427        345,770
Artisoft Inc                              356,110        336,025
Aspect Telecomm Corp                      512,475        300,156
#Atchison Casting Corp                      1,000         35,525
#Atlantic SE Airlines                     468,395        121,146
Atmel Corp                                606,817        543,280
Au Bon PainA                            1,291,385        989,255
Aura Systems Inc                        1,704,429      1,613,175
Auspex Systems Inc                        458,264        304,105
Autodesk Inc                            2,556,097      2,184,551
#Automotive Inds A                          6,307         63,802
+Autotote CorpA                           603,269        383,112
Avid Tech Inc                             823,982        799,798
BHC Financial Inc                          34,897         86,221
BMC Software Inc                        1,116,630      1,501,458
BPI Packaging Tech                        372,054        340,831
Babbage's Inc                             266,688        258,027
Bally Gaming Intl                         713,241        729,061
Banco de Galicia Ads                       42,403        118,786
Bank South Corp                            98,161        189,978
#BankAtlantic FSB                         288,552          3,247
Banyan Systems Inc                        768,958        893,190
#Barefoot Inc                              13,899         84,741
Base Ten Systems A                        176,433        305,721
Bassett Furniture                         188,248        240,163
BE Aerospace Inc                          152,061        101,647
Bed Bath & Beyond                       1,239,258      1,296,582
Bell Bancorp Inc                          120,498         81,745
Bell Sports Corp                          840,854        777,087
Ben & Jerry's Cl A                        165,274        250,900
Ben Franklin Retail                       380,283        405,400
Bertucci's Inc                            299,646        234,821
Best Power Tech Inc                       273,008        267,113
Big B Inc                                 662,424        466,439
Bindley Wstn Ind                          564,077        491,132
Biochem Pharm Inc                         553,686        577,595
Biogen Inc                              1,782,416      1,617,834
Biomedical Waste Sys                      299,090        289,483
Biomet Inc                                906,735      2,324,374
Boatmen's Bancshares                    1,649,302      1,972,754
Bob Evans Farms Inc                       268,237        269,186
Boomtown Inc                            1,461,007      1,506,671
Borland Intl Inc                        4,218,040      4,637,400
Boston Tech Inc                           444,885        457,798
Box EnergyB NV                            922,216        947,829
#Broadband Techs Inc                      259,230         44,180
Broderbund Software                     1,244,694      1,875,966
Brooktree Corp                            332,805        216,631
#Bruno's Inc                               76,637        864,953
Buffets Inc                             3,337,422      4,007,322
Burnup & Sims Inc                         444,000        441,395
CIS Tech Inc                              771,607        843,786
#COR Therapeutics                          55,560         13,360
Cabot Medical Corp                        425,332        464,133
#Cal Micro Devices                         26,979        164,486
#Cal Microwave Inc                         90,490         43,607
Calgene Inc                               335,129        358,541
Cambridge Biotech Corp                    244,282        300,424
Canandaigua Wine A                        275,978      1,004,461
Canyon Resources Corp                     626,084        562,339
Carson Pirie Scot Il                      194,479           N.L.
Casey's Gen Stores                        506,528        534,441
Casino America Inc                      1,344,796      1,262,361
Casino Magic Corp                       5,246,571      5,135,454
Catalyst Semicond                         365,723        316,930
Cel Sci Corp                               29,720         70,983
Celestial Seasonings                      248,742        211,572
Celgene Corp                               57,883         94,134
Cell Com Puerto Rico                      755,497        625,383
Cellpro Inc                               160,317        102,150
Cellular CommA                            357,623        293,410
Cellular Inc                              158,007        413,643
#Centerbank                               248,129         40,423
Centex Telemanagemnt                      170,090        286,268
Centocor Inc                            2,256,652      1,920,817
Cephalon Inc                              407,809        419,484
Cerner Corp                                57,801        120,724
Charming Shoppes Inc                      539,524        930,003
Charter Golf Inc                           65,666        225,812
#Chattem Inc                               72,493         10,127
Checkers Drive-In                       6,732,353      5,927,202
#Cheesecake Factory                       219,046         94,882
#Childrens Dis Ctrs A                      75,949         38,931
#Chipcom Corp                             516,614        254,199
#Chips & Tech Inc                         264,478        138,020
Chiron Corp                             1,008,071      1,630,759
Cholestech Corp                           434,556        453,275
Cincinnati Financial                      356,577        318,076
Cintas Corp                               280,611        194,250
Circon Corp                             1,786,112      1,812,657
Cirrus Logic Inc                          620,506        817,262
Cisco Sys Inc                           2,662,319      2,576,649
#Civic Bancorp                             75,376         10,096
Clearly Canadian Bev                      782,496        968,647
Coastal Banc Pfd A                         35,230           N.L.
Collagen Corp                             497,725        494,746
Colonial Bancgroup A                      216,744        169,424
Comcast Corp A                          7,615,929      5,193,776
Comcast Corp Cl A Spcl                  9,111,597      6,349,968
#Commun Intelligence                      173,699         86,749
Compression Lab Inc                     2,587,932      2,739,210
#Comptronix Corp                          373,747        200,094
Compucom Systems Inc                      500,000        501,108
#Computer Horizons Corp                    80,150         32,848
#Computer Ntwk Tech                        98,029         33,529
Comverse Tech Inc                          50,426        102,497
Concord Camera Corp                     1,052,983      1,050,077
Cons Papers Inc                           406,355        346,222
Consilium Inc                              76,404        126,406
Cooker Restaurant Corp                    476,509        478,236
Coors Adolph Co B                         202,080        269,189
Copytele Inc                            2,300,822      2,444,156
#Cordis Corp                              325,628        109,759
Corel Corp                                243,499        338,061
+Corestates Fin Corp                    3,281,479      2,700,164
#Corporate Software                        10,013        108,499
Cott Corp                               2,237,799      1,895,872
Coventry Corp                             334,285        325,843
Cracker Barrel Old                      1,453,556      1,163,150
Cray Comp Corp                            745,928        787,230
Creative Tech Ord                         806,664        965,311
Credence Systems Corp                      37,300           N.L.
#Credit Acceptance Corp                     8,940         47,555
Crop Genetic Intl Corp                    387,873        342,657
Crosscomm Corp                          1,030,578      1,247,237
Crown Resources Corp                      303,172        293,434
Cryomedical Sci                         1,272,586      1,378,350
#Cullen Frost Bkrs                         61,446         10,133
Curative Tech Inc                         162,250        129,552
Cygnus Therapeutic                        243,778        157,345
#Cyrix Corp                               665,358        275,793
Cytogen Corp                            1,003,509      1,042,741
DAKA Intl Inc                             326,518        314,896
DM Management Co                          287,496           N.L.
DNA Plant Tech Corp                       745,327        754,394
DSC Commun Corp                         3,770,676      3,424,296
#DSG Intl Ltd Ord                           9,016         79,465
Danka Business ADR                        110,438        199,297
Data Race Inc                             318,621        325,746
Datascope Corp                            531,648        714,795
#Dataware Techs Inc                        82,148         41,700
Davidson & Associate                      457,521        451,789
Dell Computer Corp                      7,603,875      8,025,916
Dentsply Intl Inc                         389,053        506,895
Deprenyl Research                         268,600        275,870
#Dial Page Inc                            372,161        148,405
Diasonics Ultrasd                          76,100        129,930
Dibrell Brothers Inc                    2,556,585      2,520,650
#Digital Microwave Corp                   579,721        320,643
Discovery Zone Inc                      1,233,440        863,903
Dollar General Corp                       559,369        563,906
Dress Barn The                             32,945         86,967
Dreyers Grand Ice                          30,777         66,485
#Dual Drilling Co                         103,000          3,000
Duracraft Corp                             37,585           N.L.
+ECI Telecom Ltd                        1,119,500        867,792
#ERO Inc                                   48,720          9,717
#Executo N E                              104,746         59,208
Ezcorp Cl-A                               565,939        526,863
Eagle Hardware & Gdn                    1,905,308      1,671,650
Easel Corp                                176,958        114,312
Ecogen Inc                                270,316        264,038
Education Alternativ                    1,138,698      1,005,325
Egghead Inc                               652,659        529,633
El Paso Electric Co                       156,778        211,658
Elec Imaging Inc                          753,621      1,095,067
#Electro Sci Inds Inc                      79,664         23,981
Electronic Arts Inc                     3,191,393      3,731,737
Emisphere Tech Inc                        622,881        561,790
Empi Inc                                  583,830        528,713
Engle Homes Inc                           519,698        418,940
#Envirotest Sys A Inc                      47,813         10,845
Envoy Corp                                615,359        621,973
Enzon Inc                                 322,352        301,950
#Evergreen Media Corp A                   289,150         70,250
Exabyte Corp                              624,015        448,346
FHP Intl Corp                             471,528        357,570
Farm & Home Fin Corp                      573,129        564,170
Fastcomm Comm Corp                        944,700        912,298
Fastenal Co                             1,755,635      2,017,378
Fifth Third Bncp                          827,531        680,799
First Alabama Bcshs                       690,310        651,098
First Amer Financial                      287,462        281,940
First Commerce Corp La                    571,323        525,532
First Pacific Ntwks                     2,459,034      2,141,247
#First Tenn Natl Corp                     196,133         18,081
First United Bk Grp                       582,623        611,292
Flagstar                                  402,748        332,426
Food Lion IncA                          4,542,141      4,329,162
Food Lion IncB                            145,236        192,552
#Foremost Corp of Amer                     72,522         38,509
Forest Oil Corp                         2,648,739      2,866,778
Forschner Group The                       159,265        123,640
Fortune Bancorp                           854,660        775,116
Fourth Financial Corp                     446,594        425,453
#Frame Tech Corp                          617,127        205,553
#Fritz                                     96,043         47,545
Fuller H B Co                              63,994        104,804
#Gantos Inc                               419,916        202,005
#Gen Nutrition Cos                        464,884      2,583,082
Genetic Therapy Inc                       513,858        454,203
Genetics Inst Dep Sh                      313,975        337,834
Gensia Inc                              2,942,742      2,786,334
Gentex Corp                               709,175        659,294
Genzyme Corp                            2,621,978      2,253,771
#Geotek Inds Inc                        1,574,132        688,686
Gibraltar Pkg Gp Inc                      153,670        201,013
Giddings Lewis Inc                        625,359        614,309
#Glenayre Techs Inc                       130,267         48,327
Glycomed Inc                              156,549        121,402
Goody's Family Cloth                      173,372        121,415
Goulds Pumps Inc                          110,412        143,802
Grand Casinos Inc                       4,769,901      3,489,936
#Grant Geophysical                         47,290          4,388
Great Amer Rec Inc                      1,321,061        898,211
Greenwich Pharm Inc                     4,349,986      4,433,537
Gupta Corp                                861,933        857,250
Gymboree Corp (The)                       958,153        760,300
HBO Co.                                   275,996        169,251
#Haverty Furniture                        103,799         38,624
Healthcare Compare                        522,367        574,453
#Healthcare Imagin Wt                          10         42,000
#Healthcare Imaging                       219,589         64,304
Healthcare Svcs Gp                      1,142,919      1,168,231
Healthdyne Inc                            287,150        351,572
Healthinfusion Inc                        744,078        754,813
Heart Tech Inc                          1,118,820        756,743
Hechinger CoA                             641,550        716,499
Herbalife Intl                            366,747        840,352
#Hoenig Gp Inc                             20,259         88,265
#Hollinger Inc                          1,212,700        453,100
Hollywood Casino A                        864,536        715,774
Hollywood Park Inc                        792,144        930,175
Homecare Mgmt Inc                         651,769        678,354
Hornbeck Offshore                         215,286        387,632
Huntington Bcshs                          236,319        408,369
Hutchinson Tech Inc                       341,112        367,792
ICOS Corp                                 518,803        535,753
IDB Commun Gp Inc                       1,138,837      1,282,710
Idexx Labs Inc                            986,185      1,026,879
IHOP Corp.                                781,540        706,884
IIS Intell Info                           138,836        101,300
#IKOS Systems Inc                           8,465         49,371
Interso L V                                48,302        100,603
I-Stat Corp                               434,491        405,446
Image Entertainment                       269,356        247,800
Immune Response Corp                    1,942,230      1,805,248
Immunex Corp                              738,248        495,168
Immunomedics Inc                          554,731        568,549
Imperial Bancorp                          510,707        405,799
#Imperial Credit Inds                     149,600         50,261
Infinity Broadcast A                       94,760        239,383
Info Resources Inc                        451,066        410,697
Informix Corp                           3,148,061      2,561,255
#Infu-Tech Inc                             40,300          7,035
#Innodata Corp                             11,477         57,470
Ins Auto Auctions                         420,809        447,915
Insite Vision Inc                          73,400           N.L.
Insituform Techs A                        472,535        409,134
Integrated Devic Tec                      569,136        597,474
#Integrated Waste Svc                      83,804          6,731
Intel Corp                              3,849,319      5,850,805
+Intel Corp Wts                           904,649        773,356
Intelligent Elec                          192,870        246,263
#Inter Tel Inc                             59,054          2,082
Interactive Network                     1,756,781      1,383,770
#Intercargo Corp                            4,601         94,396
Interface Inc A                           719,203        656,424
Intergraph Corp                           647,639      1,002,046
Intermet Corp                             116,528         69,466
Interneuron Pharm                         842,998        817,031
Intervoice Inc                             67,239        125,221
#Intl Cabeltel Inc                        292,218         98,963
Intl Totalizator Sys                      221,799        155,462
Intuit Inc                                534,041        430,808
Itron Inc                                  64,327           N.L.
Iwerks Entertain Inc                      123,548           N.L.
JB Hunt Trans Svcs                        603,431        454,466
JB Restaurants Inc                        165,300        123,544
J Baker Inc                             2,038,979      1,966,745
JSB Financial Inc                          17,901         70,403
Jefferies Group Inc                        97,915        186,579
Jennifer Convertible                      381,985        348,712
Johnstown Amer Inds                       202,336        121,099
Jones Intrcable A                         530,658        474,300
KLA Instruments                           366,910        234,693
#K Swiss IncA                              64,042          7,911
#Kaman Corp A NV                           82,669         30,653
Kelley Oil Corp                         1,498,019      1,352,497
Kendall Square Resch                    2,252,152      2,002,309
Kinder Care Learning                      283,549        257,231
Kinetic Concepts Inc                      153,588        264,183
Knowledgeware Inc                       1,015,531      1,311,196
#Koll Real EstA                           202,721          8,953
#Kopin Corp                               246,684        130,588
Kronos Inc                                 69,991        121,502
Kulicke & Soffa                           494,260        690,917
#Kurzweil App Intel                        76,125          7,470
LCI Intl Inc                              129,155        186,770
LDDS Commun Inc                         1,174,806      1,289,992
LM Ericsson Tel ADR                     1,107,734        967,936
LTX Corp.                                 104,844        302,185
#Lady Luck Gaming Corp                    651,517         43,796
Lam Research Corp                       1,306,614      1,548,342
Lance Inc                                 254,663        284,552
Lannet Data Comm Ord                      182,025        296,672
Lattice Semiconduct                       368,630        523,518
Lawyers Title Corp                        224,172        164,044
Learning Co                               139,706        201,356
Lechters Inc                              325,479        341,315
Legent Corp                               381,913        676,862
#Lesco Inc                                 18,246        174,090
Level One Commun Inc                       77,218        149,765
Liberty Media A                           172,306        251,815
#Liberty Natl Bncp                        190,864          2,292
Lidak PharmA                              436,871        534,739
#Life U.S. A Hldg Inc                      28,296        118,889
#Linear Technology Corp                   363,917        149,928
Liposome                                  606,250        524,946
Liposome Tech Inc                         717,617        415,643
Littelfuse Inc                          1,095,037      1,161,333
Lone Star Steakhouse                    3,690,906      3,331,075
Longhorn Steaks Inc                       641,354        741,348
#Lottery Enterprises                      133,325         33,079
Lotus Development Corp                  3,206,045      4,195,160
#MARC Inc                                  73,560         30,500
#MB Comm Inc                              181,617         64,669
MCI Comm Corp                           8,834,282      8,340,435
#MDL Inform Systems                         5,770        128,641
MFS Comm                                  594,259        517,472
MTC Elec Tech Ltd                         701,771        815,029
#Madge N.V.                               147,727         45,146
#Magainin Pharmace                          9,202         85,382
Magma Power Co                            783,326        821,068
Mail Boxes Etc                            832,866        945,642
Marcam Corp                               246,838        778,994
#Marshall & Ilsley                      1,437,438        692,429
Masland Corp                               73,014           N.L.
Maxicare Hlth New                       1,291,921      1,092,670
Maxtor Corp                               651,361        827,911
McCaw Cellular A                        1,053,029      1,012,093
McCormick Co NV                           504,016        566,368
McGaw Inc                                 408,939        409,443
Medaphis Corp                             515,252        442,298
Media Vision Inc                        2,470,010      2,026,765
Medic Computer Sys                         30,933         84,473
#Medical Devices                            1,538         45,702
Medical Marketing Gp                      756,811      1,015,227
Medicine Shoppe Intl                    1,012,456      1,016,157
Medicis PharmA                            685,705        697,641
Medimmune Inc                           1,000,463        817,060
Medstat Group Inc                         122,197        195,846
Megahertz Corp                            488,934        505,624
#Memorex Telex NV Adr                      80,917         40,108
Mentor Corp The                           266,626        285,175
Mentor Graphics Corp                      748,116      1,013,815
#Mercer Intl Inc Sbi                       22,662        126,578
Merisel Inc                               222,837        431,782
Mesa Airlines Inc                       1,166,920      1,151,715
Michael Foods Inc                         818,486      1,159,290
Michaels Stores Inc                     1,427,267      1,029,170
Michigan Natl Corp                        375,242        304,711
Micro Component Tech                       74,730           N.L.
Micro Healthsys Inc                       204,792        142,680
#Microage Inc                              10,766        100,386
Microchip Tech Inc                        283,700        197,722
#Micrografx Inc                            81,834         33,957
Micronics Computers                       243,961        139,479
#Micropolis Corp                          257,042        146,191
#Microprobe Corp Wts 98                   200,700          8,000
Microprose Inc                            274,709        237,394
Micros To Mainframe                        55,750           N.L.
Microsoft Corp                          2,693,473      2,799,171
#Mid Am Inc                                59,946          7,497
Mid Atlantic Medical                      252,861        288,746
#Mid Ocean Ltd Ord                         79,693         26,529
Midlantic Corp                            890,968        927,154
Mobile Telecomm Tech                    8,774,788      8,039,081
Molex Inc                                 256,960        324,005
Molten Metal Tech                         532,225        341,824
Multimedia Inc                             46,044        175,182
NAC Re Corp                               275,649        415,942
Nextel Commun A                         2,662,013      3,443,259
#NS Bancorp Inc                           368,907        183,369
#Nam Tai Electronics                       52,157         17,770
Natl Gypsum Co                            492,262        386,026
Natl Vision Assoc                       1,845,988      1,939,772
Nature's Bounty Inc                       402,848        714,497
Nellcor Inc                               287,336        236,514
Neorx Corp                                270,137        323,652
Net F R A M E System                      742,505        811,136
Network General Corp                      107,886        368,392
Network Systems Corp                      681,782        772,684
#Neurex Corp                                4,190         47,715
Neutrogena Corp                           494,429        491,903
New Image Inds Inc                        981,252        903,877
Newbridge Netwks Corp                     963,942        652,929
#Newpark Res Inc                           10,424         52,775
Noble Drilling Corp                     5,138,116      5,111,986
Noise Cancellation                      1,080,084      1,107,785
Nordstrom Inc                           1,658,784      2,085,200
Novell Inc                              4,092,798      4,215,826
Novellus Systems Inc                      406,780        396,452
OM Group Inc                              175,261           N.L.
#OPTI Inc.                                106,482         60,698
Octel Commun Corp                         234,230        344,367
Olicom A/S    E                           860,446      1,269,888
#Omega Environment                        525,846        221,946
Onbancorp Inc                             311,514        292,742
Oncor Inc                                  71,496        124,360
+Oracle Systems Corp                    2,255,363      3,943,180
Orbital Sciences Corp                   1,437,898        977,187
Oshkosh B GoshA                           249,261        210,745
#Osmonics Inc                               1,215         89,718
Outback Steakhouse                      2,981,291      3,213,187
+Oxford Health Plans                    2,116,473      1,822,158
#PDK Labs A Pfd                               500         85,411
PDK Labs Inc                              545,680        466,672
PET Smart Inc                             397,214        305,155
Platinum Tech                             154,823        383,167
#Paccar Inc                               179,069         72,472
Pacificare HlthA                          270,959        301,763
#Pacificare HlthB                         526,863        209,938
+Paging Network Inc                       816,383        814,377
#Pairgain Tech                             73,673         13,548
Parallan Computer                         236,845        152,598
Parametric Tech Corp                    1,651,447      1,934,939
Park Commun Inc                           292,748        215,293
Partnerre Hlds Ltd                         92,518           N.L.
Penwest Ltd                               245,229        157,080
Peoples Bk (Ct)                           470,971        451,688
Peoples Heri Fin Gp                       281,707        278,073
Peoples Telephone                         434,520        424,883
Peoplesoft Inc                            839,142        768,660
Perrigo Company                         1,060,915        994,972
Perseptive Biosys                         175,672        232,487
Petrocorp Inc                              33,450           N.L.
Petroleum Geo Sv Ads                      438,621        570,703
Pharmaceutical Mktg                       368,029        354,254
Phoenix Re Corp                         1,153,088      1,151,259
#Phoenix Tech Ltd                          51,692         10,529
Phycor Inc                                822,062        758,277
Physician Corp America                    172,365        105,037
Picturetel Corp                         4,099,885      3,943,137
Pinkerton's Inc                           111,859        211,466
Pioneer Hi Bred Intl                      347,107        295,847
#Pittencrieff Commun                      463,367        246,566
Platinum Software Corp                    275,057        388,793
Players Intl Inc                        2,377,548      2,323,581
Powersoft Corp                            952,610        892,299
#Preferred Entertain                       54,355          8,832
#Preferred Hlth Care                      123,857         68,702
Premier Anesthesia                        267,713        256,072
Pres Riverboat Casinos                  2,530,400      3,127,527
Presidential Life Corp                    860,249        574,172
Presstek Inc                              604,404        616,122
+Price/Costco Inc                       3,592,395      2,185,659
#Pride Pet Svcs Inc                         8,729         47,040
Primadonna Resorts                        232,132        404,639
Primedex Health Sys                       357,747        486,624
#Procyte Corp                             108,613         51,265
Production Oper                           219,128        270,341
#Proffitt's Inc                           232,614         30,181
Progress Software Corp                    105,250        146,706
Pure Tech Intl                            289,437        398,948
Puritan Bennett Corp                    1,417,461      1,508,130
Pyramid Technology                        325,735        225,764
Pyxis Corp                              1,285,819      1,785,670
Qualcomm Inc                            1,684,748      1,584,140
QVC Network Inc                         1,590,838      1,729,654
Quadrex Corp                              358,930        648,591
#Quality Food Centers                     755,127        409,195
Quantum Corp                            3,118,053      2,861,431
#Quantum Hlth Res Inc                     897,328        468,082
Quantum Restaurant                        644,036        716,168
Quiksilver Inc                            130,128         90,490
RPM Inc                                   748,162        637,509
Rally's Hamburger                       2,638,522      2,425,265
Rasterops                                 304,378        373,810
Re Capital Corp                           416,688        363,676
Read-Rite Corp                            309,810        282,278
Regal Comm Corp                           676,858        545,098
#Rehabclinics Inc                          20,936         99,283
Repap Enterprises Corp                    542,515        536,179
Repligen Corp                             178,193        142,173
Resound Corp                            1,157,804      1,000,176
Retix                                     331,848        246,637
Reuters Hldg Adr                        1,675,933      1,246,628
+Rexall Sundown Inc                       201,753        166,320
Ribi Immunochem                           114,381        183,802
#Richardson Elect Ltd                      10,451         50,800
Riggs Natl Corp The                       366,851        316,973
Rio Hotel & Casino                        107,185        152,927
Roadway Services Inc                    1,023,690        875,416
Roberts Pharm Corp                        355,952        278,732
Rochester Comm Sav                      1,127,478        922,612
Ross Stores Inc                           159,955        211,946
#Ross Systems Inc                           8,858        280,031
Rouse Co                                  949,223        945,487
Ryan's Family Steak                        33,269         74,148
Safeco Corp.                              142,936        272,794
SCI Systems Inc                         2,260,411      1,989,439
Seacor Hldgs                              336,008        346,145
SGI International                         795,736        942,613
SHL Systemhouse                           189,191        131,786
SLM Intl Inc                              349,245        259,115
Steri's Cp                              1,430,056      1,365,844
S3 Inc                                    414,798        292,379
Sanmina Corp                              238,565        200,330
Sapiens Intl Corp N V                     935,886        788,806
Savoy Pict Entertnmt                      886,864        835,995
#Scholastic Corp                           84,895         18,386
Schuler Homes Inc                       1,407,270      1,158,510
Schulman A Inc                            293,604        316,642
Sciclone Pharma Inc                       448,460        395,101
Scimed Life Sys Inc                     2,120,844      2,192,634
Scitex Corp                               415,835        471,908
Score Board Inc                         1,092,829      1,145,594
Seagate Tech                            1,402,876      1,145,326
Sealright                                  71,253        163,961
Sequent Computer Sys                    2,699,589      2,861,006
Shared Medical Sys                         94,898        206,059
Shorewood Pkging Corp                      59,876        113,166
Sierra On Line Inc                        326,954        432,888
Sigma Aldrich Corp                        410,701        349,865
#Sigma Designs Inc                        172,904         67,416
#Signal Tech Corp                         278,856        127,132
Signet Gp Ord ADR                         668,893        681,126
#Siskon Gold Corp A                         5,037        106,682
Skybox Intl Inc                           652,340           N.L.
Smithfield Foods Inc                    1,340,847      1,388,965
Snapple Beverage Corp                  10,247,541     10,137,888
Software Publishing                       136,416        244,333
Software Toolwks Inc                    1,537,588      1,027,326
Somatogen Inc                           3,133,196      2,397,706
Somerset Sav Bk                            24,942         61,438
Sonoco Prod Co Pfd A                       87,270           N.L.
#Sonoco Products Co                       965,133        238,656
#Southern Electron Corp                    56,260         19,833
Southern Ergy Homes                        93,653        187,765
#Southtrust Corp                           62,353          5,756
#+Sovereign Bancorp                        72,919          8,080
Spartan Motors Inc                        533,746        322,584
Spectranetics Corp The                    271,685        223,737
Spectrum Info Tech                      3,152,512      6,308,189
+Spiegel Inc A NV                          55,111        113,542
Sports & Recreation                     1,760,875      1,763,836
#Sports Heroes Wts 95                     151,489         72,469
Sports/Leisure Inc                         62,171        138,732
St Jude Medical Inc                       625,556        645,924
Staff Builder Del                          67,227        153,996
Standard Microsystem                      571,575        616,268
#Stanford Telecommun                       65,070          9,418
#Stant Corp                                52,416          2,183
Staodyn Wts Ser II                         52,670           N.L.
Staples Inc                             1,459,283      1,590,408
Starbucks Corp                          4,118,733      4,430,060
Starsight Telecast                        300,768        247,002
State Street Boston                       498,351        506,769
+Statesman Gp Inc                       1,029,660        991,647
Station Casinos Inc                       386,072        262,732
Stein Mart Inc                            277,388        189,041
Stratacom Inc                           1,017,858      1,557,808
Structural Dynamics                     2,474,777      2,709,314
Stryker Corp                            3,765,760      3,770,654
Summit Care Corp                          296,166        308,355
Summit Tech Inc                         3,201,962      3,195,473
Sun Microsystems Inc                    3,612,864      5,133,352
Sun Television & App                      386,367        383,583
Sunglass Hut Intl                         587,650        464,734
Sunrise Tech Intl                         388,948        385,182
#Surgical Tech Inc                        190,117          7,414
Sybase Inc                              1,071,647        857,120
Symantec Corp                             467,088        591,146
Synetic Inc                               265,397        358,941
Synopsys Inc                              439,612        342,936
Synoptics Commun Inc                    5,487,515      4,821,668
System Software                         1,255,716      1,192,582
Systemed Inc                              371,775        356,024
Systems Comp Tech Corp                    584,778        350,632
TCA Cable TV Inc                          116,062         79,144
TJ Intl Inc                               356,706        338,646
TPI Enterprises                         4,668,158      4,080,322
T Rowe Price Assoc                        291,619        287,938
+Taco Cabana Inc Cl-A                     238,757        192,638
#Tanknology Environ                        64,898          5,302
Telco Systems Inc                         398,836        338,354
Tele Commun Inc A                       9,255,607     12,178,793
#Telebit Corp                              12,701        104,751
Telematics Intl Inc                       217,360        269,531
#Tellabs Inc                              140,359         59,861
Telxon Corp                               789,566        770,008
The 3Do Co                                615,880        856,357
Thomas Nelson Inc                         419,571        391,211
Tigera Group Inc                           13,773         47,270
Todays Man Inc                            720,139        563,209
Tokos Med Corp Del                      3,922,905      3,783,764
Topps The                                 390,086        415,542
Tracor Inc                                265,360        467,453
Trans World Music Corp                     38,516         90,952
Transamerican Waste                       507,210        354,479
+Transmedia Ntwk Inc                      254,718        199,218
Trenwick Group Inc                        224,720        272,525
Tricord Systems Inc                       308,544        354,382
Trimble Navigation                        515,183        604,675
Tristar Corp                              515,531        522,901
Tseng Labs Inc                          3,520,274      3,719,959
Tyson Foods IncA                          373,493        376,426
US Bancorp Oregon                         425,278        522,724
US Healthcare Inc                       4,246,952      2,946,719
US Long Distance Corp                     421,104        324,561
US Robotics Inc                           501,286        440,543
UST Corp.                               1,012,646      1,056,648
#US Trust Corp                             42,807          4,283
#Ultratech Stepper                        169,218         15,215
#+United Cos Finl Corp                     77,147         39,392
United Gaming Inc                       1,386,829      1,041,449
VLSI Tech Inc                             616,224        437,133
Valence Tech Inc                          463,880        586,757
Vanguard Cellular A                       428,996        386,377
Ventritex Inc                             271,794        376,124
Verifone Inc                              611,587        381,734
#Veterinary Ctrs                           96,927         46,590
Vicorp Resta                               63,392         97,915
Video Lottery Tech                        225,757        291,081
Videocart Inc                           2,065,262      2,321,715
Viewlogic Systems                         652,822        843,901
Viking Office Prods                       146,346        349,339
WPP Gp Adr                                520,510        523,293
#Wall Data Inc                             72,408         35,702
Washington Mut Sv Bk                    1,906,057      2,134,725
Weitek Corp                               194,860        299,395
Wellfleet Commun Inc                    1,449,542      1,315,828
West One Bancorp                        1,456,978      1,616,253
Westcott Comm                             496,945        321,709
Western Publishing                        391,177        404,632
Westwood One Inc                        2,537,743      2,117,653
Whole Foods Market                        437,310        447,428
Willamette Inds Inc                       380,079        250,991
#Wind River Sys Inc                        74,998         28,999
Xoma Corp.                                471,818        463,649
Yellow Corp                               301,938        323,457
York Research Corp                        941,733        993,712
Younkers Inc                               68,788        201,234
#Zale Corp                                762,341         43,257
Zebra Tech Corp Cl-A                      400,665        515,407
Zeos Intl Ltd                             924,161        968,633
Zoll Medical Corp                         982,182      1,043,821
#Zycad Corp                               125,369         63,630
Other Nasdaq

+ACS Enterprises                          169,300        121,800
#ASEA Ab ADR Spons                        148,055         11,900
Advanced Enviro A                         185,576        124,987
Advanced Nmr Sys Inc                      213,531        146,244
#Alamar Biosciences                           501         36,187
#All Amer Communic                        104,600         56,098
Alpha Hospit Corp Wts                      48,275           N.L.
Alter Sales                               436,572        360,000
Amer Bus Comp Corp                        327,492        324,318
#Amer Res of Delwr                         20,275         81,631
Amer West Airlines                      1,494,190        956,208
American Complex                           39,313              0
Ames Dept Stores Inc                      317,706        339,396
#Amrion Inc                               293,251          1,166
Aphton Corp                               419,704        402,479
Applied Laser Sys                         238,547        196,650
#Applied Laser Wts A                      114,820         42,130
Aquanatural Co                             31,069        110,526
#Armanino Foods                             1,761         60,891
#Aztec Energy Corp                         12,263         92,323
Babystar Inc Wts 98                        36,219         88,155
Billy Blues Food Corp                     205,152        161,290
Biocontrol Tech Inc                       303,558        255,929
Biomechanics CpAmer                       666,657      1,157,952
Biosource Intl Inc                         95,019              0
#Boston Pac Med Inc                         8,797         44,982
#CECO Envir                                    81         87,980
Cal Fed Bank Wts 94                        14,259         55,882
Capital Gaming Intl                       595,573        413,852
#Cellex Biosciences                       295,489         88,899
#Cellular Tech Svcs                       111,674         18,223
#Centurion Mines Corp                      57,217         16,083
#Chefs Intl Inc                           109,771          7,598
Coastland Corp of Fl                       36,027              0
#Comp Mktplace Inc                        258,620        118,920
#Complink Ltd                                 143         32,780
#Conquest Airlines                         79,650        364,418
#Continuum Group                            4,334         40,000
Cortex Pharm Inc                          200,531        245,152
Crown Casino Corp                          28,897        113,018
DRS Inds Inc                              157,458        124,785
Diamond Entertain                         594,986        988,441
#Direct Connect Wts A                     149,748        902,999
Dollar Time Inc                           114,772        292,198
Dresdner Ag Sp ADR                      1,134,100      1,138,221
#Educational Dev Corp                      38,640          4,519
Employee Solution                          38,420              0
Energy Conversion                         389,609        370,202
Europa Cruises Corp                       144,907        200,185
#Fiberchem Inc                            106,491          9,023
Franklin Cons Mining                       46,360        157,071
Franklin Optha Uts                         32,678              0
#Free St Cons Gld ADR                      45,536          3,743
GB Foods Corp                             384,330        353,811
#GTS Duratek Inc                            1,506         54,304
Gaming Corp Of Amer                       255,508        240,779
#Gamma Intl Ltd                            12,042        130,788
Gerant Inds Inc                            41,010              0
#Great Amer Rec Pfd                         8,810         46,270
#Hansen Natural Corp                          700         90,939
Harmony Holdings Inc                       95,646        212,745
ICC Techs Inc                             309,675        318,131
Incomed Corp                              144,512        292,750
#Innovir Lab Wts B                            140         44,710
#Innovir Labs Inc                           1,000         34,110
#Innovo Group Inc                          52,879         14,942
Internet Commun Corp                      290,397        201,627
Intl Gaming Mgmt Inc                      363,590        354,132
#Intl Nesmont Inds Corp                    41,752             40
Invitro Intl                              758,207        940,664
Irvine Sensors Corp                       180,994        139,732
#Judicate Inc                                   0         41,176
LM Ericsson Tel Add                     2,331,734      1,873,116
#Lancit Media Prod                         10,518         71,368
#Las Vegas Enter Ntwk                     164,418         52,475
#Laser Video Ntwk                         409,503        221,123
#Licon Intl Inc                           398,615         30,588
Lucille Farms Inc                         149,580           N.L.
#Luxcel Group Uts                             750         44,750
#Malvy Tech Inc                            50,065          6,300
Managed Hlth Bene Wt                       34,614              0
Management Techs Inc                      269,788        207,300
Marcum Natural Gas                        499,001        338,537
Medical Dynamics Inc                      233,772        150,592
Micronetics Inc                            35,000              0
Microterra Inc                            313,797        516,607
Modami Services Inc                        20,041         57,282
#Monaco Finance Cl-A                      343,599         22,724
Natural Earth Tech                         33,875        117,353
#Network Imaging Corp                     136,276         52,129
Nona Morelli's II                          46,654         85,924
#Northrim Bank                             90,036          5,880
#Out-Takes Inc B Wts                            0         91,000
#+Pharmos Corp New                        181,057          4,250
#Princeton Dental                           5,899         42,238
Projectavision Inc                        463,183        449,648
#Puroflow Inc                               1,796         46,498
Qsound Labs Inc                           168,366        114,049
Quality Product Inc                       652,118        443,300
Research Frontiers                        175,318        142,259
Royce Laboratories                        493,420        466,148
#Sage Tech Inc                            245,050        130,792
#Satcon Tech Corp                         110,841         21,263
#Scorpion TechA                            47,934         10,147
#Senetek Adr                              634,906        176,787
#Shuffle Master Inc                        93,760         50,666
Site Based Media Inc                      618,915        697,073
#Skolniks Inc                              86,550         47,148
Solv Ex Corp                              328,260        304,100
Southland Corp                          2,636,988      2,425,172
#TAT Techs Ltd                             48,901          3,723
#Topro Inc                                 30,262        274,985
#Telefonos de Mexico                       71,669         10,400
Telescan Inc                               52,145           N.L.
#Teletek Inc                               45,241          1,281
#Touchstone App Sci                        23,000        249,149
#Trans Global Res ADR                           0         98,184
#US Techs Inc                               1,553         34,956
#US Trans System                          220,526         16,217
#Ultrak Inc                                 1,022         34,501
#United States Explor                     111,710         23,175
Urethane Techs Inc                        643,465        654,722
#VSI Enterprises                          110,747          4,697
#Valuevision Intl A                       333,467        164,369
Ventura Entertain                          62,119        121,608
Vertex Inds Inc                           159,600         92,654
Voice Powered Tech                        201,784        144,708
#WRT Energy Corp                          153,848          9,420
Williams Controls                         299,081        402,766
Wisconsin Pharmacal                       329,287        312,569
Work Recovery Inc                         314,488        320,060


Short Sales Tables Explained

    These tables show issues with a short interest position in the current month
of at least 250,000 shares or a change up or down from the previous month of at
least 32,537 shares.

    Cover ratio represents the number of days, at average volume level, that it
would take to purchase the number of shares sold short.

    T -- National Market System.

    N.L. -- Not listed.

    + -- Stock split.

    * May have been affected by arbitrage transactions resulting from any one or
more of the following: proposed or pending acquisitions; convertible securities
of the same company; rights offerings; stock splits or distributions; tenders;
other special situations.

    Short interest may also be affected by options positions.

    # Indicates a change of 75 percent or more from the previous month.

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1993


                             949 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                   November 24, 1993, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 65

LENGTH: 1154 words

HEADLINE: Biotech companies seen as favorites;
THE VENTURE CAPITAL REPORT

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    When it comes to companies going public, Wall Street likes the engineering
to be "wireless," not genetic.

   But almost the opposite is true for venture capitalists who are throwing
millions of dollars at PhDs with petri dishes, according to the latest Boston
Globe/Price Waterhouse Venture Capital Survey.

   Of the $ 107.3 million that venture capital firms reported invested in New
England companies during 1993's third quarter, a full 63 percent went to the
biotech and medical instrumentation industry.

   In part, analysts say, this is because some biotech companies look like hot
prospects. Focal Inc. of Cambridge received $ 20 million in venture financing
and "could have gotten a lot more," said company president David Clapper.

   In part, it's because Wall Street has shunned biotech. Many companies which
would have gone public in a more hospitable market and raised cash by selling
stock were instead looking for third- or fourth-round financing from venture
capitalists.

   Focal, of Cambridge, received the richest infusion of venture capital. The
company is developing a post-surgery coating for internal organs to prevent
surgical adhesions. The market is huge and particularly promising; preventing
adhesions prevents costly second operations to remove them.

   By contrast, there's little enthusiasm for biotech firms on Wall Street. Of
the eight New England companies that sold their first shares on Wall Street to
the public, only Genzyme Transgenics Inc. of Framingham was a biopharmaceutical
firm. Although it raised $ 12 million in its initial public offering, Genzyme
Transgenic stock has slid from an IPO price of 8 down to 6.50 at one point,
closing yesterday 7 3/4.

   "We have a bipolar market with the software and communications on one side,
setting all-time records in their initial public offerings," said Howard Cox,
general partner at Greylock Management Corp. of Boston. "As for biotech, it has
to go back to private sources of capital."

   That's what Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., a developer of gene therapy
products to treat diabetes, osteoporosis and some cancers found. The Cambridge
company wanted to sell 2.5 million shares at about $ 10 a share, but its timing
in July coincided with President Clinton excoriating drug companies for their
pricing. The company abruptly canceled its IPO plans and recently raised $ 8.1
million in a private placement - one-third of its hoped for IPO.

   "We thought we could differentiate ourselves from the other biotech companies
in the traditionally quiet summer period, but it was also the time of great
uncertainty about health care reform, so we stopped our plans," said K. Michael
Forrest, Transkaryotic's president.

   Biotech and medical instrumentation firms have gotten the cold shoulder on
Wall Street as investors worry the federal government will impose price controls
for new drugs. Wall Street also learned how risky drug development can be when
three companies tried unsuccessfully, but expensively, to develop a septic shock
drug. And there is growing concern that, with 1,300 companies, the biotech
industry is overgrown and due for a shakeout.

   "Biotech is fraught with uncertainty from the investors' perspective who see
fewer risks with telecommunications companies and multimedia firms," noted
Katherine Kirk, managing director of Hambrecht & Quist's Boston office. "People
can hang a business strategy on CD-ROMs and wireless communication - they see it
happening. Biotech, for the moment, is just risky."

   Venture capitalists, wielding the pooled funds of wealthy individuals and
institutional investors, are generally willing to take greater risks than other
investors. As such, they generally play a key role in financing new and emerging
companies.

   For the venture capital report, Price Waterhouse surveyed 157 venture capital
funds and investment bankers about their investments in New England companies;
80 responded. While not a scientific survey, analysts and investors say the
results - much money to biotech, much less money to other industries - is
representative of the what's happening in the marketplace. Also evident is an
emphasis on later stage, rather than start-up, financing.

   Among those companies responding to the survey, seed stage financing
represented only about $ 1 million, less than 1 percent of all investments. On
the other hand, the $ 52.1 million in third-round financing accounted for nearly
half the total.

   Most of the third-round money went to biotech companies, notably Focal;
UroMed Corp. of Watertown, a developer of urology products, and Ascent
Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Billerica, which is specializing in formulating generic
forms of well-known children's medicines.

   Smaller amounts of third-round financing went to software firms - Software
Emancipation Technology Inc. of Waltham, The Dodge Group Inc. of Waltham,
OpenBooks Software Inc. of Lexington - and to Cascade Communications Corp., a
Westford developer of computer communications networking products.

   The venture capital report noted that, on Wall Street this summer, the
winning New England companies were mostly high-tech firms whose stock has
soared. Among them:

   - Summa Four Corp. of Manchester, N.H., raised $ 37.4 million in its public
offering at $ 17 a share. The 17-year-old communications company, a developer of
switching systems for telephone networks, has seen its stock nearly double.
Yesterday it closed at 32 1/8.

   - Dataware Technologies Inc. of Cambridge, a developer of information
programs and corporate business data stored on CD-ROMs raised $ 29.25 million
selling 2.25 million shares at $ 13 a share. The stock soared to $ 23 a share
before settling down to the high teens. Yesterday, it closed at 17. "We had
orders from institutions for more than 20 million shares," said Mead Wyman,
Dataware's chief financial officer. "There's a lot of interest in CD-ROMs and
multimedia and investors could easily understand what we do."

 1 New England initial public offerings

    Third quarter 1993

    Gross IPO Company proceeds Product description MRS Technology Inc.
Chelmsford $ 16,100,000 Photolithographic equipment for active matrix liquid
crystal screens. Green Mountain Coffee Waterbury, Vt. $ 10,000,000 Coffee
roasting and retailing. Dataware Technologies Cambridge $ 29,250,000 Information
applications for CD-ROM. Summa Four Manchester, N.H. $ 37,400,000 Provides
distributed switching systems and advanced signalling equipment for telephone
networks. Kurzweil Applied Intelligence Waltham $ 21,000,000 Produces voice
recognition systems designed to interact with computers. Cyrk Inc. Gloucester $
24,000,000 Custom-designed sports apparel. Advanced Deposition Taunton $
5,000,000 Manufacturer of metalized films for the electronics and food packaging
industries. Genzyme Transgenics Corp. Cambridge $ 12,000,000 Manufacturer of
recombinant proteins. SOURCE: Price Waterhouse

GRAPHIC: CHART, Globe staff chart

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1993


                             950 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   November 23, 1993, Tuesday, Valley Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 4

LENGTH: 894 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY COULD MOUNT CHALLENGE TO AMGEN DRUG;
HEALTH: ANALYSTS SAY THE THREAT TO THOUSAND OAKS BIOTECHNOLOGY GIANT'S EPOGEN IS
MANY YEARS AWAY AND REMAINS HIGHLY SPECULATIVE.

BYLINE: By PATRICE APODACA, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: THOUSAND OAKS

BODY:

   An experimental gene therapy that might begin human trials in about a year
could one day siphon off sales of Amgen Inc.'s blockbuster Epogen drug, a
genetically engineered protein used to treat patients with severe anemia.

   But the potential threat to Amgen is many years away and highly speculative
at that.

   "People who want to lose sleep over this should set their clocks for the year
2000," said David Stone, an analyst at the investment firm Cowen & Co. in
Boston.

   Amgen, the Thousand Oaks biotechnology giant, has marketed Epogen since 1989.
Last year it sold $506 million worth of the drug, and sales are expected to
reach $560 million this year.

   Epogen is a genetically engineered copy of erythropoietin (EPO), a human
protein. EPO is normally made in the kidney and stimulates red blood cell
production. Kidney dialysis patients often are bedridden and suffer from chronic
anemia because they aren't producing enough EPO, a problem that is cured by
regular injections of Epogen.

   But Epogen is expensive. The cost of the drug averages about $4,000 to $6,000
a year.

   Now scientists, led by Jeffrey Leiden of the University of Chicago, in
partnership with Vical Inc., a La Jolla-based biotechnology company, say they
are experimenting with a gene therapy approach to curing severe anemia in the
135,000 kidney-disease patients who now depend on Epogen. The gene therapy,
which involves replacing unhealthy genes with healthy ones, is also thought to
have potential for AIDS patients suffering from severe anemia.

   If it works, kidney patients would no longer need Amgen's expensive drug.

   In the past three years, gene therapy has emerged as a promising but
controversial potential treatment for everything from inborn genetic defects to
cancer and AIDS.

   In a groundbreaking experiment in 1990, two young girls suffering from a rare
genetic disorder that destroys immune systems were able to lead relatively
normal lives due to gene therapy treatments. There are now dozens of gene
therapy experiments under way, but many obstacles and unanswered questions
remain.

   In concept, gene therapy is simple: A malfunctioning gene is replaced in a
cell by a healthy gene.

   The most common method of replacing a bad gene with a good one is to infuse
into a patient's bloodstream cells that have been genetically engineered to
produce the missing protein. Many such techniques use a portion of certain
viruses called retroviruses, which include some rare kinds of cancers and the
virus that causes AIDS.

   These retroviruses are chosen because they are good at entering cells and
incorporating new genes into these cells. Scientists believe they can
genetically alter the retroviruses to stop their ability to replicate, thus
rendering them harmless. But some critics warn that the viruses might eventually
regain the ability to reproduce or combine with others to form lethal viruses.

   Leiden said that the gene therapy he and his colleagues are working on
involves inserting the gene for EPO into immature muscle cells, called
myoblasts. It is hoped that the myoblasts will attach themselves in the body and
steadily secrete EPO into the bloodstream.

   But it isn't yet known how to regulate gene therapy so that the inserted gene
will stimulate the correct amount of missing protein. If too high a level of EPO
is produced, for instance, an excess of red blood cells could be created,
leading to heart disease. If too few red bloods cells are produced, the
treatment would be ineffective.

   And it's not yet clear whether gene therapy will be long-lasting, or if it
will require repeated treatments.

   *

   Analysts say it would be at least 2000 before an anemia gene-therapy
treatment could be made commercially available because of the time needed to
complete clinical trials and obtain Food and Drug Administration approval.

   Kidney patients typically receive three injections of Epogen per week. "This
drug has no side effects, it works every time and it's cost-effective relative
to blood transfusions," said analyst Stone.

   Daniel Vapnek, Amgen's senior vice president for research, said the company
has looked into gene therapy itself, but decided that it wasn't worth pursuing
for EPO because of the potential drawbacks and the fact that Epogen is already
so effective. Vapnek believes that future gene therapy methods will be used
primarily for life-threatening diseases for which adequate treatments don't
currently exist, such as cystic fibrosis or AIDS.

   But Leiden said that severe anemia was chosen for the research because of the
large number of patients with that health problem. Also, he said, if the gene
therapy experiments are successful it could lead to treatments for other
disorders caused by insufficient amounts of certain proteins in the bloodstream,
such as diabetes, hemophilia and dwarfism.

   While there are existing treatments for many of these diseases, Leiden said,
"the problem is, they're extremely expensive and inconvenient for the patient."

   Getting gene therapy to the point where it is cost-effective, and able to
correct a disorder with a single treatment, is "exactly what we're working on,"
he said.

   Leiden is now doing the gene-therapy experiments with mice. He plans to
submit the data from that research to the Food and Drug Administration, and if
he receives approval, human trials could begin in about a year.

GRAPHIC: Photo, An Amgen Inc. laboratory worker during part of the purification
process of Epogen, a biotechnology drug used to treat chronic anemia.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1993


                             951 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



              November 21, 1993, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: MEDLIFE; SUNDAY ROUNDS; Pg. 66

LENGTH: 536 words

BYLINE: Tom Seibel

BODY:


   Dr. Leslie B. Heffez has been appointed professor and head of the Department
of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery at the University of Illinois at Chicago. He
succeeds Dr. Louis Mercuri who is now chief of Dentistry and Oral Maxillofacial
Surgery at Humana Hospital-Michael Reese.

   John R. Birdzell has been named chief executive officer of Chicago
Osteopathic Hospitals and Medical Centers. Birdzell formerly was chief executive
officer at Lakeshore Health Systems Inc., in northwest Indiana. Also at
Osteopathic, John L. Greenbaum has been appointed senior vice president for
Business Affairs.

   John Ammerman is the new executive director of The Chicago House and Social
Service Agency, a North Side housing provider for people with HIV and AIDS.

   Columbus-Cabrini Medical Center's chief executive officer, Lee Domanico, has
been elected to a two-year term on the Illinois Hospital Association's board of
trustees.

   Dr. Annick Gaye has been elected chief of staff at La Rabida Children's
Hospital and Research Center. With LaRabida since 1988, Gaye has been a
physician in the allergy, immunology and pulmonology section.

   Dr. Donald B. Kohn, who is director of the Gene Therapy Program at Children's
Hospital of Los Angeles, has been awarded the hospital's H. Russell Smith Award
for his contributions to gene therapy. Kohn is a native of Wilmette and graduate
of New Trier West High School and the University of Illinois at Urbana. His
medical degree is from the University of Wisconsin.

   Anne Mengler has been promoted to associate executive director of the
Illinois Masonic Medical Center Foundation. Hospital officials also announced
that Joseph Starshak has been appointed to the foundation's board.

   Donald E. Sveen has been appointed chairman of Central DuPage Hospital's
Board of Directors. Sveen is president and chief executive officer of the John
Nuveen Company.

   Dr. Chris Chon has joined the medical staff of Rush North Shore Medical
Center. Chon specializes in internal medicine. Dr. Jeffrey Weinberg has been
elected president of the medical staff at Rush. Other elected officers are Dr.
Norman Gutmann, vice president; Dr. Richard Sperling, secretary, and Dr. Michael
Lewis, treasurer.

   Holy Family Hospital announced six new medical staff physicians. They are
Betty Goldstein, internal medicine; William Lauth, internal and emergency
medicine; Birgitta McGuire, board certified in family practice; Dr. Jules Marks,
board certified in internal medicine, and Dr. Susan Rubin, neurology.

   Registered nurse Barbara Carlson has been named project manager for the
Ambulatory Care Enhancement Project at Elmhurst Memorial Hospital. As manager,
Carlson will evaluate and redesign outpatient services and other support
activities.

   Jean Gilly has been appointed director of support services at EHS Good
Shepherd Hospital, and Angela Chesley has been named director of the hospital's
critical care/cardiac services unit.

   Pamela A. Novak has been elected president of The Illinois Society of
Opticianry The society presented Carole L. Estes with the Mary Hackett Optician
of the Year Award.

   Mail for this column should be addressed to MedLife Rounds, Chicago
Sun-Times, Box 3596, Chicago 60654.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1993


                             952 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                           November 21, 1993, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 1329 words

HEADLINE: SLEEP DISORDERS:;
70 MILLION AMERICANS TOSS AND TURN;
LIGHT IS KEY TO BODY'S CLOCK

BYLINE: Michael B. Lafferty; Dispatch Science Reporter

BODY:


   It's midnight, you can't sleep. But your body knows just what do to - raid
the refrigerator.

   When insomnia forces a person into the kitchen, it's not food but switching
on the light that, scientists say, resets an internal clock allowing sleep.

   The light from the kitchen bulb enters the eye where it sets in motion a
series of complex chemical steps, the result of which is relayed to a group of
nerve cells at the base of the brain. It's this group of cells, called the
suprachiasmatic nucleus, that comprises the master circadian clock in all
mammals, including humans.

   The proper functioning of the master clock, researchers believe, is geared to
tiny clocks in the cells of the retina, the light-gathering cells of the eye.
Scientists are now zeroing in on exactly how these tiny biological clocks tick.
The payoff to millions of Americans could be more effective help in getting to
sleep - or in staying awake - relief from depression, a better understanding of
how the brain works, even improving the ability for humans to function in space.

   Sleep problems are a serious and not very well understood problem. An
estimated 70 million Americans suffer from at least intermittent sleep
difficulties, according to the National Commission on Aging. Sleep problems are
especially severe for the 6.8 million Americans who work night shifts, according
to the Sleep Research Society in Rochester, Minn. The association estimates
thee-fourths of night shift workers are sleepy every night and 20 percent fall
asleep on the job.

   Sometimes the results are tragic.

   ''Every time a truck driver falls asleep at the wheel and kills himself he
takes four more people with him,'' said Dr. Helmut Schmidt, who treats sleep
disorders at the Ohio Sleep Medicine Institute in Dublin.

   Sleep, the brain, biological clocks and light are intimately tied together
and researchers in a new field known as chronobiology are making rapid strides
in separating the strands that connect them.

   Nearly all organisms contain some type of clock or light-regulated mechanism.
Morning glories open in the evening and remain open until mid-morning. Swallows
return to Capistrano on the same day each year and palolo worms rise to the
surface of the Pacific Ocean to breed exactly one week after the November full
moon.

   Known as circadian clocks, in humans, internal clocks govern waking,
sleeping, menstrual cycles, birth and death. A statistical study of 438,000
people indicated you're more likely to die in the early morning. A study of
4,700 deaths from heart disease revealed a death peaks between 7 a.m. and 11
a.m.

   An internal clock figures a solar day at about 24 hours and a month at 29.5
days. But without light to reset them and keep them in sync with the world,
circadian clocks appear to drift, slowly gaining a little time each day.

   Stanford University researchers believe the master clock in humans, called
the suprachiasmatic nucleus, functions to keep people awake. Keep people in a
cave with no exposure to light and they would stay awake 25 hours.

   Tests have indicated that light trips a complex clock-regulating mechanism.
Electrical activity within human eyes increases and decreases in response to
light and dark. Doctors performing glaucoma tests have to know what time of day
it is because pressure in the eye varies in relation to the amount of daylight.
Also, doctors prescribe certain drugs to be taken at certain times of the day
because of the effects of internal clocks.

   The basis of the internal mechanism is believed to involve a half-dozen or
more genes. That was theory, however, until researchers developed the ability to
identify and clone genes, making it possible to search for the genetic basis of
the clock mechanism. A breakthrough came when researchers realized that some
animal mutants had clocks that ran fast or slow. Researchers at Northwestern
University and other institutions began locating these genetic mutations,
learning how the genes worked and what was wrong with them.

   Northwestern researcher Joseph Takahashi teamed with Harvard Medical School
scientists to identify how light triggers a mechanism called phosphorylation
that acts as a kind of on-off switch for the master clock in mammals. In this
case, a phosphate molecule becomes attached to a particular part of a protein
which activates other genes critical to the process.

   Other organisms, including bread molds, have similar switches. Fruit flies
have a gene responsible for making a protein called Per that has been linked to
the internal clock's functioning. The gene functions or expresses itself when
the Per level in the cell is low. Per takes about 24 hours to accumulate and, as
the amount builds, the gene shuts down, allowing Per to ebb and flow every 24
hours.

   Plants and animals probably have more than one clock. Mary E. Pierce, a
molecular neurobiologist at the University of Kansas Medical School, has
confirmed a clock-like mechanism in chicken retina cells. The finding supported
previous studies indicating biological clocks operate within individual cells.
Pierce determined that the key to winding the retina clock is the iodopsin gene
which controls the synthesis of a pigment in the cell.

   Tiny biological wrist watches are not in every retina cell - only in those
cells which gather light, Pierce said. Other retina cells take this information
and transmit it to the master clock, basically passing along the orders
triggered by light entering the eyes.

   If chickens have retina clocks, we do too,'' said Pierce. ''Just about every
form of life that's been looked at has evolved with a circadian clock.''

   Capital University neurologic researcher Michael Torrello said the
suprachiasmatic nucleus, the master clock, is simply a collection of cells
acting differentially to night and day.  ''Any one cell, if you extract it,
would have the same ability as all the others.''

   In fact, scientists have already shown that humans share similar
sleep-related functions with other animals. Hamsters, for example, have
suprachiasmatic nuclei. Removing a nucleus from a hamster with an abnormal clock
and switching it with one from a normal hamster, leaves the abnormal hamster
cured and the normal hamster suffering from a sprung clock.

   Internal clocks regulate a variety of functions related to sleep, including
the internal core temperature, which rises and falls about two degrees
Fahrenheit every 25 hours.

   When body temperature starts dropping, people, become drowsy, Torrello said.
For people who stay awake for 24 hours, working a third shift or studying for an
exam, would normally become drowsy in the late afternoon and again early in the
morning about 12 hours later.

   Rising body temperature serves as a wake up call.

   Humans vary widely in their need for sleep with a few individuals needing
just an hour or two. This is a trait that can be passed to children, Torrello
said.

   Crossing time zones rapidly upsets internal clocks and so the rise in
temperature it produces comes at the wrong time. Body temperature, light, even
diet affects the clock. Less light in winter affects circadian rhythms and can
result in depression.

   Scientists believe the internal clock deteriorates later in life. It ticks
faster, triggering sleep earlier in evening and wakefulness earlier in morning.
Some elderly people find it difficult to remain awake past 8 p.m. and find
themselves awakening at 4 a.m. An estimated 52 percent of Americans over age 65
report serious sleep difficulties.

   Northwestern's Takahashi believes basic research will point the way to fixing
body clocks. ''Clearly drugs will be designed to treat people,'' he said.

   But gene therapy - transplanting a functioning gene to take over for one that
is not working properly - is not possible until scientists learn to insert genes
into brains.

   ''Every time a truck driver falls asleep at the wheel and kills himself he
takes four more people with him.''

GRAPHIC: photo graphic, Northwestern University photo, Northwestern University's
Joseph Takahashi examines a DNA sequencing gell that shows how genes direct
production of proteins in the brain when a person is exposed to light.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1994


                             953 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            November 21, 1993 Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 1084 words

HEADLINE: Novel gene therapy may have shrunk brain tumor

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   After months of receiving injections of a novel genetic therapy, most of
Clemma Hewitt's invasive brain tumor had been destroyed, her doctors are now
reporting after her death. She also may have benefited from other experimental
treatments she was receiving at the time, the doctors said. To alleviate the
inflammation that followed decay of the tumor in the brain of the first patient
to receive the gene therapy, doctors had to discontinue the genetic treatment,
and during the break the tumor returned. Hewitt, weakened and discouraged,
received one last injection of the genetically altered, therapeutic cells in
September, then told her family and doctors she wanted no more treatments, said
Dr. Robert Sobol of the San Diego Regional Cancer Center.

   The tumor, a type called a glioblastoma that is almost always fatal,
continued to grow.

   The La Mesa woman's condition worsened, and she lapsed into a coma, then died
Oct. 20. The case received national attention and changed federal health policy
to allow for use of unproven gene therapies as treatments of last resort, or
"compassion," when conventional interventions have failed. Sobol spoke publicly
for the first time yesterday about the course of the treatment during the second
International Conference on Gene Therapy of Cancer at the Hotel del Coronado.

   The cancer center sponsors the conference. But the role of the gene therapy
in destroying the tumor that was the size of a tennis ball is unclear, Sobol
cautioned, because Hewitt, 53, was receiving other treatments at the time.

   She was taking the drug Tamoxifen, which is primarily given for breast
cancer, and had undergone an experimental radiation treatment in December, about
three weeks before the gene therapy injections started in January. "It could
have been a synergystic effect" of the three treatments that reduced the tumor's
mass, Sobol said in an interview. She had a period of stability with no apparent
growth or decline of the tumor and no loss of function from January through
April. Sobol and colleague Dr. Ivor Royston are seeking permission from National
Institutes of Health regulators in a Dec. 2 meeting to use the therapy in a
trial involving several patients. "We believe evaluation in additional patients
is warranted," Sobol said. The cancer center has received dozens of inquiries
from people with brain tumors who are seeking the treatment, he said. The
treatment involves arming cells with a gene that produces interleukin-2, a
substance that the doctors hope will stimulate the immune system's own T-cells
to attack tumors aggressively. If the federal health officials approve the
proposal, the doctors will use Hewitt's cancer cells, taken from an earlier
surgery, to carry the gene in other patients.

   The doctors think the cancer cells help stimulate the immune response, but
the cells are irradiated so they are harmless and cannot themselves cause
cancer. Regulators may want to see evidence that the approach works in animals,
Sobol said, but the tests they plan for rats are not complete. The NIH took the
unprecedented step last December of granting an exemption from traditional rules
by approving the therapy for use in Hewitt even though there were no such animal
tests that showed it might be effective. No autopsy was performed on Hewitt, but
Sobol said it could have allowed doctors to learn more about how the tumor
responded to treatments.

   Her husband, James Hewitt, a San Diego lawyer, said he did not want an
autopsy. What doctors know about the tumor's behavior they learned from a
magnetic resonance imaging technique that can yield detailed pictures of the
soft tissue of the brain.

   Cells in the center of the tumor were dead, so the core was essentially
hollow, leaving only a thin rim or shell region of apparently cancerous cells,
Sobol said. The decay of the tumor followed the largest dose of the gene therapy
in June, an injection of a tablespoon's volume, that was 40 times as potent as
the first injections at producing the interleukin-2 to stimulate an immune
response, Sobol said.

   After that same injection, lab tests in which samples of her blood were
exposed to tumor cells showed that the blood contained elevated levels of
T-cells, those the doctors hoped to stimulate. The concentrations of T-cells in
the blood suggests the treatment did boost an immune response, independent of
whether it had any effect on the tumor, Sobol noted.

   The doctors hoped these T-cells would attack the tumor, and the timing of the
killing suggests they may have, he said. "We won't know exactly the role any one
of these therapies may have played," Sobol acknowledged, adding again that the
other treatment she was receiving also could have had an effect. Also of
interest, a smaller tumor that developed in her brain in the spring was killed
after the largest gene therapy injection, Sobol said.

   Since that tumor developed after the radiation treatment in December, doctors
reason that its destruction could only have been brought about by either the
gene therapy or the drug. It was a few weeks after the large June dose that the
harmful swelling and inflammation set in as a side-effect of the destruction of
the tumor cells, Sobol said.

   Dizzy and weak, Hewitt was admitted to Sharp Memorial Hospital in Kearny
Mesa. The gene therapy and Tamoxifen doses were discontinued and she was given
another drug, Decadron, instead to reduce swelling.

   The debilitating amount of the swelling and inflammation probably was tied to
the great size of the tumor, he said.

   Hewitt underwent physical rehabilitation exercises to regain strength and to
walk again, he said. She was back at home in August.

   But with the treatments discontinued, the brain tumor had begun to grow
again, and in September she was given a final injection of the genetically
altered cells.

   Again, weakened by the growing tumor and losing her ability to walk, she lost
interest in having medical evaluations, blood test, brain scans and even
therapy, Sobol said. "She decided she didn't want any more treatment," Sobol
said. During the course of her therapy, doctors spoke only sparingly about the
woman's condition upon the instruction of her husband. James Hewitt, who
championed the fight to gain federal permission for using the gene therapy, said
in retrospect he thinks the treatment probably extended his wife's life.

   He said he hopes something the doctors learned may benefit others. "I have a
positive feeling about it," Hewitt said.

   "If I had to do it all over again, I think I would."

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             954 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                   November 20, 1993, Saturday, City Edition

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 838 words

HEADLINE: Science teachers discuss 'the new biology'

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    "When I was in school, genetics was about garden peas and fruit flies; now
it's students learning about gene therapy and realizing that they have friends
with cystic fibrosis," said Jim Duncan, a high school biology teacher from
Rochester, Pa.

   This radical shift, reflecting the explosion in genetic research and the
ethical dilemmas it raises, was a theme of the National Association of Biology
Teachers convention that brought Duncan and 2,500 other educators to Boston this
week.

   While their parents may be only hazily familiar with DNA, more and more high
school students today are splicing the stuff, as well as debating life-or-death
issues and controversies they may have to deal with one day as parents and
citizens.

   For example, should new tests for genetic diseases or susceptibilities be
given to everyone? Should doctors withhold treatment from seriously ill newborns
who would soon die or else live with severe physical disabilities? To what
extent should people's genetic makeup be private, when insurers and employers
may want that information?

   "Human genetics is the hot field now," said Jon Hendrix of Ball State
University in Indiana, who has developed a nationwide genetics curriculum called
Project Genethics. About one-third of the programs at the convention, Hendrix
said, focused on how to teach the new biology.

   The growing emphasis on the weighty social consequences of DNA discoveries
stems in part from a shift in science education to a system that emphasizes
using real-world applications and getting students to think conceptually and
make rational decisions. Old rote learning traditions, many educators agree,
have failed to produce scientifically literate adults.

   Not all high school faculty or biology teachers have become converts, and
some students may lack the maturity for such discussions. "A lot of my students
can just about manage to decide what to wear to school every day," noted one
teacher who attended a crowded session Thursday on innovative methods for
teaching genetics.

   Nevertheless, high school teachers and teen-agers who soon may be confronted
with personal dilemmas as a result of gene technology "have a social
responsibility to become familiar with the new technology and to take part in
discussions about public policy" on medical genetics issues, said Robin Blatt, a
consultant to the Massachusetts Corporation for Educational Telecommunications,
which beams a human genetics telecourse to about 20 schools in the state and
others across the country.

   Massachusetts is one of the most active states in transferring the explosion
of genetics research into school curricula, a process helped by the large number
of academic research centers and biotech companies in the area. The
Massachusetts Biotechnology Council, which represents a large number of biotech
firms in the state, has provided expertise for teacher workshops and other help
to a consortium of 13 schools in eastern Massachusetts.

   Generally, states don't dictate the content of science courses. As a result,
schools in one area, or even teachers in one school, may differ widely in their
enthusiasm for the new genetics. Also, larger districts with more resources,
especially if they are located in regions heavy in high-tech, are likely to have
a head start.

   "My students are somewhat interested in genetics, because they are always
interested in themselves," said Dwane Grace, who teaches biology at rural Celina
High School in west-central Ohio. However, Grace said it has been difficult to
convey the importance of the social and ethical questions, because "students
live for the moment."

   "I try to impress on them that they are going to have to make these decisions
themselves someday - and I hope they'll remember I said that," he added.

   All across the country, teachers are trying to engage their students by
asking them to play roles, watch video "soap operas" in which families confront
genetic conditions, or take ethical positions and defend them. Examples
discussed at the convention include:

   - Students imagine themselves genetic counselors writing to tell parents
their unborn child would be affected with Tay-Sachs disease.

   - People affected by dwarfism, Huntington's disease and other genetic
conditions visit biology classes to relate their experiences.

   "It breaks down a lot of the stereotypes that kids have," said Duncan, the
Pennsylvania teacher. "Most of them seem to be more understanding afterward, and
some of them say they feel better about themselves because they see what some
people have to cope with."

   - In their own school labs or in facilities provided by biotech companies,
students across the country have been conducting simple gene-splicing
experiments themselves.

   Several teachers said that because impressionable students sometimes become
overly worried about genetic disease in themselves or future children, it's
important to emphasize that the vast majority of births - 95 to 97 percent -
result in infants unaffected by genetic conditions.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1993


                             955 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 18, 1993 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 571 words

HEADLINE: To beat old bull, eye stocks that are beaten down

BYLINE: Don Bauder

BODY:

   An elderly bull has the puissance of a steer -- and that's what this hoary
bull market looks like to the chief investment strategist of Wall Street's
Kidder, Peabody. So William J. Newman is steering customers into stocks that
provide some comfort in an aging bull market -- mainly, stocks that have been
beaten down, or have missed much of the big bull upmove since late 1990. "I'm
cautious.

   This is a late-cycle bull market with speculation rising," says Newman, in
San Diego this week to talk with Kidder clients. Wall Street stocks turned lower
yesterday in nervous trading leading up to the crucial vote on the North
American Free Trade Agreement.

   The Dow Jones industrial average was off 6.42 points to end at 3,704.35,
retreating from Tuesday's record closing high of 3,710.77 on optimism that NAFTA
would pass.

   The bottom line is that it is still very strong. But madcap speculation --
always a sign of a late bull market -- is increasing scarily.

   Initial public offerings (IPOs) are popping up everywhere.

   They're overpriced when they hit the market and may zoom 100 percent the
first day.

   Marginally profitable Boston Chicken soared 143 percent its first day last
week. Small stocks are hot and blue chips cold.

   The Standard & Poor's 500 is up 7 percent this year, but the Russell 2000 --
loaded with Lilliputians -- is up 17 percent.

   Volume of the low-cap (lesser capitalization, or smaller) stocks exceeds
volume of the high-caps. Americans flood into foreign stock or bond funds
without concern about currency risks. "The market looks dangerous.

   There is too much complacency," says Newman, noting that there hasn't even
been a correction of 10 percent in three years. Wall Street has fallen in love
with the idea of slow growth and low inflation.

   "But this ideal environment won't continue," says Newman. "The inflation has
been in financial assets," he says -- a view also taken by Kennedy Gammage of La
Jolla's Richland Report.

   "How long can you keep this liquidity-driven world going?" asks Newman,
noting that the market correction could come so fast that investors will find it
difficult to get out. Interest rate-sensitive stocks such as utilities and banks
have been weak. That's often an indication that interest rates are headed up,
and higher rates could hurt the market, he says. For all these reasons, "we're
looking for stocks that have been left behind in this market," says Newman.

   There are pharmaceuticals, biotechs and various health care stocks that have
been hit hard as the market fears the Clinton health care program.

   He likes Cardiovascular Imaging Systems, Integrated Health Services, Watson
Pharmaceuticals, Genetic Therapy, Liposome Technology, Mylan Laboratories and
Teva Pharmaceutical. He likes companies that have been restructuring (slicing
costs) such as Logicon, Tech-Sysm, Varian Associates, Ford, Humana, Tenneco,
E-Systems and United Technologies. (Note that several are in aerospace -- a
category that doesn't scare Newman.) He also likes stocks in
productivity-enhancing industries such as Compaq Computer, Oracle Systems,
Whirlpool, 3Com and PeopleSoft. Although he thinks the large caps will catch up
with small caps, some in the above list are small caps. Newman does not see a
bear market yet, but for those who believe in a four year cycle, 1994 would be
the time for another one, he says. Generally speaking, he advises: "Lower your
risk profile as other people are raising theirs."

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             956 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                   November 17, 1993, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 52

LENGTH: 416 words

HEADLINE: Biotechnology firms await land bank applications;
EMERGING BUSINESS / FAST TRACK

BODY:

    A dozen companies, most of them in biotechnology, are about to receive
applications from the Massachusetts Government Land Bank that could net them $
300,000 to $ 5 million in loan guarantees.

   Ranging from start-up GelTex Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Lexington, with 14
employees, to the 274-employee Cambridge Biotech Corp. of Worcester, the 12
firms are the first to have sought applications for the land bank's new Emerging
Technology Fund.

   Approved by the Legislature in March, the loan-guarantee program is expected
to leverage up to $ 50 million in land bank loans, primarily to assist in the
financing of emerging companies' manufacturing facilities. About 25 percent of
the funds are earmarked for research and development facilities.

   In exchange for the guarantees, borrowers will pay the land bank a half
percent of the total loan guarantee at the time of commitment, followed by a 2
percent minimum annual fee on the outstanding guarantee for up to 10 years. The
borrowers will also pay the land bank in warrants to purchase stock or a share
of future revenue.

   "We're hoping to make our first commitment in place by January," said Karl
Seidman, deputy director of the land bank.

   Although the funds are aimed at three industries - biotechnology, advanced
environmental technologies and advanced materials - no materials company has
inquired about land bank funds, Seidman said.

   Besides Cambridge Biotech and GelTex, the first emerging fund companies to
receive applications include:

   - Alpha-Beta Technology Inc. of Worcester, which is requesting $ 5 million to
complete the financing of a $ 22 million facility near its current headquarters
in the Massachusetts Biotechnology Research Park. Separately, the company is
building a $ 30 million biomanufacturing facility in Smithfield, R.I., financed
through revenue bonds from the Rhode Island Port Authority.

   - Creative Biomolecules Inc. of Hopkinton, which is looking for office,
laboratory and production space in Westborough. The company recently acquired
Verax, a biomanufacturing company in Lebanon, N.H.

   - Molten Metal Technologies Inc. of Waltham. It is seeking to expand its
recently opened hazardous waste recycling facility in Fall River.

   Other companies include: Focal Inc. of Cambridge, Wood Recycling Corp. of
Woburn, BioMedical Waste Systems Inc. of Boston, East Acres Biologicals Inc. of
Southbridge, Alkermes Inc. of Cambridge and Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of
Cambridge and Bio Shelters Inc. of Amherst.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1993


                             957 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                   November 17, 1993, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 52

LENGTH: 201 words

HEADLINE: Transkaryotic raises $ 8.1m;
EMERGING BUSINESS / FAST TRACK

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., which postponed plans this summer to launch an
initial public offering, announced last week that it raised $ 8.1 million in a
private offering of convertible preferred shares.

   The company said the funds will be used for research and clinical development
programs.

   Transkaryotic is focusing on providing gene therapy products for severe
anemia and hemophilia.

   In July, TKT announced plans to sell 2.5 million shares of common stock for
its first public offering when it filed a registration statement with the
Securities and Exchange Commission.

   The company hoped to sell those shares for $ 9 to $ 11, raising $ 22.5
million to $ 27.5 million. In August, the company postponed the offering, citing
Wall Street nervousness about the effects of health care reform on biotech and
pharmaceutical stocks.

   Company officials, however, have said the sale could go forward if market
conditions on Wall Street improve.

   Participating in the $ 8.1 milion private placement were its major investor,
Warburg Pincus Capital Co. along with BEA Associates, H & Q Health Care
Investors, H & Q Life Sciences Investors, Medical Portfolio Management and Dr.
Alejandro Zaffaroni.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1993


                             958 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk; Health Page

LENGTH: 1368 words

HEADLINE: A.M.A. Heralds a Genetics Revolution

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   CONVINCED that advances in molecular biology and molecular genetics are
transforming the theory and practice of medicine, the American Medical
Association is virtually shouting at the nation's doctors to pay attention.

   It is publishing more than 150 articles on advances in molecular genetics in
11 medical journals today, devoting its resources to pointing out that the
genetics revolution is well under way.

    The barrage of articles "is an explosion, a culmination, a profound
statement of the importance of this subject for the human condition," said Dr.
George D. Lundberg, who is editor of The Journal of the American Medical
Association, where some of the articles appeared, and editor in chief of the
American Medical Association's scientific publications.

Wide Range of Issues

    The papers address subjects rangingfrom clinical applications for cancer,
neurology, pathology and dermatology to issues in law and ethics. Researchers in
every arena are quoted as saying that there is no turning back.

   In the field of prenatal diagnosis, scientists are on the verge of testing
fetal cells taken from a pregnant woman's blood. This blood test could allow
them to find disorders like Down syndrome, for example, as early as 10 weeks
into the pregnancy. In another journal article, Dr. Joe Leigh Simpson and Dr.
Sherman Elias of the University of Tennessee noted that researchers were already
able to pick fetal cells out of a pregnant woman's blood by identifying their
molecular features, even when there was only one fetal cell for every 100
million maternal blood cells.

   Gene therapy is also well on its way. Fifty-two gene therapy studies have
already been approved in patients, according to an article by Dr. C. Thomas
Caskey and his colleagues at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston. Gene therapy
is being tested to correct inherited gene mutations that cause diseases like
cystic fibrosis. It is also being tested to treat cancer, by making tumor cells
more vulnerable to drugs or to being destroyed by the body's own immune system.

   Genes for inherited diseases are being found at a dizzying rate, not only in
disorders like Huntington's disease, where the inheritance is fairly
straightforward, but in diseases with a much more complicated genetic pattern.
Now, according to an article by Dr. James Gusella, a professor of genetics at
Harvard University who is director of molecular neurogenetics at the
Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, advances in genetics have made it
feasible to find genes that predispose a carrier to common diseases like heart
disease and mental disorders, manic depression and schizophrenia.

Threshold of Major Change

    "We are on the threshold of a big change, and a lot of ethical hassles," Dr.
Gusella said.

   In an editorial in today's issue of The Journal of the American Medical
Association, Dr. Jeanette M. Smith, a contributing editor, quoted Dr. Francis
Crick, the co-discoverer of the structure of DNA, the genetic material, to
explain how such a momentous change could have taken place almost imperceptibly.
Dr. Crick's image was of pennies dropping one by one until, Dr. Crick said,
"eventually, it all clicks."

   To make clear what this means, Dr. Smith wrote, not since "the Dutch janitor
and shopkeeper" Anton van Leeuwenhoek, and later the Royal Society, puzzled over
the little animals in rain water "has the stage been set for as radical a
rethinking of the causes of disease and disability as is now occurring in
conjunction with the elucidation of the human genome."

   "Just as inevitability of death by infectious disease was diminished through
knowledge of cause and prevention," Dr. Smith continued, "we may now begin to
lift the burden of devastating inherited conditions."

   Each specialist whose article is being published today has a story to tell
that makes Dr. Smith's point.

   For example, Dr. Jeffrey Sklar, a professor of pathology at Harvard Medical
School who was an author of one of the papers, said in an interview that he was
seeing the beginning of marked changes in the way cancer was detected and
diagnosed and in the advent of ways to predict who would get cancer in the first
place.

   Dr. Sklar, who is also the director of the division of molecular oncology at
the Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, said that tests using molecular
biology could now address all the areas of pathology that had been addressed by
conventional methods, but with much greater sensitivity. He said those areas
include primary diagnosis (is the tumor malignant?); staging (how far has it
spread?), and efficacy of treatment (how much was the cancer reduced?)

   The conventional methods of pathologists were developed 100 years ago, Dr.
Sklar said, and rely on changes in the shape and architecture of cells as
indications of the presence of a malignancy. "There is nothing wrong with that,"
Dr. Sklar said. "It's a powerful method," he said, but there can be times when
results are equivocal.

   One example is in patients with cancers of white blood cells, like Hodgkin's
disease or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, where tumors can be hard to distinguish from
normal cells. White blood cells routinely change their size and shape when they
are fighting an infection. "They can get big and ugly looking as part of the
normal changes they undergo," Dr. Sklar said.

   In cancer, he added, "you can get cells that look exactly like that, but they
are not responding to an antigen." Pathologists diagnose cancer by trying to
decide whether all the suspicious cells appear to have evolved from a single
cell, which would happen in a tumor, or whether they seem to be individual cells
that are, together, fighting an infection.

   "It's a subjective criterion," Dr. Sklar said, and so specialized a skill
that pathologists from around the world routinely send their most troubling
specimens to one of a dozen or so experts. Even so, Dr. Sklar said, these
experts can disagree on whether a cancer is there.

   Other ambiguities arise when doctors find a very small pocket of cells that
appear to be malignant, raising the question whether they are normal cells that
look abnormal because they are responding to something else in the body or
whether they are cancer cells.

New Molecular Tests

    But to resolve such puzzles, within the last few years there has been a
virtual explosion of molecular tests that can objectively determine whether
cells are cancerous. The tests look for genetic changes and molecular markers
that characterize particular tumor cells. Besides being precise, the tests are
also exquisitely sensitive, Dr. Sklar said.

   Conventional methods allow pathologists to see cancer cells that are present
among normal cells in ratios of 1 in 10 or 1 in 100. The new tests, Dr. Sklar
said, find cancer cells when the ratio is as low as 1 in a million.

   Within the next two to three years, Dr. Sklar predicts, screening tests will
have been developed to detect genetic predilections to colon and breast cancers.
The colon cancer gene and the breast cancer gene are dominant, meaning that if
an individual inherits a gene from either parent, the person is at risk for the
cancer, and they have a high likelihood of producing cancer. They also are very
common, Dr. Sklar said, occurring in about 1 in 200 people in the general
population, making the cancers the most common inherited diseases. A few such
tests are in use now for people with family histories of certain rare tumors,
but, Dr. Sklar said, "we are really only beginning to see the tip of the
iceberg."

   Genetic screening tests for cancer should be of enormous benefit because they
could alert those at risk to be screened routinely, to find cancers early, and
they could allow researchers to test methods of preventing cancer more
effectively by focusing on those likely to get the disease. But, Dr. Sklar
warned, the tests will also "raise all sorts of issues -- privacy, insurability,
how widespread screening should be, the economic impact of doing broad-based
screening."

   Dr. Sklar urged that these problems be addressed now. "Scientists have an
obligation to raise the issue and then the public has an obligation to set
guidelines," he said.

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1993


                             959 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                  NOVEMBER 17, 1993, WEDNESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C2; BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 98 words

HEADLINE: Chiron to Collaborate

BODY:

    Chiron Corp., the Emeryville-based biotechnology company, has agreed to
collaborate with San Diego-based Viagene Inc. to develop gene therapy treatments
for cancer and other diseases. Viagene will be responsible for most of the
research and will finance the first $ 12 million in development costs. Chiron
will oversee clinical studies and finance the second $ 12 million. Viagene will
manufacture products developed under the agreement, while Chiron will market the
products. As part of the agreement, Chiron bought $ 17.6 million of Viagene
preferred stock.


LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1993


                             960 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          November 17, 1993 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 419 words

HEADLINE: Chiron buys stake in Viagene;
Local biotech firm plans public offering

BYLINE: CRAIG D. ROSE, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Viagene Inc.'s proposed public offering may turn out to be more of a second
helping than a main meal. The San Diego biotechnology company said yesterday
that Chiron Corp. has invested $20 million and could pump $30 million more into
Viagene to co-develop gene therapy treatments.

   The investments would surpass the $27 million that Viagene hopes to raise
through a proposed initial public stock offering. Chiron has purchased 1.6
million shares of Viagene preferred stock for $17.6 million.

   The company also paid $2.4 million for warrants that will allow it to
purchase an additional 2.75 million shares of Viagene common stock at $11 per
share.

   If fully exercised, the warrants could bring Viagene about $30 million. The
two companies will attempt to develop products for the treatment of cancer and
other diseases. A 6-year-old company with 120 employees, Viagene has brought
three products to the point of human clinical trials. Chiron, based in
Emeryville, is best known for having developed Betaseron, the only treatment for
certain cases of multiple sclerosis.

   The company reported net income for the quarter ended Sept. 30 of $4.9
million, or 15 cents per share, on sales of $78.3 million. Chiron employs 2,150
people. Viagene has focused on the development of gene therapy treatments for
human immunodeficiency virus and cancer. Viagene has filed with the Securities
and Exchange Commission for an initial public offering of 2.5 million shares.

   The company has targeted a price range of $11 to $13 per share. Alex. Brown &
Sons Inc., CS Boston and Nomura Securities International Inc. are the
underwriters for the Viagene offering. James McCamant, editor of the Medical
Technology Stock Letter in Berkeley, said the agreement with Chiron "ensures the
success of Viagene's proposed IPO." "Chiron has the reputation of having the
best science of any biotech company and they have their own gene-therapy
program, so this is strong endorsement of Viagene's technology," said McCamant.
A spokesman for Chiron said the agreement with Viagene followed six months of
discussion between the two companies. "We chose Viagene because of their
technology," said the Chiron spokesman. Steven Mento, vice president of research
and development for Viagene, said Chiron will contribute rights to certain key
genes to the partnership. A committee composed of equal numbers from each
company will direct the research and development program.

   The agreement allows Chiron to appoint a senior executive to Viagene's board
of directors.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             961 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  November 17, 1993, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 9D

LENGTH: 1029 words

HEADLINE: How genetics can be used against you

BYLINE: Mike Snider

BODY:

    Discrimination against a person because of his or her family's medical
history can be indiscriminate.

   Take it from civil rights lawyer Theresa Morelli. In 1990, she applied for
disability insurance and paid her premium. A month later her check came back
with a notice.

   When the Wintersville, Ohio, lawyer called the insurance company, a
representative said she had been refused coverage because her father had been
diagnosed with Huntington's disease. "They basically said, 'Come back when
you're 50.' Here I'm a civil rights attorney and where are my civil rights?"

   Morelli, who's 32, works for a large firm and has medical insurance, "but I
don't believe I could go out and be self-employed or work for a small firm. I
don't believe I could get any insurance."

   Privacy gets compromised right now, and it will worsen as the genetic
revolution continues, Morelli says. Think of how credit information gets
disseminated nationwide. More medical records are being computerized and
information about genetic susceptibilities may become part of that.

   Once information "goes out to insurance companies and credit bureaus, Lord
only knows what happens to it," says Morelli, who helped draft an Ohio law,
passed in October, that regulates the use of genetic test results.

   Susceptibilites to some diseases can be determined with just a small amount
of genetic material from a blood test or a hair or tissue sample. Using this
sample, tests may be done to establish one's "probabilistic future diary," as
described by George J. Annas, director of Boston University's law, medicine and
ethics program.

   Right now, the genetic code has only partly been broken. For instance,
certain genetic tests have already been devised that confirm the likelihood a
person will develop Huntington's disease, sickle cell anemia, Down's syndrome,
certain cancers and other diseases. Someday, tests may be available for all
diseases and susceptibilities.

   One must be brave upon entering this new world. "There are two problems with
knowing our future - it may change your view of yourself and your life
possibilities, and second, it may change the way others deal with you," Annas
says.

   As more information can be inferred, "that gives others potential power . . .
by providing a basis not only for counseling, but also for stigmatization and
discrimination," he writes in today's Journal of the American Medical
Association.

   Already, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the U.S. Army have DNA banks
- sophisticated collections of DNA samples. Some states now make giving a DNA
sample a condition of parole.

   Laws are needed to govern banks and the use of genetic data, Annas says.

   Business, in particular, is pushing for increased genetic screening, says a
National Academy of Sciences report, Assessing Genetic Risks: Implications for
Health and Social Policy, released last week. Potential misuse: loss of
insurance and employment.

   Also needed: public education about genetics and a national advisory
committee to set genetic testing standards, the report recommends.

   "Genetic information is going to be more difficult to explain as more and
more tests for different diseases are bundled and are performed at one time,
allowing us to detect multiple genetic traits in an individual," says Arno
Motulsky, University of Washington, Seattle, who chaired the report committee.

   Similarly, Annas recommends a new federal agency be created to develop
genetic privacy guidelines.

   Noted researcher C. Thomas Caskey of Baylor College of Medicine is less
convinced that genetic information can be kept confidential. "We need to prepare
for the likelihood of information getting out in public sectors (like) the work
community, the health care community."

   Each of us carries at least five to 10 genetic defects, he says. Perhaps,
Caskey says, the acceptance that "we all are flawed" might make us more
thoughtful and considerate to those whose flaws "lead to major health problems."

    Out of the lab and into doctors' offices

   Advances in genetics will - and are - bringing about changes in the practice
of medicine. Here's how, from an American Medical Association seminar held
Tuesday:

   - Gene therapy. Some strategies being used in ongoing human trials include
packing a "normal" gene into a virus to multiply within special cells called
stem cells. Stem cells make all other blood cells and once treated, should
regenerate healthy ones. Another strategy: In Britain, researchers have inserted
healthy DNA into fat cells that can be shot into cystic fibrosis patients'
lungs. Look for more attempts at making gene therapy "drugs," says Dr. C. Thomas
Caskey, Baylor College of Medicine.

   - Patient management. Lab tests are available for the management of at least
two dozen types of cancer. For instance, in breast cancer the ERBB2 gene is
being studied because it might indicate a patient's risk of relapse. A different
defect can be used in monitoring a patient's treatment for acute lymphoblastic
leukemia and chronic myelogenous leukemia. Probably the most common test helps
diagnose non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Genetic markers "provide a dimension on the
diagnosis not available from conventional medicine," says Dr. Jeffrey Sklar,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston.

   - Genetic testing. A gene linked to Huntington's disease was identified in
March and a more convenient predictive test for the neurodegenerative disorder
is due soon. But without effective treatment for the disease - the symptoms of
which usually begin in midlife - not all those at risk are interested in knowing
their fate, a study shows.

   - Genetic counseling. An international study of Jewish couples at risk for
having children with Tay-Sachs disease found that with counseling, couples who
previously hadn't tried having children did; 2,400 babies were born. And
incidence has dropped to less than five cases a year since 1985; previously
about 60 were born annually in North America.

   - Prenatal screening. An upcoming National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development trial will test maternal blood for evidence of Down's syndrome
in the pregnancy as early as 10 weeks into gestation.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, b/w, Marcia Staimer, USA TODAY (Illustration)


                             962 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                November 16, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 4; Science Desk; Medical Science Page

LENGTH: 1958 words

HEADLINE: Cystic Fibrosis Surprise: Genetic Screening Falters

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   FOUR years ago, when molecular geneticists isolated the gene for cystic
fibrosis, some scientists were ecstatic. This was one of the first fruits of the
avid search for the genes that cause various diseases. Screening for the gene
would provide the prototype, some thought, for national screening programs for
other dread diseases and the basis for offering prenatal diagnosis to couples
who carry the gene.

   Now, however, the story is taking an unexpected twist. Human genetics, at
least in this case, turns out to be far more complicated than expected.
Biologists have found more than 350 points at which the gene can be mutated, and
more are appearing almost weekly. At the same time, scientists are finding that
many people who inherit mutated genes from both parents do not have cystic
fibrosis.

    With so many possible mutations, the potential combinations in a person who
inherits one gene from each parent are endless. And the researchers are finding
that combinations of different mutations produce different effects. Some may
cause crippling and usually fatal cystic fibrosis and others may cause less
serious disorders, like infertility, asthma or chronic bronchitis.

   The picture could be even more complicated if, as some researchers suspect,
other genes come into play by altering the way different mutations of the cystic
fibrosis gene are expressed. That would mean that a pair of mutations inherited
by one person might behave differently from that same pair inherited by another
person, depending on the state of a third, regulatory gene.

   Dr. Norman Fost, a pediatrician and ethicist at the University of Wisconsin,
said that as the evidence from the cystic fibrosis research points out, "there
is, in fact, no such thing as a single-gene genetic disorder," adding: "One of
the worst things that Mendel ever did was work with this plant that was either
tall or short. Not a single gene in human biology works that way."

   Dr. Michael Kaback, a professor of pediatrics and reproductive medicine at
the University of California at San Diego, said geneticists can make good
predictions when they counsel individuals whose family members have had cystic
fibrosis. They can pinpoint the combination of mutations in those family members
and can tell if a fetus is carrying it. "For family members where C.F. patients
have been identified, testing is certainly relevant," Dr. Kaback said.

   But in those with no family history of the disease, or who have inherited
either different mutations from each parent or a combination of unfamiliar
mutations, making any prediction is risky. Attempts to associate particular
combinations of mutations with particular outcomes in the general population,
"have been almost totally unsuccessful," said Dr. Barbara Handelin, a medical
geneticist at Integrated Genetics in Framingham, Mass."There are exceptions to
almost every rule."

   The cystic fibrosis story began in 1968, more than 20 years before the gene
was found. At that time, Dr. Douglas S. Holsclaw, working at Children's Hospital
in Boston, made an observation that turned out to be the first hint that a
cystic fibrosis gene might cause more than the classic symptoms of the disease.

   Cystic fibrosis, which affects an estimated 30,000 Americans, results in an
accumulation of thick, sticky mucus in the pancreas and lungs. People with the
disease eventually have pancreatic failure and recurrent bacterial infections of
the lungs that lead, finally, to lung failure. But Dr. Holsclaw found another
defect. When he did hernia repairs for boys with cystic fibrosis, or when he did
autopsies on them, he noticed that they were missing the vas deferens, the tube
that carries sperm to the penis.

   No one had known about this defect because, until recently, boys with cystic
fibrosis did not normally live to adulthood, when the infertility that would
have been caused by a missing vas deferens might have become apparent. But with
the administration of pancreatic enzymes and the development of improved
treatments for the lung infections, people with cystic fibrosis now live into
their 20's or 30's.

   Dr. Holsclaw's observation "was opportunistic," noted Dr. Jean Amos, a
geneticist at Boston University. "Who would have predicted that these boys would
be infertile?"

   Several other investigators took the next logical step. One, Dr. Robert
Oates, co-director of the New England Male Reproductive Center at Boston
University Medical Center, said his interest was piqued in 1990, when he started
seeing relatively large numbers of men who were infertile because they had no
vas deferens. A few years earlier, infertility specialists had discovered that
men with this defect could father children if doctors aspirated sperm directly
from their testicles and used them to fertilize a woman's eggs in a petri dish.
Many men who were missing the vas deferens and had given up hope of being able
to father children began flocking to fertility specialists.

Link to Various Illnesses

    Dr. Oates said that the men he saw were "otherwise quite healthy," adding,
"They had no lung problems, no pancreatic problems." But because he knew about
the vas deferens defect in cystic fibrosis, he wondered whether the men might
have mutations in their cystic fibrosis genes.

   To his surprise, Dr. Oates said, his hunch was correct. He referred the men
to Dr. Amos for genetic testing. So far, Dr. Amos said, she has seen 115 men,
most of whom seem to have inherited mutations in their cystic fibrosis genes
from both parents. She added that the men typically have one mutation that is
severe. People who inherit this mutation from both parents seem to get cystic
fibrosis. The other mutation most of these men inherited seems to be milder. Dr.
Amos said it seems likely that the gene with the milder mutation functions well
enough to prevent most manifestations of cystic fibrosis.

   Independently, Dr. Handelin is finding the same thing. But she is seeing
mutations that are even more puzzling. Some men have two mutations that are
identical to those usually found in patients with cystic fibrosis, Dr. Handelin
said. From looking at the men's genes, she said, "they should have cystic
fibrosis, but they clearly don't." Ticking off the hallmarks of the disease, she
said: "They have negative sweat tests, no history of pulmonary or G.I. disease
or absorption problems. There are people out there with various separate
manifestations of cystic fibrosis with incredibly mild disease. We haven't been
able to say, 'Here are five mutations where you always find infertility and here
are others where you always find C.F.' "

   Dr. Handelin says that her favorite theory "for which I have no evidence" is
that a third gene affects the expression of the mutations of the cystic fibrosis
gene.

   Dr. Kaback agreed that that explanation is possible. "Genes don't function in
a vacuum," he said.

   But infertility is not the only surprising manifestation of cystic fibrosis
mutations. Dr. Gary Cutting, a molecular geneticist at Johns Hopkins University,
is starting to find cystic fibrosis mutations in two groups of patients, those
with a frequent complication of asthma known as allergic bronchopulmonary
aspergillosis and those with a common manifestation of chronic bronchitis called
chronic pseudomonas bronchitis. Researchers in France and Italy are also
reporting cystic fibrosis mutations in patients with asthma and chronic
bronchitis, Dr. Cutting said.

Highly Prevalent Mutation

    In addition, said Dr. Handelin, cystic fibrosis mutations may turn out be
much more common than anyone had expected. In collaboration with Dr. David Witt,
assistant chief of the genetics department at Kaiser Permanente of Northern
California in San Jose, she screened 5,000 healthy women coming in for routine
prenatal care. The investigators were looking for a particular mutation of the
cystic fibrosis gene, r117h, that was thought to occur in less than 1 percent of
the population, an estimate derived from studies of people with cystic fibrosis.
Dr. Handelin and her colleagues, however, found that 11 percent of the people
they screened had the mutation, suggesting that cystic fibrosis is just the tip
of the iceberg for the many mutations of the cystic fibrosis gene.

   "It was a very surprising finding," Dr. Handelin said. "It tells you that
this mutation is much more prevalent then you would expect. It is manifested in
a disease that we didn't count as C.F."

   Researchers are optimistic that the discoveries will lead to a new
understanding of the spectrum of disorders caused by the cystic fibrosis gene
and, possibly, to new treatments for more common diseases, like asthma. Dr.
Cutting said that if some people with asthma and chronic bronchitis were really
suffering from a genetic disorder, then gene therapy, which is being tested for
cystic fibrosis, might benefit them.

   Dr. Ronald Crystal of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York
said that the complex picture of the cystic fibrosis gene's manifestations
should not affect attempts to treat cystic fibrosis with gene therapy. Studies
indicate that people need only 5 to 10 percent of the protein made by the cystic
fibrosis gene to be free of symptoms of cystic fibrosis, Dr. Crystal said,
adding that "probably only one in five cells need it." That means that gene
therapy does not have to accomplish a miracle and make every gene in every cell
work perfectly. "That's very positive news," he said.

   But, Dr. Handelin cautioned, the research will take time. And the
complications that are emerging, "go against the idea that we will know
everything we need to know in the next five years."

   The findings, "complicate things terribly," said Dr. Cutting. If a man and
his wife are screened and each is found to carry a different mutation of the
cystic fibrosis gene, they will have one chance in four of having a child who
inherits two mutated genes. Ordinarily, that would spell disease, but now it is
not so certain.

   "What do you tell them?" Dr. Cutting asked. "Do you say, 'Maybe your son will
be infertile, or maybe your daughter will be healthy or maybe your child will
have cystic fibrosis'?"

   Molecular geneticists say that the story of cystic fibrosis is a cautionary
tale. "The onus is on us not to sell this research in an oversimplified way,"
Dr. Handelin said.

   Researchers added that such complications may turn out to be more the norm
than the exception. Already, several other genes are starting to show their own
confusing effects, making genetic counseling infinitely complicated.

   For example, said Dr. Kaback, the gene for Tay-Sachs disease also seems to
have variable effects. This disease, most often found in Ashkenazi Jews,
typically kills babies within a few years after they are born. But, Dr. Kaback
said, researchers are finding some mutations in the Tay-Sachs gene that can
result in "changes in the age of onset or severity and even some mutations that
look like mutations but whose effects are benign."

   The result, Dr. Kaback said, is that "it's not going to be simple: one gene,
one effect," as researchers once thought it would be.

   Dr. Handelin agreed. Whenever a new gene is cloned, she said, "people think,
bingo, it's all solved," adding: "Everyone is tempted to say that this is the
solution to our problems. But it may be the start of new problems."

   Dr. Kaback said that the new wrinkles in molecular genetics were "a wonderful
example of how, the smarter you get, the less you know."

   But, the researchers emphasize, the complications do not mean that it is a
mistake to search for genes. After all, Dr. Kaback said, finding a gene is a
first step toward understanding what causes a disease and how to cure it.

GRAPHIC: Diagram: "Genetic Puzzle Confronts Disease Study"

    More than 350 multations have already been discovered for the gene involved
in causing cystic fibrosis; not only that, most people who inherit mutated genes
from both parents do not have the disease.

    When a base pair of a gene is altered through mutation, the template for
producing proteins, the body's fundamental chemical workhorses, changes. Of the
350 mutations already identified in the gene for cystic fibrosis, some produce
that disease, some produce other disabilities, and some have no discernible
effect. (pg. C3)

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1993


                             963 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   November 16, 1993, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. B1

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: GENES SEEN AS THERAPY IN TREATING ARTHRITIS

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   Researchers at the University of Pittsburgh have shown they can protect the
knees of rabbits from arthritic inflammation by modifying the lining of the
joints with a therapeutic gene.

   The experiment, reported yesterday in the Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, suggests how gene therapy might someday be used to treat arthritis
in people.

   ''Ultimately, if we can get the gene (to function) in the joint for years,
the treatment in effect becomes a cure,'' said Christopher H. Evans, a molecular
biologist and director of Pitt's Ferguson Laboratory, which studies arthritis.

   But trials in humans are years off, he emphasized.

   In the animal studies, Evans and his colleagues removed parts of the synovial
membrane surrounding the knee joints of the rabbits.

   Then, using a retrovirus developed by Pitt's Paul Robbins, a human gene that
produces an anti-arthritis substance was incorporated into the synovial cells.
The modified cells were placed back in the animal joints.

   The gene produces a protein that inhibits the actions of interleukin-1, a
substance produced by the body's immune system. Interleukin-1 is found in
arthritic joints and is blamed for breaking down cartilage and causing
inflammation.

   The interleukin-inhibiting protein has been tested in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis and has helped ease symptoms, Evans said. But the patients
had to inject themselves with the protein; getting the joint cells to produce
the protein would appear to be a more satisfactory way of delivering the
protein, he suggested.

   In the Pitt animal experiments, the researchers simulated rheumatoid
arthritis by injecting interleukin-1 into the rabbits' knees. Those with the
genetically modified synovial cells had far less inflammation and cartilage
damage than other rabbits that had not undergone gene therapy, Evans said.

   The genetic protection against arthritis lasted five to six weeks, then
tapered off.

   Evans said the researchers are working on ways to extend the length of time
that the genes continue to pump out the anti-arthritis protein. They also are
looking for an easier method for introducing the therapeutic genes into the
synovial cells and for regulating the genes once they are in place.

   Though the animal research most closely mimics rheumatoid arthritis, Evans
said the same principles of gene therapy might be used to treat osteoarthritis,
the most common form of the disease.

   A variety of genes might have therapeutic potential, he noted. Once
scientists learn how to manipulate the biochemistry of the joint, the problem
will be deciding which gene is best to use.

   Careful study will be necessary before human trials can begin, Evans said.
Gene therapy has been attempted only in recent years and, thus far, only for
life-threatening diseases such as cancer and immune deficiencies. Rigorous
safety tests will be necessary before gene therapy is used to treat a nonfatal,
chronic condition such as arthritis.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             964 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   NOVEMBER 16, 1993, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B2; BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 101 words

HEADLINE: New Somatix Exec Named

BODY:

    Richard Mulligan, a pioneer in the fledgling field of gene therapy, will
become executive vice president of research at Somatix Therapy Corp., the
Alameda- based biotechnology company said yesterday. Mulligan, who co-founded
Somatix in 1988, will take a year-long leave of absence from his position as a
professor of molecular biology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Mulligan will assume the post in June, replacing Anton Berns, who is returning
to the Netherlands Cancer Institute where he will oversee clinical trials of
Somatix's gene therapy treatment for melanoma.


LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1993


                             965 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   November 16, 1993, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z12

LENGTH: 2667 words

HEADLINE: The Ethics Of Cloning: Who Decides?

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Rick Weiss

BODY:

   They met as they did every month, late in the afternoon, sitting around a
large wooden table in a conference room in Ross Hall on the campus of the George
Washington University Medical Center.

   They were doctors, scientists, a pharmacologist, some legal and financial
experts. A couple of dozen people in all, known as the Human Research Committee.
Their job was to review every bit of medical research proposed by any staff
member at the university and make sure that the study would do no harm and had
at least the potential to do some good. Among the 10 or 12 proposals on the
table that day was a bundle of documents submitted by GW fertility specialists
Jerry L. Hall and Robert J. Stillman.

   Hall and Stillman were asking permission to investigate an innovative means
of teasing apart the individual cells of 2-day-old human embryos to produce
multiple identical embryos, or clones, from a single fertilized egg. They hoped
to improve success rates with in vitro fertilization, a process in which human
eggs and sperm are joined in test tubes and the resulting embryo is later
implanted in the mother. But they didn't plan to go very far with their
experiments. They would use defective embryos, fertilized with more than one
sperm, that had no chance of growing into babies. And even if the embryo clones
managed to survive in test tubes, the scientists would discard them within six
days, before even the most rudimentary sign of a nervous system appeared.

   Nobody outside the group knows how long the cloning protocol was debated.
Members of the research committee, and members of the GW ethics committee that
also reviewed the proposal, have declined to discuss it openly. But as the
public now knows, the proposal was approved, the experiments were performed with
some success, and then, to put it plainly, all hell broke loose. Newspaper
headlines boasted that scientists had cloned babies in the laboratory, raising
concerns that parents would design Frankenstein families made of look-alike
children. Some went so far as to suggest that parents might store a few extra
embryos in the freezer and later grow them for spare parts should they be needed
by an older identical sibling.

   Even in hindsight, however, few in the research or medical community argue
that the GW study should not have been approved. Strictly speaking, the work
didn't break much scientific ground; researchers have cloned animals since the
1980s, and similar work with human embryos has progressed steadily since then.
Nor did it breach terribly novel ethical boundaries. In vitro fertilization
specialists have been splitting apart human embryos for years -- not just in
research labs but in fertility clinics too. In some cases, these specialists
remove one cell from an eight-cell human embryo grown in the lab, check its sex
and test for various genetic defects, then implant the remaining seven cells
into a woman's womb, where they develop into a normal baby.

   Given these precedents, the GW research was, if not routine, then hardly
startling. So why did the news cause such a stir when it was reported last
month? Why did so many people -- including many scientists -- feel as though
they'd been suddenly transported into the future?Behind the Hysteria

   According to many medical experts and ethicists, the surprise came because
neither physicians nor the general public were given an opportunity to consider
the implications of the work during the years that it was under development. And
that failure, they say, is rooted in an acrimonious political stalemate of four
years ago that triggered the dissolution of the nation's primary forum for
bioethical debate.

   That forum, known as the Biomedical Ethics Advisory Committee, was created by
Congress to look into the social and ethical implications of biomedical
advances. The committee's demise in 1989, which followed terminal bickering
among its members over the issue of abortion, marked the end of the federal
government's uneasy effort to foster thoughtful and open consideration of
challenging bioethical issues. With the committee's death, experts say, the
nation lost its primary means of keeping abreast of the raft of ethical
challenges wrought daily by biomedical advances.

   "The hysteria of the past couple of weeks is a beautiful case study of what
happens when we don't go through the public exercise of putting this kind of
research on the table, working out the issues, having the debate and educating
the country," said John C. Fletcher, professor of bioethics at the University of
Virginia. "The responses I've heard from people, including many of my
colleagues, were bizarre and far-fetched."

   Some in Congress, including Senators Mark O. Hatfield (R-Ore.) and Edward M.
Kennedy (D-Mass.), are pushing to resuscitate some version of the old biomedical
ethics advisory committee. And the National Institutes of Health, concerned that
the lack of an ethics advisory board has blocked many lines of federal research
beyond reproductive studies, started a long, slow process of creating a board of
its own several months ago. But the rebirth of such a board is by no means
guaranteed. Although the Clinton administration has expressed support in
principle, a specific provision for the creation of a national bio- ethics panel
didn't survive into the final version of the president's health plan presented
to Congress.

   Meanwhile, other countries have moved far ahead of the United States in their
creation of institutions to advise their governments on how best to regulate
such controversial technologies as in vitro fertilization, embryo transfer and
gene therapy. A November 1992 survey by the congressional Office of Technology
Assessment found that at least 32 countries had created or were planning to
create governmental commissions to review research proposals like the one at
George Washington. In contrast, the United States, which once pioneered
bioethical review, has none.

   Lacking any such overarching institution in this country, individual
universities, research institutes and medical specialty organizations have been
left to devise their own rules of acceptable science and to review -- behind
closed doors -- those research proposals submitted by staff scientists. Bigger
questions relating to medical ethics have been left to the courts, which can
respond to crises only after they've occurred and then must rely on the
relatively crude tools of common law and contract law to decide issues of deep
moral and philosophical significance.

   "When it comes to questions of surrogate motherhood, genetic screening, human
cloning, there really is no public dialogue or debate or regulatory oversight,
so this stuff keeps getting battled out in the front page of the newspapers or
in the courtroom," said Arthur L. Caplan, director of the Center for Bioethics
at the University of Minnesota. With no government body to offer legislation,
judges are left with an extremely difficult burden. "The courts have begged and
pleaded for guidance," Caplan said. "Judges say, please stop giving us these
cases because we have no statutory precedent upon which to base our decisions."

   But the cases keep coming. And together they make a patchwork of
contradictory rulings that leave scientists, doctors and patients perpetually
uncertain about what is acceptable practice. In the arena of high-tech
reproductive technology like that under investigation at George Washington, the
U.S. Supreme Court has yet to hear a single case. One result of this legal
vacuum is that thousands of embryos worldwide remain frozen in suspended
animation because it's unclear who owns the rights to them.Abortion Debate

   Congress created the most recent federal biomedical ethics advisory committee
in 1985 precisely to fill this gap. The committee brought together doctors,
lawyers, philosophers, clergy and other interested parties to discuss in public
meetings the ethical implications of medical advances and make recommendations
to lawmakers on how best to regulate such rapidly advancing specialties as
genetic engineering and fetal research.

   But the 14-member board's four-year lifespan was mostly consumed by debates
about its own composition, as advocates for and against abortion rights fought
to get people sympathetic to their views onto the board. In the end, the
committee barely managed to decide what topic it ought to address first before
its charter expired in 1989.

   By most accounts, the major roadblock to forming a new panel continues to be
the issue of abortion, which rides the coattails of any discussion about genetic
screening or reproductive technology.

   "Everybody says we need to talk about these issues, but everybody's afraid
because all this borders on the subject of abortion," said Patricia King, a
professor of law at Georgetown University. "We have a consistent pattern of
recognizing the need for having some national review of these topics, and we
also have a consistent pattern of avoiding these reviews."

   Things get much simpler when embryos are not involved. Since 1991, for
example, the federal Ethics, Legal and Social Issues program (ELSI) has funded
bioethical analyses of genetic research. With funding in excess of $ 7 million
in 1993, ELSI is by far the largest source of federal funds for bioethics
research. But it sidesteps all questions of reproductive technology.

   "Any discussion of reproductive technology means you have to talk about
conception, embryos and yes, abortion," Minnesota's Caplan said. "And that's a
300-pound gorilla that makes government officials take a classical ostrich-like
pose."

   The death of the last medical ethics board in 1989 not only cut off debate on
controversial issues of science; it also blocked federal funding of reproductive
research. That's because federal regulations have long required that
government-funded research relating to reproduction gain approval from a
national ethics board. With all such boards effectively defunct since 1983, no
such approval has been possible for more than a decade. These regulations were
lifted this year, but the impact on scientists has been significant.

   "In effect . . . IVF and embryo research were pushed into the private
sector," said Fletcher of the University of Virginia. "The whole process of
scientific peer review and funding was just abdicated by the federal government,
even as the most interesting work was just happening."

   The de facto ban on federally funded reproductive research did more than
simply push this field of study into the hands of academics, commercial
laboratories and biotech companies, Fletcher said. It cut off federal funding
for entire lines of investigation in other fields, including some areas of
cancer research. "Imagine the contradiction when you're interested in studying
childhood cancer . . .  and yet you're prohibited from getting funds to learn
how cancer starts in the embryo," he said. "That is the best example I know of
the disarray of our policies of ethics on embryo research."A Lack of Oversight

   Scientists are not completely without guidance. To fill the federal void,
various non-government committees have created their own guidelines for
researchers and physicians doing reproductive research. Among them are
university institutional review boards and ethics committees like those that
oversaw the George Washington cloning proposal, and the National Advisory Board
on Ethics in Reproduction (NABER), a privately funded policy group on ethics
that is gaining a Solomonic reputation among specialists in assisted
reproduction.

   But institutional review boards and NABER are only a partial solution, said
Edward Wallach, a fertility specialist at Johns Hopkins University who chairs
the American Fertility Society's ethics committee. Since they only respond to
specific research proposals, he said, they are by nature reactive rather than
proactive, with little opportunity to address controversies just starting their
way down the bioethical pipeline. "There's a great need for these local groups,"
he said. "But there's still a big gap in oversight without the involvement of
the federal government."

   Moreover, said Georgetown's King, most federal committees are open to the
public and the press, so issues that come up in those meetings are more likely
to get some broad consideration before they leap to the front page. "There are
times when the research is so significant in terms of the ethical implications
that it deserves a national review," she said. "My own view is that in the area
of experimental work on embryos we need that kind of oversight and review."

   In the past, national panels to assess biomedical technology have been
successful. The first such body, bearing the unwieldy name of the National
Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral
Research, is widely recognized today as a model of what's possible to achieve on
difficult bioethical questions. The commission was created by Congress in 1974
to develop rules for the protection of people enrolled in clinical studies. It
issued its first report within 10 months, offering guidelines limiting research
on human fetuses, and within two months those guidelines became codified as
federal regulations. In the remaining three years, before succumbing to a sunset
clause written into its charter, the commission created lasting regulations
relating to the protection of prisoners and children in medical research.

   Along similar lines (and in keeping with its apparent penchant for cumbersome
names), Congress created in 1978 the President's Commission for the Study of
Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral Research. That
group's carefully considered definition of brain death has since become the
national standard, and its conclusions regarding the acceptability of forgoing
life-sustaining treatment remain key legal reference points today. But the
commission's charter expired 10 years ago. And although the pace of medical
research has only quickened in the ensuing decade, the country hasn't had any
such commission since.

   It remains to be seen whether Congress will create a committee to perform
those duties. Senators are already disagreeing over how the members of an ethics
committee would be selected. The House has yet to write legislation on the
topic. And in a sign that abortion politics may again interfere, some on Capitol
Hill and in the halls of science have withheld their support for a standing
ethics committee. They say they fear that activists who oppose abortion might
gain control of the committee and use it to further their political agenda.

   "Our concern is that a permanent board could someday be used to stop research
from going forward," said Van H. Dunn, senior health policy adviser to Sen.
Kennedy. An attractive alternative, he said, would be to create ad hoc
committees as needed to deal with specific ethical questions. But while
temporary committees would lower the odds of an irreversible ethical coup, they
have their own problems; an analysis by the Office of Technology Assessment
concluded that temporary committees are problematic because they never get to
benefit from accumulated wisdom. Apparently savvy to the controversy, incoming
NIH director Harold Varmus recently told the Senate Committee on Labor and Human
Resources he was still weighing the relative benefits of permanent and temporary
ethics commissions.

   Stillman at GW said he favors some kind of a national bioethics commission
and would be willing to submit his research for review if he were to continue
the work. "Using abnormal embryos as we did, I think it's not necessary to go
beyond the internal review boards that we used," he said. "But if you want to
talk about cloning normal embryos, now is the time to have the debate.

   "In the best of all worlds, you'd have the debate before the real thing,"
Stillman said. "Well, we still haven't done the real thing. So I'm glad the
debate has begun."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, BIOETHICAL QUESTIONS, STEPHAN BROWN/AP; ILLUSTRATION

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1993


                             966 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                November 15, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 8; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1076 words

HEADLINE: Equity Issues This Week

BODY:

   The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:

   Advanced Technology Material Inc., Danbury, Conn., an initial public offering
of two million shares. Needham & Co.

    Allied Life Financial Corp., Des Moines, an initial public offering of 2.65
million shares. Alex. Brown & Sons.

   Alpha-Beta Technology, Worcester, Mass., 1.3 million shares. Alex. Brown &
Sons.

   Argus Pharmaceuticals Inc., Woodlands, Tex., 2.5 million shares. S. G.
Warburg.

   Arris Pharmaceutical Corp., San Francisco, an initial public offering of 2.5
million shares. Montgomery Securities.

   Asia Tigers Fund Inc., an initial public offering of 2.7 million shares.
Oppenheimer & Co.

   Atlantic Beverage Co., Baltimore, an initial public offering of one million
shares. Hamilton & Co.

   Bollinger Industries, Irving, Tex., an initial public offering of 1.4 million
shares. William Blair.

   Cable Design Technologies Corp., Pittsburgh, an initial public offering of
3.4 million shares. Smith Barney Shearson.

   Castle Energy Corp., Blue Bell, Pa., 11.3 million shares, nine million in the
United States and Canada. Kidder, Peabody & Co.

   Cell Genesys Inc., Foster City, Calif., two million shares. CS First Boston.

   Centerpoint Properties Corp., Chicago, an initial public offering of 4.95
million shares. Natwest.

   Chateau Properties Inc., Detroit, an initial public offering of 5.5 million
shares. Merrill Lynch.

   Chico Fas Inc., Fort Myers, Fla., 1.05 million shares. Robert W. Baird & Son.

   Coflexip, France, an initial public offering of 6.74 million American
depository shares, representing 3.37 million shares, with 5.055 million in the
United States. CS First Boston.

   Corporacion Bancaria de Espana S.A., Madrid, an initial public offering of
one million American depository shares, each representing a half share. Morgan
Stanley & Co.

   Damark International Inc., Minneapolis, two million shares. Wessels, Arnold &
Henderson.

   Elsag Bailey Process Automation N.V., the Netherlands, an initial public
offering of 8.12 million shares, 6.5 million in the United States. Merrill
Lynch.

   FSI International Inc., Chaska, Minn., 1.25 million shares. Needham & Co.

   FTP Software Inc., North Andover, Mass., an initial public offering of four
million shares. Montgomery Securities.

   Fulcrum Technologies Inc., Ottawa, an initial public offering of 1.75 million
shares. Pacific Growth Equities.

   Genetic Therapy Inc., Gaithersburg, Md., 2.5 million shares. Smith Barney
Shearson.

   Harmon International Industries Inc., Washington, 2.85 million shares.
Montgomery Securities.

   Hospitality Franchise Systems Inc., Parsippany, N.J., 5.6 million shares, 4.2
million in the United States. Merrill Lynch.

   HS Resources Inc., San Francisco, 1.7 million shares, 1.36 million in the
United States and Canada. Lehman Brothers. Also, $75 million of senior
subordinated notes due in 2003.

   Intelligent Surgical Lasers Inc., San Diego, three million units, each
representing one share, one class A warrant and one class B warrant. D. Blech &
Co.

   Jacor Communications Inc., Cincinnati, 4.75 million shares. Donaldson, Lufkin
& Jenrette.

   JP Realty Inc., Salt Lake City, an initial public offering of 9.55 million
shares. Merrill Lynch.

   Landair Services Inc., Greenville, Tenn., an initial public offering of two
million shares. Alex. Brown & Sons.

   Lawyers Title Corp., Richmond, 1.3 million shares. Wheat, First Securities.

   Leggoons Inc., Vandalia, Mo., an initial public offering of 900,000 units,
each consisting of one share and one class A warrant. RAF Financial Corp.

   Macerich Co., Santa Monica, Calif., an initial public offering of 12.9
million shares. Lehman Brothers.

   Med/Waste Inc., Opa-Locka, Fla., an initial public offering of 910,000
shares. Comprehensive Capital Corp.

   Mid-America Apartment Communities Inc., Memphis, an initial public offering
of four million shares. M. Keegan.

   Network Imaging Corp., Reston, Va., 1.4 million shares of $25 cumulative
convertible preferred. RAS Securities.

   Of Counsel Enterprises Inc., Houston, an initial public offering of one
million units, each unit consisting of one share and one warrant. J. W. Charles.

   Olympic Financial Ltd., Minneapolis, one million shares of $25 cumulative
convertible exchangeable preferred. Piper Jaffray.

   Portland General Corp., Portland, Ore., five million shares. Merrill Lynch.

   Positron Corp., Houston, an initial public offering of two million shares.
Josepthal Lyon & Ross.

   Putnam Investment Grade Municipal Trust III, Boston, an initial public
offering of four million shares. Smith Barney Shearson.

   Quaker Fabric Corp., Fall River, Mass., an initial public offering of 2.1
million shares. Smith Barney Shearson.

   Roberds Inc., Carrollton, Ohio, an initial public offering of 2.7 million
shares. Kidder, Peabody & Co.

   Safeskin Corp., Boca Raton, Fla., an initial public offering of 2.9 million
shares. Smith Barney Shearson.

   Sanmina Corp., San Jose, Calif., 2.15 million shares. Montgomery Securities.

   Schnitzer Steel Industries Inc., Portland, Ore., an initial public offering
of 2.75 million shares, 2.51 million in the United States and Canada. Goldman,
Sachs & Co.

   Seventh Generation Inc., Colchester, Vt., an initial public offering of 1.2
million shares and 1.2 million redeemable warrants. GKN Securities.

   Shoe Carnival, Evansville, Ind., 2.62 million shares. McDonald & Co.

   Splizman Industries, Charlotte, N.C., 1.4 million shares. Interstate/Johnson
Lane.

   Sunglass Hut International Inc., Miami, 2.2 million shares. Montgomery
Securities.

   Talbots Inc., Hingham, Mass., an initial public offering of 11 million
shares, 8.8 million in the United States. Merrill Lynch.

   Thornburg Mortgage Asset Corp., Santa Fe, N.M., three million shares. Kidder,
Peabody.

   TN Energy Services Acquisitions Corp., Delaware, Pa., an initial public
offering of 1.5 million units, each consisting of one share and two warrants.
GKN Securities.

   Torch Energy Royalty Trust, Wilmington, Del., an initial public offering of
7.85 million units. Smith Barney Shearson.

   Tower Air Inc., New York, an initial public offering of 3.75 million shares.
Goldman, Sachs.

   Uniphase Corp., San Jose, Calif., an initial public offering of 2.1 million
shares. Unterberg Harris.

   United Video Satellite Group Inc., Tulsa, Okla., an initial public offering
of 3.28 million shares, 2.46 million in the United States. Paine Webber.

   Source: MCM CorporateWatch.

   Ratings: Moody's/ Standard & Poor's.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1993


                             967 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   November 15, 1993, Monday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. A6

LENGTH: 1416 words

HEADLINE: BIRTH LEFTOVERS ON MEDICAL MENU;
BLOOD OF UMBILICAL CORD, PLACENTA CAN BE PRESERVED TO FIGHT CANCER

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   Few events are as infused with hope as the birth of a healthy child. To the
parents, the world seems full of wonderful possibilities and, for a moment,
pitfalls are forgotten.

   New parents of children born at Magee-Womens Hospital, however, will soon be
asked to consider the possibility their newborn might have a genetic defect or
later develop a cancer that would require treatment with a bone marrow
transplant.

   That's because their child's birth is the only opportunity for them to save
from being discarded something that may ultimately prove precious: the blood
found in their baby's placenta and umbilical cord.

   Magee soon will become the first hospital in the country to routinely give
parents the option -- for a price -- to save their child's cord blood.

   Since 1988, cord blood -- instead of bone marrow -- has been transplanted in
about 40 children and teen-agers worldwide to treat cancers such as leukemia and
genetic disorders such as aplastic anemia. Though the number of cases is still
small, researchers say cord blood seems to work as well as bone marrow and may
actually have some advantages.

   Most of those cases have involved cord blood collected from a newborn and
transplanted to a diseased older brother or sister. But saving and freezing cord
blood from a newborn as a precautionary measure could make it available if it is
ever needed as the child grows.

   Officials of Biocyte Corp., of Stamford, Conn., on Thursday will launch a new
cord blood storage service at Magee in conjunction with Central Blood Bank.

   Parents willing to pay an initial $ 1,500 fee can preserve their baby's cord
blood, frozen in liquid nitrogen, for at least 10 years at an annual cost of $
75.

   ''If you're from a family that's had a lot of cancer or genetic disorders, it
may be worth it,'' said Dr. Edward Ball, chief of hematology and director of the
bone marrow transplant program at Montefiore University Hospital.

   Dr. Craig Howe, chief executive officer of the National Marrow Donor Program
in Minneapolis, likewise sees the storage program appealing to a select group of
families. ''Obviously, the cost is going to be prohibitive for many people,'' he
noted.

   But Kenneth Moch, president and CEO of Biocyte, said his company's marketing
surveys suggest that interest in cord blood storage is much broader.

   The service is unprecedented, so it's hard to predict how many people will
buy it. But Moch said most people who learn about it express interest,
regardless of their family's medical history.

   Magee was chosen as the first site because of its stature as one of the
nation's leading women's hospitals and because of the blood processing and
marrow transplant expertise available at the Central Blood Bank and University
of Pittsburgh, Moch said.

   He anticipates ''a rapid nationwide rollout,'' with cord blood storage
becoming available in all major cities, and many smaller ones, within a few
years.

   While Biocyte is trying to establish self-storage of cord blood, other
organizations are looking at the possibility of banking cord blood that could be
used by unrelated persons, much as regular blood banks operate.

   Dr. Pablo Rubinstein of the New York Blood Center, for instance, has stored
about 1,200 samples of cord blood as part of a federally sponsored research
program to see if cord blood banking might help relieve a shortage of bone
marrow donors.

   ''The idea of having a bank makes sense,'' said Howe of the marrow registry,
''but it has to be seen in the context that we are in the very, very early days
of this technology.''

   Cord blood is of interest to transplanters because it has a high
concentration of stem cells. These cells serve as seeds from which all blood
cells originate. Bone marrow -- the body's blood factory -- contains only a
small percentage of stem cells, but these cells are considered its most
important.

   Transplants of bone marrow or cord blood are performed when a person's bone
marrow is diseased, as in aplastic anemia. Transplants also are performed when
the use of high levels of radiation or chemotherapic drugs, needed to kill an
advanced cancer, also destroy the bone marrow.

   In either case, the stem cells from bone marrow or cord blood infused into
the patient are intended to repopulate the patient's bone marrow and restore his
ability to make blood.

   Stem cell transplants already are considered a standard treatment for
leukemias, lymphomas and, in children, a type of tumor called neuroblastomas.
Some genetic diseases such as aplastic anemia also are treated this way.

   The advent of gene therapy, in which a genetic defect is treated by
introducing a beneficial gene into the patient's body, could greatly expand the
use of stem cell transplants. Ball noted Pitt already has done preliminary
studies to suggest that Gaucher's disease, a genetic defect that causes certain
organs to balloon in size, could be treated with infusions of stem cells altered
to include a gene missing in patients with Gaucher's.

   Advanced breast cancers and ovarian cancers are among the malignancies that
may also prove treatable with stem cell transplants.

   Finding bone marrow donors can be difficult, however. Howe explained that the
tissue type of donor and recipient must match each other closely -- much more
closely than is necessary for transplants of solid organs.

   Many bone marrow transplants thus depend on finding a sibling or other close
relative of a patient to donate bone marrow. In some cases, it is possible for
bone marrow to be retrieved from a patient and then infused back to the same
patient after she undergoes radiation or chemotherapy.

   It is sometimes possible to get a sufficient number of stem cells by sorting
them out of the patient's circulating blood.

   Yet another strategy to increase the supply of transplantable stem cells is
the National Marrow Donor Registry, which was established to help match patients
with non-related marrow donors. Thus far, more than 1 million people are
registered as potential donors.

   In its first year, 1987, the registry facilitated two unrelated marrow
transplants; as of Oct. 2, 498 unrelated marrow transplants had been performed
this year.

   Even so, the National Institutes of Health estimates between 10,000 and
15,000 Americans require a marrow transplant each year, but can't find a donor.
Racial minorities have a particularly hard time because they are represented
only in small numbers in the registry and because their tissue types tend to be
more diverse, Howe said.

   One result of this shortage is the increasing frequency of bone marrow donor
drives, such as the one performed Saturday in Braddock for 24-year-old Alan
Pepper, a town resident who has aplastic anemia.

   Banking cord blood might be one way to relieve this shortage. Preliminary
evidence suggests cord blood may be less likely to cause a transplant
complication called graft-vs-host disease. This occurs when immune cells from
the transplant attack the patient.

   Howe said it thus may be possible to use cord blood that is less closely
matched to the tissue type of the recipient than is now the case with bone
marrow transplants. Having even a million potential donors in the marrow
registry has proven inadequate, he noted; far fewer types of cord blood may need
to be banked.

   But it is not at all clear that such mismatches are possible, Howe
emphasized. Also unclear is whether the cord blood contains enough stem cells to
transplant to a patient of more than 140 pounds.

   Theoretically, the cord blood contains enough stem cells for an adult
transplant, but such a transplant has not been attempted, Howe said. Researchers
are studying ways to us growth factors to expand the number of stem cells in a
cord blood sample.

   Banking of cord blood likely would prove expensive, Howe said. But if cord
blood were readily available, saving lives and reducing the time patients
otherwise would spend waiting to find a donor, the cost may be worth it.

   ''If that's the case,'' Howe said, ''we're prepared to become a cord blood
registry.''

   Even if cord blood banking for nonrelated transplants becomes a reality, Moch
said there will continue to be a need and demand for self-storage of cord blood,
such as is being offered at Magee.

   ''Your own cells are always the best'' for transplant, he explained,
eliminating the dangers of graft-vs-host disease. The stored cells, he added,
''are as pristine as your body was at the day of your birth.''

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, Biocyte Corporation; Post-Gazette: (Saving cord
blood transplants)

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             968 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



              November 14, 1993, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: PEOPLE PLUS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 502 words

HEADLINE: Rounding Up Funds;
$ 100,000 Lassoed for Neuroresearch

SOURCE: pp

BYLINE: Mary Cameron Frey

BODY:


   T hey put aside their stethoscopes, thermometers, bedpans and briefcases,
changed from hospital greens and three-piece suits into Western clothes, and
whooped it up for a very good cause.

   "Round Up For Research" a hoedown organized by the Associates of CINN,
welcomed almost 500 doctors, nurses, technicians and friends to the back room at
Bub City on West Weed to raise funds for the Chicago Institute of Neurosurgery
and Neuroresearch.

   Heather and Henry French co-chaired the party.

   The Hazzard County

   Band played honky-tonk tunes. Linda Foster and her husband, Ken, taught a
passel of people the two-step and led a crowd in line dancing. Booths featured a
cowboy boot toss, a 10-gallon hat toss and bandanna bartering. Actually, those

   games were just golf balls thrown at shoes and hats.

   Grub consisted of Southwestern spring rolls, tortilla chips and salsa,
buffalo chicken wings, barbecue beef and pork, cornbread and that old Western
favorite, pasta salad.  Beer was cooled in big metal horse troughs.

   An outlaw roundup saw Henry French putting CINN chief of staff Leonard "Lenny
the Blade" Cerullo in jail for "horse-doctoring without a license." It cost $
500 to spring him, which was cheerfully supplied by Susan Regos, whose late
daughter Annette had been one of the doctor's patients.

   French became involved with the group because of his best man.  "Mike
(Hultquist) hurt his back playing basketball and needed surgery to repair two
herniated disks," he said. "It was a great opportunity for us to get involved,
and I'm glad we did."

   The party raised more than $ 100,000 for neuroresearch in what French said
could be an amazing breakthrough. "Imagine gene therapy that could avert the
need for invasive brain surgery," he said. Sounds good to me.

   Guests spent a lot of time bidding on a great silent auction when they
weren't on the dance floor. Jack Kammer went home with $ 20,000 in cash without
ever saying "stick 'em up." He was the winner of an all-cash raffle with more
than $ 30,000 in prizes.

   DRESS OF THE WEEK: Mary Ann Childers' turquoise satin by Mark Heister.

   YUCKS OF THE WEEK: What would you get if you got Heidi Fleiss and Dr. Jack
Kevorkian together? Killer sex! Or Dr. Kevorkian and Sonny Rollins? Killer sax!
Dr. Kevorkian and Bill Clinton? Killer tax!

   WIFE OF THE WEEK: Yona Johannsson never watches the second act of "Tosca" at
the Lyric Opera when husband Kristjan is singing the role of Cavaradossi.  She
can't bear to hear his screams during the torture scene.

   PARTY OF THE WEEK: The baby shower given new grandpa Neil Hartigan by his
associates at Gardner, Carton and Douglas for baby Margaret Mary Connolly.

   WASTE OF THE WEEK: Those traffic ladies on North Michigan Avenue who spend
their time chatting two-by-two in the middle of the block instead of directing
traffic at some of our

   town's busiest intersections!

   BEAUTY OF THE WEEK:

   An all-grown-up Samantha

   Thompson -- a sophomore at

   the Latin School -- tall,

   spittin' image of her mom.

GRAPHIC: Co-chairman Henry French sends Dr. Leonard "Lenny the Blade" Cerullo to
jail at the benefit.  At left, Debby Derdzinski (left) and Tony Green hang out
with a cow at the Chicago Institute of Neurosurgery and Neuroresearch benefit at
Bub City. Above, line-dance instructor Linda Foster (front right) kicks up her
heels. Dress of the week: Mary Ann Childers in turquoise satin with actor Paul
Regina of "The Untouchables."

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1993


                             969 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                    November 14, 1993, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; HEALTH & MEDICINE; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 192 words

HEADLINE: Vaccine for heart disease predicted

SOURCE: Cox News Service

DATELINE: ATLANTA

BODY:


   Researchers are rapidly moving toward the day when they may be able to
vaccinate a person against heart disease.

   Scientists note that dozens of experiments are under way to treat, perhaps
even cure, several diseases by inserting genetically altered genes and cells
into the body to produce proteins that prevent diseases. Those diseases range
from AIDS to cystic fibrosis.

   A vaccine based on the same concept could be available in the lifetimes of
most people living today to prevent heart disease, said Dr. Sanders Williams,
director of cardiology at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
in Dallas. He spoke at the annual meeting of the American Heart Association in
Atlanta.

   Williams said experiments with rodents showed that genetically altered  cells
were able to reduce levels of artery-clogging cholesterol by more than  40
percent in the animals' blood. However, the cells shut down after a few  weeks.

   But in another experiment, doctors already are using "gene therapy" in an
attempt to lower cholesterol levels in people who suffer from excessively high
levels because of a genetic defect.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1993


                             970 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



             November 13, 1993, SATURDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 513 words

HEADLINE: AIDS Researcher Charges Dropped

BYLINE: By Sheryl Stolberg

BODY:


   The federal government Friday reluctantly dropped charges of scientific
misconduct against Dr. Robert C. Gallo, the pioneering researcher who has spent
the last decade fighting accusations that his role in the discovery of the AIDS
virus was tainted by failure to give proper credit to French scientists.

   The decision by the Office of Research Integrity reversed an earlier guilty
finding. It came just three days before a hearing was to begin on Gallo's appeal
and brought an official end to what may be the most closely watched ethics probe
in modern medical science.

   It did not, however, lay to rest the international controversy over who
discovered the AIDS virus.

   In the wake of the ORI ruling, French scientists once again demanded full
credit for the discovery and all royalties from the blood test it made possible
-- despite a 1987 accord in which France and the United States agreed to share
credit and split the money.

   Gallo was cleared last year of the most serious allegation against him, a
charge that he stole the virus from the Pasteur Institute in Paris. But in a
serious blot on his career, he was found guilty of scientific misconduct for
failing to acknowledge the contribution of French scientists to his work.

   Government investigators made clear Friday that they are still troubled by
his actions in the early to mid-1980s, saying they withdrew the charges solely
as "a practical matter." A recent legal decision, they said, set "a new and
extremely difficult standard" for proving scientific misconduct.

   The 56-year-old researcher, who has vehemently denied wrongdoing, declared he
was "delighted" by the ruling.

   "I have been completely vindicated," Gallo said in a brief statement released
to reporters. "I will now be able to redouble my efforts in the fight against
AIDS and cancer."

   Widely regarded as a brilliant scientist, Gallo is known as much for his
brusque manner as for his contributions to AIDS and cancer research.

   His lab at the National Cancer Institute is currently working on an AIDS
vaccine, and on gene therapy treatments for AIDS and cancer. He has also helped
develop drugs that are now being tested for Kaposi's sarcoma, a cancer common to
AIDS patients.

   Controversy has swirled around Gallo's research since 1984, when he published
a paper that described how he had discovered the virus that causes AIDS. At the
time, researchers all over the world were racing to find the cause of the new
disease.

   One year earlier, researchers in the laboratory of Dr. Luc Montagnier at the
Pasteur Institute in Paris had published similar findings, saying they had
isolated a virus taken from AIDS patients, but were uncertain whether it
actually caused the disease. Calling the virus LAV, they sent two samples to
Gallo's lab.

   When Gallo's paper appeared, critics accused him of stealing the virus from
the French and taking credit for their work. While Gallo denied the claims,
later analysis showed that the virus he had isolated was nearly identical to
that of the French, indicating that it may have been the same virus.

GRAPHIC: Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1993


                             971 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                   November 13, 1993, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 4; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words

HEADLINE: U.S. DROPS CHARGES AGAINST AIDS PIONEER

BYLINE: By SHERYL STOLBERG, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   The federal government Friday reluctantly dropped charges of scientific
misconduct against Dr. Robert C. Gallo, the pioneering researcher who has spent
the past decade fighting accusations that his role in the discovery of the AIDS
virus was tainted by failure to give proper credit to French scientists.

   The decision by the Office of Research Integrity reversed an earlier guilty
finding. It came just three days before a hearing was to begin on Gallo's appeal
and brought an official end to what may be the most closely watched ethics probe
in modern medical science.

   It did not lay to rest the international controversy over who discovered the
AIDS virus. In the wake of the ruling, French scientists once again demanded
full credit for the discovery and all royalties from the blood test it made
possible -- despite a 1987 accord in which France and the United States agreed
to share credit and split the money.

   Gallo was cleared last year of the most serious allegation, a charge that he
stole the virus from the Pasteur Institute in Paris. But, in a serious blot on
his career, he was found guilty of scientific misconduct for failing to
acknowledge the contribution of French scientists to his work.

   Government investigators made clear Friday that they are still troubled by
his actions in the early to mid-1980s, saying they withdrew the charges solely
as "a practical matter." A recent legal decision, they said, set "a new and
extremely difficult standard" for proving scientific misconduct.

   "Clearly, we weren't happy to do it," said Dr. Lyle W. Bivens, who heads the
Office of Research Integrity. "We felt that we couldn't proceed with our case."

   But the 56-year-old researcher, who has vehemently denied wrongdoing,
declared that he was "delighted" by the ruling.

   "I have been completely vindicated," Gallo said in a brief statement. "I will
now be able to redouble my efforts in the fight against AIDS and cancer."

   Widely regarded as a brilliant scientist, Gallo is known as much for his
brusque manner as for his contributions to AIDS and cancer research. His lab at
the National Cancer Institute is working on an AIDS vaccine, and on gene therapy
treatments for AIDS and cancer. He has also helped develop drugs that are being
tested for Kaposi's sarcoma, a cancer common to AIDS patients.

   Friday's decision was not entirely a surprise. Last week, in a related case,
an appeals panel overturned a judgment against Dr. Mikulas Popovic, who had
carried out crucial AIDS experiments under Gallo's direction.

   Like Gallo, Popovic was found guilty of scientific misconduct last year by
the Office of Research Integrity, an arm of the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services. When Popovic won his appeal, it became apparent that Gallo --
whose hearing was set to begin Monday morning -- would win as well.

   In the Popovic decision, the appeals board ruled that false statements alone
were not enough to warrant a finding of scientific misconduct. Rather, the board
said, the agency would have to prove that the statements were deliberately
deceptive, that they had a significant effect on the research conclusions of the
paper and that there was no possibility of honest error.

   Bivens said it made no sense to go forward under those terms, "in the face of
virtual certainty that we would lose." He added that his office intends to work
toward legislation that would make such cases easier to prove.

   Controversy has swirled around Gallo's research since 1984, when he published
a paper in the prestigious journal Science that described how he had discovered
the virus that causes AIDS. At the time, researchers worldwide were racing to
find the cause of the mysterious new disease.

   One year earlier, researchers in the laboratory of Dr. Luc Montagnier at the
Pasteur Institute in Paris had published similar findings, saying they had
isolated a virus taken from AIDS patients, but were uncertain whether it caused
the disease. Calling the virus LAV, they sent two samples to Gallo's lab.

   When Gallo's paper appeared in Science, critics accused him of stealing the
virus from the French and taking credit for their work. Although Gallo denied
the claims, later analysis showed that the virus he had isolated was nearly
identical to that of the French, indicating that it may have been the same
virus.

   In 1985, when the AIDS blood test was licensed, the French sued the U.S.
government over credit for the discovery of the virus. That suit was settled in
1987 with an agreement signed by President Ronald Reagan and French Prime
Minister Jacques Chirac naming Gallo and Montagnier as co-discoverers.

   France is now trying to renegotiate that agreement. In a statement Friday,
lawyers for the Pasteur Institute said the U.S. government is "obligated by both
conscience and its commitment to scientific integrity" to give them full credit.

   Although the matter was the subject of international negotiations, the U.S.
government did not launch a formal ethics probe until 1989, after the Chicago
Tribune published an extensive article detailing the charges against Gallo.

   The government took three years to investigate. Last December, the Office of
Research Integrity cleared Gallo of the charge that he stole the virus from the
French, but concluded that he had "falsely reported" the role that the French
samples had played in his work in an intentional effort to mislead colleagues
and gain credit for himself.

   The agency also found that Gallo had failed to give proper credit to American
scientists who developed the cell culture in which his researchers grew the AIDS
virus. The report also charged that Gallo withheld the AIDS culture from other
laboratories, slowing the pace of research.

   Gallo appealed. "The charges against Gallo were false," said his lawyer,
Joseph Onek, on Friday. "They were always false. The government, despite all
this rigmarole, withdrew the case because it knew it could not prove these false
charges."

   Times staff writer Robert L. Jackson in Washington contributed to this story.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Dr. Robert C. Gallo talks in his Bethesda, Md., office in 1991.
Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1993


                             972 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1993 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       November 13, 1993 Saturday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: MISCONDUCT CHARGES DROPPED IN AIDS-DISCOVERY CONTROVERSY

BYLINE: By SHERYL STOLBERG Los Angeles Times

BODY:

   The federal government Friday reluctantly dropped charges of scientific
misconduct against Dr. Robert Gallo, the pioneering researcher who has spent the
past decade fighting accusations that his role in the discovery of the AIDS
virus was tainted by failure to give proper credit to French scientists.

   The decision by the Office of Research Integrity reversed an earlier guilty
finding. It came just three days before a hearing was to begin on Gallo's appeal
and brought an official end to what may be the most closely watched ethics probe
in modern medical science.

   It did not, however, lay to rest the international controversy over who
discovered the AIDS virus. In the wake of the ORI ruling, French scientists once
again demanded full credit for the discovery and all royalties from the blood
test it made possible - despite a 1987 accord in which France and the United
States agreed to share credit and split the money.

   Gallo, 56, was cleared last year of the most serious allegation against him,
a charge that he stole the virus from the Pasteur Institute in Paris. But in a
serious blot on his career, he was found guilty of scientific misconduct for
failing to acknowledge the contribution of French scientists to his work.

   Government investigators made clear Friday that they are still troubled by
Gallo's actions in the early to mid-1980s, saying they withdrew the charges
solely as "a practical matter." A recent legal decision, they said, set "a new
and extremely difficult standard" for proving scientific misconduct.

   "Clearly, we weren't happy to do it," said Dr. Lyle Bivens, who heads the
ORI. "We felt that we couldn't proceed with our case."

   But Gallo, who has vehemently denied wrongdoing, declared he was "delighted"
by the ruling.

   "I have been completely vindicated," he said in a statement to reporters. "I
will now be able to redouble my efforts in the fight against AIDS and cancer."

   Widely regarded as a brilliant scientist, Gallo is known as much for his
brusque manner as for his contributions to AIDS and cancer research. His lab at
the National Cancer Institute is working on an AIDS vaccine, and on gene therapy
treatments for AIDS and cancer.

   He also helped develop drugs that are being tested for treating Kaposi's
sarcoma, a cancer common to AIDS patients.

GRAPHIC: Gallo [COLOR] PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1993


                             973 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                          November 10, 1993, Wednesday

SECTION: LIVING; Section D; Page 1

LENGTH: 381 words

HEADLINE: American Heart Association THE ATLANTA MEETINGS Scientists envision
vaccine to prevent heart disease

BYLINE: By Charles Seabrook STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Researchers are rapidly moving toward the day when they may be able to
vaccinate a person against heart disease, scientists said Tuesday.

   They note that dozens of experiments are under way to treat, perhaps even
cure, several diseases by inserting genetically altered genes and cells into the
body to produce proteins that prevent disease.

   Those diseases range from AIDS to cystic fibrosis.

   A vaccine based on the same concept could be available in the lifetimes of
most people living today to prevent heart disease, said Dr. Sanders Williams,
director of cardiology at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in
Dallas.

   He said that immunizing people against heart disease may sound like a
"grandiose concept" right now, "but we can now envision a day when that may
happen." He spoke at the annual meeting of the American Heart Association in
Atlanta during a session titled "Gene Therapy for Atherosclerosis - How Soon?"

   Williams said recent experiments with rats and mice showed that genetically
altered cells were able to dramatically reduce levels of artery-clogging
cholesterol - by more than 40 percent - in the animals' blood. However, the
cells shut down after a few weeks.

   "That's a problem we're going to have to overcome, and we think we can do
it," he said.

   But in another experiment at the University of Pennsylvania, doctors already
are using "gene therapy" in an attempt to lower cholesterol levels in people who
suffer from excessively high levels of the substance in the blood because of a
genetic defect. The results look promising, said Dr. Elizabeth Nabel, associate
professor of internal medicine at the University of Michigan.

   She said that a more immediate use of gene therapy in heart disease will be
to prevent "restenosis," or the rapid build-up of material in arteries shortly
after they have been treated by angioplasty. In that common procedure, a tiny
balloon is inserted into an artery clogged with cholesterol and briefly inflated
to push back the material and let blood flow unimpeded through the vessel.

   Nabel also said that researchers have produced genetically altered cells
that, when inserted into the body, grow inside blood vessels and might one day
be able to repair the damaged arteries that lead to heart attack.

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1993


                             974 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  November 10, 1993, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 254 words

HEADLINE: DNA 'drug' may soon prevent heart disease

BYLINE: Tim Friend

DATELINE: ATLANTA

BODY:

    Human DNA will be a major heart "drug" of the near future with gene therapy
a common treatment procedure, experts said Tuesday.

   Gene therapy is being tested in animals to lower cholesterol, dissolve blood
clots and prevent artery wall thickening.

   If effective, it could replace expensive and toxic drug therapies and some
surgeries.

   Scientists say it also may be possible to alter genes to prevent heart
disease.

   "I envisage a day when we will give an injection that will make a person
resistant to coronary disease," said Sanders Williams, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center.

   Most of the 59 human gene therapy studies under way focus on cancer and
diseases like hemophilia, but heart disease trials are coming of age.

   "DNA is a drug, nothing exotic about it," said Williams. "Eventually, it will
enter virtually every area of medicine."

   Key gene-related studies at the American Heart Association's 66th Scientific
Sessions:

   Preventing reclosure of arteries in animals after balloon angioplasty by
using genes to alter vessel wall biology.

   Gene therapy to mop up bad cholesterol or raise good cholesterol in mice.

   One human gene therapy trial for clogged arteries is under way, but data
aren't ready.

   Hurdles: Genes work only a couple of weeks, and immune reactions are caused
by viruses that carry genes or the genes themselves. Experts predict such
problems are beatable.

   How soon will gene therapy for heart disease arrive? "It's here today," says
Elizabeth Nabel, University of Michigan.


                             975 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1993 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                            November 8, 1993 Monday

SECTION: SOCIETY; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 480 words

HEADLINE: Social Scene;
Friends of CF Foundation have a ball at tennis event

BYLINE: DANA BISBEE

BODY:

   The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation took its supporters to court yesterday - the
tennis court at the Boston Athletic Club - for the fourth annual Tennis Auction
Ball.

   There were 16 teams, each composed of one tennis pro and one amateur, vying
for points in the tournament.

   Each team was "sold" at an auction Saturday night during a dinner dance at
the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Cambridge.

   Each owner chose one of 16 prizes based on team placement. The first-place
team's owner had first choice. The second-place team's owner could choose from
the remaining 15 prizes. And so on.

   The two-day fund-raising event is more interactive than the standard dinner
party - a large part of its attraction.

   Graham del Rossi, 13, backed his mother.His winning bid of more than $2,000
gave him sole interest in team No. 12 - his mother Suzanne Del Rossi, wife of
General Cinemas' chairman Paul Del Rossi, and Hal Gorman, the Prince tennis
racket representative in Boston.

   "My stockbroker made a lot of money for me this year," Graham said.

   His stockbroker, author John Spooner, is a longtime friend of the Del Rossis
and supporter of the CF Foundation. He and his wife Susan Spooner chaired the
first Tennis Auction Ball four years ago.

   Last weekend's party was chaired by Gilda and Alfred Slifka. Guests included
WBCN-FM program director Oedipus and Kristin Bendary.

   The CF Foundation has been making points on the research court. Cystic
fibrosis is a genetic disease, the No. 1 such killer of children.

   On Oct. 14, researchers from the University of Iowa and Genzyme Corp.
announced the results of gene therapy research in which they were able to
correct the abnormal gene in three patients.

   Supporters of St. Jude Children's Research Hospital gathered at the Westin
Hotel Saturday night for the sixth annual "Keep the Magic Alive" dinner dance
and auction.

   Linda and Joe Malone, the state treasurer, were the honorary chairmen of the
event supporting the hospital founded in Memphis, Tenn., 32 years ago by the
late Danny Thomas.

   Malone met Thomas several years ago at a St. Jude fund-raiser in Washington,
D.C.

   Though honorary, the Malones were active chairmen, with Linda tracking down
auction donors and Joe coming to the party with 300 instant lottery tickets to
raffle off.

   Linda and Paul Hajar co-chaired the benefit attended by designer Denise
Hajjar, Silver Lake Dodge president Herb Abramson, Jody and Elias Dow and Dick
Hackett, former Memphis mayor now working for his city's most famous hospital.

   St. Jude is a research hospital where children receive experimental treatment
for deadly diseases.

   Acute lymphocytic leukemia, for example, killed 100 percent of its victims
when the hospital was founded. The cure rate is now 70 percent.

   "Anyone who knows the story of St. Jude doesn't need much convincing to work
for it," Hackett said. "Love of the hospital - it's something I hope they don't
find a cure for."

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             976 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                            November 7, 1993, Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS; Section G; Page 4

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: COMMUNITIES A CLOSER LOOK AT HOW WE LIVE GETTING AROUND AMERICAN HEART
ASSOCIATION 66th Scientific Sessions Nov. 8-11 Convention to highlight
cardiovascular research

BYLINE: By Charles Seabrook STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Downtown restaurants are sprucing up their low-fat-food menus and hotels are
dusting off their no-smoking signs as they prepare for more than 30,000
scientists, physicians and nurses involved in the treatment and prevention of
heart disease.

   The American Heart Association's 66th Scientific Sessions begin Monday and
continue through Thursday at the Georgia World Congress Center.

   The meeting will be one of the biggest to take place in Atlanta this year,
but certainly not the biggest. The SuperShow attracts nearly 100,000 people each
year, and the Comdex computer show more than 80,000.

   "We can absorb 30,000 visitors with no problem," said Kim Arculeo,
spokeswoman for the Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau. She said the heart
association meeting is not expected to cause any major traffic problems.

   At the meeting, which is open only to registered attendees, researchers from
around the world will present more than 3,500 scientific reports about progress
in the fight against cardiovascular diseases, including heart attack, stroke,
high blood pressure and congenital heart defects.

   Together, these diseases claim the lives of almost a million Americans a
year.

   Scientists will discuss new drugs for treating high cholesterol levels in the
blood, and genetic therapy to prevent the buildup of cholesterol in arteries,
which can lead to heart attack and stroke.

   At least 30 of the scientific reports will deal with the benefits of low
levels of nitric oxide on various body functions. Fifteen years ago, the gas was
regarded as an obnoxious air pollutant that had no health benefits.

   Large amounts of nitric oxide, spewed out of car exhausts and factory
smokestacks, are indeed toxic to the body, but scientists now believe that tiny
amounts of the gas produced within the body are vital for maintaining blood
pressure and several other body processes.

   Other reports will deal with the advantages and disadvantages of balloon
angioplasty, a common heart procedure developed in the 1980s.

GRAPHIC: Map: Downtown traffic alert The American Heart Association is expected
to draw 30,000 conventioneers to Downtown Atlanta and the Georgia World Congress
Center. The meeting begins Monday and ends Thursday. Area of downtown Atlanta. /
Staff

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1993


                             977 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1993 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                    November 7, 1993, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: VIEWPOINTS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 854 words

HEADLINE: THE RIGHT TO BE A PARENT SHOULD HAVE SOME LIMITS

BYLINE: By SUSAN JACOBY, New York Times

BODY:

    I once interviewed a woman who was enraged because her health insurance
company, after paying for two unsuccessful attempts at in vitro fertilization,
had refused to reimburse her for further infertility treatments.

   "They're depriving me of my right to become a mother," she said, "and I'm
going to sue them."

   But where is it written that our society owes everyone the "right" to become
a parent, regardless of the financial or ethical cost?

   The woman's comment offers yet another example of the pervasive, bloated
sense of entitlement that forms a crucial, largely unexamined backdrop to the
debate over the ethics of cloning human embryos.

   The ethical controversy erupted recently after scientists at George
Washington University Medical Center announced that they had developed a cloning
procedure that would help infertile couples conceive artificially by providing
them with identical extra embryos.

   But this "breakthrough" also creates a real possibility that unused embryos
could be sold to other couples. The debate pits the so-called right of people to
control their own embryos -- and to have children in any way they desire --
against society's need to protect itself from those who would cheerfully clone
and sell endless multiples of human beings as long as there was a profit to be
made.

   Almost no one has questioned the notion of parenthood as a right and
infertility as a violation of that right -- and a disaster that must be fought
with all the high-tech tools of modern medicine.

   Because I consider infertility a sorrow rather than a tragedy, I cannot
conceive of any ethical justification for cloning humans. I am far more
concerned about the potential social consequences of merchants' peddling
"desirable" embryos (no doubt white and proved Harvard material) than about the
personal disappointment experienced by couples who cannot easily produce
children.

   To take this position is to risk accusations of being a Luddite. Any
scientific advance can, of course, be misused, but the real question is whether
the possible benefit outweighs the possible risk.

   Gene therapy also raises grave ethical questions, but the risks are worth
taking because such experiments hold out the possibility of correcting lethal
genetic defects.

   Embryo-cloning, by contrast, will surely be used not only to remedy
infertility but to enable affluent Americans to get what they want when they
want it.

   I am 48 and deeply regret having no children. Yet I am perfectly aware that
the career-oriented decisions made in my 20s and early 30s are largely
responsible for my childless state.

   Cloning would certainly get someone like me off the hook. If such a procedure
had been available back in the '70s, my then-husband and I could have stored
away a number of identical future babies.

   Now that I'm older and ready to be a parent, I could take my bundles of joy
off the freezer shelf. Because I no longer have a uterus, I'd have to rent
another woman for the pregnancy.

   And the baby wouldn't have a father, because my ex-husband died some years
after our divorce. But why worry? I'd have exactly what I want exactly when it
suited me.

   An unlikely scenario? In an era of rights run wild, anything is not only
possible but likely.

   Twenty years ago, who would have believed that we would witness court battles
between surrogate mothers and well-off couples determined to do anything to
reproduce at least one partner's precious genes?

   It is past time for our society to call a halt to the "me first" expansion of
rights.

   No one has the right to jeopardize the precious uniqueness of all members of
the human race in order to assuage individual heartbreak and gratify individual
desires.

   SUSAN JACOBY writes on medical ethics and reproductive issues.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1993


                             978 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   NOVEMBER 4, 1993, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 83 words

HEADLINE: Somatix, Baxter Team Up

BODY:

    Somatix Therapy Corp., an Alameda- based biotechnology company, has agreed
with Baxter Healthcare Corp. to jointly develop a gene therapy to treat
hemophilia. Under the terms of the agreement, Somatix will develop a
blood-clotting cell line to be used with Baxter's cell membrane technology.
Baxter will hold worldwide marketing rights and will conduct clinical trails for
the therapy, while Somatix will receive royalties on product sales. Financial
terms were not disclosed.


LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                             979 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    November 2, 1993, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 5; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 2921 words

HEADLINE: PACE OF GENE THERAPY EXPERIMENTS QUICKENS;
MEDICINE: DRAMATIC SUCCESS WITH TWO GIRLS SPURS MORE ATTEMPTS. BUT OBSTACLES TO
TREATMENTS REMAIN HIGH.

SERIES: HEALING GENES. Medicine's Attack on Genetic Diseases. Last of three
parts.

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   Cynthia Cutshall's parents never expected that she would be able to go to
school. Born with a rare genetic disorder called ADA deficiency, the Canton,
Ohio, girl had no functioning immune system to protect her from infections. As a
result, she suffered chronic sinus problems that often led to near-fatal
pneumonia, and seemed destined to live a life of wretched isolation, much like
an earlier, more well-known victim of the disease, David, the "boy in the
bubble" in Houston, who died at age 12.

   Three years ago, however, then-9-year-old Cynthia and 4-year-old Ashanthi
DeSilva, who also suffers from the disorder, became the first subjects of a
radical, and then controversial, new technique called gene therapy.

   Dr. R. Michael Blaese and Dr. Kenneth Culver at the National Cancer
Institute, and Dr. W. French Anderson, a geneticist now at USC, removed white
blood cells from the girls and inserted a healthy copy of the ADA gene into the
cells. They then infused the cells back into the girls' bloodstreams, where the
gene stimulated the production of the missing enzyme.

   After several such treatments, the girls have functioning immune systems and
are attending public schools. Cynthia is in the sixth grade and loves playing
baseball. Ashi, as Ashanthi DeSilva's parents call her, swims with her friends
in suburban Cleveland and loves drawing. Both are serving as "research
ambassadors" for the March of Dimes to talk about their experiences and to
educate the public on the benefits of gene therapy.

   "We are exceptionally pleased with our patients' progress so far," Blaese
said recently. "But more than anything else," Anderson said, "the first
treatment was a social and cultural victory. It launched the field of human gene
therapy."

   Geneticists have long predicted that genetic engineering techniques would be
able to produce such dramatic achievements, but few would have predicted the
rush of human gene therapy projects that would be initiated in the wake of the
success with Cynthia and Ashi.

   The National Institutes of Health has approved 48 such projects and 10 are
pending, according to NIH's Office of Recombinant DNA Activities. At least four
are in progress in other countries.

   Human gene therapy centers are being established throughout the country,
including at USC, City of Hope, the University of Michigan and University of
Pennsylvania. The fast pace has astonished many researchers.

   "Just a year or two ago, I don't think any of us in the field thought it
would move so fast," said Dr. Albert P. Deisseroth, a medical geneticist at the
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston. Even then, many
critics were arguing that researchers should perform more studies in animals
before plunging headlong into human trials.

   "There is no substitute for doing it in man," said Dr. Gary J. Nabel, a
geneticist at the University of Michigan. "Humans are where we really need to go
if we are going to have a greater understanding (of gene therapy) and make an
impact on disease. If we can learn what's working and what's not working, we can
improve on it."

   "The idea of doing human gene therapy is now more acceptable," said molecular
biologist Inder Verma of the Salk Institute in La Jolla.

   One infant in every 100 is born with a serious disorder caused by a defect in
one or more of the 100,000 genes that make up the human genetic complement. The
gene -- composed of deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA -- is the fundamental unit of
heredity.

   Usually the damage becomes evident in childhood. "All too often," Verma said,
"it gives rise to physical or mental abnormalities, pain and early death." Of
the more than 4,000 known inherited disorders, most lack fully effective
therapies.

   In many cases, the only hope for the patients is to insert a healthy version
of the defective gene into the diseased cells. Once the gene is there,
researchers must induce it to produce a healthy enzyme or other protein to
restore normal function. Researchers have made great progress in their attempts
to do this, especially in patients like Ashi and Cynthia, although problems
remain.

   But the correction of such inborn genetic defects is not the only -- or even
the primary -- focus of today's gene therapists. More than half of all current
projects are aimed at cancer and AIDS, the former caused by healthy genes gone
awry, the latter caused when viruses insert their genes into healthy cells,
causing them to function abnormally.

   For the short term, researchers are attempting to add genes to the body's
immune cells to bolster their effectiveness and to help them recognize cancerous
and HIV-infected cells and destroy them. For the longer term, geneticists hope
to replace defective tumor suppressor genes that have allowed cancers to emerge,
thereby preventing cancers from developing in the first place.

   Even that is not the end of the possibilities for gene therapy. Many of the
most important human diseases, ranging from heart disease and diabetes to
arthritis and Alzheimer's, involve genetic susceptibilities. Genetic engineers
hope to eventually be able to prevent many of these diseases by giving people
healthy genes to reduce that susceptibility.

   Researchers are drawn to all these applications because, at first blush, gene
therapy looks easy. "Gene therapy is conceptually simple, but in practice, there
are horrendous hurdles to overcome," said geneticist Richard Samulski of the
University of Pittsburgh.

   Among those hurdles: targeting the gene to specific cells; producing large
enough quantities of the previously missing protein to cure, or at least
ameliorate, the disease, and sustaining production of the missing protein
produced by the target cells for more than a few weeks so that the patient does
not have to be continually re-treated.

   But the demonstrated successes of gene therapy are luring many new
investigators, who are making impressive progress on these fronts. These "clever
applications . . . ensure that gene therapy will be applied to a broad range of
diseases over the next several years," Anderson said.

   But until gene-carrying agents "can safely and efficiently be injected
directly into patients as drugs like insulin are now," he added, gene therapy
will be able to help "only thousands, not millions, of patients."

   *

   As of now, replacing even one gene is difficult. The most common approach
involves using a virus to insert the desired gene into the target cell's DNA.
But not just any virus will do. Because most viruses do not insert their own
genes into the target cell, most are useless for gene therapy.

   The primary exceptions are retroviruses, which can insert their genes into
the DNA of an infected cell. Retroviruses include animal cancer viruses, HTLV --
which causes certain rare leukemias in humans -- and the human immunodeficiency
virus or HIV, which causes AIDS. All of these viruses -- rendered harmless by
genetic engineering -- are being used for gene therapy in humans or in animal
studies. "Retroviruses are the most promising gene delivery system studied so
far," Verma said.

   Many investigators started working with retroviruses, such as the mouse
leukemia virus, in the early 1980s. The first step is to defang the virus by
removing the genes that allow the virus to reproduce in the cell and those that
cause cancer. In place of these viral genes, researchers insert the human gene
or genes that they wish to use.

   That's the easy part. Researchers then must grow adequate quantities of the
virus -- no easy task because the genes that allow it to replicate have been
removed -- and prove that it is safe.

   One fear is that the altered viruses will regain the ability to replicate.
Most researchers had not particularly worried about such an event: They commonly
use mouse viruses for gene therapy because they believe that such viruses could
not cause disease in humans -- a view that was seemingly upheld by studies in
the mid-1980s.

   Thus, researchers were shocked two years ago when three of eight rhesus
monkeys used by molecular biologist Arthur Nienhuis of the National Heart, Lung
and Blood Institute in a gene transfer experiment developed lymphoma, a cancer
of the lymphatic glands. Nienhuis knew the retrovirus preparation contained
viruses capable of replication, but experience had led him to assume they were
harmless.

   That experience has prompted the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to expand
the amount of testing required for retroviral preparations before they are used
in humans in order to ensure that no viable viruses are present. Some critics of
gene therapy argue that the viruses could recombine with others present in
humans to form lethal viruses.

   Molecular biologist Richard Mulligan of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology notes that "outbreaks" of infectious viruses have occurred in cell
lines used to prepare retroviruses. He urges that greater efforts be made to
determine how to prevent the formation of such infectious viruses before
retroviruses are used for therapy in humans. Most researchers consider
retrovirus-initiated disease unlikely, however, and so far no disease has been
attributed to gene therapy.

   Perhaps a bigger problem is that retroviruses can infect only cells that are
in the process of dividing, sharply limiting the number of cells in the body
that can be targeted. Blood cells, skin cells called fibroblasts, liver cells
and a few others present the primary opportunities. Brain and muscle cells are
among the many that do not divide.

   Furthermore, only a small fraction of the dividing cells exposed to the
altered retroviruses are infected -- typically between 3% and 10%. And even if
the gene is successfully inserted into target cells, it may turn itself off
after a few days or weeks so that it no longer produces the desired protein.
Molecular biologists are actively attacking these problems.

   Because of fears that viable retroviruses would be formed in humans, a
majority of researchers have so far chosen to treat patients' cells outside the
body and then reinfuse them. In the case of Cynthia, Ashi and two other children
treated by Blaese and his colleagues, this process worked well. Despite the fact
that only a small fraction of cells were infected by the inserted retroviruses,
enough ADA was produced to restore immunity. Researchers in other countries have
obtained similar results in severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID) and
hemophilia, a bleeding disorder.

   Unfortunately, the infused cells, like all normal white cells, are slowly
cleared from the bloodstream, so the process has had to be repeated every three
to six months. To circumvent this problem, Blaese, Culver and Anderson in May
used the same procedure to treat the girls' stem cells -- the primitive parent
cells from which all other blood cells are formed. A similar procedure was
performed on three newborns with SCID, two in San Francisco and one in Los
Angeles, the same month.

   Theoretically, if stem cells were subjected to gene therapy, the result would
be a "cure" because they would provide a continuous supply of healthy cells for
the rest of the patient's life. But they are present only in very small
quantities and special procedures are necessary to harvest them.

   It is not clear whether the stem cell treatment was successful in the
patients.

   Another example of successful gene therapy involves patients with familial
hypercholesterolemia, a liver disorder that results in extreme cholesterol
buildup and early death.

   To treat these patients, Dr. James M. Wilson, a geneticist at the University
of Michigan, removes about 15% of the patient's liver, separates individual
cells and inserts the healthy gene for a protein called an LDL receptor. LDL, or
low-density lipoprotein, is the so-called bad form of cholesterol whose presence
in the blood in high quantities increases the risk of heart disease. When the
cells are infused back into the patient, they take up residence in the liver,
and the LDL receptor on their surface allows them to remove cholesterol from the
recipient's blood.

   Wilson performed the first treatment in June, 1992, on a 29-year-old Quebec,
Canada, woman who had such severe coronary disease that bypass grafts were
failing after only three years. He reported in February that her cholesterol
level, initially three times normal, had been reduced nearly 40%. He hopes to
bring it into the normal range with conventional drugs. Wilson, now at the
University of Pennsylvania, is treating four more patients.

   A similar approach of engineering cells outside the body has been used in
most searches for cures to cancer and AIDS. In each case, the goal is to get the
immune system to attack the tumors more vigorously.

   Some of these approaches involve adding the genes for therapeutic proteins to
a patient's white cells to increase their ability to attack cancerous or
HIV-infected cells. Others involve attaching easily recognizable protein markers
to cancer cells, so that the immune system attacks them more readily.

   So far, these "cancer vaccines" have proved safe, but it is not clear if they
are effective. In August, however, Dr. Claudio Bordignon of the Institute of
Scientific Research in Milan, Italy, reported that he had used such a vaccine to
cure a 29-year-old woman of lymphoma, a tumor of the lymph glands. Bordignon
said this was the first reported cancer cure by gene therapy.

   Because retroviruses infect only cells that are dividing rapidly, researchers
must use other techniques to treat those that reproduce slowly, such as lung
cells. This year, Wilson, Dr. Ronald G. Crystal, a geneticist at the National
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, and Dr. Michael J. Welsh of the University of
Iowa each began treating cystic fibrosis patients with genetically engineered
adenoviruses. These viruses are one of the many causes of the common cold and
normally target nasal passages and the lungs, although they do not insert their
genes into the host cell's DNA.

   Cystic fibrosis patients have a defective version of a gene called CFTR that
allows thick mucus to build up in the lungs, where it impairs breathing and
traps bacteria that can cause lethal infections. The researchers insert a
healthy copy of the gene into a defanged adenovirus, which is then sprayed into
the patients' nasal passage and lungs. The researchers predict that infecting
just 10% of cells in these areas could significantly alleviate cystic fibrosis
symptoms.

   Welsh reported last month that the procedure was safe and could cure the
cystic fibrosis biochemical defect in treated nose tissues, providing "a
foundation for moving forward to test whether gene therapy can provide clinical
improvement for the patient."

   Crystal, however, had to stop treating one woman who was receiving a high
dose of the altered virus after she developed lung inflammation, fever and a
drop in the oxygen levels in her blood. The symptoms disappeared within a week,
but Crystal and Wilson have decided to use only lower levels of virus for now.

   Researchers are planning a variety of other approaches as well, such as
encapsulating genes in fatty globules that they hope will be taken up by
diseased cells. Michigan's Nabel and others, such as molecular biologist Robert
J. Debs of UC San Francisco, hope that these globules, called liposomes, will
present fewer safety hazards than viruses and that they will be useful on a much
wider variety of cells.

   Meanwhile, Ashi and Cynthia are playing the games that little girls play and
enjoying the company of newfound friends. And that, perhaps, is the strongest
recommendation of all for human gene therapy.

Targets of Gene Therapy (Orange County Edition, A3)

   Geneticists have long predicted that genetic engineering techniques would be
able to produce dramatic achievements, but few would have anticipated the rush
of recent projects. Some examples of new treatments for diseases:

   Cystic fibrosis: The healthy CF gene is inserted into a common cold virus,
called an adenovirus. The virus is sprayed into the nasal passage and lungs,
where it infects cells and produces the missing protein.

   Severe combined immunodeficiency disease: White cells are extracted from
blood and treated with a mouse leukemia virus that inserts the gene for the
missing protein, adenosine deaminase. When the white cells are reinfused in the
body, they produce the missing protein and restore immune function.

   Familial hypercholesterolemia: Researchers combat the disease, which produces
a massive buildup of cholesterol, by removing about 15% of the liver, separating
the cells and using a mouse leukemia virus to insert the gene for a missing
protein called the LDL receptor. When the altered cells are infused back into
the body, they accumulate in the liver and remove cholesterol from the blood.

   Advanced cancers: White blood cells are removed from the tumor site. Then
researchers insert the gene for anti-tumor agents and grow large numbers of the
cells. The cells are reinfused to fight the tumor.

   Melanoma: Circular strings of DNA called plasmids, encased in fat globules,
are inserted directly into tumors. The DNA inserts the gene for a so-called
transplantation antigen that makes the body reject the tumor as it would a
transplanted organ.

   AIDS: HIV-infected white blood cells are removed and treated with a mouse
leukemia virus so they can be more easily recognized by the immune system. When
reinjected, the cells stimulate a stronger immune attack on other HIV-infected
cells.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Ashanthi DeSilva, left, and Cindy Cutshall, were both
successfully treated through gene therapy for a genetic disorder called ADA
deficiency Associated Press; Chart, Targets of Gene Therapy, LORENA INIGUEZ /
Los Angeles Times


                             980 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     November 1, 1993, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 5; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 3146 words

HEADLINE: THE PROMISE AND PERILS OF NEW GENETIC SCREENING;
SCIENCE: MORE DISEASES WILL BE DIAGNOSED AND BETTER THERAPIES DEVELOPED. BUT HOW
SHOULD THE TESTS BE USED?

SERIES: HEALING GENES: Medicine's Attack of Genetic Diseases. Next: The gene
therapy era begins

BYLINE: By ROBERT STEINBROOK, SPECIAL TO THE TIMES

BODY:

   By the turn of the century, scientists should be able to quickly test a small
sample of our cells for dozens of genetic conditions, ranging from rare ailments
to inherited susceptibilities to heart disease, cancer and other common causes
of death. Genetic tests may even suggest if we are likely to become mentally ill
or an alcoholic.

   Until recently, this scenario would have been dismissed as science fiction.
But advances in molecular medicine now hold the promise of prevention and early
treatment of a wide range of diseases.

   The advances may also create what one medical ethicist terms the "unpatient."
Such people, while outwardly well, will know they are at increased risk of
serious disorders, particularly those with no therapy or preventive approach.

   "The 'unpatient' is a little like the 'undead' in horror movies," said the
medical ethicist, Albert R. Jonsen of the University of Washington School of
Medicine in Seattle. "They are both dead and not dead."

   Unpatients may develop severe anxiety and believe that they are under a death
sentence. They may visit doctors frequently, seeking monitoring and reassurance.
In extreme cases, they may contemplate suicide. They may be ostracized by
friends and family and be discriminated against in insurance and employment.

   These phenomena are already seen in some people who know that they will
develop Huntington's disease, an untreatable ailment characterized by abnormal
movements and mental deterioration that occurs in middle age.

   The specter of the unpatient illustrates the promise as well as the perils of
the new genetics. The advances that will allow scientists to identify an
increasing number of genetic diseases and predispositions represent a
technological tour de force that should advance human knowledge and lead to
better therapies. But it will be a far more daunting challenge for society to
determine how and when the tests should be used and how to protect people
against potential, adverse consequences.

   "The whole benefit of the revolution in human genetics . . . is put at risk
the longer we delay resolving the public and political issue of how much
discrimination we are going to allow to be based on genetics," said Dr. Paul R.
Billings of California Pacific Medical Center in San Francisco, who has studied
the problem. "It is my belief that basic human rights and entitlements should
never be put at risk because of one's heredity."

   Genetic screening is the study of people in order to find an inherited
disease. Depending on the illness, the screening can be conducted before birth,
immediately after birth, or at any time during life. The information could be
used to guide decisions about treatment or reproduction or to help predict and
perhaps prevent health problems.

   For years, physicians have tested for diseases such as sickle cell anemia,
which is most often found among blacks, and Tay-Sachs disease, a fatal nerve
disorder that primarily occurs in families of Eastern European Jewish origin.

   In some instances, such as a positive test for Tay-Sachs in a fetus, the
result is a guarantee that fatal illness will develop. In other instances, such
as for some neuromuscular ailments, a positive screening test may simply
identify an increased susceptibility. There may be no way to predict when and if
the illness will occur or how severe it will be.

   The explosion of genetic knowledge has created many volatile dilemmas for
society:

   * How good are the screening tests? Some are nearly 100% accurate, but
others, such as tests for cystic fibrosis, typically miss 10% to 15% of gene
carriers. A negative screening test for cystic fibrosis does not mean that there
is no chance of passing the disease on to one's children; it just means that the
odds are greatly decreased. Studies have found that people have far more
difficulty understanding medical advice based on such probabilities than simple
"yes-no" information.

   * Should advances in genetic testing chiefly be used to spur research on
treatments for deadly or disabling diseases, or to avoid the birth of people who
carry genes for the illnesses? Many physicians and ethicists see an inevitable
competition for resources between those who champion new but potentially
expensive treatments, such as gene therapy or new rehabilitation strategies, and
those who seek to use genetic testing to reduce medical costs by preventing
births.

   "There is a belief among policy-makers and the public that disabled people
bleed the society of scarce resources," said Barbara Faye Waxman of Los Angeles,
a disability policy consultant who is disabled. "As a result of this belief,
there is pressure to use prenatal testing to prevent the birth of disabled
people in the first place."

   * Will individuals, consistent with the principles of medical ethics, truly
be free to decide for themselves whether or not to be screened for an inherited
illness. If they are screened, will they be free to decide what to do with the
information or subtly coerced to make the decision that is "best" for society?

   In a recent case, described by Billings, a health maintenance organization
pondered withdrawing coverage of a woman's pregnancy and her future baby's
health care after a prenatal test indicated that the fetus had cystic fibrosis.
A threat of legal action was required before the HMO backed down.

   "It is not really an entirely free-choice situation," said Barbara Katz
Rothman, a professor of sociology at the City University of New York.

   Rothman, a critic of many genetic screening proposals, charges that social
problems, such as society's commitment to the disabled, will increasingly be
"solved in the bellies of pregnant woman."

   An expectant mother, according to Rothman, may be told: "You can inflict the
child upon the world and the world upon the child, or you can terminate the
pregnancy, grieve the loss of the baby, and the medical community and society at
large will tell you how lucky you were."

   Proponents of genetic screening counter this view by arguing that physicians
should not withhold potentially valuable information from their patients and
should do their best to assure accuracy and balance in discussions.

   * How good are laws to prevent genetic discrimination in insurance and
employment? While many experts view the 1990 American with Disabilities Act as a
step in the right direction, they believe it is not sufficient to guard against
discrimination, particularly for individuals who harbor a potential genetic
illness but have yet to develop symptoms. Only a handful of states have laws
that specifically address genetic discrimination. In California, such a law was
passed by the Legislature in 1991, but vetoed by Gov. Pete Wilson.

   Some believe that the only way to avoid genetic discrimination in health
insurance may be to establish universal access to health care "The real bottom
line is that employers are under tremendous pressure to do anything they can to
hold down health costs," said Mark A. Rothstein of the University of Houston Law
Center. Until the system is reformed, he added, "the incentives are just too
great to discriminate."

   * How can the enthusiasm for genetic screening be reconciled with efforts to
limit the availability of abortions? The results of prenatal genetic tests may
increasingly be used to terminate pregnancies, said Vicki Michel, associate
director of the Pacific Center for Health Policy and Ethics at USC.

   "On the one hand, you are offering people the possibility of technologies
that are going to allow them to avoid the birth of children with disabilities,"
Michel said. "On the other hand, you have a climate (that is) . . . more
restrictive about the availability of abortion."

   Michel's colleague, Alexander M. Capron, a USC professor of law and medicine,
notes that prenatal diagnosis can also be viewed as a technology that can help
prevent abortions. This is because such tests often reveal that a feared genetic
defect is not present in the fetus. In many instances, "you have couples who
feel that they are at risk and would abort a pregnancy if they did not have the
information," he said.

   * Will the general public want to be screened, particularly for diseases many
have never heard of? Some physicians charge that the push for screening is being
fueled by companies who stand to profit from increased sales of genetic tests,
such as those for cystic fibrosis.

   The 4 million women who give birth in the United States each year represent a
vast potential market. "It says in the Bible, where your treasure is, there your
heart will be," said Dr. Norman Fost of the University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine in Madison. "Many people's hearts (at biotechnology companies) have
suddenly turned to cystic fibrosis screening."

   Biotechnology companies dispute such charges. "There are enormous debates
that go on within every company . . . (producing screening tests) as to what is
appropriate," said John Richard, a vice president of Collaborative Diagnostics
in Waltham, Mass., which markets a cystic fibrosis test. At this point, cystic
fibrosis testing is not a "big moneymaker" for anybody, he said.

   In addition, the public has often been less enthusiastic about screening
tests than have the experts, particularly when it seems unlikely that a
condition will develop or people are asked to pay for expensive tests
themselves.

   When testing is offered, "a minority of the population eligible for the
testing takes advantage of it," said Dr. Wylie Burke of the University of
Washington. "But for some individuals . . . the opportunity is very, very
important."

   Many of these dilemmas are part of the debate over mass screening for cystic
fibrosis, one of the most common of all potentially lethal inherited diseases.

   There are about 30,000 people with cystic fibrosis in the United States,
primarily whites. People with the disease have two copies of an abnormal gene.
Those with only one copy of the gene are not at risk to become ill but may pass
the gene on to their offspring.

   Since the cystic fibrosis gene was discovered in 1989, most physicians have
offered voluntary testing to family members of patients. But beyond that there
is little agreement on the best course of action. In 1992, an estimated 63,000
people were likely to be screened, according to a report by Office of Technology
Assessment.

   Experts debate whether screening should be encouraged to prevent the birth of
cystic fibrosis children when promising new treatments, such as gene therapy,
are on the horizon. If mass screening were implemented, millions of people might
be tested each year, creating a vast and potentially lucrative market for
biotechnology companies.

   The American Society of Human Genetics, whose members include most physicians
with expertise in genetic diseases, says mass screening programs are premature.

   Cystic fibrosis "is not Tay-Sachs disease, where the outlook for meaningful
childhood development is nil," a group of prominent geneticists wrote in the
American Journal of Human Genetics last year.

   The geneticists, who favor a cautionary approach to widespread screening,
noted that "individuals with cystic fibrosis commonly live to adulthood; there
is every indication that survival will continue to improve, and the possibility
of breakthroughs in therapy is greater now than at any time in the past."

   According to Fost, of the University of Wisconsin, cystic fibrosis patients
"could be stigmatized if the public comes to perceive that they would have been
better off not having been born. . . . A highly public prevention program may
undermine efforts at improving treatment, as the public comes to see cystic
fibrosis as a disease that will or should disappear."

   But some prominent geneticists take a different view. They note that 80% of
babies with cystic fibrosis are born to couples without a family history of the
condition and argue that all individuals should be routinely informed about the
availability of screening, so they can decide for themselves whether or not to
be tested.

   "It is not a question of if we will proceed with cystic fibrosis carrier
testing, but how rapidly the utilization will increase," said Dr. Arthur Beaudet
of the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.

   Physicians and genetic counselors are still learning how best to educate
people about their test results and the disease.

   A typical counseling session for a couple with positive tests may take
several hours. "We are dealing with rough concepts for people to comprehend,"
said Joan H. Marks of Sarah Lawrence College in Bronxville, N.Y., who directs
the nation's leading training program for genetic counselors. "It is not
something you can read on a mimeographed sheet and understand. You need someone
who is really good at communicating scientific information at the layman's
level."

   "This is very complex information, even a lot of physicians would not be able
to interpret what the test means," said Dr. Wayne W. Grody of the UCLA Medical
Center, who directs a federally funded study of screening for the disease. "If
we find that even telling people about this test creates so much anxiety that we
are doing more harm than good or the carriers feel stigmatized, we may decide it
is not worth screening the population."

   In addition, there are only about 1,000 trained genetic counselors in the
United States and "there is no way" we could meet the demands of potentially
conducting millions of screening tests for the disease each year, said Barbara
Bowles Biesecker, a genetic counselor at the University of Michigan.

   Others say that concerns about adverse reactions to testing may be overrated.
Cystic fibrosis screening "is not going to be a big deal" to many people, said
Dr. Neil A. Holtzman of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, who
directs another federally funded study of the illness.

   A British study of more than 3,000 women, published in the Lancet in July,
concluded that "the great majority of both carriers and non-carriers are pleased
that they have been tested and many commented that they would like to see the
test made more widely available."

   One of the biggest challenges is what to tell people about cystic fibrosis.
The severity of cases varies tremendously; some children may be profoundly
affected and die before adulthood, others may lead essentially normal lives well
into middle age.

   "In genetics, we try to be completely non-directive and just offer patients
information and they can do with it what they want," Grody said. "On a
videotape, do I show a horribly affected kid who is carrying an oxygen tank
around or do I show a kid who is playing soccer? By what I tell patients, I can
skew who is going to want the test and who might decide to terminate a pregnancy
based on positive results. There is a big debate over how to give information
and still be non-directive."

   On a recent morning at UCLA, pregnant women who were scheduled for other
prenatal tests were volunteering for the ongoing study of cystic fibrosis
screening. As an alternative to a blood specimen, they used a small brush to
scrape a sample of their cells from the inside of their cheek. To most, the
decision to participate in the testing seemed routine. "I know I am probably not
a carrier, but it is best to know for sure," one said.

   Another participant said she was not bothered by the inaccuracies of the
test. "I don't think of medicine as being an exact science," she said. "Any sort
of information that can increase my knowledge is useful."

   One 35-year-old Los Angeles woman found to her surprise that she had tested
positive. Her husband was then tested; he was found not to carry the gene. "We
had maybe a few days when we were a little concerned," said the woman, who
requested anonymity. "I think it is great that (physicians) have these methods
available now."

   The UCLA study and six others funded by the National Institutes of Health
will take several years to complete. By 1995, the NIH hopes to make
recommendations about whether testing of the general population is advisable.

The Genetic Probe

   Genetic testing involves looking for the presence or absence of specific
genes, both normal and abnormal. A genetic probe takes a known genetic pattern
and tries to find the same pattern in the genetic material being studied, a
person's or that of a fetus in the womb. Here is how the probe works:

   1. DNA is obtained from white blood cells or fetal tissue obtained in a
prenatal test.

   2. The DNA is treated with restriction enzymes that can recognize a specific
pattern in the DNA and cut it where the pattern occurs. The result is pieces of
DNA of varying lengths.

   3. The pieces -- numbering in the millions -- are put on the surface of a
special gel. The gel receives an electrical charge, which separates the pieces
according to size.

   4. The gel is treated with a solution that divides the double-stranded DNA
into single strands. Those are transferred to a nylon membrane.

   5. A genetic probe is added to the membrane. The probe, a radioactively
labeled single strand of DNA, matches the DNA pattern of the gene under
scrutiny.

   6. If the suspect gene is present, the probe will bind to the piece of DNA
that matches the pattern and give off radiation. A film called an autoradiograph
will show the binding as a dark band. If a match for the pattern is not found,
no radiation is present so no dark band shows on the film.

   7. Band patterns in a series of autoradiographs might look something like
this: The normal pattern is in column D; other columns show where bands are
missing.

Passing the Test

   After researchers identify the defective gene that causes an inherited
disorder, they are able to test for it. Some tests can be done prenatally or
almost immediately after a baby is born. Some genes discovered in the last two
years cause:

   Alzheimer's disease. Inherited form, which accounts for 15% of all cases.

   Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig's disease). Degenerative disease of
the nervous system.

   Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Causes foot and hand deformities.

   Cystic fibrosis. The most common lethal genetic defect, causing pancreas
malfunction.

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Major form of muscular dystrophy in children.

   Familial colon cancer, accounting for about 15% of all cases of colon cancer.

   Fragile X syndrome. Leading cause of mental retardation.

   Gaucher's disease. A disorder that strikes Ashkenazic Jews.

   Huntington's disease. Another crippling neurodegenerative disorder.

   Marfan syndrome. Disease of connective tissue that often strikes athletes.

   Myotonic dystrophy. Most common form of muscular dystrophy in adults.

   Retinoblastoma. Inherited eye tumors in children.

   Retinitis pigmentosa. Researches has discovered genes that cause 43% of the
cases of this blinding disorder.

   Source: Genes and Inheritence

GRAPHIC: Chart, COLOR, The Genetic Probe, LORENA INIGUEZ / Los Angeles Times ;
Chart, COLOR, Passing the Test, LORENA INIGUEZ / Los Angeles Times


                             981 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     November 1, 1993, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 12; Column 3; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 396 words

HEADLINE: INHERITED DISEASES

BYLINE: By ROBERT STEINBROOK

BODY:

   Advances in genetic technology have focused new attention on screening for
inherited conditions, as well as for sporadic disorders such as Down's syndrome.
There are thousands of inherited diseases, most of them rare. Here are examples
of diseases for which many people are now screened:

   * CONGENITAL HYPOTHYROIDISM: Results when the thyroid gland fails to develop
properly. Newborns in all states are screened. Cases are sporadic. Occurs in
about one in 4,000 white infants and one in 30,000 black infants. Can cause
mental and physical retardation. Prompt treatment with thyroid hormone is very
effective.

   * NEURAL TUBE DEFECTS: Birth defects of the spinal column that can cause
varying degrees of paralysis or, in extreme cases, absence of the brain.
Prenatal diagnosis is usually recommended; California has a state sponsored
screening program for pregnant women. Clusters in families but most cases are
sporadic. Occurs in about nine in 10,000 births. Recent data suggests that folic
acid supplements prior to conception and during early pregnancy can prevent
recurrence in many cases.

   * PHENYLKETONURIA: Results from a genetic defect in the metabolism of
phenylalanine, an amino acid. Can cause mental retardation. Newborns in all
states are screened. Occurs in about one in 14,000 births. A phenylalanine
restricted diet is usually an effective treatment.

   These are examples of diseases for which preconception or prenatal screening
of at-risk families is often advised.

   * DOWN'S SYNDROME: Birth defect characterized by mental retardation and
physical abnormalities. Prenatal testing, such as amniocentesis, usually
recommended for at-risk women. Occurs in one in 600 to one in 650 births; most
frequent in infants of women over 35 years of age. Researchers are developing
blood tests that can also be used in diagnosis.

   * SICKLE CELL ANEMIA: A blood disease that occurs almost exclusively in
blacks. Affected individuals have episodes of severe pain and are at increased
risk for serious infections. With improved treatments, more patients are
surviving to age 50 or beyond. In the United States, there are about 60,000
people with sickle cell anemia.

   * TAY-SACHS DISEASE: Uncommon nervous system ailment that is usually fatal by
4 years of age. Most common in families of Eastern European Jewish origin. There
is no specific treatment. ROBERT STEINBROOK


                             982 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     October 31, 1993, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 2414 words

HEADLINE: COLUMN ONE;
UNRAVELING THE SECRETS OF GENES;
GENETIC EXPERIMENTS HAVE EXPLODED AND COULD HOLD THE KEY TO MAKING SUCH DISEASES
AS CYSTIC FIBROSIS, HUNTINGTON'S AND LOU GEHRIG'S OBSOLETE. BUT ETHICAL
QUESTIONS REMAIN.

SERIES: HEALING GENES: Medicine's Attack on Genetic Diseases. NEXT: The ethical
implications of genetic screening.

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   Huntington's disease. Lou Gehrig's disease. Cystic fibrosis. Duchenne
muscular dystrophy. Fragile X syndrome. Marfan syndrome.

   These once-mysterious and disabling disorders and a host of others are
beginning to yield their deepest secrets to the inquiring chemical scalpels of
molecular biologists and geneticists.

   Scientists are riding an unprecedented wave of medical research that many
believe is bringing them closer and closer to the dream of a world where genetic
disease is obsolete. Virtually every week, researchers report the discovery of a
disease-linked gene.

   Pinpointing the defective genes that cause diseases such as cystic fibrosis
opens the door to what many scientists consider the ultimate cure for genetic
maladies: gene therapy, the replacement of a defective gene with a healthy one.

   Three years ago, there were no gene therapy experiments under way. Today,
there are nearly 50, and new ones are being proposed regularly.

   "Over the next 20 to 40 years, we will have the potential for eradicating the
major diseases that plague the . . . population," said molecular biologist Leroy
Hood of the University of Washington. "Biotechnology will fundamentally change
how we will practice medicine."

   In the 10 years since molecular biologists discovered the techniques of
genetic engineering, researchers have identified the causes of more than 25
serious genetic disorders and hundreds of other genes as well. Myriad other
discoveries seem just over the horizon.

   These discoveries have already allowed geneticists to perform prenatal
screening of high-risk groups that have family histories of diseases such as
muscular dystrophy, Huntington's disease and cystic fibrosis. But more important
in the long run, advances in genetics have frequently provided the first
insights into how these diseases wreak their havoc.

   "Every disease we know about is either being attacked with genetics or is
being illuminated through genetics," said Nobel laureate David Baltimore, a
molecular biologist at Rockefeller University in New York City.

   Eventually, the new developments will provide the ultimate answer to
controlling the escalating costs of health care, Hood said. As physicians learn
more about the multiple genetic causes of cancer, heart disease and other
widespread disorders, they will be able to practice much more preventive
medicine, he said, reducing the costs of health care by minimizing the need for
it.

   But Hood and others also caution that the discoveries are prompting questions
about the ethics of using genetic screening to identify people with inborn
susceptibilities to disease and of using gene therapy.

   The rapid pace of recent research is all the more remarkable because it has
been a mere 40 years since two brash young scientists at the Cavendish
Laboratory in Cambridge, England, deduced the structure of DNA --
deoxyribonucleic acid, the genetic blueprint of life. In the April 25, 1953,
issue of the British journal Nature, James D. Watson and Francis H. C. Crick
proposed the now-famous double-helix structure of DNA, an event that marked the
beginning of the modern era of genetics.

   But that era was slow to bloom, especially in its application to human
beings. It was not until 1978 that molecular biologist Y. W. Kan of UC San
Francisco first used information from DNA for the prenatal diagnosis of sickle
cell disease and beta-thalassemia. Both disorders involve defects in the gene
that is the blueprint for hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying molecule in red blood
cells.

   About the same time, scientists working in several laboratories made a
discovery that made genetic engineering and the search for genes practical. They
found a family of naturally occurring proteins called restriction enzymes and
polymerases. Restriction enzymes split DNA at specific sites, producing useful
fragments -- such as genes -- while polymerases stitch it back together.

   These tools gave scientists the ability to isolate genes and other DNA
fragments and insert them into other organisms to produce large quantities of a
gene or to change the physical characteristics of the recipient. Early on,
researchers at Genentech in South San Francisco introduced the gene for human
insulin into bacteria to produce insulin for diabetics. Others inserted the gene
for human growth hormone into pigs to produce animals with leaner meat.

   Restriction enzymes are the "foundation of the genetic engineering industry,"
said molecular biologist Joshua Lederberg of Rockefeller University, and have
proved equally valuable in the search for genes that cause disease.

   Just as crucial was the 1983 discovery of an enzymatic process called
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) by Kary Mullis, then a molecular biologist at
Cetus Corp. in San Francisco -- a feat for which he won the 1993 Nobel Prize for
chemistry. PCR, Lederberg said, led to "democratization of molecular biology" by
allowing a single piece of DNA in a messy mixture from a cell to be fished out
and reproduced in large quantities, at low cost and with simple instruments. PCR
played a key role in the isolation of the defective genes that cause cystic
fibrosis and Fragile X syndrome.

   "High school students do experiments today that would have been doctoral
dissertations 15 years ago," Lederberg said.

   The pace of discovery is likely to become even more furious. Researchers are
in the third year of the $3-billion, 15-year Human Genome Project, whose
ambitious goal is nothing less than decoding the human genome -- "the complete
set of instructions for making a human being," in the words of biochemist Robert
Sinsheimer of UC Santa Barbara. Their aim is not only to locate and identify the
estimated 100,000 human genes that make up about 10% of the genome, but also to
decipher the sequence of the 3 billion individual chemicals, called bases, that
compose the entire genome. The sequence is the order in which bases are strung
along the DNA chain, providing information in the same way that letters form a
sentence.

   Including work done before the initiation of the Human Genome Project,
researchers had determined the sequence of a grand total of 3,837 genes by the
end of March. Only a relative handful of the identified genes cause disease. The
rest are healthy genes whose functions in the cell are known.

   The search for new genes relies heavily on two key tools whose uses are
inseparable: large human families and genetic markers -- short fragments of DNA
with a unique sequence. Scientists home in on defective genes by identifying
markers that are present only in family members that suffer from the inherited
disorder.

   Looking for a specific gene in the mammoth human genome without any signposts
is much like looking for a needle in a haystack. Genetic markers provide these
signposts and allow researchers to navigate their way through the immense maze
of the genome.

   But the markers by themselves are of limited value for finding the causes of
genetic diseases. Identification of the defective genes also requires the use of
a family with a history of the disease, and the bigger the family the better.

   The use of families relies on the fact that each person's DNA is slightly
different from that of everybody else. When one person's genome is chopped up
with restriction enzymes, it will produce a pattern of genetic markers that is
different from that of other people.

   The key in using families is to locate genetic markers that are inherited by
people with the disease but not by healthy family members. When such inheritance
occurs, it means that the marker lies close to the defective gene. Researchers
then search for other markers in that same region, hoping to find a series of
markers that get closer and closer to the defective gene until the gene is
identified.

   The markers can be useful for genetic screening of newborns and adults in
affected families. For years, researchers have used a particular pattern of
markers in families with Huntington's disease to show with 95% accuracy whether
individuals will develop the disease. The closer the marker is to the actual
gene, the higher the percentage of success.

   The families are so important that the search for them has led geneticists to
some otherwise unlikely research sites. Geneticist Raymond White moved his
laboratory from the University of Massachusetts to the University of Utah
because of the large number of Mormon families there. The Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints, headquartered in Salt Lake City, not only encourages its
members to produce large families, but also urges them to compile extensive
genealogies.

   After arriving in Utah, White collected DNA from 46 healthy families of three
generations -- four grandparents, two parents and at least six children. Over
the years, he has put together more than 500 markers scattered throughout their
genomes. By comparing these markers to those in families with a history of a
particular disease, it is possible to locate the gene.

   Using the markers from a family with a history of colon cancer, White, Utah
geneticist Mark Skolnick and their colleagues identified the defective gene on
Chromosome 5 that causes familial adenomatous polyposis, which is responsible
for about 1% of all cases of colon cancer.

   The markers were also crucial to White's discovery of the gene for
neurofibromatosis, a disfiguring disease often referred to incorrectly as
"elephant man's disease," and the identification of the gene for cystic fibrosis
by molecular geneticists Francis Collins of the University of Michigan and
Lap-Chee Tsui of the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto. White's DNA markers
have also become the core of the collection at the Centre d'Etude du
Polymorphisme Humain in Paris, which provides them to researchers around the
world.

   The search for the gene that causes Huntington's disease revolved around an
even larger family in a more unusual location. Molecular biologist Nancy Wexler
of Columbia University compiled a pedigree of nearly 11,000 residents of the
remote village of San Luis on Lake Maracaibo in Venezuela. All 11,000 were
descendants of a single woman with Huntington's disease who moved to San Luis in
the 18th Century, and DNA isolated from about 2,000 relatives was critical in
the discovery of the Huntington's gene, which was announced in March.

   Researchers are still looking for appropriate families to study for other
disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease, a degenerative mental disorder of aging.
"There are a lot of good molecular biologists involved in Alzheimer's disease,"
Wexler said, "but they just don't have the families to work with."

   The discovery of the gene that causes an inherited disorder has many
potential ramifications. At the very least, the discovery enables prenatal
identification of individuals with the disease, allowing parents to take
appropriate action -- whether it is having an abortion in the case of very
serious disorders such as Huntington's or increased vigilance for the onset of
the disorder, as is the case with genes that cause colon cancer.

   Widespread prenatal screening for beta-thalassemia, for example, has largely
eradicated the disorder in Sardinia, where it was once common, and has greatly
reduced the incidence of Tay-Sachs disease in the United States.

   The discovery of a gene can also open the door to new forms of therapy. When
researchers this year discovered that amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, better
known as Lou Gehrig's disease, is caused by a defect in the body's antioxidant
system, they immediately began planning trials with antioxidant medications such
as Vitamin E.

   Researchers are working to identify the function of the defective gene that
causes Huntington's disease in the hopes that new therapies will be possible
there as well.

   But the discovery of a gene does not mean that successful drug therapy is
inevitable. Scientists have known the cause of sickle cell disease since the
beginning of the age of molecular biology but have not been able to design a
therapy based on it. The same is true for Down's syndrome.

   "Having localized and characterized a gene doesn't mean we can do anything
about it," Hood said. "Every isolated gene is a unique story."

   The cure for diseases such as sickle cell may ultimately involve gene
therapy, in which a healthy gene is inserted into a patient's genome to correct
the disorder. Gene therapy is being used to treat such conditions as severe
combined immunodeficiency disease, in which the victim lacks an enzyme that is
crucial to the functioning of the immune system, and cystic fibrosis.

   Such therapy may also prove useful for combatting a number of other
disorders, such as cancer, and even for diseases that are caused by viruses,
such as AIDS. Close to 100 gene therapy projects are approved or under way
around the world.

   The identification of defective genes is also raising a number of ethical
questions about the use -- and potential misuse -- of genetic information.
Scientists recently discovered the gene that causes the major inherited form of
colon cancer. Virtually every person who has this gene will develop cancer, and
that prompts several concerns, including: Will people who have the gene be able
to get health insurance? Will employers hire them? Will they become genetic
outcasts?

Genetic Blueprint

   Humans have an estimated 100,000 genes, each of which serves as the recipe
for a protein -- the fundamental unit of heredity. Here are the basic elements
of the genetic code:

   (Cell drawing): Each of the 100 trillion cells in the human body (except red
blood cells) contains the complete genetic blueprint of a human in the form of
deoxyribonucleic acid, DNA.

   (With chromosome drawing): DNA is packaged into 23 pairs of chromosomes. One
chromosome in each pair comes from the father, one from the mother.

   (With helix detail): The long, fragile DNA molecule is made up of two
intertwined strands called a double helix. The two strands have four types of
compounds called bases. The four bases -- adenine, cytosine, guanine and thymine
-- constitute the 'alphabet' that makes up the genetic code.

   (With drawing of a protein molecule): The information encoded in DNA is used
to build chains of amino acids in protein molecules. Proteins are the workhorses
of cells, providing structure and carrying out all the chemical reactions that
occur in metabolism.

   DNA compound bases: A, C, G and T

   Researched by VICKY McCARGAR / Los Angeles Times

GRAPHIC: Chart, COLOR, Genetic Blueprint, LORENA INIGUEZ / Los Angeles Times ;
Drawing, COLOR, Genetic Blueprint, LORENA INIGUEZ / Los Angeles Times


                             983 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    October 31, 1993, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: BOOK WORLD; PAGE R14; EDUCATION REVIEW

LENGTH: 1477 words

HEADLINE: Teaching as a Moral Vocation

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Frank H. T. Rhodes

BODY:

   JEAN LOUIS Rodolphe Agassiz, the great 19th-century geologist and zoologist,
was an eloquent lecturer who knew when to be silent. He would give each of his
new Harvard zoology students a live fish, instruct them to observe it and report
the results to him. Then he would retire to his office nearby, available if
needed. After a week of agonizing scrutiny, the students would be invited to
describe their specimens. Usually, Agassiz would smile and say in a kindly way:
"That's not quite right." Back the hapless students would go -- more sketches,
measurements, notes, long hours of examination -- until at last the professor
was satisfied with their reports.

   Agassiz knew that much of learning comes when students are allowed to ignite
their own engines. He was teaching about more than fish and more, even, than
techniques of observation. He was teaching about learning and self-confidence,
about the progressive synthesis of knowledge and the satisfaction of discovery.

   In an era of external criticism and internal doubt about the value and
quality of undergraduate education, I believe critics and champions have focused
too readily on the curriculum as culprit or potential redeemer. Of course, the
curriculum matters -- we need the humanities, for example, even more perhaps
than most humanists realize -- but it is the teacher who has the power to
elevate a student's interest into the passionate commitment that scholarship at
its best requires and life at its fullest rewards.

   I was fortunate to have one such teacher in the person of L.J. Wills, whose
required course in geology -- one of 13 such requirements inflicted upon me as a
first-term engineering student -- had a lasting impact on my life. Wills was
scarcely a compelling speaker, neither dynamic nor particularly lucid. He was
kindly but austere, a trifle aloof and critical to a degree. But he cared for
his students, and I saw in him -- I think for the first time -- someone wholly
committed to his subject, endlessly patient in his professional studies,
tireless in his curiosity. A year before retirement, he was still scrambling up
the steepest gorges in search of specimens, for he, like Agassiz, studied fossil
fish. Fifteen years after his retirement -- at last too old to work in the field
-- he was still publishing pathbreaking monographs on European paleogeography.

   Wills was 40 years my senior: I never really knew him intimately, never
called him anything but "professor" -- even years later, when I became a
professor, too. But he taught me much, simply by what he was. Without ever
mentioning it, still less by lecturing about it, he taught me the rigor and
power of science. And as I reflect on his style and personality, I conclude that
the essential quality of a great teacher is not only mastery of the subject but
also a personal enthusiasm to transmit that mastery and a commitment to advance
the field as a whole.

   Effective education involves a personal transaction. It is not courses but
people who can inspire, transform and redeem. We must vest our hopes for
excellence in undergraduate education in professors who regard teaching as a
moral vocation, professors who see teaching not simply as conveying information,
however sophisticated or profound, but as promoting understanding, encouraging
insight, establishing linkages, endowing knowledge with meaning and
significance. This calls not for advocacy of public causes or proselytism but
for sensitive and responsible objectivity, inspired by the openness, fairness,
judgment and dedication which are the marks of the scholar.

   Professional commitment is especially important in today's universities
because size and complexity have largely obscured a sense of shared purpose.
While some will lament that loss, we must acknowledge that the 19th century is
over. Our great universities, public and private, will never again be ivory
towers. They have accepted a wider responsibility. They are citizens of the
world -- not content to examine Aristotle or Sophocles or the over-arching
questions of meaning and existence in isolation, but now also involved with
government and business and all the practical problems of humankind.

   We who are faculty members must help guide students through this new
territory. Yet with research so important to the world and to professional
careers, it is scarcely surprising that some faculty members see teaching as the
price to be paid for a career of research. All the rewards have been in that
direction. We need to reaffirm the significance of our research. John Slaughter,
the president of Occidental College, was right when he said that research is to
teaching as sin is to confession. If you don't participate in the former, you
have very little to say in the latter. But we also need to maintain some
balance. We dare not forget that the transaction between student and professor
lies at the heart of our mission. And most of the professors I know have not
forgotten, current criticisms notwithstanding.

   Our challenge is to present all our subjects, whether Shakespeare or modern
literature or thermodynamics, in a liberal spirit -- "illustrating the general
within the particular" in Alfred North Whitehead's words -- with a breadth of
outlook, with a humane dimension and with a concern for its context, its
relationships and its implications. Like it or not, we as faculty are exemplars:
We exemplify either the generosity of spirit and breadth of thought that are the
products of liberal learning or the narrowness of mind and hollowness of heart
that mere cleverness or simplistic rationalism can produce.

   But commitment to teaching is not automatic. Universities must make a special
effort to identify, support, nurture and reward it. We need practical schemes to
mentor young faculty members and to cultivate and reward their teaching skills.
Deans, provosts, presidents and faculty colleagues need to give emphasis and
practical support in this vital area.

   At most large universities, each academic department has jurisdiction,
appropriately, over appointments, promotions and the granting of tenure within
that department. But the dean and a senior university officer -- at Cornell, the
provost -- must endorse, or veto, departmental recommendations. Since last year,
following the recommendations of a senior-level faculty committee, our provost
has made clear that he will not even review a tenure file unless the candidate's
teaching has been evaluated with the same rigor given to his or her research.
This is a swift and effective way to dilute the cliche "publish or perish." Now,
professional survival depends as well on teaching.

   By teaching I mean more than eloquence or method in classroom or lab. I also
mean hours spent with students, advising and mentoring. I mean some demonstrated
interest in the wider issues of one's subject; I mean proof that imagination has
been involved in the project of learning; I mean respect for the ancient trust
between teacher and pupil. The task of the teacher is not simply to convey
information but to persuade students of their own ability, to instill not just
competence but also self-confidence. That's why I like to compare the effective
teacher with a coach -- one who encourages, motivates, brings out the best in a
person, one who instills confidence in the ability and skills of each member of
his or her team.

   On my own campus there are many such teachers. They are the ones who can
relate their own discipline -- whether it be genetics or ecology or some other
specialized field -- to the larger issues in which the discipline plays a role,
from the ethical implications of gene therapy to the political and economic
consequences of "prospecting" for biologically active substances in the rain
forests of the world. They are the ones who involve students in their research
projects, invite them to explore the subject and its wider implications,
encourage them in their interests and careers -- not only in the classroom but
during office hours and perhaps in residence halls and campus gatherings. They
are the ones alumni seek out when they come back to the campus to visit, for it
is they who have left an indelible imprint on other lives.

   With an explicit commitment to teaching as a moral vocation -- a commitment
augmented by financial incentives and professional recognition -- we can
continue to inspire students without renouncing our wordly citizenship. We can
sustain the spirit of liberal learning without repudiating the professional
aspirations of faculty and students. We can help students affirm life and
learning while giving them, not a rewarmed or recycled 19th-century education,
but one attuned to the needs and opportunities of the modern world.

   Frank H. T. Rhodes, the president of Cornell University, is writing a book
about the modern research university.

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, BECKY HEAVNER FOR TWP

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1993


                             984 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               October 27, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 20; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 7447 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY REPORTS;
Short Sales Outstanding Set a Record on Nasdaq

BYLINE: By FLOYD NORRIS

BODY:

   The bears keep betting that Nasdaq stock prices will tumble, but so far the
bets are not paying off.

   The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that a
record 661.1 million shares of companies traded on Nasdaq had been borrowed and
sold short as of Oct. 7, up 7 percent from the 618.1 million shares recorded a
month earlier. The figure was 43 percent higher than in October 1992.

    While there are several reasons to sell a stock short, the usual one is to
bet that its price will decline, enabling a speculator to buy it back later for
less than its sale price. Some share prices have tumbled, providing profits for
short-sellers, but more have risen. The Nasdaq composite index rose to a record
high earlier this month.

   A big loser for the shorts was Tele-Communications Inc., which had a short
position of 12.2 million shares, virtually unchanged from a month earlier.
Shortly after the figures were compiled, plans were announced for Bell Atlantic
to acquire the cable giant, a move that drove up the stock price.

   The Tele-Communications position was the second largest of any Nasdaq stock,
behind American Power Conversion, a maker of equipment to protect computers from
electrical surges. Its position, of 14.5 million shares, rose 2.3 million shares
in the month, the largest gain of any stock. Its stock price was about level,
however, so the jury is out as to whether those betting the stock is overpriced
will prove to be losers.

   Health Food Stock's Progress

   As some initial public offerings took off in price, they attracted more
interest from short-sellers. General Nutrition, the health-food retailer, went
public in January at $8 a share, adjusted for a subsequent split, and sold more
stock in July at $18.50. In the month ended Oct. 7, while the stock rose to a
peak of $27, the short position rose by 2.2 million shares, to 2.6 million
shares. Since then, its stock price has slipped slightly.

   Another source of pain for the short sellers has been Westwood One, a radio
network operator. They leaped on the stock during the month, a period in which
its price hovered around $3 a share, and the short position rose by 1.9 million
shares, to 2.1 million shares.

   Since then, however, the company has announced plans to acquire another
network in a complicated transaction that would change the management of
Westwood One and provide a capital infusion from Infinity Broadcasting. Westwood
One stock has leaped to $6.25.


Largest Increases

Security Name                          10/15/93     09/15/93       Change

+Amer Power Convers                  14,536,663   12,239,092    2,297,571   T
+Gen Nutrition Cos                    2,583,082      415,672    2,167,410   T
Westwood One Inc                      2,117,653      201,213    1,916,440   T
MCI Comm Corp                         7,941,235    6,511,845    1,429,390   T
Mobile Telecomm Tech                  8,039,081    6,762,065    1,277,016   T
Apple Computer Inc                    7,623,179    6,512,261    1,110,918   T
Nextel Commun A                       3,443,259    2,349,237    1,094,022   T
QVC Network Inc                       1,729,654      642,927    1,086,727   T
Sun Microsystems Inc                  5,133,352    4,069,525    1,063,827   T
Lotus Development Corp                4,195,160    3,223,348      971,812   T
Kendall Square Resch                  2,002,309    1,046,526      955,783   T
Comcast Corp Cl A Spcl                6,349,968    5,424,353      925,615   T
Comcast Corp A                        5,193,776    4,290,252      903,524   T
United Gaming Inc                     1,041,449      172,638      868,811   T
+Applied Materials                    1,531,499      810,976      720,523   T
Spectrum Info Tech                    6,308,189    5,656,767      651,422   T
Signet Gp Ord ADR                       681,126       69,489      611,637   T
Marshall & Ilsley                       692,429       99,759      592,670   T
Microsoft Corp                        2,799,171    2,252,502      546,669   T
Atmel Corp                              543,280       14,582      528,698   T
Intel Corp                            5,850,805    5,342,249      508,556   T
Orbital Sciences Corp                   977,187      472,233      504,954   T
Borland Intl Inc                      4,637,400    4,132,683      504,717   T
Checkers Drive-In                     5,927,202    5,428,288      498,914   T
Schuler Homes Inc                     1,158,510      678,774      479,736   T



Largest Decreases

Security Name                          10/15/93     09/15/93       Change

Reuters Hldg Adr                      1,246,628    5,639,917   -4,393,289   T
Novell Inc                            4,215,826    5,592,892   -1,377,066   T
Cellular Inc                            413,643    1,728,265   -1,314,622   T
Free St Cons Gld ADR                      3,743      838,285     -834,542
LM Ericsson Tel Add                   1,873,116    2,608,126     -735,010
Food Lion IncA                        4,329,162    4,946,602     -617,440   T
Acclaim Entertainmnt                  2,628,041    3,176,372     -548,331   T
+Snapple Beverage Corp               10,137,888   10,649,442     -511,554   T
Western Pac Res Corp                      3,000      510,399     -507,399
Natl Vision Assoc                     1,939,772    2,416,405     -476,633   T
Gensia Inc                            2,786,334    3,244,871     -458,537   T
Immune Response Corp                  1,805,248    2,226,409     -421,161   T
Verifone Inc                            381,734      783,177     -401,443   T
Peoples Heri Fin Gp                     278,073      673,329     -395,256   T
Kelly ServicesA                          91,773      485,562     -393,789   T
Rally's Hamburger                     2,425,265    2,816,319     -391,054   T
Eagle Hardware & Gdn                  1,501,650    1,879,591     -377,941   T
Premier Anesthesia                      256,072      611,142     -355,070   T
Adobe Systems Inc                     3,441,019    3,779,327     -338,308   T
Neorx Corp                              323,652      637,129     -313,477   T
Conquest Airlines                       364,418      676,636     -312,218
Creative Tech Ord                       965,311    1,267,200     -301,889   T
Executo N E                              59,208      360,785     -301,577   T
First Pacific Ntwks                   2,141,247    2,436,973     -295,726   T
Scimed Life Sys Inc                   2,192,634    2,475,695     -283,061   T



Largest Positions

Security Name                          10/15/93     09/15/93       Change

+Amer Power Convers                  14,536,663   12,239,092    2,297,571   T
Tele Commun Inc A                    12,178,793   12,194,200      -15,407   T
+Snapple Beverage Corp               10,137,888   10,649,442     -511,554   T
Mobile Telecomm Tech                  8,039,081    6,762,065    1,277,016   T
MCI Comm Corp                         7,941,235    6,511,845    1,429,390   T
Dell Computer Corp                    7,908,916    7,901,504        7,412   T
Apple Computer Inc                    7,623,179    6,512,261    1,110,918   T
Comcast Cl A Spcl                     6,349,968    5,424,353      925,615   T
Spectrum Info Tech                    6,308,189    5,656,767      651,422   T
Checkers Drive-In                     5,927,202    5,428,288      498,914   T
Intel Corp                            5,850,805    5,342,249      508,556   T
Comcast Corp A                        5,193,776    4,290,252      903,524   T
Casino Magic Corp                     5,135,454    5,274,851     -139,397   T
Sun Microsystems Inc                  5,133,352    4,069,525    1,063,827   T
Noble Drilling Corp                   5,111,986    5,113,405       -1,419   T
Synoptics Commun Inc                  4,821,668    4,637,160      184,508   T
Borland Intl Inc                      4,637,400    4,132,683      504,717   T
Greenwich Pharm Inc                   4,433,537    4,683,398     -249,861   T
+Starbucks Corp                       4,430,060    4,240,802      189,258   T
Food Lion IncA                        4,329,162    4,946,602     -617,440   T
Novell Inc                            4,215,826    5,592,892   -1,377,066   T
Lotus Development Corp                4,195,160    3,223,348      971,812   T
TPI Enterprises                       4,080,322    3,931,467      148,855   T
Buffets Inc                           4,007,322    4,222,580     -215,258   T
Picturetel Corp                       3,943,137    3,474,627      468,510   T



Largest Cover Ratios

Security Name                          10/15/93    Avg. Vol.         Days Mkt

Dibrell Brothers Inc                  2,520,650       43,660           58   T
Fastenal Co                           2,017,378       35,287           57   T
Smithfield Foods Inc                  1,388,965       32,637           43   T
Healthcare Svcs Gp                    1,168,231       32,618           36   T
UST Corp.                             1,056,648       31,512           34   T
Summit Tech Inc                       3,195,473      101,106           32   T
Zeos Intl Ltd                           968,633       34,302           28   T
Sofamor/Danek Gp Inc                  2,811,196      105,574           27   T
Circon Corp                           1,812,657       69,469           26   T
Medical Marketing Gp                  1,015,227       41,229           25   T
Westwood One Inc                      2,117,653       83,199           25   T
Copytele Inc                          2,444,156      105,536           23   T
50-Off Stores Inc                     2,340,878      109,975           21   T
Somatogen Inc                         2,397,706      115,738           21   T
Sports & Recreation                   1,763,836       88,472           20   T
Compucom Systems Inc                    501,108       26,130           19   T
Concord Camera Corp                   1,050,077       55,969           19   T
Phoenix Re Corp                       1,151,259       59,993           19   T
Puritan Bennett Corp                  1,508,130       77,606           19   T
Videocart Inc                         2,321,715      121,595           19   T
Cell Com Puerto Rico                    625,383       34,849           18   T
Compression Lab Inc                   2,739,210      155,550           18   T
Datascope Corp                          714,795       39,999           18   T
Dell Computer Corp                    7,908,916      440,985           18   T
Interneuron Pharm                       817,031       44,820           18   T



National Market

Security Name                            10/15/93       09/15/93

National Market

#3D Systems Corp                           10,124         60,488
3Com Corp                               3,570,227      3,302,522
4th Dimen Sftwar Ltd                      119,600        155,703
50-Off Stores Inc                       2,340,878      2,172,658
Advanta Cl-A                            1,254,204      1,090,807
Advanta Cl-B                              122,391        244,629
AES Corp (The)                            329,080        273,072
AGCO Corp.                                950,356        684,096
#Amfed Finl Inc                            40,183            920
APS Hldg Corp Cl A                         36,510           N.L.
ASK Group (The)                           647,477        510,581
AST Research Inc                        1,216,039      1,222,944
Abbey Healthcare Gp                       796,597        634,381
Acclaim Entertainmnt                    2,628,041      3,176,372
#Ace Cash Express Inc                      58,565          2,230
#Actel Corp                               240,101         42,735
Adaptec Inc                             1,315,450      1,032,275
#Adia Services Inc                          7,400        112,945
Adobe Systems Inc                       3,441,019      3,779,327
#Advanced Logic Res                       203,371         60,711
Advanced Polymer Sys                      341,845        358,800
Advanced Promotions                       813,792        592,300
Advanced Tissue Sci                       316,279        310,959
Air Methods Corp                           44,161        145,593
Aldila Inc                                360,266        283,372
Aldus Corp                                322,170        338,464
Alkermes Inc                              231,542        339,047
#All Amer Semiconduct                     757,947        430,706
Alliance Pharm Corp                       794,185        791,962
#Alpha Microsystems                        40,512          4,461
#Alpha-Beta Tech Inc                      138,299         64,113
Alteon Inc                                221,300        260,744
#Altera Corp                              322,422        175,617
Altron Inc                                445,278        368,470
#Amer Bankers Ins Gp                       77,155          3,255
Amer BiogeneticA                          266,055        261,013
Amer Dental Techs                         313,524        354,371
Amer Film Tech Inc                        266,880        279,508
+Amer Greetings Corp A                    172,537        412,630
Amer Intl Pet Corp                        254,454        150,770
#Amer Management Sys                       72,619         24,043
Amer Pacific Corp                         653,652        644,602
+Amer Power Convers                    14,536,663     12,239,092
Ameribanc Invest SBI                       16,539         56,931
#Americas All Seas Fd                       3,766         43,552
Amgen                                   2,117,826      1,826,599
Ampex Inc Cl-A                            426,882        429,671
Amtech Corp                             3,427,406      3,573,993
#Anchor Bancorp Inc                        84,268         35,046
Apple Computer Inc                      7,623,179      6,512,261
Applebee's Intl Inc                       877,102        878,793
#Applied Immune Sci                        26,350        112,458
#+Applied Materials                     1,531,499        810,976
Argosy Gaming Co                        1,829,502      1,701,660
Arkansas Best Corp                        345,770        242,019
Artisoft Inc                              336,025        333,195
#Aspect Telecomm Corp                     300,156         99,050
Atchison Casting Corp                      35,525           N.L.
Atlantic Se Airlines                      121,146         76,522
#Atlantic Tele-Ntwork                      96,693         24,750
#Atmel Corp                               543,280         14,582
Au Bon PainA                              989,255        824,319
Aura Systems Inc                        1,613,175      1,721,039
Auspex Systems Inc                        304,105        251,214
Autodesk Inc                            2,184,551      2,009,534
Avid Tech Inc                             799,798        740,739
#+BHC Financial Inc                        86,221         32,018
BMC Software Inc                        1,501,458      1,257,423
#BPI Packaging Tech                       340,831        192,051
Babbage's Inc                             258,027        273,929
#Bailey Corp                                3,280        126,819
Bally Gaming Intl                         729,061        613,634
Banco de Galicia Ads                      118,786         83,005
Bank South Corp                           189,978        148,639
Bankers Corp                               49,191         83,714
Banyan Systems Inc                        893,190        790,950
Base Ten Systems A                        305,721        280,901
Bassett Furniture                         240,163        302,515
Baybanks Inc                              105,840        189,572
Be Aerospace Inc                          101,647        172,675
Bed Bath & Beyond                       1,296,582      1,248,816
Bell Sports Corp                          777,087        837,461
Ben & Jerry's Cl A                        250,900        409,511
Ben Franklin Retail                       405,400        405,564
#Benton Oil & Gas                         133,428           N.L.
Best Power Tech Inc                       267,113        161,335
+Big B Inc                                466,439        394,838
Bindley Wstn Ind                          491,132        545,306
Biochem Pharm Inc                         577,595        601,380
Biogen Inc                              1,617,834      1,535,007
Biomedical Waste Sys                      289,483        264,920
Biomet Inc                              2,324,374      2,113,357
Blyth Holdings Inc                        237,656        189,838
+Boatmen's Bancshares                   1,972,754      1,671,746
Bob Evans Farms Inc                       269,186        279,047
#Books-A-Million Inc                       37,810          1,000
Boomtown Inc                            1,506,671      1,772,606
Borland Intl Inc                        4,637,400      4,132,683
Boston Tech Inc                           457,798        608,219
Box EnergyB NV                            947,829        904,160
Broderbund Software                     1,875,966      2,029,101
#Brooktree Corp                           216,631         88,871
Brooktrout Tech                            69,029        198,729
Bruno's Inc                               864,953        981,246
Buffets Inc                             4,007,322      4,222,580
Burnup & Sims Inc                         441,395        436,580
#CDW Computer Cntrs                        38,466          2,922
CIS Tech Inc                              843,786        830,782
Cabot Medical Corp                        464,133        426,660
#Cal Amplifier                              4,399         59,645
Cal Micro Device Wts                       37,924         76,777
Calgene Inc                               358,541        307,664
#Cam Net Comm Ntwk                         69,613         16,189
Cambridge Biotech Corp                    300,424        295,538
Canandaigua Wine A                      1,004,461        967,584
Canyon Resources Corp                     562,339        449,992
Cardinal Distr                             87,873        211,714
#Carl Karcher Entrpr                       26,499        109,579
Carlton Commun ADR                         82,966        180,735
Casey's Gen Stores                        534,441        325,810
Casino America Inc                      1,262,361      1,273,622
#Casino Data Systems                      155,365         49,809
Casino Magic Corp                       5,135,454      5,274,851
Catalyst Semicond                         316,930        233,038
#Cel Sci Corp                              70,983         19,459
Celgene Corp                               94,134         53,855
Cell Com Puerto Rico                      625,383        556,140
Cellular CommA                            293,410        315,058
#Cellular Inc                             413,643      1,728,265
Centex Telemanagemnt                      286,268        448,601
Centocor Inc                            1,920,817      1,933,991
#Centocor Inc Wts 94                       17,005        110,869
#Cephalon Inc                             419,484        218,125
Cerner Corp                               120,724        164,822
Charming Shoppes Inc                      930,003        955,862
Charter Golf Inc                          225,812        405,133
Checkers Drive-In                       5,927,202      5,428,288
Chipcom Corp                              254,199        186,024
Chiron Corp                             1,630,759      1,265,239
Cholestech Corp                           453,275        401,189
Chronimed Inc                             149,192        110,490
Cincinnati Financial                      318,076        336,343
Circon Corp                             1,812,657      1,752,558
Cirrus Logic Inc                          817,262        923,568
Cisco Sys Inc                           2,576,649      2,122,279
#Clean Harbors Inc                         31,226        181,770
Clearly Canadian Bev                      968,647      1,231,575
Cobra Golf Inc                             60,415           N.L.
Code Alarm Inc                            108,599         69,807
Collagen Corp                             494,746        491,465
Colonial Bancgroup A                      169,424        125,693
Comcast Corp A                          5,193,776      4,290,252
Comcast Corp Cl A Spcl                  6,349,968      5,424,353
Commerce Clearing A                        18,800         56,578
#Commun Intelligence                       86,749         32,400
#Community First Bksh                      68,625          6,493
Compression Lab Inc                     2,739,210      2,876,507
Comptronix Corp                           200,094        431,276
Compucom Systems Inc                      501,108        497,136
#Comshare Inc                               2,000         44,397
Comverse Tech Inc                         102,497        165,120
Concord Camera Corp                     1,050,077      1,062,426
#Conductus Inc                             30,870        140,240
Cons Papers Inc                           346,222        246,961
Constellation Bncp                        129,634        206,566
Cooker Restaurant Corp                    478,236        502,652
Coors Adolph Co B                         269,189        232,641
Copytele Inc                            2,444,156      2,588,662
Corel Corp                                338,061        341,430
Corestates Fin Corp                     1,350,082      1,182,243
Corrections Corp Amer                      41,550        152,825
#Cortech Inc                               40,456          5,682
Cott Corp                               1,895,872      1,961,206
Coventry Corp                             325,843        358,917
Cracker Barrel Old                      1,163,150      1,295,307
Cray Comp Corp                            787,230        451,159
Creative Tech Ord                         965,311      1,267,200
Crop Genetic Intl Corp                    342,657        311,961
Crosscomm Corp                          1,247,237      1,044,004
Crown Resources Corp                      293,434        323,549
Cryomedical Sci                         1,378,350      1,411,620
#Cygnus Therapeutic                       157,345         74,197
Cyrix Corp                                275,793        163,050
Cytogen Corp                            1,042,741        928,868
DAKA Intl Inc                             314,896        318,418
#DF&R Restaurants                          20,896        155,577
DNA Plant Tech Corp                       754,394        826,905
DSC Commun Corp                         3,424,296      3,058,213
Danka Business ADR                        199,297        402,777
Data Race Inc                             325,746        425,700
Datascope Corp                            714,795        723,963
#Dataware Techs Inc                        41,700          3,100
Davidson & Associate                      451,789        316,800
Dell Computer Corp                      7,908,916      7,901,504
Dentsply Intl Inc                         506,895        526,257
Deprenyl Research                         275,870        288,410
#Dial Page Inc                            148,405         19,967
Dibrell Brothers Inc                    2,520,650      2,523,163
Digital Microwave Corp                    320,643        446,986
Discovery Zone Inc                        863,903        501,110
Dixie Yarns Inc                            29,299         98,666
+Dollar General Corp                      563,906        739,661
#ECI Telecom Ltd                          433,896         38,529
#Executo N E                               59,208        360,785
#Ezcorp Cl-A                              526,863        283,671
Eagle Hardware & Gdn                    1,501,650      1,879,591
Ecogen Inc                                264,038        289,547
Education Alternativ                    1,005,325        890,953
Egghead Inc                               529,633        560,736
Elec Imaging Inc                        1,095,067        828,333
Electronic Arts Inc                     3,731,737      3,810,717
Emisphere Tech Inc                        561,790        503,950
Empi Inc                                  528,713        453,478
Engle Homes Inc                           418,940        359,966
#Envirogen Inc                             26,267        196,678
Envoy Corp                                621,973        594,973
Enzon Inc                                 301,950        313,599
#Evergreen Media Corp A                    70,250         26,629
Exabyte Corp                              448,346        431,935
FHP Intl Corp                             357,570        254,582
Farm & Home Fin Corp                      564,170        546,835
Fastcomm Comm Corp                        912,298        770,343
Fastenal Co                             2,017,378      2,001,230
#Fidelity Fed Sav Va                        3,450         76,274
#Fidelity N.Y. FSB                          8,710         56,235
Fifth Third Bncp                          680,799        865,539
First Alabama Bcshs                       651,098        613,147
First Amer Financial                      281,940        295,411
First Commerce Corp La                    525,532        559,594
First Pacific Ntwks                     2,141,247      2,436,973
First Palm Beach                          121,431           N.L.
First United Bk Grp                       611,292        681,444
Flagstar                                  332,426        258,526
#Flagstar Pfd                               1,525         49,256
Food Lion IncA                          4,329,162      4,946,602
Food Lion IncB                            192,552        120,687
Forest Oil Corp                         2,866,778      2,748,096
Fortune Bancorp                           775,116        689,826
Fourth Financial Corp                     425,453        473,450
Frame Tech Corp                           205,553        142,404
Framingham Savs Bk                        101,989         66,768
Fuller H B Co                             104,804         68,670
Gartner Group Inc                          41,212           N.L.
#+Gen Nutrition Cos                     2,583,082        415,672
Genetic Therapy Inc                       454,203        355,450
Genetics Inst Dep Sh                      337,834        343,233
Gensia Inc                              2,786,334      3,244,871
#Genta Inc                                 94,067         49,842
Gentex Corp                               659,294        724,266
Genzyme Corp                            2,253,771      2,329,666
#Geotek Inds Inc                          688,686        354,856
#Gibraltar Pkg Gp Inc                     201,013          5,198
Gibson Greetings Inc                       91,880        223,579
Giddings Lewis Inc                        614,309        599,582
Gilead Sciences Inc                        68,934        115,591
Glycomed Inc                              121,402        188,646
#Good Guys Inc The                         58,872         13,594
Grand Casinos Inc                       3,489,936      3,041,349
Great Amer Rec Inc                        898,211        560,596
Greenwich Pharm Inc                     4,433,537      4,683,398
Groundwater Tech Inc                      219,472        137,569
Gupta Corp                                857,250        691,026
Gymboree Corp (The)                       760,300        480,536
HBO Co.                                   169,251        210,736
Haven Bancorp Inc                          39,281           N.L.
Hawthorne Financial                        45,224        126,907
#Health Risk Mgmt Inc                       5,238         54,377
Healthcare Compare                        574,453        691,055
#Healthcare Imagin Wt                      42,000          6,400
Healthcare Imaging                         64,304        138,196
Healthcare Svcs Gp                      1,168,231      1,221,221
Healthdyne Inc                            351,572        309,745
Healthinfusion Inc                        754,813        783,187
Heart Tech Inc                            756,743        663,117
Hechinger CoA                             716,499        436,145
Herbalife Intl Inc                        840,352        665,528
Hogan Systems Inc                         142,579        104,463
Hollinger Inc                             453,100           N.L.
Hollywood Casino A                        715,774        665,168
Hollywood Park Inc                        930,175        829,578
Homecare Mgmt Inc                         678,354        565,694
Homedco Gp Inc                             29,853         69,140
Hometown Buffet Inc                        41,813           N.L.
Hornbeck Offshore                         387,632        240,401
Huntington Bcshs                          408,369        560,531
Hutchinson Tech Inc                       367,792        314,693
Hycor Biomedical                           19,486         72,076
ICOS Corp                                 535,753        544,404
IDB Commun Gp Inc                       1,282,710      1,099,761
+Idexx Labs Inc                         1,026,879      1,128,330
IHOP Corp.                                706,884        697,781
#IIS Intell Info                          101,300         17,291
#ISG Tech Inc                              63,431         12,734
I-Stat Corp                               405,446        383,343
Immune Response Corp                    1,805,248      2,226,409
Immunex Corp                              495,168        379,016
Immunomedics Inc                          568,549        563,751
Imperial Bancorp                          405,799        406,120
Infinity Broadcast A                      239,383        180,282
Info Resources Inc                        410,697        362,657
Informix Corp                           2,561,255      2,164,779
#Innodata Corp                             57,470         13,545
#Innodata Corp Wts                         43,970            460
Ins Auto Auctions                         447,915        414,337
Insituform Techs A                        409,134        354,821
#Integrated Circuit                        24,732        152,459
Integrated Devic Tec                      597,474        420,622
Intel Corp                              5,850,805      5,342,249
Intel Corp Wts                            386,678        316,928
#Intelligent Elec                         246,263         95,551
Interactive Network                     1,383,770      1,443,662
Interface Inc A                           656,424        682,861
Intergraph Corp                         1,002,046      1,034,142
#Intermedia Commun Fl                      35,681          1,114
Interneuron Pharm                         817,031        864,403
Intl Cablecasting                         223,487        184,494
#Intl Totalizator Sys                     155,462         47,893
Intuit Inc                                430,808        388,871
JB Hunt Trans Svcs                        454,466        447,515
#JB Restaurants Inc                       123,544         42,476
J Baker Inc                             1,966,745      1,730,045
#JJ Snack Foods                            73,135         23,454
JMAR Inds Inc Wts                          28,794         62,929
JSB Financial Inc                          70,403        123,884
Jefferies Group Inc                       186,579        256,055
Jennifer Convertible                      348,712        342,476
#Johnstown Amer Inds                      121,099         26,799
Jones Intrcable A                         474,300        426,707
#KLA Instruments                          234,693         86,938
Kelley Oil Corp                         1,352,497      1,416,955
#Kelly ServicesA                           91,773        485,562
Kendall Intl Inc                          231,084        192,935
#Kendall Square Resch                   2,002,309      1,046,526
Keystone Fin Inc                          225,641        153,784
Kinder Care Learning                      257,231        255,891
#Kinetic Concepts Inc                     264,183        127,344
Knowledgeware Inc                       1,311,196      1,400,711
Komag Inc                                 253,198        324,260
#Kopin Corp                               130,588         42,811
#Krug Intl Corp                            48,158          9,582
Kulicke & Soffa                           690,917        469,983
#LCI Intl Inc                             186,770        103,478
LDDS Commun Inc                         1,289,992        974,894
LM Ericsson Tel ADR                       967,936      1,017,619
LTX Corp.                                 302,185        361,097
Lady Luck Gaming Corp                      43,796           N.L.
+Lam Research Corp                      1,548,342      1,307,774
#Lancaster Colony Corp                     70,475          6,258
Lance Inc                                 284,552        343,770
Lannet Data Comm Ord                      296,672        260,536
Lattice Semiconduct                       523,518        323,112
Leader Fin Corp                            61,450           N.L.
Lechters Inc                              341,315        407,678
Lectec Corp                                30,616         70,556
Legent Corp                               676,862        508,807
#Lesco Inc                                174,090          2,233
#Level One Commun Inc                     149,765         32,126
Liberty Media A                           251,815        176,236
#Life US A Hldg Inc                       118,889         14,992
Lin Broadcasting Corp                     159,515        287,149
Liposome                                  524,946        419,966
Liposome Tech Inc                         415,643        300,758
Littelfuse Inc                          1,161,333      1,136,353
#Littelfuse Inc Wts                           690         50,030
#Little Switzerland                       105,476         47,286
#Loewen Group Inc                          36,070        153,358
Lone Star Steakhouse                    3,331,075      3,240,273
Longhorn Steaks Inc                       741,348        784,415
Lotus Development Corp                  4,195,160      3,223,348
MCI Comm Corp                           7,941,235      6,511,845
MDL Inform Systems                        128,641        177,465
#MFS Comm                                 517,472        194,442
MNX Inc                                    28,762         89,496
MTC Elec Tech Ltd                         815,029        804,258
#Madge, N.V.                               45,146            995
Magma Power Co                            821,068        827,327
#Magna Group Inc                          103,349         45,800
Mail Boxes Etc                            945,642      1,058,600
Marcam Corp                               778,994        780,565
#Marcus Corp                               18,816         79,236
Marine Drilling Co                         38,437         93,829
#Marsam Pharm Inc                          72,763         19,666
#Marshall & Ilsley                        692,429         99,759
Maxicare Hlth New                       1,092,670        927,589
Maxim Group Inc                            37,995           N.L.
Maxtor Corp                               827,911        845,743
McAfee Associates                         255,800        255,100
McCaw Cellular A                        1,012,093      1,233,321
McCormick Co NV                           566,368        605,314
McGaw Inc                                 409,443        255,105
Medaphis Corp                             442,298        405,275
Medco Containmnt                        1,067,673        976,155
Media Vision Inc                        1,926,665      1,656,308
#Medic Computer Sys                        84,473         14,670
Medical Marketing Gp                    1,015,227        893,630
Medicine Shoppe Intl                    1,016,157      1,029,728
Medicis PharmA                            697,641        824,123
Medimmune Inc                             817,060        830,664
#Medstat Group Inc                        195,846         53,321
Megahertz Corp                            505,624        453,703
Memorex Telex NV Adr                       40,108         76,367
Mentor Corp The                           285,175        290,560
Mentor Graphics Corp                    1,013,815      1,012,678
#Mercer Intl Inc Sbi                      126,578            871
Meridian Bncp Inc                          45,913        109,215
Merisel Inc                               431,782        352,642
Mesa Airlines Inc                       1,151,715      1,120,467
#Metricom Inc                             175,835          5,194
Michael Foods Inc                       1,159,290      1,364,238
Michaels Stores Inc                     1,029,170        637,972
Michigan Natl Corp                        304,711        339,399
#Micro Bio-Medics Inc                       6,497        106,474
Micro Healthsys Inc                       142,680        214,313
#Microage Inc                             100,386         48,292
+Microchip Tech Inc                       197,722        387,512
Microprose Inc                            237,394        329,593
#Microsemi Corp                            47,683         11,426
Microsoft Corp                          2,799,171      2,252,502
Mid Atlantic Medical                      288,746        298,944
Midlantic Corp                            927,154      1,167,801
#Miller Herman Inc                         83,269         34,313
#Mitek Surgical Prods                      22,077        104,987
Mobile Telecomm Tech                    8,039,081      6,762,065
Molex Inc                                 324,005        303,533
Molten Metal Tech                         341,824        247,301
NAC Re Corp                               415,942        455,874
Nextel Commun A                         3,443,259      2,349,237
#Nationwide Cell                          241,794         62,085
#Natl Gypsum Co                           386,026        155,940
#Natl Home Centers                          2,380         61,715
Natl Vision Assoc                       1,939,772      2,416,405
Natural Wonders                           217,359        259,607
Nature's Bounty Inc                       714,497        658,141
Nellcor Inc                               236,514        137,109
Neoprobe Corp                             132,905         87,676
Neorx Corp                                323,652        637,129
Net F R A M E System                      811,136        793,280
Netmanage Inc                              33,910           N.L.
Network General Corp                      368,392        355,768
Network Systems Corp                      772,684        820,703
Networth Inc                              202,363        129,243
Neurex Corp                                47,715           N.L.
Neutrogena Corp                           491,903        485,720
New Image Inds Inc                        903,877        809,009
#Newbridge Netwks Corp                    652,929        305,627
#Newpark Res Inc                           52,775         12,638
Noble Drilling Corp                     5,111,986      5,113,405
Noise Cancellation                      1,107,785      1,154,715
Nordstrom Inc                           2,085,200      2,141,418
Novell Inc                              4,215,826      5,592,892
#Novellus Systems Inc                     396,452        207,398
#Ntwk Computing Dev                         8,969         60,503
Nutramax Prods Inc                        247,927        161,481
#OCOM Corp.                                98,963         15,077
#O'Charleys Inc                             2,288         40,604
Octel Commun Corp                         344,367        275,153
Olicom A/S    E                           857,988        960,924
Onbancorp Inc                             292,742        375,485
#Optical Data Systems                      55,510        224,369
Oracle Systems Corp                     1,971,590      1,975,166
#Orbital Sciences Corp                    977,187        472,233
#Orion Pictures Corp                      229,789        114,339
Ornda Healthcrp                           180,853        126,398
Oshkosh B GoshA                           210,745        344,775
Osmonics Inc                               89,718         53,509
Outback Steakhouse                      3,213,187      3,244,238
#Outlook Graphics Corp                        774         37,976
Oxford Health Plans                       911,079        906,100
#PDK Labs A Pfd                            85,411         37,211
PDK Labs Inc                              466,672        495,176
#PET Smart Inc                            305,155         72,751
Platinum Tech                             383,167        335,194
Pacific Bk N.A.(The)                      177,122        136,744
+Pacific Dunlop ADR                       187,991        321,655
#Pacific Telecom Inc                       45,519        206,258
Pacificare HlthA                          301,763        183,230
#Pacificare HlthB                         209,938         65,934
Paging Network Inc                        542,918        471,810
Papa John's Intl Inc                      122,276         74,583
#Parallan Computer                        152,598         18,143
Parametric Tech Corp                    1,934,939      1,519,146
Paychex Inc                                55,447        114,604
Peoples Bk (Ct)                           451,688        443,174
Peoples Heri Fin Gp                       278,073        673,329
+Peoples Telephone                        424,883        387,849
Peoplesoft Inc                            768,660        725,394
Perrigo Company                           994,972      1,107,342
Perseptive Biosys                         232,487        176,150
#Petroleum Geo Sv Ads                     570,703        195,996
#Petrolite Corp                            19,642        101,708
Pharmaceutical Mktg                       354,254        403,817
Phoenix Re Corp                         1,151,259      1,082,338
Phycor Inc                                758,277        706,905
Picturetel Corp                         3,943,137      3,474,627
Pinkerton's Inc                           211,466        136,790
Pioneer Hi Bred Intl                      295,847        260,507
#Pittencrieff Commun                      246,566         51,706
Platinum Software Corp                    388,793        335,478
Players Intl Inc                        2,323,581      2,301,312
Powersoft Corp                            892,299        866,576
Preferred Hlth Care                        68,702        104,210
Premier Anesthesia                        256,072        611,142
Pres Riverboat Casin                    3,127,527      3,282,534
Presidential Life Corp                    574,172        498,251
Presstek Inc                              616,122        663,156
Price Co The                            1,026,131      1,242,693
#Primadonna Resorts                       404,639        123,078
Primedex Health Sys                       486,624        491,236
Production Oper                           270,341        275,504
Progress Software Corp                    146,706        224,313
Protein Design Labs                        35,726        101,283
Proteon Inc                               184,033        137,091
#Pure Tech Intl                           398,948        215,207
Puritan Bennett Corp                    1,508,130      1,443,767
Pyxis Corp                              1,785,670      1,514,441
Qualcomm Inc                            1,584,140      1,227,689
#QVC Network Inc                        1,729,654        642,927
Quadrex Corp                              648,591        776,697
#Quality Food Centers                     409,195        150,029
Quantum Corp                            2,861,431      2,898,384
#Quantum Hlth Res Inc                     468,082        175,104
Quantum Restaurant                        716,168        869,989
#Quickresponse Svcs                       167,777          7,094
Quiksilver Inc                             90,490         54,399
#Quincy Saving Bank                        12,380         88,439
RPM Inc                                   637,509        470,631
#Radiation Care Inc                        50,991         11,239
Rally's Hamburger                       2,425,265      2,816,319
#Rasterops                                373,810        172,285
Re Capital Corp                           363,676        357,141
Read-Rite Corp                            282,278        449,776
Regal Comm Corp                           545,098        604,536
Rentrak Corp                               42,570        107,471
Repap Enterprises Corp                    536,179        538,812
Resound Corp                            1,000,176        709,190
Retix                                     246,637        281,486
#Reuters Hldg Adr                       1,246,628      5,639,917
#Rexall Sundown Inc                        83,160         18,710
#Richardson Elect Ltd                      50,800          7,656
Riggs Natl Corp The                       316,973        397,666
Roadway Services Inc                      875,416        995,139
Roberts Pharm Corp                        278,732        273,992
Rochester Comm Sav                        922,612        789,338
#Ross Systems Inc                         280,031         65,770
Rouse Co                                  945,487      1,159,030
Royal Grip Inc                            132,780           N.L.
Ryan's Family Steak                        74,148        176,794
Safeco Corp.                              272,794        294,513
SCI Systems Inc                         1,989,439      1,797,977
Seacor Hldgs                              346,145        388,479
SGI International                         942,613      1,026,861
SLM Intl Inc                              259,115        215,857
Softima G E                               230,837        165,762
Steri's Cp                              1,365,844        927,133
S3 Inc                                    292,379        473,366
Salick Health Care                        251,373        179,685
#Santa Cruz Operation                     101,801         11,360
Sapiens Intl Corp N V                     629,106        470,494
#Savoy Pict Entertnmt                     835,995        452,596
Schuler Homes Inc                       1,158,510        678,774
Schulman A Inc                            316,642        282,300
Sciclone Pharma Inc                       395,101        402,423
Scimed Life Sys Inc                     2,192,634      2,475,695
#Scios Nova Inc                           210,771         14,507
Scitex Corp                               471,908        521,647
Score Board Inc The                     1,145,594      1,321,558
Seagate Tech                            1,145,326        910,825
#Sealright                                163,961         64,993
Sequent Computer Sys                    2,861,006      2,586,825
#Shaman Pharm Inc                         127,806         60,863
Shared Medical Sys                        206,059        157,740
Sierra On Line Inc                        432,888        431,902
Sigma Aldrich Corp                        349,865        293,870
#Sigma Designs Inc                         67,416         21,289
#Signet Gp Ord ADR                        681,126         69,489
Silicon Valley Gp                          37,146         78,544
Smithfield Foods Inc                    1,388,965      1,385,088
+Snapple Beverage Corp                 10,137,888     10,649,442
#Sodak Gaming Inc                         149,895         63,323
Sofamor/Danek Gp Inc                    2,811,196      2,856,044
Software Toolwks Inc                    1,027,326      1,141,928
Somatix Therapy Corp                       63,214        178,875
Somatogen Inc                           2,397,706      2,217,352
Sonoco Products Co                        238,656        343,704
Spacelabs Medical                         239,624        192,409
Spartan Motors Inc                        322,584        365,807
Spectrum Info Tech                      6,308,189      5,656,767
Spiegel Inc A NV                           56,771        108,699
Sports & Recreation                     1,763,836      1,764,556
St Jude Medical Inc                       645,924        542,405
#St Paul Bancorp Inc                       48,158          7,868
#Staff Builder Del                        153,996         81,876
Standard Microsystem                      616,268        555,589
#Stanford Telecommun                        9,418         48,999
Staples Inc                             1,590,408      1,797,188
+Starbucks Corp                         4,430,060      4,240,802
Starsight Telecast                        247,002        178,504
State Street Boston                       506,769        524,646
Statesman Gp Inc The                      944,426        933,755
Station Casinos Inc                       262,732        310,933
Stratacom Inc                           1,557,808      1,493,009
Structural Dynamics                     2,709,314      2,250,375
Stryker Corp                            3,770,654      3,427,271
Summa Four Inc                             57,682           N.L.
Summit Care Corp                          308,355        329,816
Summit Tech Inc                         3,195,473      3,322,804
Sun Microsystems Inc                    5,133,352      4,069,525
Sun Television & App                      383,583        374,117
#Suncoast Sav Ln Fsa                       93,931         35,997
Sunglass Hut Intl                         464,734        318,902
Sunrise Tech Intl                         385,182        370,425
Sunward Tech Inc                           16,656         64,185
#Supercuts Inc                            121,012         67,080
Supermac Tech Inc                         144,927        192,652
Sybase Inc                                857,120        599,052
#Sybron Chemicals Inc                     117,185         12,941
Symantec Corp                             591,146        772,308
Synergen Inc                              235,677        306,487
Synetic Inc                               358,941        412,820
Synopsys Inc                              342,936        400,026
Synoptics Commun Inc                    4,821,668      4,637,160
Syratech Corp                             226,755        284,296
System Software                         1,192,582      1,129,792
Systemed Inc                              356,024        462,833
#Systems Comp Tech Corp                   350,632        182,863
#Tekel E C                                 79,388         38,950
+TJ Intl Inc                              338,646        455,310
TPI Enterprises                         4,080,322      3,931,467
#TR Finl Corp                              77,349         15,663
TRM Copy Ctrs Corp                        222,624        258,475
T Rowe Price Assoc                        287,938        299,251
#TVX Gold Inc                              18,968        155,971
Takecare Inc                               69,935        104,311
Target Therapeutics                        26,705         74,805
Telco Systems Inc                         338,354        316,502
Tele Commun Inc A                      12,178,793     12,194,200
#Telebit Corp                             104,751         37,720
Telematics Intl Inc                       269,531        413,976
Telxon Corp                               770,008        762,580
Teva Pharm Ind ADR                        101,518        234,979
The 3do Co                                856,357        809,014
The Holson Burnes Gp                       31,688         73,774
The Men's Wearhouse                       102,820         59,500
Thomas Nelson Inc                         391,211        392,898
Todays Man Inc                            563,209        588,266
Tokos Med Corp Del                      3,783,764      3,653,324
Topps The                                 415,542        455,818
#Tracor Inc                               467,453        215,007
#Transamerican Waste                      354,479        194,550
Trenwick Group Inc                        272,525        362,695
#Tricord Systems Inc                      354,382         61,433
#Trimark Hldgs Inc                         47,970          1,940
Trimble Navigation                        604,675        646,374
Tristar Corp                              522,901        513,583
Tseng Labs Inc                          3,719,959      3,802,235
Tyson Foods IncA                          376,426        465,848
US Bancorp Oregon                         522,724        522,992
US Healthcare Inc                       2,946,719      2,906,487
US Long Distance Corp                     324,561        260,038
US Robotics Inc                           440,543        374,209
UST Corp.                               1,056,648      1,124,849
#United Gaming Inc                      1,041,449        172,638
United Retail Gp Inc                      167,543        131,816
#Universal Elect Inc                      226,399         40,548
VLSI Tech Inc                             437,133        273,958
Valence Tech Inc                          586,757        384,301
Vanguard Cellular A                       386,377        472,779
Varlen Corp                               222,402        166,792
Ventritex Inc                             376,124        472,364
Verifone Inc                              381,734        783,177
#Vicorp Resta                              97,915         18,526
Video Lottery Tech                        291,081        279,106
Videocart Inc                           2,321,715      2,575,218
Viewlogic Systems                         843,901        917,666
Viking Office Prods                       349,339        532,724
Vision Sciences Inc                       262,631        289,246
WPP Gp Adr                                523,293        594,272
Washington Mut Sv Bk                    2,134,725      2,011,154
Weitek Corp                               299,395        260,703
Wellfleet Commun Inc                    1,315,828      1,239,189
West One Bancorp                        1,616,253      1,467,320
Westcott Comm                             321,709        360,499
Western Publishing                        404,632        384,358
#Westwood One Inc                       2,117,653        201,213
Whole Foods Market                        447,428        435,787
#Wholesome Hearty                         147,615         76,507
Willamette Inds Inc                       250,991        339,347
#Wind River Sys Inc                        28,999        140,647
Wisconsin Central                         105,369         64,627
Worthington Inds Inc                      126,058        184,446
XOMA Corp.                                463,649        520,942
Yellow Corp                               323,457        466,011
York Research Corp                        836,512        899,127
#Younkers Inc                             201,234        106,757
Zebra Tech Corp Cl-A                      515,407        520,747
Zeos Intl Ltd                             968,633        945,043
#Zilog Inc                                143,582         80,429
Zoll Medical Corp                       1,043,821        989,735
Other Nasdaq
3Net Systems Inc                           35,467         78,126
Adv Mammography Sys                       120,042         85,512
Advanced Nmr Sys Inc                      146,244        208,983
Alamar Biosciences                         36,187              0
#Alanco Envirnmtl Res                     141,093         51,404
Alter Sales                               360,000        368,625
#Amer Bus Comp Corp                       324,318        150,469
Amer Res of Delwr                          81,631           N.L.
Amer West Airline                         956,208        647,366
Ames Dept Stores Inc                      339,396        404,170
#Anglo Amer Gold ADR                        3,172         41,841
Aphton Corp                               402,479        311,250
Applied Laser Sys                         196,650        123,318
#Applied Laser Wts A                       42,130          4,193
Aquanatural Co Wt 97                       33,870              0
#Aquanautics Corp                          90,737         14,520
#Armanino Foods                            60,891         11,346
#Aztec Energy Corp                         92,323          4,675
#Babystar Inc                              39,244            100
#Babystar Inc Wts 98                       88,155          1,415
#Barringer Techs Inc                        7,296        105,004
#Biocontrol Tech Inc                      255,929        145,587
Biomechanics CorpAmr                    1,157,952        717,442
Boston Pac Med Inc                         44,982              0
CAPX Corp (Del)                            22,207         60,411
#CECO Envir                                87,980          1,220
Capital Gaming Intl                       413,852        313,625
Cellex Biosciences                         88,899        246,250
Centurion Mines Corp                       16,083         52,452
#Comp Concepts New                         70,255         34,905
Comparator Sys Corp                       122,809         71,009
#Complink Ltd                              32,780        165,450
Conquest Airlines                         364,418        676,636
Continuum Group                            40,000           N.L.
#Cortex Pharm Inc                         245,152          2,329
#DRS Inds Inc                             124,785         62,416
#De Beers Cons ADR                         21,329         98,921
#Diamond Entertain                        988,441        538,648
Diasonics Ultrasd                         129,930           N.L.
Direct Connect Intl                        72,684        112,884
Direct Connect Wts A                      902,999        915,499
#Dollar Time Gp Inc                       292,198        116,644
Dresdner Ag Sp ADR                      1,138,221      1,206,808
#Dynagen Inc                              130,899         48,375
#EVRO Financial Corp                      133,275         11,350
#Embrace Systems Corp                     201,461        111,609
Energy Conversion                         370,202        313,469
#Europa Cruises Corp                      200,185         12,910
#Fonic Inc                                138,106         67,254
#Foreland Corp                              7,453        106,575
#Franklin Cons Mining                     157,071         39,360
#Free St Cons Gld ADR                       3,743        838,285
GB Foods Corp                             353,811        292,847
#GTS Duratek Inc                           54,304         15,520
Gaming Corp Of Amer                       240,779        202,442
#Gamma Intl Ltd                           130,788         57,628
#Gentner Commun Corp                       35,837          1,582
#Greg Manning Auct Wt                      18,970        118,235
#Greg Manning Auction                      58,560         22,800
HMG Digital Tech                           35,550           N.L.
#Hariston Corporation                      83,610         15,900
#Harmony Holdings Inc                     212,745         90,398
#Homecall Inc                               3,800         45,185
ICC Techs Inc                             318,131        233,683
Incomed Corp                              292,750        247,486
Innovir Lab Wts B                          44,710           N.L.
Innovir Labs Inc                           34,110           N.L.
#Innovo Group Inc                          14,942         96,230
#Insta Cool Inc                            61,510         20,992
#Internet Commun Corp                     201,627         23,907
#Intl Bus Schools Inc                          30         63,981
#Intl Gaming Mgmt Inc                     354,132        173,226
Invitro Intl                              940,664        666,896
#Invitro Intl Wt                           78,974          9,970
Isramco Inc                                23,979         85,224
Japan Airlines ADR                         24,184         61,825
#Jockey Club Inc                          121,536         60,404
#Judicate Inc                              41,176          5,950
LM Ericsson Tel Add                     1,873,116      2,608,126
Laser Video Ntwk                          221,123        144,638
#Licon Intl Inc                            30,588        123,053
#Lidak PharmA                             534,739        305,009
#Luxcel Grp Wts B                           8,220         42,600
#Marcum Natural Gas                       338,537        160,928
Medical Dynamics Inc                      150,592         97,521
Medical Innov                              41,000              0
Members Service Corp                       32,212         81,115
Metalclad Corp                             32,516         76,772
#Microterra Inc                           516,607        224,507
#NDE Enviro Corp                            2,763         57,321
#Natural Earth Tech                       117,353         29,582
Neolens Inc                               239,061        177,281
#Network Imaging Corp                      52,129         11,988
#News Commun Inc                           93,701          9,088
#News Commun Wts A 95                       4,210         64,210
#Nona Morelli's Ii                         85,924         19,574
Out-Takes Inc B Wts                        91,000              0
#Parallel Tech                             43,500          3,000
#Plasma Therm Inc                             400         66,897
#Prime Equities Intl                        1,012         36,981
#Producers Entertain                        7,490         57,644
Projectavision Inc                        449,648        320,427
#Puroflow Inc                              46,498          1,648
#Quality Product Inc                      443,300        191,841
Royce Laboratories                        466,148        289,372
#SMT Health Svcs                              660         96,975
#SOI Inds                                  53,474          6,427
#Sage Alerting System                     130,792         52,997
#Scorpion TechA                            10,147        178,932
Sherwood Corp                              46,577         95,228
Site Based Media Inc                      697,073        483,239
Solv Ex Corp                              304,100        296,381
Southland Corp                          2,425,172      2,675,480
#Submicron Systems                        165,400         41,000
TJ Systems Corp                           217,500        176,500
TJ Systems Wts                            199,150           N.L.
Topro Inc                                 274,985        304,775
#Telefonos de Mexico                       10,400        104,608
#Total Research Corp                       54,600            688
#Touchstone App Sci                       249,149          4,500
Trans Global Res ADR                       98,184              0
#US Trans System                           16,217         89,515
#Ultrak Inc                                34,501            575
Vaal Reefs Explr ADR                      142,626         88,093
#Valuevision Intl A                       164,369         27,382
#Ventura Entertain                        121,608         61,100
#Vimrx Pharm Wts A                          2,000         48,740
Voice Powered Tech                        144,708         94,674
#Wesco Auto Parts Corp                    110,920          1,469
#Western Pac Res Corp                       3,000        510,399
#Williams Controls                        402,766        185,651
Wisconsin Pharmacal                       312,569        389,689
Work Recovery Inc                         320,060        223,621
Zila Inc                                  185,513        127,135


Short Sales Tables Explained

    These tables show issues with a short interest position in the current month
of at least 250,000 shares or a change up or down from the previous month of at
least 33,784 shares.

    Cover ratio represents the number of days, at average volume level, that it
would take to purchase the number of shares sold short.

    T -- National Market System.

    N.L. -- Not listed.

    + -- Stock split.

    * May have been affected by arbitrage transactions resulting from any one or
more of the following: proposed or pending acquisitions; convertible securities
of the same company; rights offerings; stock splits or distributions; tenders;
other special situations.

    Short interest may also be affected by options positions.

    # indicates a change of 75 percent or more from the previous month.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1993


                             985 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 26, 1993 Tuesday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. B-5

LENGTH: 1204 words

HEADLINE: A bitter pill;
First, let's properly diagnose the `crisis'

BYLINE: KENNETH J. WIDDER, WIDDER is chairman and chief executive officer of
Molecular Biosystems Inc. in San Diego.

BODY:

   President Clinton clearly articulated and passionately presented to the
country his vision of health care reform.

   No one disputes the fact that a sizable fraction of the American public is
not currently insured and that the cost of health care (now approximately 14
percent of GNP) is escalating faster than any of the other sectors of our
economy. But despite the system's flaws, the quality of U.S. health care is
unquestionably the highest in the world.

   The question is whether this country can afford to provide high-quality care
to the entire public, in essence providing cradle-to-grave coverage, without a
deleterious economic impact. Before focusing on the economic impact of the
health care proposal, it is instructive to look at two uniquely American social
conditions that directly impact our health care system. First, serious injury
resulting from violence is unparalleled in other Western societies.

   Second, according to federal health officials, medical emergencies resulting
from drug abuse have reached record levels in the United States. The common
denominator of these two social problems is the emergency room, which receives
both types of patients in ever-increasing numbers.

   For drug abuse alone, treatment in an ER is among the most expensive kind of
care and does little to reverse chronic drug abuse.

   The Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at Columbia University recently
found that 20 percent of all Medicaid costs were related to drug abuse. As a
result, one must be careful when comparing statistics regarding health care as a
percentage of GNP. Yes, our country spends more than any other Western nation on
health care, but what price would other countries be paying with the societal
burdens we face here? Fee-for-service eliminated The Clinton system, as
proposed, would force all health plans to sell a standard, federally defined
package of health benefits that would include coverage of everything from
hospitalization to mental health treatment. Significantly, the plan would
eliminate virtually all fee-for-service medical practice.

   An annual ceiling and the 20 percent rule (that a health care alliance cannot
offer any plan that costs 20 percent more than the average price of all plans it
offers) will make it virtually impossible for alliances to offer "choose your
own doctor" insurance. This contradicts what Americans have been told
repeatedly: that they will have the option to purchase fee-for-service
insurance.

   Where a fee-for-service plan is offered, an alliance can impose a costly
surcharge that will discourage its use.

   In sum, the administration is eliminating personal choice, not by fiat but as
a result of strongly disincentivizing the providers of care to make
fee-for-service an economically viable alternative. Aside from one's ability to
choose one's physician, perhaps the thorniest issue of health care reform has
yet to be adequately articulated.

   We as a country have yet to come to grips with an ethical question that has
been studiously sidestepped: Should the government pay to keep every American --
regardless of age, chosen lifestyle or medical condition -- alive at any cost?
This extremely difficult question is clearly a political time bomb.

   But we need to wrestle with it because the outcome will determine what health
care priorities the American people mandate. Saving lives at any cost? It is
said that medical costs will bankrupt this country if they continue on the
current track.

   However, assertions that "managed care" will cause this trend to abate are
unfounded.

   Short-term savings from managed competition may well occur as HMOs and other
elements of managed care shut down expensive facilities and limit access to
health care, but long-term savings are more suspect and theoretical. The reality
is that the majority of health care dollars are spent in pursuing the saving of
life at any cost, regardless of the circumstances. It is estimated that 30
percent of health care dollars are spent in the last six months of life.

   If we are sincere about the need to control the costs of health care -- and
that is the real reason health care has been labeled a "crisis" -- then we need
to undertake a more fundamental debate: a debate about our attitudes toward life
and death, the goals of medicine, who should live and who shall die, and the
mechanism for deciding. For example, should taxpayers be required to pay the
medical expenses of an 85-year-old unconscious man maintained on a ventilator
with no chance of being removed?

   What about transplant eligibility depending on age?

   It is a lot easier for politicians and policymakers to talk about delivery
systems, managed competition and third-party reimbursement than to deal with the
quagmire of medical ethics and rationing. The paradox of our current situation,
however, is that unless we address such fundamental issues, we stand little
chance of solving our nation's health care dilemma. One state, Oregon,
confronted the very ethical issues which the Clinton health care task force
avoided.

   Oregon sought to guarantee a basic health care package for everyone.

   But it also recognized the financial impossibility of delivering all services
to all people regardless of medical condition.

   Unless hard choices were made regarding what constituted basic health care,
it would bankrupt the state. A list finally was generated which laid out the
medical conditions and treatments that would be reimbursed by the state.

   However, individuals who desired additional services would be free to pay for
them.

   This alternative won't be readily available under the Clinton plan. Wishful
thinking It has been said that if something looks too good to be true, it
probably is.

   The Clinton task force has indulged in the wishful thinking that we can have
it all.

   By focusing on the elimination of waste within the health care system, the
Clinton plan does little to disturb the delusion that we can provide a health
care system that can meet every American's health care need -- such as providing
artificial organs, gene therapy, stress counseling, cosmetic surgery and
intensive care for the infirm elderly as well as for the 2-pound fetus --
without monumental adverse economic consequences. Perhaps, as a country, we
might collectively believe that any and all measures should be taken until one's
dying breath.

   In that case, we will decide that 14 percent of GNP or even 20 percent of GNP
is what we as a country want to spend on health care and that we really don't
have a crisis.

   However if the "crisis" we have all heard about is not related to access but
to financial cost to our country, then the Clinton health care plan as proposed
is the "financial fantasyland" described by Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, D-N.Y.
If the government promises benefits but savings don't materialize, the taxpayers
are on the hook.

   The cost of miscalculation to taxpayers will make the savings and loan
debacle appear insignificant.

   Elaborate disguises to hide de facto taxes and price controls combined with
the establishment of a monstrous bureaucracy do not credibly assure the solution
of increased health care costs. As a nation, we need to look within our
collective soul and redefine ethically what we can accept based on what we have.

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; PHOTOBY: JORDIN ISIP

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             986 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     October 24, 1993, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 34; Column 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 105 words

HEADLINE: CLEMMA ADELE HEWITT; FIRST TO UNDERGO GENE THERAPY

BODY:

   Clemma Adele Hewitt, 53, the first person to receive an unproven gene therapy
approved by the federal government on a "compassionate use" basis. Hewitt began
receiving the experimental treatment in January after it was determined that
conventional methods of treating her cancer had failed and that she had no other
options available. Officials at the National Institutes of Health waived the
usual reviews for the new medical treatment for her only. Halfway through the
treatments, her physician said he believed the novel therapy was helping to stop
the tumor's growth. In La Mesa, Calif., on Wednesday of brain cancer.


                             987 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 24, 1993 Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 995 words

HEADLINE: Benefit of novel gene therapy is unclear

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   While she was receiving a novel gene therapy to attack a brain tumor, Clemma
Hewitt lived longer than doctors had expected when they first sought to try the
technique. But much about how the course of her treatment benefited her remains
unclear, even with her death Thursday.

   Her doctors say they still hope to try the treatment in other patients,
perhaps in the next several months. But some medical ethicists question the
value of the entire episode. Hewitt, 53, was the first -- and as yet only --
person to receive a gene therapy treatment that had not been tested to the
standards federal regulators usually require.

   Doctors at the San Diego Regional Cancer Center were given special permission
last December to proceed on a compassionate exemption, arguing that it might
help as a last resort after conventional treatments had been fruitless. At the
request of her husband, James Hewitt, a San Diego attorney and businessman, her
physicians continued yesterday their policy of not discussing details of her
condition or the treatment. "Out of respect to the family, we think it is best
not to comment on her condition or any response to the therapy," said Dr. Robert
Sobol.

   He and Dr. Ivor Royston, both of the San Diego Regional Cancer Center,
directed the therapy. The physicians had reported just last month at a medical
conference in Norway that the injections of genetic material into her
bloodstream apparently had boosted the activity of potential cancer-fighting
immune cells.

   But it may never be entirely clear how effective those cells were in entering
the brain and attacking the tumor, a type called a glioblastoma and one that is
almost always fatal. The cancer center has received dozens of inquiries from
people with brain tumors seeking the treatment, Sobol said.

   The doctors could seek permission as early as December for permission from
National Institutes of Health regulators to establish a clinical trial for the
therapy with several patients. They do not plan to seek permission again on a
compassionate basis, Sobol said.

   Further review of Hewitt's case and continuing tests of the therapy in rats
will guide their timing for seeking any trials, Sobol said. The physicians and
others observing the case acknowledge it will be difficult to assess the
treatment, in part because the woman had other therapies, including surgery and
radiation treatments.

   It is not easy to distinguish how each type of treatment influenced the
tumor. In addition to those complications, the fact that it was done in just one
person and for only a matter of months further limits the experiment's value to
science, said Arthur Caplan, director of the Center for Biomedical Ethics at the
University of Minnesota. Caplan said he believes it is premature to try this
technique in other people without more information. While sympathetic toward
Clemma Hewitt's individual plight, Caplan said the episode may have damaged
public confidence in gene therapy.

   He said the nascent therapy needs to be used in controlled studies, "not
desperation." "From a public policy standpoint, it set a very bad precedent,"
Caplan added. This particular case also "extended compassionate care to someone
who looked like they had connections and influence, and it said genetic
engineering could be given out on the basis of clout and having special ties to
legislators that most people don't have." Sen. Tom Harkin, D-Iowa, wrote a
letter to Dr. Bernadine Healy, then National Institutes of Health director,
urging consideration of the Hewitts' request, and officials in the Department of
Health and Human Services also became involved.

   James Hewitt said at the time that the letter was requested by a friend, and
he said he sought no special intervention by anyone in government outside the
National Institutes of Health officials considering the case. But Caplan said he
does not think the permission would have been granted without the interventions.
"This was a person who knew senators, and most people won't have senators
intervening for them," Caplan said. Most trials of new treatments have several
patients, and they are designed so that the effectiveness can be clearly tested.

   A compassionate exemption has few restrictions on a patient's qualifications
other than need. Sobol said he hopes to give greater detail about Hewitt and the
therapy during a conference the cancer center is sponsoring here next month.
Royston said in December that he questioned whether the woman would live the
three months until the next scheduled review meeting unless she had the gene
therapy injections. The director of the National Institutes of Health ultimately
approved the exemption, and a new expedited review process has been established
for such cases in the future.

   To date, no other exemptions from the usual review process have been sought
or granted, said Nelson Wivel, executive secretary to the review body, the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee. At the September medical conference in
Norway, Sobol announced that the woman had received nine injections of the
genetically altered cells that they hoped would kill her tumor. The first shot
was given in January.

   The injections were given in the arm, and the last two, which were the
largest, contained about 10 million cells occupying the volume of a thimble. The
cells had been altered to contain the gene that produces interleukin 2, a
protein doctors hoped would stimulate the activity of cytotoxic T-cells, immune
agents thought to be effective at fighting cancers. Some of those cells were
stimulated, but other types of immune cells the doctors had not expected seemed
to respond more often, Sobol reported at the conference. After injections of the
therapeutic genes, cancer-fighting immune cells collected from Hewitt's blood
were able to kill about 40 percent of tumor cells in a laboratory test.

   But the real test is in the brain, and the doctors are not commenting on the
tumor's size or condition. The Hewitts lived in La Mesa.

GRAPHIC: CAPTIONS: Clemma Hewitt (B-7)

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             988 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           October 23, 1993, Saturday

SECTION: LIVING; Section E; Page 3

LENGTH: 490 words

HEADLINE: SUNDAY'S TV TIPS PRIME TIME

BYLINE: Compiled by Jennifer Erickson

BODY:

   "Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman" 8 p.m. on Channel 2 (1569) -
This episode was postponed from last week but sounds good enough to wait for.
Lois (Teri Hatcher) goes undercover as a sultry nightclub singer in order to
expose a ring of arsonists.

   "Other Women's Children" 8 p.m. on Lifetime (459163) - The story of a
pediatrician who tries to juggle her career with being a mother and wife.
Melanie Mayron ("thirtysomething") stars.

   "The Secret of Life" 9 p.m. on Channel 30 (63182) - An eight-part series
about DNA and gene therapy. Two episodes air tonight and the series continues at
9 p.m. through Wednesday.

   "The Unknown Marx Brothers" 9 p.m. on Disney (653881) - A two-part
documentary on the comedic family. The conclusion airs Nov. 14.

   BEST BET

   "A Stranger in the Mirror" (1993) 9 p.m. on Channel 2 (1328) - Adapted from
Sidney Sheldon's novel about two people (Perry King and Lori Loughlin) who
follow their dreams to Hollywood. It's got all the necessary elements: romance,
greed and betrayal.

   LATE NIGHT

   "Arsenio Hall" 1 a.m. on Channel 2 (22293) - Actress Jane Seymour, musical
group Kiss and comic Father Guido Sarducci.

   "Siskel & Ebert" 1:30 a.m. on Channel 5 (41854) - A review of Tommy Lee
Jones's career including a look at his roles in "The Fugitive" (1993) and
"Lonesome Dove" (1989).

   NEWS

   "60 Minutes" 7 p.m. on Channel 5 (39569) - Segments include a profile of Sen.
Bob Dole (R-Kan.), the Senate minority leader; a report on allegations that
black Marine officers are held back from advancement in the Corps; and a look at
a Manhattan Family Court Judge, Judy Sheindlin, and how she dispenses justice in
her courtroom.

   'MASTERPIECE THEATRE'

   "Jeeves & Wooster III" 10 p.m. on Channel 8 (14250) - Lady Florence Craye's
(Francesca Folan) admiration of Bertie's (Hugh Laurie) mustache creates problems
for her relationship with fiance Stinton Cheesewright (Nicholas Palliser).

   MOVIES

   "Perry Mason: The Case of the Sinister Spirit" (1987) 7 p.m. on Channel 17
(74873) - A publisher (Robert Stack) is accused of murdering a mystery writer
and Perry Mason (Raymond Burr) is called in for his defense.

   "Remember" (1993) 9 p.m. on Channel 11 (61182) - The first half of a two-part
miniseries based on Barbara Taylor Bradford's novel. Donna Mills stars as a
television reporter who has never recovered from her fiance's mysterious
disappearance on their wedding day. The conclusion airs 9 p.m. on Monday
(45274).

   EITHER / OR

   Depending on what happens between the Blue Jays and the Phillies Saturday
night, there could be a World Series Game 7 on Sunday at 8 p.m. on Channel 5
(168328). But if the Blue Jays pull it off Saturday and win the Series, CBS is
scheduled to air "Murder, She Wrote" at 8 p.m. (15989) and a made-for-cable
movie, "Double Jeopardy" (1992) at 9 p.m. (18076), about a lawyer (Sela Ward)
who represents her husband's (Bruce Boxleitner) former girlfriend (Rachel Ward).

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mug of Melanie Mayron Photo: Lori Loughlin and Perry King head
for Hollywood in 'A Stranger in the Mirror.' /ABC

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1993


                             989 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           October 23, 1993, Saturday

SECTION: LIVING; Section E; Page 3

LENGTH: 490 words

HEADLINE: SUNDAY'S TV TIPS PRIME TIME

BYLINE: Compiled by Jennifer Erickson

BODY:

   "Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman" 8 p.m. on Channel 2 (1569) -
This episode was postponed from last week but sounds good enough to wait for.
Lois (Teri Hatcher) goes undercover as a sultry nightclub singer in order to
expose a ring of arsonists.

   "Other Women's Children" 8 p.m. on Lifetime (459163) - The story of a
pediatrician who tries to juggle her career with being a mother and wife.
Melanie Mayron ("thirtysomething") stars.

   "The Secret of Life" 9 p.m. on Channel 30 (63182) - An eight-part series
about DNA and gene therapy. Two episodes air tonight and the series continues at
9 p.m. through Wednesday.

   "The Unknown Marx Brothers" 9 p.m. on Disney (653881) - A two-part
documentary on the comedic family. The conclusion airs Nov. 14.

   BEST BET

   "A Stranger in the Mirror" (1993) 9 p.m. on Channel 2 (1328) - Adapted from
Sidney Sheldon's novel about two people (Perry King and Lori Loughlin) who
follow their dreams to Hollywood. It's got all the necessary elements: romance,
greed and betrayal.

   LATE NIGHT

   "Arsenio Hall" 1 a.m. on Channel 2 (22293) - Actress Jane Seymour, musical
group Kiss and comic Father Guido Sarducci.

   "Siskel & Ebert" 1:30 a.m. on Channel 5 (41854) - A review of Tommy Lee
Jones's career including a look at his roles in "The Fugitive" (1993) and
"Lonesome Dove" (1989).

   NEWS

   "60 Minutes" 7 p.m. on Channel 5 (39569) - Segments include a profile of Sen.
Bob Dole (R-Kan.), the Senate minority leader; a report on allegations that
black Marine officers are held back from advancement in the Corps; and a look at
a Manhattan Family Court Judge, Judy Sheindlin, and how she dispenses justice in
her courtroom.

   'MASTERPIECE THEATRE'

   "Jeeves & Wooster III" 10 p.m. on Channel 8 (14250) - Lady Florence Craye's
(Francesca Folan) admiration of Bertie's (Hugh Laurie) mustache creates problems
for her relationship with fiance Stinton Cheesewright (Nicholas Palliser).

   MOVIES

   "Perry Mason: The Case of the Sinister Spirit" (1987) 7 p.m. on Channel 17
(74873) - A publisher (Robert Stack) is accused of murdering a mystery writer
and Perry Mason (Raymond Burr) is called in for his defense.

   "Remember" (1993) 9 p.m. on Channel 11 (61182) - The first half of a two-part
miniseries based on Barbara Taylor Bradford's novel. Donna Mills stars as a
television reporter who has never recovered from her fiance's mysterious
disappearance on their wedding day. The conclusion airs 9 p.m. on Monday
(45274).

   EITHER / OR

   Depending on what happens between the Blue Jays and the Phillies Saturday
night, there could be a World Series Game 7 on Sunday at 8 p.m. on Channel 5
(168328). But if the Blue Jays pull it off Saturday and win the Series, CBS is
scheduled to air "Murder, She Wrote" at 8 p.m. (15989) and a made-for-cable
movie, "Double Jeopardy" (1992) at 9 p.m. (18076), about a lawyer (Sela Ward)
who represents her husband's (Bruce Boxleitner) former girlfriend (Rachel Ward).

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mug of Melanie Mayron Photo: Lori Loughlin and Perry King head
for Hollywood in 'A Stranger in the Mirror.' /ABC

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1993


                             990 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                October 23, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 223 words

HEADLINE: Clemma A. Hewitt, 53, Gene-Therapy Patient

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: LA MESA, Calif., Oct. 22

BODY:

   Clemma Adele Hewitt, the first person to receive an unproven gene therapy
approved by the Federal Government on a "compassionate use" basis, died on
Wednesday at her home here. She was 53.

   The cause was brain cancer, said her husband, James Hewitt.

    Mrs. Hewitt began receiving the experimental treatment in January after it
was determined that conventional methods of treating her cancer had failed.
Officials at the National Institutes of Health waived the usual reviews for the
new treatment for her.

   Researchers genetically altered Mrs. Hewitt's own tumor cells to give them a
gene for interleukin 2, a substance involved in the production of white blood
cells. Her doctors hoped that the altered cells would produce a type of white
blood cell that would attack the cancer.

   Half way through the treatments, her doctor said he believed that the therapy
was helping to stop the tumor's growth. Mr. Hewitt said last summer that her
condition had not deteriorated over the course of the gene therapy treatments.

   Mrs. Hewitt was born in Washington, Iowa, and received a bachelor's degree
from Coe College in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, and a master's degree from Iowa
University. She was a homemaker.

   In addition to her husband, she is survived by a son, Brigg, of El Cajon,
Calif.; a brother, Mark Mosier of Iowa, and a grandson.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1993


                             991 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                October 21, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 107 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
Executive Changes

BODY:


   EON CORP., Reston, Va., appointed R. Michael Sheridan president and chief
executive, to succeed David A. Lehman, who will retire after a short transition
period.

GENVEC, Rockville, Md., a gene therapy company, named Thomas W. D'Alonzo chief
executive.


   GRIST MILL CO., Lakeville, Minn., a maker of private-label and brand-name
foods, named Glen Bolander, its president and chief operating officer, to the
additional position of chief executive. He succeeds Ronald K. Zuckerman, who
will continue as chairman.

HOGAN SYSTEMS INC., Dallas, appointed David R. Bankhead senior vice president
and chief financial officer.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1993


                             992 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    October 19, 1993, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE D1; BIZ: TECHNOLOGY

LENGTH: 785 words

HEADLINE: Virginia Wants Biotech Industry to Scope Out Richmond

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Daniel Southerland, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Maryland's biotechnology industry may be getting some neighborly competition
from Virginia.

   For a decade, Virginia has lagged Maryland and several other states in
transforming its scientific discoveries into lucrative biotechnology products.

   Virginia's scientists were taking their research outside the state and
advising companies in Maryland and elsewhere how to transform the research into
medicines, therapies or diagnostic products.

   Now, thanks to Virginia Commonwealth University President Eugene P. Trani and
other Richmond leaders, Virginia is building a 20-acre biotechnology research
park at the northern end of the city's central business district. The aims are
to get scientists to license their discoveries in their home state and to make
the state less dependent on shrinking defense industries.

   The Richmond business community and county governments have contributed $
1.23 million to fund start-up operating costs. Construction is to begin in
March, and the park is to become self-sustaining in three years.

   According to Robert E. Olson, executive vice president of the research park,
a biotechnology corridor is emerging from Boston down to North Carolina's
Research Triangle. But a gap exists between Washington and North Carolina -- and
Virginia wants to fill it.

   So far, half a dozen companies have said they'll move into the new Virginia
Biotechnology Research Park, Olson said. They include BioClin USA, Cobra
Pharmaceutical Corp., Commonwealth Biotechnologies Inc., HemoTech Sciences Inc.,
Innovative Medical Technologies and Stereotaxis Inc.

   WHEN VICE PRESIDENT GORE recently proposed to "reinvent government," concern
swelled in the Washington area that the efficiency measures would mean the loss
of thousands of federal jobs.

   But some local executives see Gore's plan as offering a multitude of
job-creating business opportunities for information technology companies --
which can provide services that help the government streamline its operations.

   "The industry is champing at the bit to get into some of these programs,"
said Robert Dornan, senior vice president of Federal Sources Inc., a market
research and consulting firm in McLean.

   Federal Sources will hold a forum Nov. 4 on 50 opportunities it has
identified in the Gore report.

   "There's a potential upside in this," said Jim Boone, vice president for
group development at TRW Inc. in Fairfax. One favorable sign is that "the
government has actually started working on the process," he noted.

   J.P. "Jack" London, president and chief executive of CACI International Inc.
in Arlington, has made the Gore report required reading for his company's senior
executives. "I think the time is right for a lot of this report to be
implemented, because the taxpayers are fed up," said London.

   A SIGN OF MARYLAND's biotech vigor: Several high-level executives have left
huge pharmaceutical companies to join small biotech firms in Rockville and
Gaithersburg.

   The latest example is Thomas W. D'Alonzo, former president of Glaxo Inc., the
$ 3.15 billion U.S. subsidiary of Britain's Glaxo Holdings PLC. D'Alonzo, 49,
left Glaxo to become chief executive of GenVec, a Rockville start-up that is
working to develop gene therapy drugs for cystic fibrosis and other diseases.

   GenVec has a $ 17 million collaborative agreement with Genentech Inc., a
biotech powerhouse based in San Francisco.

   GENENTECH, MEANWHILE, HAS selected America Online Inc. in Vienna to provide a
nationwide interactive computer network for high school biology teachers.

   Genentech said it will invest $ 10 million in the network, which is designed
to break through what many biology teachers in a new Roper Organization survey
call an "isolation barrier."

   The survey of more than 500 biology teachers shows that restricted school
budgets and the teachers' heavy workloads have prevented many from keeping up
with scientific advances.  Through America Online, the teachers will be able to
reach peers, experts and university resources that have been out of reach,
Genentech officials said.

   Each year the National Science Teachers Association, based in the District,
will select 100 among the nation's 50,000 biology teachers to be core
participants in the network. They will receive a laptop computer, a free
six-month subscription to America Online and special training on the network.

   The network also will be available to anyone else with access to a computer,
a modem and a subscription to America Online, which is the nation's
fastest-growing provider of on-line services.

   G. Kirk Raab, president and chief executive officer of Genentech, said the
company wanted to give something back to the country through the teachers
network.

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, DAVID BRION FOR TWP

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1993


                             993 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                     October 17, 1993, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 574 words

HEADLINE: Elation, tinged by frustration;
Discovery heartens cystic fibrosis patients, but time is a factor

BYLINE: By Daniel Golden, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Whenever Maggie Smillie goes to the mall with her parents, she throws a
penny in the wishing well and says, "I hope they cure cystic fibrosis."

   Now the wish of the 5-year-old from Norwood, who uses a machine three times a
day to help her breathe, seems closer than ever to coming true. Cystic fibrosis
patients and their families are celebrating this week's announcement of a
breakthrough in treating the lethal lung disease, which afflicts an estimated
30,000 Americans. But their elation that scientists have learned how to correct
the genetic defect that causes the disease is tinged with frustration that a
therapy probably won't be widely available for at least five years.

   Because most CF patients die from respiratory complications before they turn
30, some people can't wait long.

   Janet and Matthew Smillie, Maggie's parents, called all their friends after
they heard on television about the breakthrough. "We were really excited," Janet
Smillie said. "But we know, realistically, that the treatment could be years
away. We want it to happen as soon as possible, before her health starts to
deteriorate."

   For 20-year-old Jennifer Zaniboni, hooked up to an oxygen tube and receiving
intravenous antibiotics at New England Medical Center, talk of a cure has
renewed her dream of someday working as a nurse and raising a family. Zaniboni,
of Medford, said she can't count the number of times she has been in the
hospital since she was diagnosed with cystic fibrosis as an 8-month-old. But
she's hopeful that a drug called DNAse, expected to reach the market this year,
will sustain her until gene therapy becomes available.

   "Ever since the gene was discovered four years ago, there's been hope," she
said. "I can see the light."

   At this time of optimism, Zaniboni remembered others who did not live to see
a cure. "I've known three people who've died from CF," she said. "One I was
really close to. It's hard thinking about, 'Why couldn't they be here, when all
these new drugs are happening?' I guess it just wasn't meant to be."

   Many children with cystic fibrosis lead virtually normal lives. Kathleen
Cuddy plays on the girls' basketball and softball teams at North Reading Middle
School, where she is also a cheerleader. "Some sports, if I run too much and get
tired, I have a coughing spell," the eighth-grader said. Severely affected
patients undergo a daily regimen of antibiotics and other medications, as well
as chest-thumping to disperse the buildup of mucus in their airways.

   Besides its medical impact, cystic fibrosis also puts a financial and
emotional strain on patients and their families. Bob Flynn, a Wellesley
businessman, said parents of cystic fibrosis patients have "an extremely high
divorce rate."

   Janet Smillie quit her job as a hotel function manager when Maggie, her only
child, was hospitalized with pneumonia at age 10 months and turned out to have
cystic fibrosis. Later, the family had to switch insurers, and the new firm
refused to cover Maggie because she had a preexisting condition. The Smillies
shelled out thousands for treatments before they could regain coverage.

   But, as much as possible, Maggie and her parents refuse to let her disease
run their lives. Even though she has been taken to the emergency room four times
in as many years, the Smillies don't worry about staying close to home in case
of a flare-up. Next week, the family is going on vacation - to Disney World.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GLOBE PHOTO/MICHAEL QUAN / Maggie Smillie, 5, who has cystic
fibrosis, uses a rocking device in her therapy, aided by her mother,
Janet.(COLOR)

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1993


                             994 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 October 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 867 words

HEADLINE: Forget the Butler; the Medical Industry Did It

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   "THE FUGITIVE" is one of the year's biggest hit movies, drawing rave reviews
and, more important, crowds week after week. Yet one central aspect of the movie
seems to have eluded comment. The movie's premise -- why the fugitive is a
fugitive -- involves a drug company so evil that it distorts its research
findings in an attempt to get a deadly drug on the market and will stop at
nothing, even murder, to do so.

   In "Jurassic Park," another blockbuster, the culprits are scientists: one who
steals dinosaur embryos to sell them to a bioengineering rival, one who builds
the theme park and another, an arrogant molecular geneticist, who not only
creates dinosaurs but tries to make the species incapable of reproducing -- and
fails.

    Last spring the movie "Lorenzo's Oil" chronicled a family whose child had a
deadly and untreatable disease. The parents, who discovered a cure, had to fight
scientists who were more interested in their own glory than in helping a
desperately ill patient.

   Sound like a trend? Why are drug companies, geneticists and other medical
scientists -- wonder-workers of yesteryear -- now the villains?

   Some scientists, historians and observers of the popular culture say that
with health care reform a dominant theme of life in this country, Americans, and
the movie-making industry that caters to them, have become sensitized to issues
like overpriced drugs and ethics in the medical community. They add that the
Human Genome Project, a huge Federal program to map every human gene, and the
first attempts at gene therapy remind the public that scientists are on the
threshold of manipulating humanity. And the legacy of the 1980's, years of greed
and crime on Wall Street, has made Americans suspicious of groups like
physicians and drug companies that make a lot of money. "It's perfectly
credible, after the 80's, to think that money really does motivate people a
lot," said George Annas, a professor in health law at Boston University.

   Ipso facto, these experts say, scientists, drug manufacturers and their ilk
become targets for the public's wrath and free-floating dread. "There's a slimy
image out there," said Dr. Arthur Caplan, director of the Center for Bioethics
at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis. "Our culture has a schizophrenic
attitude about science and technology these days. If you look at opinion polls,
scientists are scoring very well. But it is also clear that bubbling beneath the
surface are primeval fears about profiteering and science and technology run
amok and scientists whose egos know no bounds."

   Jim Welsh, an English professor at Salisbury State University in Maryland and
the editor of Literature/ Film Quarterly, agreed: "I think that Hollywood is
picking up on all sorts of negative vibes about the health-care industry,
doctors and scientists. It's almost a truism that popular culture is a kind of
mirror that reflects back to the society its own values. I think there is a
popular awareness that there are real problems with health care and costs and
greed."

   With the nuclear threat fading and with the fall of Communism, Professor
Welsh said, Hollywood has had to search for new villains, characters to add to
their stockpile of psychotic criminals, agents of evil foreign powers and femmes
fatales. "Once the Iron Curtain crumbles, where do you go for villains?" he
asked. The answer, of course, is to find people currently believed to have the
potential for being heinous.

   "Bio-business has become the bogey man of cinema," Dr. Caplan said, referring
to the commerce in molecular biology and genetic engineering. "It's not every
science -- it's bio-business. He says he believes there are two reasons for
this. One is the fear of hubris. After all, who are these scientists to mess
with genes, the essence of life itself?

   In addition to this old fear, Dr. Caplan said, newer fears arise from the
very business of medicine.

   "People don't feel they can trust drug companies or medical associations," he
said. "That's reflected in the themes of these movies." Scientists and drug
company executives, he added, "are painted with attributes that used to be
reserved for Soviet double agents."

   But not everyone is willing to go so far. Neil Harris, a historian at the
University of Chicago, is wary of reading too much into the current movie
themes. The negative views of the health-care industry could be seen as "a part
of a larger hostility toward professionals and expertise," Dr. Harris said.
"This has been around in our society for a long time -- 150 years at least.
Hostility toward experts is human."

   With movie villains, he said, "we go through phases, and there is tremendous
imitation in Hollywood." So if the American public likes to see scientists,
doctors and drug companies cast as villains, Hollywood studios will generate
more and more. What is merely a series of copycats, Mr. Harris said, suddenly
begins to look like a popular uprising.

   Dr. Caplan, however, is adamant. "If Clinton wants to push health care
reform," he said, "he would be well advised to send some of his people out to
see these movies and realize how vulnerable the drug and medical industries are
to attack."


GRAPHIC: Drawing.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1993


                             995 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 17, 1993 Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 1440 words

HEADLINE: No cure for `CF', but now a hope;
Parents of young John Villani wait, pray for miracle

BYLINE: BARRY M. BLOOM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   When John Villani was 6 months old, doctors told his parents he probably had
as little as 12 more months to live.

   His mother, Jan, and father, Pat, wondered why their baby hadn't stopped
coughing from nearly the moment he was born. John -- a shortened form of his
given name of Giovanni -- was taken to the hospital with all the signs of
pneumonia.

   It turned out to be worse.

   Much worse. "We were a perfect little family," Pat recalled recently.

   "(John's disease) was a big slap in the face.

   It wakes you right up." John is 9 now, having somehow defied all the odds.

   Adorable with his wavy blond hair, John appears to be a healthy little boy
with an incessant cough.

   "A miracle child," Jan said. But the real miracle will come when a cure for
cystic fibrosis is on the market.

   The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation is trying to raise money for genetic research
that is so close to fruition it makes the collective heart ache. In a
breakthrough announced last week, scientists using gene therapy corrected the
underlying defect that causes cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal inherited
disease in the country. The researchers inserted a healthy copy of the gene into
an adenovirus, a common cold virus, then put the genetically altered virus into
the nasal passages of volunteers with cystic fibrosis.

   The research suggests the same approach may work on malfunctioning lung
cells, which cause the buildup of mucus that eventually causes death. The Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation heralds this achievement as the first time "CF research
treated the cause of CF rather than the symptoms." Groups like the 65 Roses
Sports Club, in which $10 is donated by every member for almost every Padres
home run, is doing its share to find a cure. But the battle seems endless. "Only
more money is standing between us and a cure right now," said Kae Meyer,
executive director of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, San Diego chapter.

   "We could see this disease cured during our lifetime.

   We're that close." For the Villanis, an El Cajon family of four, the wait is
almost as devastating as the daily regimen of antibiotics, enzymes, inhalators
and vibration therapy that keeps John breathing and alive. They can't let
themselves cross the line into believing that a cure for this genetic disease
that almost always kills children is on the horizon. Pat, 40, and Jan, 39, who
were born and raised in East County and operate a family-owned restaurant,
understand they must maintain their daily vigil. Anna Villanis, 12, who was
lucky enough to escape the genetic cystic fibrosis imprint that is passed along
only when both parents are carriers, also must watch for signs that her
brother's health is deteriorating. As the older sister, she monitors John's
behavior. "When I don't do what I'm supposed to do, she tells my parents," he
said with a giggle. Anna hardly lives a normal life.

   Her parents admit that many times, she does not receive the attention or the
accolades she would normally enjoy if her brother was not afflicted by an
illness that is almost always terminal. Pat is clear about the family focus. "I
just keep telling John we've got to keep him in shape for the day the cure
comes," he said. John, a fourth-grader in Vista Grande Elementary School, is
only one of the thousands of children who are desperately waiting. Recent
advances in medicine have made life more comfortable, even prolonged it for
people whose lungs are filled with a thick, sticky mucus that promotes
infectious diseases and eventually causes death through suffocation. A decade
ago, there wasn't even the hope of waiting for a cure.

   Frank Deford, a sports writer of national acclaim, watched in despair as his
daughter was ravaged by the disease victims and their parents simply call "CF."
"We knew she was going to die, knew there was no hope, even knew it was best,"
Deford wrote in his book, Alex, The Life of a Child.

   "Imagine being 8 years old and dead.

   Old people die with achievements, memories.

   Children die with opportunities, dreams.

   They carry the hopes of all of us when they go off." Alex died in 1980, years
before current medical leaps have placed cystic fibrosis on the endangered
disease list. In August, a new drug called Pulmozyme was sent to the Food and
Drug Administration for final approval.

   Researchers discovered that the drug, known commercially as DNase, thins
mucus, improves lung functions and reduces the number of respiratory infections.
Patients over 5 years of age can take the drug.

   The Villanis have been told John is on the list of initial recipients. The
Villanis are in a race against time, warding off the symptoms, keeping John at
heaven's gate while hoping the gene-therapy research yields a cure. "He has such
incredible spirit," Jan said about her son.

   "At school, the kids protect him.

   He's an inspiration.

   They figure, if he can do it, whatever problems they have to overcome, they
can do it." An integral part of the race, the Villanis understand, is generating
research dollars.

   So they constantly take part in cystic fibrosis fund-raisers. When the 65
Rose Sports Club holds its annual celebrity golf tournament Nov. 8, the Villanis
will be there. They are among 50 members of 65 Roses who donated $1,300 this
year based on their association with the Padres. Members pay a $100 initial fee,
and in return receive tickets to a half dozen baseball games.

   On those nights, they are treated with a meal and use of a luxury box.

   The Padres donate the tickets, stadium concessionaire Service America offers
the food at cost and the Chargers provide the box. Padres players and coaches
offer autographs and inspiration. "Whether you like it or not, you're a role
model," said coach Rob Picciolo, the current 65 Roses chairman.

   "You're not only obligated, but your humanity says you must help raise money
for such an important cause." All members donate another $10 a piece for each of
the Padres' first 120 home runs. "Some seasons, I've had to sweat it out," said
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation director Meyer.

   Not this past season.

   Though the Padres lost 101 games and did poorly in almost every category,
they did well for 65 Roses.

   The Padres hit 153 homers. Between the Padres and the golf tournament, Meyer
says, the 65 Roses Sports Club generates about $125,000 of the $475,000 the San
Diego chapter of CF raises annually. "Our relationship with the people of 65
Roses has been very rewarding," said Padres president Dick Freeman.

   "We have a special relationship." The name "65 Roses" was adopted in 1983
after a little girl once went to school and told her teacher she had a terrible
disease, "65-broses," innocently mangling the words "cystic fibrosis." By 1990,
the local chapter had become so successful that Sam Ploetz, a 9-year-old CF
patient, was granted a wish through the Make-A-Wish foundation. He wanted a cure
for cystic fibrosis and a membership in 65 Roses. Sam, a baseball fan, was
granted the membership.

   Sadly, the possible cure is coming way too late.

   Sam died that Memorial Day. Death is a chilling, omnipresent fact of life for
the Villani family. John is always on the edge.

   When Pat and Jan hear their son cough in the night, they wonder if a trip to
the hospital is in the offing.

   Though John likes to eat, he finds it hard to maintain his weight. He is on a
high-fat diet that calls for almost 6,000 calories a day.

   A nearly impossible task, his mother says. The mucus buildup prevents the
flow of enzymes from the pancreas to the small intestine, disrupting the
digestive system and placing a cystic fibrosis sufferer in a constant siege of
malnutrition. "A normal, healthy child of 9 years would need about 2,000
calories a day," said Sue Creveling, the dietitian for the Cystic Fibrosis
Center at UCSD Medical Center. Last summer, when the family was on vacation in
Reno, Nev., John took a turn for the worse.

   The family rushed home.

   His breathing capacity had deteriorated to a dangerously low 40 percent --
lung-transplant range. Having lost eight pounds, his weight hovered near 50
pounds. After numerous tests, a fungus was found in his lungs.

   Heavy doses of antibiotics and steroids were prescribed.

   Like most CF children, John had to spend several weeks in the hospital with
drugs dripping slowly into his small body through intravenous tubes. But the
"miracle child" rebounded and has rekindled his newfound passion for golf.

   Next spring, health willing, it's back to Little League baseball. John has
bulked up to 61 pounds.

   His lung capacity has soared to over 90 percent. For the second time in his
short life, he is beating the odds.

   How much time does he have left?

   With his oxygen compressor next to his bed, John Villani waits for the cure.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Miracle child: Nine-year-old John Villani suffers from
cystic fibrosis, but continues to defy the odds. His father, Pat, is active in
CF fund-raising efforts.; PHOTOBY: Union-Tribune/GERALD MCCLARD

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             996 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     October 16, 1993 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 664 words

HEADLINE: A CURE FOR CYSTIC FIBROSIS? ;
RAINBOW CHEERS NEW GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: By MICHAEL DREXLER; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

DATELINE: CLEVELAND

BODY:

   In the dim, quiet hospital room, Ashley, 4, watched "Beauty and the Beast" on
television while her sister, Brittany, 5, slept uneasily, twisting slowly in her
bed, attached to an oxygen tube and an intravenous injection administering
antibiotics.

   The two girls have a fatal disease - cystic fibrosis. Their mother, Mary
Eichele of Conneaut in Ashtabula County, has been bringing the girls to Rainbow
Babies and Childrens Hospital, part of University Hospitals of Cleveland, since
their births. That's because for more than 30 years, the hospital's Cystic
Fibrosis Center has been acclaimed as the top researcher of the disease, which
strikes one in every 2,000 to 3,000 children.

   Yesterday was just another dreary day at the hospital for the children and
their mother - until Eichele heard of a new gene therapy that might pave the way
for curing the relentless killer.

   "It would be wonderful," she said.

   Eichele drives her daughters the hundred or so miles to Rainbow from her home
for treatments that include "pounding" mucous from the lungs by tapping portions
of the back, various nutritional and physical therapies, and many medications.

   "It's hard keeping up with everything," Eichele, 25, said. "They have to take
treatments at home three times a day, and pills to digest their food for them. I
hate to see my kids sick. I lost another one to cystic fibrosis."

   In the past couple of days, a stir of excitement has rippled through the
cystic fibrosis research community. Dr. Michael J. Welsh of the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute in Iowa revealed Thursday at the North American Cystic
Fibrosis Conference in Dallas that gene therapy can correct the underlying
defects that cause cystic fibrosis.

   The approach uses genetically engineered cold viruses delivering healthy
genes to replace defective genes in affected areas of the body. In the first
human experiments, researchers reversed the genetic abnormality in the noses of
three people with cystic fibrosis.

   But the real source of the disease's deadly character is its effect on the
lungs. The nose and lung tissues are similar, scientists say, and some believe
it is only a matter of time before the genetic treatment will stop the progress
of the disease - and possibly cure it.

   In an interview from Dallas, Dr. Pamela B. Davis, chief of University
Hospitals' Pediatric Pulmonary Division, called the advance "a tremendous
achievement. I think a cure is possible. I wouldn't sign my name in blood to
that, but it is possible."

   She said Welsh used nose tissue from three patients, and, though it is much
the same as lung tissue, "the lung is thicker. I think there are more technical
difficulties in placing the virus in the lung. Kids with CF have thick mucous in
their lungs. There is more to learn about the lung. Also, I think what needs to
be determined is if the dose is below that which makes you sick."

   A minimal dosage can be applied to nose tissue, she said, but lungs that are
thickened by mucous would take much larger doses.

   If toxicity and application questions can be answered, "We're in business,"
Davis said.

   She said her questions were "not to distract from the nature of the
achievement. It is tremendously exciting."

   Welsh himself said Thursday that "many more questions need to be answered.
The really, really important issue is safety."

   On the fourth floor of Rainbow, Amy Lazbin, 35, a cystic fibrosis patient
originally from Akron who now lives with her husband in Georgia, sat on her bed
and said she had seen many new therapies over the years. She is among the oldest
and most successfully treated cystic fibrosis patients in the United States.

   Most people who have cystic fibrosis die in childhood. Doctors call Lazbin a
model patient.

   Lazbin said she would be willing to try the new treatment. "I would want to
know the side effects, but I would take that chance. I know they've done their
work. I'm always open to new treatments."

GRAPHIC: AP; GENE THERAPY FOR CYSTIC FIBROSIS; PHOTOS BY: PD/BRYNNE SHAW; PHOTO
1; Ashley Eichele, 4, draws "The Beast" while her sister Brittany, 5, sleeps in
the Cystic Fibrosis Center of Rainbow Babies and Childrens Hospital. The girls
were there yesterday for treatment of cystic fibrosis when their mother and
others at the hospital learned of a breakthrough in gene therapy that could lead
to a cure of the fatal illness.; PHOTO 2; Dr. Pamela B. Davis, chief of the
pediatric pulmonary division of University Hospitals and a cystic fibrosis
researcher.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1993


                             997 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   OCTOBER 16, 1993, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 566 words

HEADLINE: Clinton Health Plan Called A Disaster for Biotech

BYLINE: Carolyn Lochhead, Chronicle Washington Bureau

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

    The head of the world's largest biotechnology company warned yesterday that
the Clinton administration's health care plan could deal a ''fatal blow'' to
California's booming biotech industry.

   Gordon Binder, chief executive officer of Amgen, based in Thousand Oaks, used
a speech before the National Press Club to launch a lobbying blitz aimed at
blocking key elements of the administration proposal.

   In an emotional plea, Binder said that the plan's price controls will stifle
innovation in the drug industry, particularly research into treatments for
Alzheimers, AIDS and other diseases.

   ''Does anyone really think price controls will work?'' he asked. ''Does
anyone think this Congress will defy logic . . . to install something in our
health care system that has never worked?''

   California biotech firms have teamed up with makers of drugs and medical
devices and with academic organizations -- such as the Scripps Research
Institute -- to form the California Health Care Institute, a lobbying group.

   Kirk Raab, chief executive of San Francisco-based Genentech Inc., who
supported Clinton in last year's election, co-founded the institute. In a recent
visit to Washington, Raab described as ''ludicrous'' the White House plan to
blacklist new drugs whose prices are deemed too high by a special government
commission. Under the Clinton plan, new drugs would be reviewed by the
commission after gaining U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval.

   Binder said that such a scheme would dry up financing for high-risk small
companies. ''If you were an investor, where would you put your money?'' he
asked. ''In a business where profitability is controlled by a government
official, or one where profitability is determined by the marketplace?  That's
the way Wall Street looks at it, and that's the way all investors look at it.''

   Defending the industry against administration charges that drug prices are
too high, Binder insisted that new medicines will reduce medical costs.  He
argued that they promise treatment for the most costly and stubborn diseases,
including AIDS, cancer, heart disease and arthritis, and could save ''hundreds
of billions on long- term-care costs.''

   He said prices reflect high drug-development costs and risks. Binder pointed
to Massachusetts-based Genzyme's first successful clinical trial of a gene
therapy for cystic fibrosis, a condition that afflicts 30,000 Americans. Binder
said the company expects to spend $ 440 million on the drug just for
research-and-development costs.

   Binder also stressed the economic importance of the biotech industry,
describing it as ''an American industry that leads medical science in such a
dramatic way that the competition from the rest of the world is far, far
behind.''

   He said 22 new human-biotech medicines have been introduced and 130 are under
development. ''Every one of these products was brought to the market by an
American company,'' he said. ''The score is America 22 and all the other
countries in the world zero.''

   Genentech's Raab emphasized that biotechnology has become one of the fastest-
growing segments of the California economy. He argued that the Clinton plan
would shift incentives, causing large biotechnology companies to focus on
gaining market share for widely used existing drugs such as tranquilizers,
rather than searching for treatments for cancer and other grave diseases.


LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1993


                             998 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                            October 15, 1993, Friday

SECTION: LIVING; Section F; Page 4

LENGTH: 601 words

HEADLINE: Health Watch Promising therapy offers hope to cystic fibrosis patients

BYLINE: By Amanda Husted STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Gene therapy can correct the underlying defect that causes cystic fibrosis,
scientists have confirmed, a "giant step" in finding an effective treatment for
the inherited disease that afflicts 30,000 Americans.

   This first step involved correcting a genetic abnormality in the noses of
three people who have CF, the same defects found in the patients' lungs that
cause mucus to collect, leading to lung damage and death.

   In this experiment, which used genetically engineered cold viruses to insert
genes into the body, scientists did not attempt to correct the abnormal cells in
the patients' lungs. They were testing whether the delivery system worked - it
did - and whether the cold virus caused illness - it didn't.

   Researchers hope this approach will work to restore the lungs of CF patients
so they function normally. Officials with the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, called the work "a giant step forward."

   The research was conducted at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute of the
University of Iowa by Dr. Michael J. Welsh and colleagues. It will be printed
next week in the journal Cell.

   Hazardous art supplies?

   Some hazardous art supplies don't carry legally required warnings that they
contain toxic or cancer-causing substances, the U.S. Public Interest Research
Group claimed Thursday.

   The consumer group cited 18 products that it contended do not carry adequate
warning labels.

   The Consumer Product Safety Commission, which enforces the labeling law,
disagreed. The commission said the consumer group looked at safety data sheets
for workers who manufacture the products, and the product that leaves the
factory may not be hazardous.

   The commission plans to recheck the products to make sure they are properly
labeled.

   The consumer group contended that some of the 18 products - oil and acrylic
paints, for instance - are labeled "nontoxic," but contain substances linked to
cancer. The group wants lawmakers to ban toxic art supplies in elementary
schools.

   A complete list of artists' supplies listed by U.S. Public Interest Research
Group as violating federal hazardous materials labeling laws is available by
fax. Dial 511, then enter 9329. When prompted enter code 4109. This is a pay per
call service; the fee is 50 cents per fax. See Page A2for details.

   Judge blocks meat labels

   A U.S. Agriculture Department rule requiring safe-handling instructions on
all packages of uncooked meat and poultry was blocked from taking effect today.

   U.S. District Judge James Nowlin of Austin ruled Thursday that the department
didn't follow proper procedures in implementing the rule and didn't give packers
enough time to comply.

   Some shoppers will see the labels anyway.

   HELP YOURSELF

   Two free programs on arthritis are being sponsored by Piedmont Hospital and
the Arthritis Foundation. ''Arthritis and Medications" will be held from 11 a.m.
to 12:30 p.m. Saturday in the Richard H. Rich Auditorium at Piedmont. On Oct.
30, from 11 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. in the auditorium, the program will feature a
panel discussion and question-and- answer session about osteoporosis, the bone
weakening disease, and fibromyalgia, a condition characterized by
musculoskeletal pain, sleep disorders and fatigue. For information, call
605-1964.

   A chapter of the International Diabetic Athletes Association is forming in
metro Atlanta with a meeting at 7 p.m. Monday at the Swissotel. The organization
provides publications, educational programs and activities to promote and
support active people with diabetes. For information, call 350-5555.

   From staff, wire and published reports

GRAPHIC: Photo: The U.S. Public Interest Research Group is calling for revised
labeling on 18 art products it claims are hazards. /FRANK NIEMEIR/Staff

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1993


                             999 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                            October 15, 1993, Friday

SECTION: LIVING; Section F; Page 4

LENGTH: 612 words

HEADLINE: Health Watch Promising therapy offers hope to cystic fibrosis patients

BYLINE: By Amanda Husted STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Gene therapy can correct the underlying defect that causes cystic fibrosis,
scientists have confirmed, a "giant step" in finding an effective treatment for
the inherited disease that afflicts 30,000 Americans.

   This first step involved correcting a genetic abnormality in the noses of
three people who have CF, the same defects found in the patients' lungs that
cause mucus to collect, leading to lung damage and death.

   In this experiment, which used genetically engineered cold viruses to insert
genes into the body, scientists did not attempt to correct the abnormal cells in
the patients' lungs. They were testing whether the delivery system worked - it
did - and whether the cold virus caused illness - it didn't.

   Researchers hope this approach will work to restore the lungs of CF patients
so they function normally. Officials with the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, called the work "a giant step forward."

   The research was conducted at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute of the
University of Iowa by Dr. Michael J. Welsh and colleagues. It will be printed
next week in the journal Cell.

   Hazardous art supplies?

   Some hazardous art supplies don't carry legally required warnings that they
contain toxic or cancer-causing substances, the U.S. Public Interest Research
Group claimed Thursday.

   The consumer group cited 18 products that it contended do not carry adequate
warning labels.

   The Consumer Product Safety Commission, which enforces the labeling law,
disagreed. The commission said the consumer group looked at safety data sheets
for workers who manufacture the products, and the product that leaves the
factory may not be hazardous.

   The commission plans to recheck the products to make sure they are properly
labeled.

   The consumer group contended that some of the 18 products - oil and acrylic
paints, for instance - are labeled "nontoxic," but contain substances linked to
cancer. The group wants lawmakers to ban toxic art supplies in elementary
schools.

   A complete list of artists' supplies listed by U.S. Public Interest Research
Group as violating federal hazardous materials labeling laws is available by
fax. Dial 511, then enter 9329. When prompted enter code 4109. This is a pay per
call service; the fee is 50 cents per fax. See Page A2for details.

   Meat carries new labels

   New labels will go on ground meat packages beginning today telling people how
to handle and cook the meat to prevent illness.

   Stores must also provide handling information for other uncooked meat, but
the information can be contained in brochures rather than on labels, under rules
formulated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture.

   The labels are a response to fatal outbreaks of illness linked to E. coli,
salmonella and other pathogens in raw meat.

   HELP YOURSELF

   Two free programs on arthritis are being sponsored by Piedmont Hospital and
the Arthritis Foundation. "Arthritis and Medications" will be held from 11 a.m.
to 12:30 p.m. Saturday in the Richard H. Rich Auditorium at Piedmont. On Oct.
30, from 11 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. in the auditorium, the program will feature a
panel discussion and question-and- answer session about osteoporosis, the bone
weakening disease, and fibromyalgia, a condition characterized by
musculoskeletal pain, sleep disorders and fatigue. For information, call
605-1964.

   A chapter of the International Diabetic Athletes Association is forming in
metro Atlanta with a meeting at 7 p.m. Monday at the Swissotel. The organization
provides publications, educational programs and activities to promote and
support active people with diabetes. For information, call 350-5555.

   From staff, wire and published reports

GRAPHIC: Photo: The U.S. Public Interest Research Group is calling for revised
labeling on 18 art products it claims are hazards. /FRANK NIEMEIR/Staff

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1993


                             1000 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                     October 15, 1993, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1146 words

HEADLINE: Cystic fibrosis is reported corrected by gene therapy

BYLINE: By Richard A. Knox, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Scientists said yesterday they have corrected the basic defect of the slowly
lethal lung disease cystic fibrosis by conscripting a disabled cold virus to
deliver a missing gene to patients' nasal and bronchial passages.

   The advance, achieved by two groups of researchers, represents the first time
scientists have reversed a genetic disease by introducing the missing gene into
a living patient.

   Other experimental gene therapy has involved removing cells from the body to
do genetic tinkering. That approach would not work for cystic fibrosis, since
the cells that need correcting line the many-branched airways of the windpipe
and lungs - a surface area equivalent to about three-quarters of this page.

   Researchers emphasized that their work has not yet produced a medically
significant improvement in any patient's condition. It will take some years to
turn the advances into a treatment that might give CF patients a nearly normal
life, probably by inhaling a mist of gene-bearing viruses, scientists said.

   However, researchers are now confident that they will ultimately be able to
attack the disease at its most basic level.

   Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute,
said he is "absolutely convinced" that gene therapy will become practical within
the lifetimes of many young people who have CF.

   "I would be very disappointed if in a decade or a little bit more we have not
solved all the problems," Lenfant said in an interview. Those problems include
demonstrating that the treatment is safe, since CF patients are very vulnerable
to respiratory infections, and finding an effective way to deliver the treatment
to enough lung cells to correct the disease, which hampers the normal flow of
lung secretions.

   An estimated 30,000 Americans have cystic fibrosis, the most common inherited
lethal disease among whites in North America and Northern Europe, according to
the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. In these populations, one baby in every 2,500 is
born with the gene defect, which must be inherited from both parents to cause
the disease.

   In its typical form, CF causes the buildup of stiff, sticky mucus in victims'
airways. This sets the stage for dangerous respiratory infections and requires
constant chest-thumping physical therapy to clear secretions. Most CF patients
die from respiratory complications before their 30th birthday, though there is
great variability in the disease's course.

   Since the CF-causing gene was identified four years ago, scientists have
dreamed of reversing the defect by introducing a copy of the normal gene. The
gene directs the manufacture of a protein called CF transmembrane conductance
regulator or CFTR, which creates a channel for the flow of chloride ions in and
out of cells lining the air passages. Without that channel, mucus builds up and
clogs the lungs.

   At a press briefing at the North American Cystic Fibrosis Conference, Dr.
Michael J. Welsh of the University of Iowa and Alan Smith of the Cambridge-based
Genzyme Corporation said they had successfully corrected the genetic defect in a
patch of cells the size of a pencil eraser lining the nasal passages of three
patients.

   Welsh emphasized in a telephone interview that the experiment has not cured
any patient, but showed that the genetic defect can be corrected by a
respiratory virus, called an adenovirus, engineered to carry the missing gene to
target cells without causing infection.

   "This is one step along the way to developing a treatment that will help
people with CF," Welsh said. "Our hope, and everybody's hope, is that perhaps CF
doesn't have to be a lethal disease."

   In addition to Welsh's three patients, an additional four have received the
experimental treatment at the National Institutes of Health, one as recently as
Wednesday. In all four, the cold virus successfully transferred the missing gene
into cells lining the airways of the lung, according to Dr. Ronald G. Crystal of
Cornell University Medical College, who conducted those experiments and will
present the results tomorrow at the Dallas meeting.

   Three other research teams in Philadelphia, Cincinnati and Chapel Hill, N.C.,
have permission to conduct similar experiments. The federal government has given
permission for more than 40 CF patients to participate in preliminary safety
trials of the technique.

   Lenfant and others said large-scale trials of the gene therapy method might
begin late next year.

   Of the patients treated so far, most have suffered no ill effects. However,
one of Crystal's patients suffered lung inflammation, fever and X-ray changes
that seemed related to the gene therapy, causing federal officials to scale back
the dose of engineered viruses used in that trial.

   One of the most encouraging findings of Welsh and Smith, researchers say, is
that very low doses of the specially prepared adenovirus are sufficient to get
the CFTR gene into target cells. Welsh and Smith used only 2 million to 50
million viruses in their patients, compared to 20 billion viruses in one of
Crystal's patients.

   "I'm very pleased that Welsh and Smith have found the necessary dose is in
the ballpark of what we know already is safe in the lung," Crystal said in an
interview.

   The experiments thus far are not designed to answer some crucial questions.
They cannot determine whether patients benefit from the gene therapy, nor can
they tell how long the CFTR gene will persist and function in the target cells.

   Scientists hope the gene could be made to function - that is, direct
manufacture of its vital protein - for the entire lifespan of the cells lining
the respiratory tract, which ranges from 40 to 80 days. That would minimize the
frequency of repeat treatments, which may carry the risk of stimulating an
immune response to the engineered virus, obviating its usefulness.

   "This is not going to be a one-shot treatment and the cells are fixed
forevermore," said Smith, who is Genzyme's senior vice president of research.
"We feel sure we will have to treat patients on a fairly regular basis - whether
weekly, monthly or several-monthly we don't know at this stage."

   To avoid the buildup of antibodies to the virus, various scientists are
trying to strip various genes from the adenovirus to make it more invisible to
the immune system. Meanwhile, Genzyme-affiliated researchers are covering their
bets by exploring a nonviral "vector" to deliver the CFTR gene packaged in a
fatty coat.

   The commercial stakes are considerable. Some analysts have predicted a $ 600
million yearly market for a successful gene therapy for CF. Meanwhile, the US
Food and Drug Administration is expected to give market approval this year to a
new drug called DNAse designed to thin CF patients' lung secretions - a
development that could extend their lives while they are waiting for gene
therapy to become practical.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1993
