
                               3 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2010 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 23, 2010 Saturday

SECTION: LETTER TO THE EDITOR; Pg. F8

LENGTH: 93 words

HEADLINE: Mice and men

BYLINE: Morley Gorsky

DATELINE: Toronto

BODY:

    Paul Taylor cautions that experiments "have produced wondrous results in
animal studies, only to fall flat in human trials" (Gene Therapy: Happier Mice
Give Researchers Hope For Treating Depression In Humans - Life, Oct. 22). Rather
than persisting in an approach that has disappointed human expectations, while
enhancing the health and longevity of lab mice, I suggest scientists concentrate
on curing or relieving the effects of disease in lab mice by testing their
hypotheses on humans. Who knows - what proved beneficial for mice may also work
for people.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2010


                               4 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2010 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 22, 2010 Friday

SECTION: GLOBE LIFE COLUMN; SMALL DOSES; Pg. L5

LENGTH: 924 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy: Happier mice give researchers hope for treating
depression in humans

BYLINE: PAUL TAYLOR

BODY:

    ptaylor@globeandmail.com

    In the not-too-distant future, doctors may use gene therapy to treat
severely depressed patients who don't get better with traditional
antidepressants.

    A team of U.S. and Swedish researchers published a study this week showing
that the basic concept works in mice. And now the researchers hope to use their
findings as a springboard for launching a human clinical trial.

    This promising development is based on years of painstaking work that has
shed light on underlying causes of depression.

    Neuroscientists have long known that serotonin, a neurotransmitter that
conveys messages between brain cells, plays a major role in the disorder. But
they weren't sure why serotonin, which normally helps regulate mood, appetite
and sleep, doesn't function sufficiently in depressed patients.

    Then, in 2007, scientists made a breakthrough in deciphering this mystery. A
team, led by Paul Greengard of Rockefeller University, discovered that some
depressed patients lack a protein, called p11, in the nucleus accumbens, which
is a pleasure-reward centre of the brain. Further studies revealed that p11 is
needed to bring serotonin-binding receptors to the surface of nerve cells.

    "If the cell does not have these receptors at the surface, it is not capable
of properly responding to serotonin," explained one of the researchers, Michael
Kaplitt of Weill Cornell Medical College. "P11 is like a tugboat that pulls the
receptor to the right position so it can stick out [of the cell] and latch onto
the neurotransmitter."

    Armed with this fresh insight into the pivotal role performed by p11, the
researchers conducted a series of experiments designed to boost levels of the
protein in depressed mice. Genes responsible for producing p11 were inserted
into deactivated or essentially harmless viruses that were then injected into
the nucleus accumbens region of mouse brains.

    Just as the researchers had hoped, the viruses entered the brain cells and
released their tiny passengers - the p11 genes, which promptly began churning
out lots of p11 protein.

    Within a short time the depressed, docile and virtually immobile mice seemed
to regain their zest for life - as demonstrated by struggling to be free when
handled by researchers.

    "We didn't just make them better. We essentially cured them," said Dr.
Kaplitt, the senior author of the study published in the journal Science
Translational Medicine.

    Dr. Kaplitt hopes that gene therapy will be equally effective in treating
some people who are locked in the grip of depression. He predicts human trials
could get started within two years, provided additional animal studies go well.

    Of course, there are different forms of depression - not all of which may be
linked to abnormal levels of p11. He suspects that the patients most likely to
benefit from the treatment would be those whose depression is characterized by
anhedonia, or an inability to enjoy normally pleasurable experiences.

    Still, it's important to remember that many experimental treatments have
produced wondrous results in animal studies, only to fall flat in human trials.

    Pushing drugs

    Pharmaceutical companies spend literally billions of dollars promoting their
drugs to physicians. And the investment seems to pay off: Doctors end up writing
lots of prescriptions for the most heavily advertised products. But that doesn't
mean patients are better off, a new review study indicates.

    The researchers analyzed 58 previous studies that examined the effects of
drug company promotions on the prescribing habits of doctors in Canada, the
United States, Europe and Australia.

    Over all, the researchers found no evidence that corporate promotions helped
doctors select the best treatments for their patients. Instead, the sales
pitches were generally associated with doctors writing more prescriptions for
higher-cost drugs - not necessarily the most appropriate medications, according
to the findings published in the journal PLoS Medicine.

    "If doctors are inundated with advertising from brand name companies, they
are more likely to prescribe that brand name, regardless of whether it's best
for the patient," said study co-author Joel Lexchin of York University in
Toronto. He estimates that drug companies spend between $2.4-billion and
$4.75-billion annually on promotion in Canada.

    Excessive CT scans?

    Are too many CT scans being done to evaluate patients with headaches?

    About a quarter of brain scans performed in Ontario in 2005 were ordered by
family physicians for patients suffering from headaches, according to a study by
the Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences in Toronto.

    Yet only a tiny fraction of these scans - 2 per cent - uncovered an
abnormality, such as a brain tumour, that could potentially explain the head
pain. John You, the principal investigator, suggests that efforts should be made
to minimize unnecessary scans because they expose patients to ionizing radiation
which can increase the odds of developing cancer. The risk is "very small" but
shouldn't be ignored, concludes the study published in the American Journal of
Medicine.

    "For every 20,000 people who get a single CT scan of the head, the
projection is that one additional person will die of cancer as a result," Dr.
You said in an e-mail.

    "The vast majority of headaches will not have a serious underlying cause,
but can still cause a lot of disability," he added. "In most cases, no imaging
tests will be needed, and the focus should be on talking with your doctor about
options for treatment."

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2010


                               5 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2010 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 5, 2010 Tuesday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: CANADIAN; TRANSFORMATIONAL CANADIANS; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 1937 words

HEADLINE: 25 making a difference

BODY:

    The Transformational Canadians program celebrates 25 living citizens who
have made a difference by immeasurably improving the lives of others. The Globe
and Mail has partnered with CTV and Cyberpresse to identify these exceptional
leaders, each of whom must combine a passion for positive change with the
discipline and focus to achieve outstanding results. Over the next three months,
we will profile winners drawn from six fields: business, science and technology,
the environment, education, health care and community

    SHEILA WATT-CLOUTIER / INUIT ACTIVIST

    A leader who stands firmly in defence of her ancestral home

    In the landmark 2005 legal petition she served against the United States,
Sheila Watt-Cloutier linked the devastating effects of climate change on the
Arctic to the human rights of her fellow Inuit. At the time, such a view wasn't
exactly accepted wisdom. In fact, it sounded downright odd.

    "Today, it's mainstream language - everybody talks about [climate change] as
a human-rights issue," says Ms. Watt-Cloutier from Maine, where she is spending
a year as a teaching scholar at Bowdoin College's Arctic Museum and Arctic
Studies Center. "I think we've been successful in changing the discourse on this
issue to making that connection."

    For the past 15 years, Ms. Watt-Cloutier has also striven to connect the
health of the Arctic with global well-being. Her petition to the Inter-American
Council on Human Rights - which led to a 2007 Nobel Peace Prize nomination
alongside Al Gore - is one of several bold stands she has taken in defence of
her ancestral home. But she doesn't believe in confrontation.

    "I have always engaged in the politics of influence rather than the politics
of protest," says Ms. Watt-Cloutier, who holds a clutch of honorary degrees and
received the Order of Canada in 2006. "The style of leadership that I have is
one of bringing people together and understanding that we're all one here. The
planet and its people are one."

    She notes that attention is now shifting to the Arctic - largely because of
the oil and mineral wealth that lies beneath its fast-melting ice. To Ms.
Watt-Cloutier's dismay, the world knows the North's resources better than its
original inhabitants, whose traditional way of life is at stake.

    "That's the sadness, even though a lot of people may disagree with me -
perhaps even in our own regions - and say, 'Development is the way to go,' "
says the 56-year-old grandmother, stressing that she is not anti-business. "For
me, it's always about balance. At what cost is it that we're going to go in that
direction?"

    Ms. Watt-Cloutier, who lives in Iqaluit, was born into a hunting and fishing
family in Kuujjuaq, a coastal Inuit community in Northern Quebec's Nunavik
region. For the first 10 years of her life, she travelled only by dogsled and
she spoke no English until she started school. "It shaped me completely - that's
the foundation upon which I do my global work," she says of her early childhood.

    After several years as an Inuktitut interpreter at the Kuujjuaq hospital,
Ms. Watt-Cloutier shifted to educational and community advocacy. Her somewhat
unlikely metamorphosis into a political leader began in 1995, when she was
elected corporate secretary of Makivik Corp., which oversees Inuit land claims
including the James Bay and Northern Quebec Agreement. Over the next decade, Ms.
Watt-Cloutier found herself thrust into a larger public role as head of the
Canadian and then the international branch of the Inuit Circumpolar Council.

    At the ICC, she led Northern indigenous people from four countries in a
campaign against persistent organic pollutants (POPs), which have long poisoned
the Arctic food chain. Aided by NGOs and other supporters, she was instrumental
in negotiating a global treaty that seeks to ban these toxins.

    As part of what she calls her mission to transform public opinion into
public policy, Ms. Watt-Cloutier is writing a book called The Right to Be Cold.
Because the Arctic is the early-warning system for climate change, she argues,
its fate is everyone's.

    "That's always been my message, to signal that everything is connected," Ms.
Watt-Cloutier says. "And it's interesting that it is our shared troubled
atmosphere that is connecting us as a shared humanity."

    GORDON KELLER / DIRECTOR, MCEWEN CENTRE FOR REGENERATIVE MEDICINE, TORONTO

    Saskatchewan native a leader in the field of regenerative medicine

    When stem cell biologist Gordon Keller joined the McEwen Centre for
Regenerative Medicine in 2007, Canada gained back one of the world's most
important medical scientists. The Saskatchewan native is a leader in the
burgeoning field of regenerative medicine, whose goal is to replace or repair
tissues damaged by disease, accident or old age.

    As director of Toronto's McEwen Centre, which was established in 2003 by
Goldcorp Inc. founder Rob McEwen and his wife Cheryl, Dr. Keller is keen to get
results. He returned to Canada from a distinguished career abroad for the
opportunity to do new things at the centre, where he is one of 15 principal
investigators conducting research.

    Using stem cell biology as one foundation, the McEwen Centre is developing
new treatments for such afflictions as heart disease, diabetes and
neurodegenerative illness. Among the centre's notable achievements, its
scientists were the first to use gene therapy to prepare donor lungs for
transplant.

    One of many initiatives to come out of talks with the McEwens and other
members of the business community is the centre's accelerated discoveries
research program. "The idea is to have very defined projects with endpoints,"
says Dr. Keller, 57. "If the project is successful, we will move on with another
award to leapfrog to the next step."

    Setting those limits is a fundraising tool, he adds. "There are many donors
who think it would be very attractive to fund such projects - where they know
where their dollar is going, they can support a specific research project and
they can actually get to know the scientists who are running the research
project."

    After graduating from the University of Alberta and doing a post-doctoral
fellowship at the Ontario Cancer Institute - where he is now a senior scientist
- Dr. Keller spent almost 25 years in Europe and the United States. In 2005, he
became director of the Black Family Stem Cell Institute at New York's Mount
Sinai School of Medicine. Dr. Keller says the first reason he and his wife,
Marion Kennedy - a blood cell specialist in his laboratory - returned home was
to work in Canada as Canadians.

    As for the commercial potential of its projects, Dr. Keller says the McEwen
Centre may seek patents and strike licensing deals. For example, its novel
methods of testing drugs on cells might be attractive to big pharmaceutical
companies. Meanwhile, the centre's stem-cell lab produces heart cells for
distribution to Canadian and other researchers.

    Dr. Keller says his job as leader is to speed up research as much as
possible by bringing together outstanding scientists and giving them the
resources to do cutting-edge work. To that end, he helps to secure funds by
reaching out to the public. The McEwen Centre often runs lab tours, and once or
twice a year it hosts a dinner and a formal, behind-the-scenes visit for invited
guests. "There's nothing like having a look down a microscope and seeing a dish
full of beating heart cells," Dr. Keller says. "That does more than all the
talking in the world."

    JAMES ORBINSKI / PHYSICIAN, HUMANITARIAN, SCIENTIST AND AUTHOR

    A pragmatist with a heart for humanitarian medicine

    James Orbinski chose to study medicine because he wanted to help people in
need and explore the unknown. But for the U.K.-born son of hard-working
immigrants to Canada, an epiphany awaited. As a medical student at McMaster
University in the late 1980s, Dr. Orbinski spent a year in Rwanda researching
children's HIV. Overwhelmed by the vast scale of suffering there, he returned
from the Central African nation forever changed.

    "I went as a researcher, I went as a scientist, and I came back as a man who
was focused almost entirely on humanitarian medicine," recalls the soft-spoken
Toronto resident.

    Dr. Orbinski, 50, is now a research scientist at St. Michael's Hospital in
downtown Toronto. But he's also pursued a global humanitarian career in which
his achievements are as profound as they are impressive. Dr. Orbinski has never
been afraid to lead by example. Throughout the 1990s, he worked for aid
organization Médecins sans frontières (Doctors Without Borders) in several
troubled countries, including Rwanda and Somalia.

    As MSF's head of mission in Rwanda during the 1994 genocide - an experience
recounted in his 2008 bestseller An Imperfect Offering: Humanitarian Action for
the 21st Century - he learned a powerful lesson about leading others.

    "Genocide really is the final limit where there is no possibility of
humanitarian action," says Dr. Orbinski, who received the Meritorious Service
Cross for his efforts in Rwanda. "Part of effective leadership is knowing the
limits when they're there."

    Having co-founded the Canadian chapter of MSF in 1990, Dr. Orbinski served
as international president from 1998 to 2001. His first task was to stop what he
regarded as MSF's drift away from its core values. Dr. Orbinski also reasserted
the agency's independence by increasing the share of private-donor support to 80
per cent from 50 per cent of its budget. Third, he boosted capacity in
epidemiology, policy analysis and other evidence-based approaches to
humanitarian work.

    In 1999, Dr. Orbinski accepted the Nobel Peace Prize on behalf of MSF. The
father of three says that leading such a sprawling operation - MSF now has
27,000 medical professionals in some 60 countries - means being only nominally
in charge. "If you can steer the boat in a certain direction - which is not
always easy - that is a marker of success in an organization of that kind."

    An associate professor of medicine and political science at the University
of Toronto, Dr. Orbinski has proved adept at forging alliances. He chaired the
working group behind the seven-year-old Drugs for Neglected Diseases Initiative
(DNDi), a partnership between MSF and medical research organizations in several
countries including Brazil, France and India. Thanks also to relationships with
pharmaceutical companies such as Sanofi Aventis, DNDi has yielded two
anti-malarial drugs and a treatment for African sleeping sickness.

    The project has 17 other drugs and compounds in development.

    With similar pragmatism, Dr. Orbinski and his colleague James Fraser
enlisted global health experts for the launch of Toronto-based Dignitas
International in 2003. Dignitas provides HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment and
support in Malawi, where this year it will expand its services to reach three
million people.

    Dr. Orbinski was also a key player in launching MSF's Access to Essential
Medicines campaign. One example of its success: The annual cost of treating an
HIV patient with anti-retrovirals has fallen from about $13,000 (U.S.) for
patented drugs to $80 (U.S.) for generic versions. "The face of global health
has fundamentally changed very much as a consequence of the initiatives and
catalytic effects, if you will, of that campaign," Dr. Orbinski says.

    For the 2009 Order of Canada recipient, leadership means being open to new
ways of thinking. "There's no point in preaching to the converted," he says. "If
I can bring a different perspective - and if I can also learn a different
perspective - then one can see the pragmatic possibilities."

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2010


                               9 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2010 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                          September 8, 2010 Wednesday

SECTION: COMMENT; LIBERATION TREATMENT; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 809 words

HEADLINE: The cure for MS includes healthy skepticism and a dose of hope

BYLINE: TIMOTHY CAULFIELD

BODY:

    Canada Research Chair in Health Law and Policy at the University of Alberta

    As many as 75,000 Canadians have multiple sclerosis. It is a heartbreaking
affliction that can slowly rob individuals of the ability to do the most basic
of physical acts.

    It is no surprise, then, that the possibility of a new treatment has
generated international attention. Paolo Zamboni's 2009 announcement of a
surgical procedure, known as the liberation treatment, produced both
hope-heightening headlines (MS Sufferers Buoyed By New Evidence Of Surgical
Cure, reads one example) and a market for the "cure," populated by desperate
patients.

    True medical breakthroughs with immediate clinical relevance do occur, but
just a bit more frequently than the passage of Halley's comet. The discovery of
insulin and penicillin, the development and distribution of various vaccines,
and the perfection of anesthetic and safe surgical techniques are all good
examples. Could the liberation technique be in the same category?

    On Aug. 31, a report issued by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
and the MS Society of Canada made the breakthrough scenario seem less likely.
The report, which stands as a wonderful example of the mobilization and
utilization of independent scientific expertise, examined both the biological
theory, a phenomenon that Dr. Zamboni has called Chronic Cerebrospinal Venous
Insufficiency (CCSVI), and the clinical procedure in the liberation treatment.

    What did the report conclude? That Dr. Zamboni's research has numerous
methodological flaws and should be viewed as a pilot study at best. That the
liberation treatment involves an intervention, venous angioplasty, that is
potentially dangerous and could lead to stroke and heart complications. And,
perhaps most importantly, that "there is little support for the notion that
'venous insufficiency' for the brain or spinal cord contributes to the
development of MS."

    This report, which accords with the emerging conclusions of other
professional and scientific organizations from around the world, has a clear
message: There is no good evidence that the liberation treatment works, or even
that it could work. More research on the possible mechanics of the theory behind
the treatment - that is, on the phenomenon of CCSVI - is required.

    The day after the report was issued, federal Health Minister Leona Aglukkaq
said she intends to follow the recommendations of the report and not devote
federal money to clinical trials at this time. However, several provinces,
specifically Saskatchewan and Newfoundland and Labrador, have reaffirmed a
commitment to fund the clinical work.

    In addition to the scientific reasons outlined in the CIHR-MS report, any
decision to fund must tackle other questions.

    First, given the scant evidence to support the start of a clinical trial, is
it appropriate to use scarce public research money in this manner? So much
health research is required and lacking financial support - shouldn't this kind
of decision be driven by the science? If not, what kind of precedent does this
establish for future funding decisions?

    Second, is it ethical to conduct this research on MS patients? Research
ethics demands that there be a degree of basic scientific evidence, such as
studies on the possible biological link between CCSVI and MS, to support the
move to research involving humans - this is particularly so when the
intervention is invasive and has known risks. Moving to clinical trials before
there is supporting data can result in missteps that hobble progress. This
happened with gene therapy in the late 1990s, when patient Jesse Gelsinger died
in a clinical trial that many believe was premature. Gene therapy is still
recovering from that controversy.

    Third, might support from provincial governments legitimize this currently
questionable technique in the eyes of desperate patients, thus helping to
buttress a market for the less reputable clinics throughout the world that are
offering the treatment, often at a hefty price? There are reports of numerous,
perhaps thousands, of Canadians travelling to receive the liberation "cure."
Given what the existing evidence tells us about efficacy, this trend seems both
risky and, perhaps, an exploitation of vulnerable individuals.

    The first reaction to any claim of a major medical breakthrough, especially
for a complex disease like MS, should be healthy skepticism, flavoured with a
dose of hope. I realize this might sound crushingly cynical. It's not. Healthy
skepticism is at the heart of good science. And good science is an essential
element of good health-care decisions. The surest way to determine whether
clinical benefit can be derived from this approach is to study it in a rigorous,
systematic manner, starting with basic research and then moving, if data are
sufficient, to clinical trials.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2010


                              10 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2010 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 22, 2010 Thursday

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; INTERNATIONAL AIDS CONFERENCE; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 908 words

HEADLINE: Talk of HIV cure now 'legitimate';
With an effective treatment in place, researchers are turning to the ultimate
goal

BYLINE: ANDRÉ PICARD

DATELINE: VIENNA

BODY:

    apicard@globeandmail.com

    Can AIDS be cured?

    It has long been a taboo to use the C-word when discussing the response to
the pandemic, but scientists at the International AIDS Conference in Vienna are
seriously discussing the idea that the human immunodeficiency virus can be
eliminated from the body, or at least battered into quasi-permanent remission.

    "Vienna will not be the conference to announce a cure. But we should not
continue to accept that HIV is a disease which commits patients to life-long
treatment," said Sharon Lewin, a physician in the infectious diseases unit of
the Alfred Hospital in Melbourne, Australia.

    While much effort has been invested in getting people with HIV-AIDS on a
course of treatment, antiretroviral drugs essentially have to be taken for life.

    If they are stopped, illness returns with a vengeance, meaning that the cost
of controlling the epidemic is astronomical, while the cost of non-treatment is
even higher - a Catch-22 of global proportions.

    "The need for a cure is more urgent in 2010 than ever before," Dr. Lewin
told conference delegates, who applauded vigorously in agreement.

    What scientists would like to do is find a way to take the treatment up a
notch so that replication of the AIDS virus is not just dampened but permanently
stopped.

    There are two major avenues being explored:

    * A functional cure, where the virus is permanently suppressed so drugs are
no longer needed; this is similar to a cancer being in remission;

    * A sterilizing cure that would eliminate HIV from the body entirely; this
is similar to a cancer that is cured with a bone marrow transplant.

    While the approaches are straightforward, there are a number of hurdles.

    The most obvious is that HIV is wily. It hides in reservoirs, allowing the
virus to pounce anew once treatment stops. Worse, researchers aren't quite sure
where those reservoirs are.

    Just as significant is that the virus can silently establish itself in CD4
and T-cells, central components of the immune system.

    As a result, all the HIV virus in the body is not killed, even in patients
who seem to be HIV-free.

    "I think it was irresponsible to talk about a cure when we had no drugs. But
now it's legitimate to talk about it now," said Mark Wainberg, head of the AIDS
Centre at McGill University in Montreal.

    As scientific knowledge increases, confidence is growing that the challenges
can be met, Dr. Wainberg said.

    There are reasons for optimism.

    The treatment regime, known as highly active antiretroviral treatment, or
HAART, is now being used by 5.2 million people worldwide. The drugs have become
cheaper, easier to use and less toxic.

    They have also extended the life expectancy of HIV-positive people by more
than 13 years on average.

    For most people on treatment, HIV-AIDS is now a chronic illness, not the
short-term death sentence it once was.

    One spectacular scientific breakthrough - and many less noticeable advances
in labs around the world - have fuelled the cure talk.

    In 2008, researchers revealed that a 42-year-old German man had been cured
of AIDS; he has been off drugs since and remains in good health, according to
his doctors.

    The case is unusual but informative. "It reminds us that HIV is an infection
of the immune system," said Frank Maldarelli, head of the HIV Resistance Program
at the U.S. National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.

    In addition to being HIV-positive, the patient developed leukemia. His
treatment included a stem-cell transplant, which required that his immune system
first be wiped out with drugs and radiation. Then, it turned out that the donor
of his bone marrow had a rare mutation, known as Delta 32, that resulted in his
white blood cells lacking the receptors that allow HIV to invade the immune
system.

    The transplant recipient inherited that mutation and his HIV seems to have
disappeared.

    The problem, Dr. Maldarelli said, is that these circumstances are virtually
impossible to replicate and, besides, "wholesale replacement of the immune
system is not a practical approach."

    Indeed, no one realistically believes that gene therapy could be done on the
33.4 million people in the world living with HIV-AIDS today. Yet, each small
advance bolsters the hope that the number of new infections (2.7 million a year)
can be slowed and the number of AIDS-related deaths (two million annually) can
be reduced.

    "There is a growing sense within the scientific community that the search
for a cure for AIDS is ripe for a concerted research effort," said Robert
Siliciano, a researcher at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Md.

    Françoise Barré-Sinoussi, the 2008 Nobel laureate in medicine for her
co-discovery of the AIDS virus and president-elect of the International AIDS
Society, is equally bullish. "The science in this area is evolving rapidly," she
said. "There is a strong need for continued investment in research."

    As tantalizing as the prospect of a cure is, scientists caution that it
should not take precedence over the search for a vaccine, the quest for
universal treatment with antiretrovirals, the development of microbicides and
other public-health measures like the promotion of circumcision and the
distribution of condoms.

    "A cure is still the Holy Grail of treatment research, just as a vaccine is
the Holy Grail of prevention research," Dr. Wainberg said.

    "But, in the meantime, there is still a lot of practical stuff we need to do
every day."

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2010


                              11 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2010 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             April 30, 2010 Friday

SECTION: GLOBE LIFE; HEALTH CANADA REPORT / SIDE EFFECTS; Pg. L4

LENGTH: 708 words

HEADLINE: Adverse drug reactions up 35 per cent: report;
While experts laud the increase in Canadians' awareness, they say 30,000 cases
in 2009 is just a tiny fraction of problem

BYLINE: CARLY WEEKS

BODY:

    Health Canada received nearly 30,000 reports of adverse reactions to drugs
and other health products from Canadians last year, a substantial 35-per-cent
increase from the previous year.

    The department received 27,496 adverse reaction reports last year, compared
to 20,360 reports in 2008.

    Three-quarters of the reports are considered to be serious, Health Canada
said, which can include a "noxious or unintended" reaction that requires
hospitalization, causes congenital malformation, leads to persistent or
significant disability or incapacity, threatens life or causes death.

    While the number of reports may seem high, experts say it likely represent a
tiny fraction of actual adverse reactions to drugs and other health products.

    "It's certainly the tip of the iceberg," said Tom Perry, clinical assistant
professor in the anesthesiology, pharmacology and therapeutics department at the
University of British Columbia, and internist at UBC Hospital.

    But the report also raises questions about the information it leaves out.
For instance, which categories of drugs are most often associated with serious
reactions? How many Canadians died as a result of a suspected reaction to a drug
last year? And what is Health Canada doing about it?

    "Adverse reactions" is a loose term applied to a wide variety of problems
relating to health products regulated by Health Canada. In essence, it refers to
side effects. In addition to drugs, Health Canada also collects information
about side effects associated with natural health products; biotechnology
products such as insulin; biologics such as gene therapies; radiopharmaceuticals
or radioactive drugs; as well as cells, tissues and organs.

    About 70 per cent of 2009 adverse reaction reports were associated with
drugs, while 23 per cent were tied to biotechnology products.

    However, health officials caution that experiencing an adverse reaction
doesn't necessarily mean there is a problem with the drug.

    Health Canada would not grant an interview request on the subject, but a
spokesman said in an e-mail it's not always possible to prove that a drug caused
a particular reaction. The reaction could also have been caused by another
factor, such as an underlying condition or a patient's previous medical history,
the spokesman said.

    The department would not provide any specific information about drugs that
are associated with high numbers of adverse reactions.

    Dr. Perry said he's encouraged by the fact the number of adverse reaction
reports submitted to Health Canada is on the rise. Although the reports don't
capture the full scope of drug side effects that occur in Canada each year,
they're an important tool in understanding and recognizing potential issues and
can potentially help prevent widespread problems before they get out of control.

    Pharmaceutical companies are required to tell Health Canada about any
reports of serious adverse reactions they receive.

    But traditionally, too few doctors and patients have taken the time to
report side effects to Health Canada, which means issues with certain drugs can
go unrecognized for an extended period, Dr. Perry said.

    Although drugs must go through rigorous clinical trials before they're
allowed on the market, they are often tested on a relatively small number of
people. When a drug is introduced to an entire population, previously undetected
side effects or problems can emerge.

    The landscape has started to shift in recent years after several major
problems with a host of drugs helped put the issue high in the public
consciousness. Merck & Co. pulled painkiller Vioxx off the market after evidence
showed that it was associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular problems.
Debate over the use of the diabetes medication Avandia has been raging for
several years after studies showed it is linked to an increased number of heart
attacks or episodes of chest pain. Recent reports in The New York Times say some
officials in the U.S. Food and Drug Administration want Avandia removed from the
market.

    Last year, Health Canada also received more than 305,000 foreign reports of
adverse reactions, meaning those that occurred outside of Canada. Drug companies
are required to submit those reports to Health Canada.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2010


                              12 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2010 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             April 30, 2010 Friday

SECTION: GLOBE LIFE; HEALTH CANADA REPORT / SIDE EFFECTS; Pg. L4

LENGTH: 708 words

HEADLINE: Adverse drug reactions up 35 per cent: report;
While experts laud the increase in Canadians' awareness, they say 30,000 cases
in 2009 is just a tiny fraction of problem

BYLINE: CARLY WEEKS

BODY:

    Health Canada received nearly 30,000 reports of adverse reactions to drugs
and other health products from Canadians last year, a substantial 35-per-cent
increase from the previous year.

    The department received 27,496 adverse reaction reports last year, compared
to 20,360 reports in 2008.

    Three-quarters of the reports are considered to be serious, Health Canada
said, which can include a "noxious or unintended" reaction that requires
hospitalization, causes congenital malformation, leads to persistent or
significant disability or incapacity, threatens life or causes death.

    While the number of reports may seem high, experts say it likely represent a
tiny fraction of actual adverse reactions to drugs and other health products.

    "It's certainly the tip of the iceberg," said Tom Perry, clinical assistant
professor in the anesthesiology, pharmacology and therapeutics department at the
University of British Columbia, and internist at UBC Hospital.

    But the report also raises questions about the information it leaves out.
For instance, which categories of drugs are most often associated with serious
reactions? How many Canadians died as a result of a suspected reaction to a drug
last year? And what is Health Canada doing about it?

    "Adverse reactions" is a loose term applied to a wide variety of problems
relating to health products regulated by Health Canada. In essence, it refers to
side effects. In addition to drugs, Health Canada also collects information
about side effects associated with natural health products; biotechnology
products such as insulin; biologics such as gene therapies; radiopharmaceuticals
or radioactive drugs; as well as cells, tissues and organs.

    About 70 per cent of 2009 adverse reaction reports were associated with
drugs, while 23 per cent were tied to biotechnology products.

    However, health officials caution that experiencing an adverse reaction
doesn't necessarily mean there is a problem with the drug.

    Health Canada would not grant an interview request on the subject, but a
spokesman said in an e-mail it's not always possible to prove that a drug caused
a particular reaction. The reaction could also have been caused by another
factor, such as an underlying condition or a patient's previous medical history,
the spokesman said.

    The department would not provide any specific information about drugs that
are associated with high numbers of adverse reactions.

    Dr. Perry said he's encouraged by the fact the number of adverse reaction
reports submitted to Health Canada is on the rise. Although the reports don't
capture the full scope of drug side effects that occur in Canada each year,
they're an important tool in understanding and recognizing potential issues and
can potentially help prevent widespread problems before they get out of control.

    Pharmaceutical companies are required to tell Health Canada about any
reports of serious adverse reactions they receive.

    But traditionally, too few doctors and patients have taken the time to
report side effects to Health Canada, which means issues with certain drugs can
go unrecognized for an extended period, Dr. Perry said.

    Although drugs must go through rigorous clinical trials before they're
allowed on the market, they are often tested on a relatively small number of
people. When a drug is introduced to an entire population, previously undetected
side effects or problems can emerge.

    The landscape has started to shift in recent years after several major
problems with a host of drugs helped put the issue high in the public
consciousness. Merck & Co. pulled painkiller Vioxx off the market after evidence
showed that it was associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular problems.
Debate over the use of the diabetes medication Avandia has been raging for
several years after studies showed it is linked to an increased number of heart
attacks or episodes of chest pain. Recent reports in The New York Times say some
officials in the U.S. Food and Drug Administration want Avandia removed from the
market.

    Last year, Health Canada also received more than 305,000 foreign reports of
adverse reactions, meaning those that occurred outside of Canada. Drug companies
are required to submit those reports to Health Canada.

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2010


                              21 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                           November 14, 2009 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 320 words

HEADLINE: National H1N1 vaccine supply gets shot in the arm

BYLINE: BY CHRISTINA SPENCER

BODY:

   Buffeted by criticism about shortages of H1N1 vaccine -- including in the
nation's capital -- federal health officials have widened access to the H1N1
shot, by approving a Canadian-made product with no booster additive and
expanding the list of demographic groups who can receive it.

   Dr. David Butler-Jones, Canada's chief public health officer, said yesterday
he's recommending the unadjuvanted vaccine manufactured by GlaxoSmithKline in
Ste-Foy, Que., be made available for healthy people aged 10 to 64. His previous
guideline called for that group to receive adjuvanted vaccine, i.e. shots with a
booster.

   The unadjuvanted GSK product had already been sent to provincial warehouses
in anticipation of federal approval, which came Thursday, according to Dr. Elwyn
Griffiths, director general of the biologics and genetic therapies directorate
at Health Canada.

   In total, Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada had ordered
1.8 million doses of the unadjuvanted vaccine from GSK. It was bound primarily
for pregnant women.

   Since there are only 300,000 to 350,000 pregnancies a year in Canada,
unadjuvanted shots can now be made available to a wider range of people with
healthy immune systems. Butler-Jones recommends those with compromised immune
responses take the adjuvanted version.

   GOOD NEWS

   The seeming glut of unadjuvanted vaccine came with other good news:
Butler-Jones said the unadjuvanted vaccine confers immunity in 94% of those who
receive it, an effectiveness much higher than seasonal flu vaccines, which
normally give 60% to 80% protection. Adjuvanted vaccine has shown results in the
98% range.

   "This is actually a very pleasant finding and beneficial in terms of the
protection it offers," he said.

   GSK has distributed 8.5 million doses of vaccine to date, and a further 1.9
million doses are expected to be in the field next week. About 20% of the
Canadian population has been immunized to date.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2009


                              25 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                           November 12, 2009 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 228 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy builds up muscles in monkeys

BYLINE: BY REUTERS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A gene therapy treatment that stops the breakdown of muscle appeared safe in
monkeys and may also build muscle, researchers said yesterday.

   The approach is being developed in the hope of treating severe muscle
weakness caused by multiple sclerosis, muscular dystrophy and neurodegenerative
diseases, but progress is slow, in part, because of fears about its safety.

   Janaiah Kota of the Center for Gene Therapy at Nationwide Children's Hospital
in Columbus, Ohio, and colleagues used an engineered virus called an
adeno-associated virus to carry a gene into the leg muscles of healthy monkeys.

   The gene causes cells to produce human follistatin, which interferes with
another compound called myostatin. Myostatin breaks down muscle, so in theory
adding follistatin should encourage muscles to grow.

   The new gene therapy went safely into the muscles of the monkeys and within
three months, their muscles were growing bigger, the researchers reported in the
journal Science Translational Medicine.

   The effects lasted for at least 15 months, they said. This is important for
treating lifelong diseases such as MS and muscular dystrophy.

   No other organs appeared to be affected, they said.

   "Our results, together with the findings in mice, suggest that therapy with
AAV1-FS344 may improve muscle mass and function in patients with certain
degenerative muscle disorders," they wrote.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2009


                              28 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                            October 25, 2009 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 49

LENGTH: 203 words

HEADLINE: Experimental gene therapy offers sight for sore eyes

BYLINE: BY PHIL FUREY, REUTERS

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   Nine-year-old Corey Haas can ride his bike alone now, thanks to an
experimental gene therapy that has boosted his fading vision with a single
treatment.

   The gene therapy helped improve worsening eyesight caused by a rare inherited
disease called Leber congenital amaurosis, or LCA, which makes most patients
blind by age 40.

   Twelve treated patients, including Corey, now have better vision, their
doctors told a joint meeting of the American Academy of Ophthalmology and
Pan-American Association of Ophthalmology in San Francisco yesterday.

   "All 12 patients given gene therapy in one eye showed improvement in retinal
function," Dr. Katherine High of The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and colleagues wrote in a report to be released
at the same time by the Lancet medical journal.

   LCA causes the retina to degenerate and the researchers found that the
younger the patient treated with the therapy, the better the effects.

   While the experiment was meant mostly to show the treatment was safe, it
showed remarkably strong effects, High and colleagues found.

   "This study reports dramatic results in restoring vision to patients who
previously had no options for treatment," said High.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2009


                              30 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2009 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 8, 2009 Thursday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; ONCOLOGY RESEARCH; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 797 words

HEADLINE: CANADIANS UNCOVER THE CANCER MAP;
'The moment has arrived' A team of B.C.-based scientists decodes the metastatic
breast-cancer genome, shedding light on how tumours develop by understanding
their mutations. The landmark achievement opens up a world of new ways to fight
the disease - including personalized treatments

BYLINE: CARLY WEEKS

BODY:

    The possibility of using a patient's genetic information to create
personalized therapies to battle cancer is one step closer to reality after
Canadian scientists decoded, for the first time, the entire genome of a
patient's metastatic breast cancer.

    It's a landmark achievement that sheds light on how cancer develops and
provides new insights into how to fight it.

    "I'm excited by the possibilities," said Samuel Aparicio, the head of the
department of breast and molecular oncology at the B.C. Cancer Agency and one of
the lead scientists involved with the discovery. "In fact, I never thought I
would see in my professional lifetime that it would become possible to routinely
sequence genomes in the way that we're now doing."

    Genomes contain all of the biological information of a living organism, and
that information is housed in DNA. There are about three billion "letters" or
building blocks in the human genome. When cells divide, all three billion
building blocks must be copied. But mistakes in the copying process can
sometimes occur, and those mutations can, in some cases, cause cells to grow in
an uncontrolled way - which is how cancer develops.

    In decoding the metastatic breast-cancer genome, which contains all of the
genetic information of a patient's cancer, scientists were able to identify all
of the mutations in the tumour, a feat that has never before been accomplished.

    But the breakthrough didn't stop there. Once all of the tumour mutations of
the developed cancer were identified - a total of 32 were found - scientists had
the information to look back and see which of those mutations were present in
the patient's original, primary tumour.

    They discovered that only 11 of the 32 mutations were present in the
original tumour, with only five of those present in all of the original cancer
cells, meaning that even in the early stages, cancer cells aren't uniform.
That's significant because it proves even from the outset, cancer cells contain
different mutations which change over time.

    While scientists have theorized that cancer cells can differ, even in a
single individual, until now it has never been possible to sequence the cancer
genome and determine what mutations are present and how they evolve.

    "I think we're getting used to the idea an individual patient's cancer is
itself multiple individual cancers that may behave differently," said Dr.
Aparicio, who holds the Canada research chair in molecular oncology and is the
Nan and Lorraine Robertson chair of breast-cancer research at the University of
British Columbia.

    The findings, discovered by a research team led by Dr. Aparicio and Marco
Marra, director of the Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre at the B.C. Cancer
Agency, are published today in the journal Nature.

    A major portion of the money used to fund the research came from the B.C.
Cancer Foundation's Weekend to End Breast Cancer walk, as well as donations
raised across the province during the annual breast-cancer walk over the past
six years. Funding also came from other groups, including the Canadian Breast
Cancer Foundation.

    The next major challenge will be interpreting the mutations to understand
their significance and determine which mutations are vulnerable to which
treatments.

    Eventually, scientists hope to decode cancer genomes from a large number of
patients to determine if there are any patterns in the genetic mutations and to
learn more about the significance of various mutations. Dr. Aparicio said their
work could help usher in an era in which scientists will be able to decode
cancer genomes in every patient with the aim of devising therapies targeted to
the mutations present in their tumours.

    This also means patients may have to undergo numerous tests as their disease
progresses to account for the fact that an individual's cancer goes though
multiple changes over time.

    A growing number of researchers have put stock in recent years in the idea
that genome sequencing holds the key to understanding cancer development and
creating targeted therapies. To date, the exorbitant cost and complex process of
genome sequencing has put those lofty goals out of reach. But now a series of
technological advancements has brought down the cost dramatically, which means
the "possibility of obtaining genome sequence from every patient's tumour is
coming closer," Dr. Aparicio said.

    The scientists involved in this advance used next-generation DNA sequencing
technology to decode the cancer genome, new technology that is lowering costs
and helping to fuel genome-related research and discoveries around the world.

    "We've been dreaming about the possibility to capture complete genome
information from cancers in a routine way for decades," Dr. Aparicio said. "The
moment has arrived."

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2009


                              31 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2009 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                          September 17, 2009 Thursday

SECTION: GLOBE LIFE; COLOUR BLINDNESS / POTENTIAL CURE; Pg. L1

LENGTH: 645 words

HEADLINE: Monkeys see red (at last) after gene therapy

BYLINE: DAKSHANA BASCARAMURTY

BODY:

    Strawberries coloured crimson, grapes tinted deep purple and limes shaded
green. For some of the estimated 422,000 Canadians who suffer from colour
blindness - the most common genetic disorder - the true colour of those fruits
is often replaced by dull shades of grey.

    But new research published in the most recent issue of the journal Nature
suggests there may be a way to correct vision disorders such as colour
blindness, which were long thought to be incurable in adults.

    A team of scientists from the University of Washington and the University of
Florida have brought full-colour vision to two adult squirrel monkeys that
suffered from red-green colour blindness using gene therapy. Because monkeys and
humans have very similar retinas, the researchers believe the techniques they
used could improve the vision of humans, too.

    The monkeys were trained to do the Cambridge Colour Test, the standard test
used to detect colour blindness in humans. They were presented with three panels
on a monitor - two were blank and one had a pattern of coloured dots on it - and
had to touch their noses to the panel with the pattern. If they were correct,
they were rewarded with a sip of grape juice, but if they were wrong, the
researchers played a buzzing sound.

    Because the monkeys were colour blind, they continually guessed and had a
success rate of about 33 per cent, said William Hauswirth, one of the study's
authors and a professor of ophthalmology and molecular genetics at the
University of Florida.

    Then, scientists injected each monkey's retina with a human virus that
contained the gene that allows the eye to detect red.

    They also injected a piece of DNA to regulate how the gene is made into
protein. They anticipated the monkeys would open their eyes to a new world after
the treatment.

    At first, there was no change in the vision test results.

    "We started losing hope," Dr. Hauswirth said.

    But after 15 weeks, he and his research partners noticed something dramatic:
The monkeys' success rate jumped to 95 per cent - they could see red.

    "We demonstrated that we can add a new colour response to a primate. If we
can do it in a monkey, we can almost certainly do it in a human," Dr. Hauswirth
said.

    This research could prove useful for those diagnosed with achromatopsia,
what Dr. Hauswirth describes as a "very debilitating" form of coloured
blindness. Sufferers are very sensitive to light and often have to wear red
contact lenses and sunglasses when they are indoors.

    This process could also benefit people suffering from a range of vision
disorders that stem from a problem with the cones in their eyes, which sense
light and are key to colour vision.

    "This is the first demonstration that you can treat cones with the gene
they're missing," Dr. Hauswirth said.

    Alex Goulet-Hanssens, a 23-year-old master's student at McGill University in
Montreal, has long eschewed the label "colour blind."

    Though there have been signs of the disorder since he was in Grade 9, when
he mistakenly bought a pair of baby-blue cargo pants thinking they were grey, it
was only a few months ago that he was formally diagnosed with the disorder.

    While Mr. Goulet-Hanssens said his colour blindness doesn't bother him
enough to seek treatment just yet,

    a cure for it would certainly help him in the laboratory.

    As student of chemistry, he sometimes struggles to detect whether a compound
is an acid or a base when he uses phenolphthalein, an indicator that stays
colourless in acidic solutions but turns pink in basic ones. His teaching
assistant usually comes to his aid to tell him if it's pink or not.

    He said it might also be nice to pick out clothes that don't clash on his
own.

    "I learned very early on that I needed female friends with me to come
shopping," he said with a laugh. "Even if I thought something was in the
ballpark, I would be wrong."

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2009


                              35 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2009 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              June 22, 2009 Monday

SECTION: SCIENCE; HIV/AIDS RESEARCH; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 556 words

HEADLINE: Canadians discover AIDS virus hiding place

BYLINE: ANNE McILROY

BODY:

    SCIENCE REPORTER

    A Canadian-led research team has discovered where the AIDS virus hides in
the human body, work the scientists say could lead to a new way to treat the
disease and perhaps even a chance to eradicate it.

    Doctors can't cure patients with HIV-AIDS. The anti-viral drugs used to
subdue the human immunodeficiency virus don't completely clear it from the body.

    There are hiding places - HIV reservoirs - where small numbers of virus lie
low, ready to launch an attack. Until now, scientists didn't know where these
havens were, but the possibilities included the brain or the kidneys.

    In a paper published in the journal Nature Medicine, the University of
Montreal's Rafick-Pierre Sékaly and his colleagues report that the virus finds
refuge in a type of long-lived immune system cell.

    They are now looking at ways to destroy the virus without crippling the
immune system. One day, the work could lead to a cure, said Dr. Sékaly, one of
Canada's top AIDS researchers.

    "It really is the first clue to allow us to eradicate HIV," he said.

    Recent studies have shown that even patients who took five or six anti-viral
drugs at the same time could not get rid of the virus, said Jean-Pierre Routy, a
hematologist at the Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre in
Montreal, who is one of the co-authors of the paper.

    The treatment regime, known as highly active antiretroviral treatment, or
HAART, adds, on average, 13 years to the life expectancy of HIV-positive people,
according to one study. But the virus remains present at low levels, ready to
stage a comeback if they stop taking their medication.

    The new findings suggest that more or stronger anti-virals aren't the
answer, the researchers say, but that targeting the reservoirs is a better
strategy for finding a cure for HIV-AIDS.

    HIV hides in the long-lived "memory" cells that allow someone to avoid the
mumps or the measles as a senior because the individual had it as a child.

    Like stem cells, these memory cells have incredible longevity. They are
relatively sleepy until they encounter an old foe - a virus or other infectious
agent they vanquished before - or a new disease-causing organism. Then they
start to replicate so they can better defend the body against invaders. But the
viruses lurking within also get a chance to reproduce.

    Mark Wainberg, director of the McGill AIDS Centre, said that while the work
is significant, it will be hard to find and eliminate every safe-haven cell.

    "They are hard to get rid of and are going to represent a challenge for us,"
said Dr. Wainberg, who was not part of the research team, which included a
number of scientists from the United States.

    Last month, Dr. Sékaly announced he was moving to the United States and
taking as many as 25 scientists on his team with him. He said he was leaving in
part because of federal cuts in science funding, and that he hoped his departure
would be a wake-up call for the government.

    Dr. Sékaly is still setting up his lab in Florida, where he is scientific
director of the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute. He is planning to move there
in the fall, but he will keep a lab running at the University of Montreal.

    There is no vaccine for HIV-AIDS. There were 2.7 million new infections
worldwide in 2007, and 33 million people are living with the virus.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2009


                              36 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2009 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              June 9, 2009 Tuesday

SECTION: GLOBE LIFE; RESEARCH / VACCINATION; Pg. L6

LENGTH: 838 words

HEADLINE: Scientists mutate mosquitoes in effort to eradicate malaria

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD, Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

    Think your job's tedious? Try beheading 100 mosquitoes an hour.

    Gently, no smushing allowed. Malaria parasites lurk in these mosquitoes'
salivary glands, and a small company on the outskirts of the U.S. capital needs
them unharmed for a dramatic test - attempting the first live vaccine to fight
malaria.

    Mutant mosquitoes, too, may help one day. Their eyes glow green under a
special microscope, a sign that the University of Maryland's genetic engineering
has taken hold: These bugs should become malaria superincubators, a bid to
eventually get more of the vaccine's key ingredient from each mosquito.

    If the two experiments sound farfetched, consider: A global push is on to
eradicate this ancient scourge, and increasingly scientists are exploring how to
use the mosquito itself to help - not just with the vaccine research but also,
conversely, by breeding insects that are less able to spread malaria.

    "It's really gene therapy for insects," says David O'Brochta, who heads the
Maryland university's novel laboratory and, with government funding, is creating
both bug types.

    It's a change in philosophy, and Dr. O'Brochta cautions that it's far from
clear that any of the mosquito research will pan out.

    A vaccine made of living malaria parasites "was considered laughable five to
seven years ago," says Stephen Hoffman, chief executive officer of Rockville,
Md.-based Sanaria Inc.

    In the U.S. Navy in the 1990s, Dr. Hoffman irradiated malaria-carrying
mosquitoes to weaken the parasites inside them, and he and 13 colleagues
subjected themselves to more than 1,000 bites. Usually malaria parasites race to
the liver and multiply before invading the bloodstream to sicken. These weakened
parasites instead sat harmlessly in the liver, unable to multiply but triggering
the immune system to fend off later infections.

    All but one of the people in Dr. Hoffman's test, himself included, were
immune when bitten by regular malaria-infected mosquitoes over the next 10
months.

    The question was how to turn that protection into a long-lasting shot.
Critics said that "it couldn't possibly be made," Dr. Hoffman recalls. "We were
dismissed by 99 per cent of the people in the malaria field."

    Yet two weeks ago, with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration's okay, the
first of about 100 U.S. volunteers started receiving test doses of Sanaria's
vaccine in a first-stage safety study.

    Nearly a quarter-billion people get malaria each year, and it kills almost
one million, the vast majority of them young children in Africa. Species of
Anopheles mosquitoes spread the parasite. Bed netting and insecticides are the
chief protection. Advanced testing of a different experimental vaccine from
GlaxoSmithKline is under way in Africa, an exciting first but one expected to
provide only partial protection.

    Hence the push by about a dozen labs worldwide to breed malaria-resistant
mosquitoes in various ways, including altering their genes.

    In Dr. O'Brochta's lab, Robert Harrell peers through a microscope and jabs a
mosquito egg - so small it takes a clump of them to resemble specks of dirt -
with a hair-thin glass needle. He's aiming new DNA near a spot that should
develop into reproductive organs, so the resulting mutant mosquito can pass its
new trait to next generations.

    Inheritance is a hurdle: Of the mutants that survive to adulthood, only
about 2 per cent of their progeny remain genetically modified.

    In a humid insectary that resembles a walk-in safe, Dr. O'Brochta pulls out
a bucket swarming with Anopheles gambiae, the species that drives malaria in
Africa. Deprived of human blood in the lab, these mosquitoes will suck on a
sedated mouse for food. (The lab mouse, which loses a little blood, then gets a
two-week vacation - and no, mosquitoes don't make mice itch.)

    But in the wild, this particular species hunts people like a bloodhound, so
a malaria-resistance gene would have to spread a lot faster through mosquito
populations to work. How to speed that spread is Dr. O'Brochta's main focus.

    The flip side of his research brings us back to Sanaria.

    It takes 3,000 mosquitoes - relatives of A. gambiae, dissected by hand - to
make a batch of the experimental vaccine, says Sanaria entomologist Adam
Richman. In an FDA-sanctioned "clean room," workers dunk frozen mosquitoes in
alcohol, killing them but not the stunned parasites inside. Then, peering
through a microscope, the workers carefully pull each mosquito's head from its
body. Out pops an almost translucent glob, the glands, ready for purification.

    The company's eventual goal: a mosquito that can harbour 200,000
sporozoites, the immature parasites, twice the typical amount. In his nearby
university lab, that's what Dr. O'Brochta is trying to create by switching off a
gene that protects the bug when it eats malaria-infected human blood.

    "No one has ever made transgenic mosquitoes with this gene knocked out," he
says. "We want to cripple its immune system so when it takes an infected meal,
it gets infected at very high levels."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2009


                              39 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2009 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                               May 4, 2009 Monday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; RESEARCH FUNDING; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 730 words

HEADLINE: Top AIDS researcher lured away by Florida;
Scientist expects to double his budget; hopes U.S. move will be wake-up call for
Ottawa

BYLINE: ANNE McILROY

BODY:

   SCIENCE REPORTER

    One of Canada's top AIDS researchers is moving to the United States, taking
as many as 25 scientists on his team with him.

    The University of Montreal's Rafick-Pierre Sékaly says he is leaving in part
because of federal cuts in science funding and hopes his departure will be a
wake-up call.

    "I hope it will trigger some kind of movement that will foster a deep soul
searching and investment," he said in an interview.

    He expects to more than double his $3.5-million research budget in his new
position as scientific director of the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute in
Florida, but will also keep a lab going at the University of Montreal.

    The move to the U.S. was motivated in part by his concern for the talented
young researchers who are part of his team. They are starting their careers and
are anxious about their futures here, Dr. Sékaly says.

    The young scientists, he adds, will have far more opportunity in the U.S.,
where President Barack Obama included $10-billion for medical research in his
economic stimulus package.

    Prime Minister Stephen Harper's government, on the other hand, cut funding
for basic research in its stimulus budget, trimming $148-million from the three
agencies that fund university-based research.

    Those cuts exacerbated a funding crunch that had left many scientists
scrambling to find money to keep their research programs running. Young
scientists are hit particularly hard, says Dr. Sékaly.

    "Right now, the funding is not there. They are going to fund you, but they
are going to fund you at levels that will not allow you to be highly
competitive. If you are not highly competitive, you are done," he says.

    As well, many universities have instituted hiring freezes, which makes it
difficult for young scientists to get jobs. Canada risks losing almost a
complete generation of fresh talent to the United States, where Mr. Obama's
commitment to science is a dream come true for researchers, Dr. Sékaly says.

    "This is something we would like to have our government here follow with the
same vision."

    The federal government has defended its approach to science funding. Science
Minister Gary Goodyear says the cuts were one part of a budget that included
$2-billion for infrastructure projects at Canadian universities and $750-million
for the Canada Foundation for Innovation, which helps researchers buy expensive
equipment.

    But many in the Canadian research community have been critical, and say they
fear it will be hard for Canada to retain and recruit top talent unless the
government invests more in the basic curiosity-driven research they say leads to
important discoveries.

    Dr. Sékaly is the kind of star many feared would leave. An expert in the
human immune system, he has published more than 200 papers in scientific
journals. He is working on a therapeutic vaccine to boost the immune systems of
people infected with the virus that causes AIDS.

    Much of his research budget already comes from U.S. sources, including the
National Institutes of Health and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. But he
expects that once he moves he will be able to attract even more support, up to
$10-million a year.

    His new job is to set up a Florida-based expansion of Oregon Health and
Science University's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute.

    Florida has invited a number of internationally recognized institutions to
build and run satellite operations in the state, offering rich incentives. Dr.
Sékaly will get $100-million to get it going and hire staff, and plans to expand
his own research into cancer and cancer vaccines.

    He moved to Canada from Lebanon in 1986, and says this country has given him
a lot.

    "I would never be where I am today without Canadian support.''

    But he says this is the kind of offer that might come along once in
lifetime.

    "It is really fulfilling a vision of what I want to do."

    Around 20 members of his team cannot relocate to Florida, so he will keep a
lab in Montreal.

    He plans to spend one third of his time there, and says the Montreal-based
scientists on his team will benefit from the increased level of funding he
expects to get in the United States.

    Jay Nelson, the director of the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute in
Portland, Oregon, said in a statement that it was a coup to get Dr. Sékaly.

    "He is considered one of the leading human immunologists in the world," he
said.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2009


                              45 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2009 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           January 10, 2009 Saturday

SECTION: FOCUS; SCIENCE: IDEAS: ANTI-AGING RESEARCH HOURGLASS FIGURES; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 4328 words

HEADLINE: The quest for the test tube of youth;
First they beat the squares, the war and the patriarchy. Now the baby-boom
generation wants to outwit Father Time. Fears of mortality and elder-care
burdens are giving science a senior moment as labs investigate how to sustain
healthy vigour far into old age. But is cheating frailty and death more than
just a dream? Carolyn Abraham reports

BYLINE: Carolyn Abraham

BODY:

    Noel Thomas Patton was 50 when he decided that he would not go gently into
that good night. He was born in December, 1945, on the eve of the baby boom, and
sees it as his birthright not to follow in the orthopedic footsteps of his
father's generation - "when you sat in your rocking chair, played checkers,
watched TV and then you died."

    Mr. Patton, now 63, wants to keep his mind sharp and to play tennis, ski and
dance for at least another decade. "I do like discoing," he says.

    He believes a long, robust life is entirely possible if you can keep all
your parts running smoothly. Mr. Patton knows parts - mostly mechanical ones:
blowers, motors, belts and blades. The American entrepreneur made his fortune in
electric fans and heating supplies. But since selling that business in 1995, the
same year he first "started to feel a little stiffness here and there," he has
applied his acumen to body parts - specifically the human cell.

    Mr. Patton believes that he has found a way to keep cells hustling well past
their prime. For the past 18 months, he has been dosing himself with an extract
of the astragalus plant, an ancient Chinese herb said to protect cells against
the ravages of time. He has also been selling the treatment - to the tune of
$25,000 a year - and says many of his clients are doctors and research
scientists.

    There is not yet any real proof that it works, but if it does, it would be a
big deal: Extend the lifespan of a healthy cell and, perhaps, you extend the
span of a healthy life.

    Through history, legions have hunted that prize in the waters of Babylon, in
the beds of young virgins and in the fabled powers of monkey testicles. Walt
Disney and baseball great Ted Williams hoped it would be found while they waited
on ice. Ponce de Léon thought he'd find it bubbling up from the ground in
Florida. And now Mr. Patton, a multimillionaire hungry for science to back up
his hopes, has joined the age-old quest to extend the vigour of youth.

    His timing couldn't be better. Once considered a fringe field littered with
charlatans and quacks, anti-aging research has entered its prime. Respected
scientists are pursuing regenerative medicine through stem cells, searching for
clues to longevity in the genes of fruit flies, flat worms and really old men
and women. Dozens of legitimate companies are developing anti-aging drugs. Bruce
Ames, one of the world's most-cited researchers and a winner of the U.S.
National Medal of Science, has launched a company called Juvenon.

    None of it has yielded any proven clock-stopping treatments so far. But just
as baby boomers brought the rise of disposable diapers, draft dodging,
miniskirts, minivans and stock options, their march toward mortality is now
making aging research a global priority.

    In part, it's because scientists are aging themselves. But governments too
are anxious about the burden of caring for a degenerating generation. The number
of people aged 80 and older is projected to quadruple to almost 400 million
worldwide by 2050. The research boom is "something of an apocalyptic response to
the demographic realities," says Anne Martin-Matthews, scientific director of
the Institute of Aging, part of the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR). "The goal is to identify the factors that will enhance the good health
of the population so that we don't exhaust our health resources."

    Aging research has gained such prominence that it has begun to spawn its own
language - as "geroscience" strives to understand the "wellderly" and increase
human "health span."

    In Europe, a massive, five-year effort is under way to study the genes of
nearly 2,700 siblings older than the age of 90 from 11 countries. The U.S. has a
Well Elderly study to investigate the links between physical activity and a
healthy aging population.

    And next year in Canada, 160 investigators from several universities will
launch the Canadian Longitudinal Study on Aging, which will follow 50,000 men
and women 45 to 85 years old for at least two decades, probing the subjects'
biological, psychological, social and economic changes over time. It is being
billed as the most comprehensive aging study ever undertaken.

    The CIHR, Canada's main medical-research funding body, spent $136-million on
all age-related research in the past year, more than five times what it spent in
2000-2001. The Institute of Aging now gets roughly 14 per cent of CIHR's total
budget, compared to 6 per cent nine years ago.

    Progress has been so rapid that many researchers now see aging as a series
of degenerative diseases that can be delayed or even prevented. The prospect has
even sparked serious debate about the limits of the human lifespan, with a bold
few predicting that the average North American girl born today will live to be
100.

    "We have all the tools - we understand genes, metabolism, and these things
are much easier [now] to measure and manipulate," the California-based Dr. Ames
says. "I think we can push back all the degenerative diseases of aging. I think
we can add a few years to everyone's life."

   Funding fuelled

    In Canada, the CIHR helped to kick-start the process in 2001 when it put out
a call for aging-research proposals. Angela Brooks-Wilson, a senior scientist at
the B.C. Cancer Agency in Vancouver, was researching genetic susceptibilities to
cancer, but she realized that she could tweak her project to qualify for the new
funds.

    "It shows how granting agencies can foster research in a particular area,"
she says, adding, jokingly, "People at the granting agencies are aging too."

    She broadened her planned study of elderly people who were free of cancer
and decided to analyze the genes of seniors who had not developed any major
disease. Dr. Brooks-Wilson says human lifespan depends largely on environmental
and lifestyle factors, but estimates genes account for about 30 per cent of the
question. By the end of 2002, the CIHR had granted her $1.25-million over five
years to study such a cohort of "super seniors."

    These 550 people from the greater Vancouver area, selected with information
from the B.C. Ministry of Health, range in age from 85 to 105 and have never
developed cancer, pulmonary disease, Alzheimer's, diabetes or cardiovascular
disease.

    Two-thirds of them are women (who tend to live longer than men) such as
Barbara Roberts, who lives alone in the city's east end and still shovels her
own snow at the age of 90. "She's amazing, energetic," says Dr. Brooks-Wilson.
"A live wire."

    Among the super seniors, researchers are looking at 25 different genes
involved in metabolism and tumour suppression. They are comparing them with DNA
from a control group of 550 randomly selected men and women between the ages of
40 and 50 - two-thirds of whom, statistics suggest, will not live to be 85. They
are investigating whether the super seniors carry a common genetic trait that
most of the control group does not.

    Results are expected early this year. Meanwhile, the B.C. group has already
found something of interest in the telomeres of the super seniors.

    Telomeres are one of the hottest molecules in medicine. Like plastic caps on
the ends of shoelaces, telomeres are tails at the ends of chromosomes that keep
genetic information from "fraying."

    But telomeres are also biological time bombs: They grow shorter each time a
cell a divides; and the longer we live, the more each cell has divided.

    The telomeres, which are actually a certain repeated sequence of DNA,
eventually wear down to unstable nubs. At that point, cells start to break down
and die - and so, it seems, bones thin, chins sag and cancers sprout.

    Naturally, there's a big interest in finding ways to turn back the telomere
clock.

    As a group the super seniors do not have especially long telomeres, says Dr.
Brooks-Wilson, but their telomeres do seem to be of a generally uniform length,
while the middle-aged control group shows much greater variation.

    The theory is that if a telomere is too long, the cell will divide more
times than it should, increasing the risk of cancer. But if a telomere is too
short, the cell could suffer early genetic damage, also leading to disease.

    In a paper published in November, Dr. Brooks-Wilson and telomere expert
Peter Lansdorp speculate that the super seniors may carry an "optimal length" of
telomere that "could contribute to disease resistance and promote healthy
aging."

   Immortal cells

    Mr. Patton had never heard of telomeres until he attended a black-tie dinner
to raise funds for aging research in Palm Desert, Calif., in 1999.

    By then, he had spent about four years searching for a doctor to provide him
"with some decent anti-aging care." But for the most part, he said, he
encountered hucksters. Then he listened to Jerry Shay, a noted cell biologist
from the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, give a talk on
telomeres.

    Dr. Shay, whose research helped produce the telomere theory of aging,
described how activating an enzyme known as a telomerase "might be able to
extend the lifespan of telomeres and immortalize cells."

    Telomerase is usually turned off in normal cells. But the gene that produces
it is usually turned on in stem cells and cancer cells - both of which are
theoretically "immortal," having the ability to multiply indefinitely.

    Mr. Patton immediately approached Dr. Shay, who told him that the University
of Texas had licensed its telomere work to the California-based Geron Corp., an
influential biotech firm that co-discovered the telomerase gene in 1997 and
backed the early work on human stem cells.

    The next morning, Mr. Patton called Geron's CEO and made a major investment
in the company. He learned that it was hunting for a compound to boost
telomerase and had started talks with researchers at the University of Science
and Technology in Hong Kong to look into compounds from China.

    As it happened, Mr. Patton was also based in Hong Kong, where he had moved
with his wife, Eve, and their two children in 1987 after deciding to manufacture
some of his fan and heater parts in mainland China. From there, he was able to
help facilitate an agreement with the Hong Kong scientists to test 50 compounds
from traditional Chinese medicine.

    One candidate was astragalus, a spiky shrub from Inner Mongolia that the
Chinese have used for thousands of years as an immune-system booster,
blood-pressure controller and overall wellness agent. They add it to stews and
soups and boil it as a tea. Health-food stores carry extracts.

    When it was tested, according to Mr. Patton, the scientists found that the
plant did indeed boost the human cell's telomerase activity.

    At the time, however, developing an astragalus drug was not a priority for
Geron, which was concentrating its efforts on cancer and stem cells.

    Mr. Patton didn't want to wait.

    In 2002, he formed his own company, TA Sciences, in Manhattan (where he now
lives part-time). He struck a deal with Geron for a worldwide licence on an
astragalus plant extract for non-drug purposes. By billing his planned product
as an dietary supplement and making no disease-curing claims, he could develop
his alternative medicine free of the time-consuming regulatory processes of the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

   Smoggy cells

    Bruce Ames never set out to study aging at all, let alone form a company
selling an anti-aging product. The 80-year-old biochemist with the University of
California at Berkeley and the Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute
has spent most of his lauded career studying DNA damage. In the 1960s, he
invented the Ames test, still the gold standard in identifying cancer-causing
substances.

    But as he became more interested in pinpointing the causes of cancer, he
found himself thinking about aging. "It's clear that cancer is a disease of the
aged," he says. "About a third of us have it by the time we're 80."

    Much of the damage is self-inflicted, he notes. Seventh Day Adventists, who
don't smoke, drink or eat meat, have half the cancer-mortality rate and live
about two years longer. (Asked what does eventually kill them, he jokes,
"Boredom.")

    His research eventually focused on fighting some of the causes of aging,
namely the disturbing phenomenon known as mitochondrial decay.

    Mitochondria are the engines of cells, converting the oxygen and fats and
sugars we consume into energy. But just as all engines give off an exhaust, the
cellular energy-conversion process gives off its own form of pollution, called
free radicals - highly reactive atoms and molecules that clutter up the cell.

    Over time, this free-radical smog fouls up DNA and the cell's proper
functions. Ironically, the very acts that sustain us - breathing and eating -
eventually kill us.

    In 2002, Dr. Ames reported in the prestigious Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences that he and colleague Tory Hagen may have found a way to
reduce mitochondrial decay. They concluded that two compounds commonly found in
health-food stores - lipoic acid and Acetyl L-Carnitine (sometimes used as a
pick-me-up in Italy) - improved mitochondrial function as well as energy levels
and cognition in aging rats.

    As Dr. Ames likes to say, "These old rats got up and did the Macarena."

    A friend persuaded him to launch a company - Juvenon - to sell the
double-compound combination. He agreed to be its scientific director on the
condition that all profits - the product sells for about $30 for a month's
supply - go to clinical research.

    These days, Dr. Ames is also on a self-funded crusade (he has mortgaged his
house) to convince scientists and governments that extremely common deficiencies
in micronutrients are behind many of the degenerative diseases of aging. Cells
lacking magnesium, for example, have a more rapid shortening of their telomeres,
he says.

   The guinea pig

    Mr. Patton did have to wait: "It took five years and millions of dollars
till I felt I had a pill in my hand that was safe enough to take," he says.

    But since the middle of 2007, he has ingested 50 milligrams a day of
astragalus extract - twice the dose that he prescribes to everyone else, but
only one-1,000th of the level his researchers determined would be toxic to human
cells.

    He admits to feeling "a bit like a guinea pig." But he adds, "I feel
absolutely great, more energy, more libido, my immune system is stronger. People
tell me my skin looks better, healthier."

    He was having joint pain in his right knee, particularly on the tennis
court, but now, he says, that pain is gone.

    Did astragalus extract solve it? "I can't say for sure," he admits. But he
says lab tests at the University of California suggest the treatment has
rejuvenated his immune system.

    Higher telomerase activity is associated with cancer cells, but Mr. Patton
considers it only a theoretical risk that his pill could cause cancer. He points
to research that suggests cancer is the result of several other mutations, not
the mere activation of telomerase. It's also a comfort that the Chinese have
consumed astragalus tea like chicken soup for centuries.

    He claims, however, that astragalus extracts at health-food stores do not
contain the same active ingredient as his compound, based on his company's tests
of four brands. TA Sciences' molecule, which it has dubbed TA65, was isolated
from the plant's 2,000 other compounds. "We start with three tonnes of
astragalus to make a very small amount," he says.

    Mr. Patton will not say if his pill is the same astragalus-based compound
that Geron is now developing as a pharmaceutical to boost telomerase in
immune-system cells. But he does maintain that it works just as well.

    In November, Geron's version, called TAT2, was the subject of an article in
the peer-reviewed Journal of Immunology that found it boosted the immune
system's ability to fight off HIV.

    Its lead author, Rita Effros, a professor of pathology and lab medicine at
the University of California at Los Angeles, collaborated with Geron in 1996
showing that people with HIV have killer T-cells with shorter telomeres.

    Killer T-cells are like the front-line soldiers of the immune system; people
tend to lose the fit ones as they age, in part because of a lifetime of battling
viruses (making the elderly especially vulnerable to the flu and other
infections).

    But people with HIV, who have T-cells at constant war with the AIDS virus,
also have relatively few functioning T-cells.

    "Their immune systems look like they're aging prematurely," Dr. Effros says.

    Meanwhile, she adds, "We know that HIV 'controllers,' who never progress to
AIDS, have killer T-cells with higher telomerase activity."

    In earlier experiments, Dr. Effros had shown that injecting the telomerase
gene into T-cells taken from infected patients kept telomeres from shortening
and better enabled the cells to fight HIV in a lab dish. But injecting genes
into HIV patients is not a feasible way to treat the disease.

    As an alternative, she and her colleagues tested the astragalus compound:
"We found we got just as much telomerase activity with TAT2 as we did with the
gene therapy.

    "The difference," she says, "is that we had more control with TAT2. We could
reduce the amount of activity - eliminate it completely."

    Dr. Effros feels the finding could have implications beyond HIV treatments.
T-cells, for example, are also involved in bone loss. Human bones constantly
undergo a process of destruction and re-creation, she said, "so that every 10
years you have a new skeleton."

    But with a chronic infection, the steady activation of T-cells and the
immune system upsets the rebuilding of skeletal tissue and bones can thin.

    "If all this comes to pass, TAT2 could be used in HIV and bone loss and
other diseases related to aging," Dr. Effros says. "That's the long-term,
blue-sky vision."

    She cautions, however, against the idea that the compound could be used to
make everyone live longer. "Anyone pushing to extend human lifespan is still on
the fringe," she says. "I'm more interested in extending 'health span' - so one
can just drop dead and not be sick for 10 or 20 years before that."

   Old, older - oldest?

    Still, some demographers do feel that history gives humans plenty of reason
to expect longer life spans in the coming decades.

    Through most of evolution, people, like most species, died not long after
the end of their reproductive period. Up to 1800, life expectancy in Europe was
stuck at 40, and only in 1900 did it reach 50. But humans have made staggering
gains in the decades since.

    In an article in Science in May, 2002, demographers James Vaupel of Duke
University and Jim Oeppen of Cambridge University noted that life expectancy in
developed countries has been growing by three months per year since 1840.

    "In 1840, the record for longest life expectancy was held by Swedish women
who lived on average a little more than 45 years," they wrote. "Among nations
today, the longest expectation of life - almost 85 years - is enjoyed by
Japanese women."

    In industrialized countries, the average now hovers around 80 for women and
slightly less for men. Most of the increase came thanks to improvements in
sanitation and nutrition, and the advent of vaccines and antibiotics, along with
more recent medical advances.

    With breakthroughs in genetics and stem cells on the horizon, some believe
the lifespan trend shows no sign of slowing. But not everyone agrees. Jay
Olshansky, a leading population expert at the University of Illinois in Chicago,
is a strong supporter of scientific efforts to extend the healthy period of
human life, but in a 2005 New England Journal of Medicine article, he argued
that the rise of obesity could end the life-expectancy gains of the past two
centuries.

    Dr. Martin-Matthews of Canada's Institute of Aging says the best evidence
from scientists suggests that the human lifespan has a ceiling of about 120
years. But, she adds, everyone agrees that it's pointless to add 40 years to
human life unless "we can reduce the incidence of degenerative disease."

    The challenge, she says, is to balance the rigours of credible research with
the demands of a greying and impatient mass market. When three University of
British Columbia scientists recently gave a public lecture on how to keep your
brain fit as you age, 1,500 people showed up, she notes. "They had to keep
finding a bigger room."

    While such public interest helps support their research, cautious scientists
stress that no aging research has yet translated into a breakthrough. In 2002,
in the wake of optimistic projections around life expectancy, 52 scientists
involved in aging research published their Position Statement on Human Aging.

    They warned the public of the distinction between the "pseudo-scientific
anti-aging industry and the genuine science of aging" and declared there is
simply no intervention currently available to stop, slow or reverse the march of
time.

    But that won't stop wishful mortals from hoping.

   Salvation or snake oil

    Even without a shred of hard proof, nearly 100 people have paid the $25,000
yearly fee for Mr. Patton's astragalus treatment regimen, which he has dubbed
the Patton Protocol.

    It begins with taking 14 vials of blood from the customer and sending them
to four different labs to undergo 90 different tests, including measurements for
telomere length. (One of those labs is the immunology lab at UCLA.) The company
also tests for cognitive function, bone density, skin elasticity and eyesight.

    Six months after the customers start taking the astragalus-derived pills,
they return to have their biomarkers retested.

    "Customers have definitely improved. ... No one's gotten worse," Mr. Patton
says, adding: "The people who have completed their first year are coming back
for a second year. ... They're not hiring lawyers and suing me."

    He doesn't advertise, he says, because he has no studies on which to base
claims. Most of his clients have come by word of mouth, and "almost all of them
know about telomere biology," he says.

    "They're MDs and PhDs and they're not just buying any pig in a poke," he
adds. "We're the only thing out there as a telomerase activator."

    Among Mr. Patton's clients is one of his competitors, Bill Andrews - the
researcher who co-discovered the telomerase gene. Dr. Andrews is now CEO of the
Nevada-based biotech research firm Sierra Sciences - where, Mr. Patton notes,
the motto is, "We'll cure aging or die trying." Sierra has itself been chasing a
telomerase activator.

    "You can take two telomere biologists," Mr. Patton says, "and one would say,
'This is too soon. It's a theoretical remedy. There are risks.' The other
scientist would say, 'I'm taking it. My wife's taking it. It might save my
life.' "

    Still, does Mr. Patton feel any concern that it's premature - or unethical -
to sell such a high-priced, unproven treatment? He knows how it sounds: "If you
were to meet me at a cocktail party and ask me what I did and I told you I was
selling something to immortalize your cells, you would think I was saying I'd
found the Fountain of Youth for cells," he says. "You'd think I was a snake-oil
salesman selling bullshit, and I wouldn't blame you."

    Then again, earlier generations might have accepted aging as inevitable -
"aches, pains and deterioration, that's just fine," he says. But "now people are
saying, 'No, that's not just fine.' " So boomers who fear that they are running
out of time to beat the aging clock are willing to take a chance on a product
that might not have come through the traditional research pipelines.

    "There is an impatience in the market place and in the baby-boom generation
- we want to keep running, discoing, having sex, using our brains," Mr. Patton
says. "There's an urgency."

    Still, the fact that they "don't have 20 years of clinical trials that are
double blind" eats at him.

    He is hoping to publish the first peer-reviewed paper on his pill's
immunity-boosting abilities this year. But he knows he needs more clients in
order to amass that data, a fact that - along with the soured economy - has
convinced him to drop his annual treatment fee to just under $16,000.

    After all, he says, "finding a cure for aging 30 years down the road, when
you're 80 now, is no help."

   Carolyn Abraham is The Globe and Mail's medical reporter.

    *****

    A 'live wire' at 90

    Barbara Roberts, 90 years old, is part of a study that is examining what
healthy and hale 'super seniors' like herself might have going for them
genetically. Here, she does some surfing on her touch-screen computer at home in
the east end of Vancouver.

    Vancouver 'super senior' Barbara Roberts puts out coffee and cookies for her
neighbour Ken James and other guests this week in her home. Researcher Angela
Brooks-Wilson calls Ms. Roberts 'amazing' and 'energetic' for her 90 years.

    *****

    Maria, 115

    Maria de Jesus was born Sept. 10, 1893, and was the world's oldest person
when she died a week ago yesterday (Jan. 2), aged 115 years and 114 days. (She
was preceded in November by Edna Parker, an American who was 115 years and 220
days old.) She is pictured at right outside her house in Tomar, central
Portugal, in 2006. She never smoked, did not drink coffee or alcohol and avoided
eating meat, though she had a lifelong weakness for rice pudding and ice cream.

    NACHO DOCE/REUTERS

    Jeanne, 122

    Below, nearer right, an undated photo of Jeanne Louise Calment of Arles,
France, who had the longest confirmed lifespan in history, 122 years and 164
days, when she died on Aug. 4, 1997. She reportedly attributed her longevity to
olive oil, port wine and chocolate and gave up smoking only at 119.

    WIKIPEDIA

    *****

    Marie, 117

    At far right, the oldest Canadian ever, Marie Louise Meilleur, rests in a
nursing home in Corbeil (near North Bay, Ont.) in August, 1997. Sir John A.
Macdonald was in his second term as prime minister when Mrs. Meilleur was born
in Kamouraska, Que., on Aug. 29, 1880. She died at 117 in April, 1998, leaving
75 grandchildren.

    THE CANADIAN PRESS

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2009


                              47 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                           December 13, 2008 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 247 words

HEADLINE: Embryo stance toughened

BYLINE: BY NICOLE WINFIELD, AP

DATELINE: VATICAN CITY

BODY:

   The Vatican has hardened its opposition to using embryos for stem cell
research, cloning and in vitro fertilization.

   But in a major new document on bioethics, it shows flexibility on some forms
of gene therapy and using vaccines prepared with cell lines from aborted
fetuses.

   The Dignity of a Person document issued by the Vatican's Congregation for the
Doctrine of the Faith, also criticized "embryo adoption," whereby infertile
couples adopt embryos frozen during in vitro techniques and subsequently
abandoned.

   It said that while the intent is "praiseworthy" the result poses legal and
medical problems.

   The Vatican's overall position is informed by its belief that human life
begins at conception and must be given the respect and dignity from that moment
on.

   The Vatican also holds human life should be created through intercourse
between husband and wife, not in a petri dish.

   As a result, the Vatican said it opposed in vitro fertilization because it
separates conception from the "conjugal act" and results in the destruction of
embryos.

   The Vatican spokesman, Rev. Federico Lombardi, agreed that, on a superficial
reading, the document could be seen as a litany of "no's."

   "But it's not like that. It is based -- starting with its title -- on the
fundamental affirmation of the dignity of the human person," he said.

   The Vatican did show flexibility in saying that parents could in good
conscience use vaccines for children that were developed using cell lines from
an "illicit origin.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2008


                              48 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                           August 20, 2008 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Discovery; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: Gene doping;
Repoxygen is a new way to artificially enhance an athlete's performance -- one
that is hard to detect and with potentially permanent effects

BYLINE: BY FINDING THE GOLDEN GENES, PATRICK BARRY AND WWW.SCIENCENEWS.ORG

BODY:

   HOW IT WORKS

   Repoxygen was developed as a gene therapy treatment for severe anemia. A
patient is injected with a harmless virus carrying a modified gene that encodes
erythropoietin, a protein that boosts red blood cell production. The host's
cells can translate that gene into active proteins as if the foreign gene were
the cells' own.

   1. DELIVERY

   DNA packaged in a virus is injected into the athlete and flows through the
bloodstream into muscle.

   Danger: Altered viruses can trigger dangerous reactions from the immune
system.

   Alternatives: Viruses are not the only way to deliver performance-enhancing
genes to cells. Fat molecules or naked DNA can be injected directly into muscle.

   2. CHANGE

   Viruses bind to muscle cells and deposit the foreign gene inside, where it
integrates into the cell's chromosomes. The gene stimulates the production of
the protein erythropoietin (EPO).

   Danger: Inserting foreign DNA can damage the cell's own genes, risking
cancer.

   Detection: Presence of a foreign gene in the athlete's DNA.

   3. DISPERSAL

   Erythropoietin (EPO), produced by the altered muscle cells, flows through the
bloodstream to bone marrow, stimulating production of red blood cells, the
body's main transporter of oxygen.

   Detection: Changes in the concentration of multiple proteins in the blood or
urine.

   4. ENHANCEMENT

   Extra red blood cells flow throughout the athlete's body, increasing oxygen
capacity and, hence, endurance.

   ---

   OTHER GENE DOPING POSSIBILITIES

   In 1988, H. Lee Sweeney and colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine injected mice with a virus carrying a gene that boosted
production of insulin-growth factor (IGF-1). The injected mice had 15% more
muscle mass than untreated mice.

   In 2004, Ronald Evans and colleagues at California's Salk Institute for
Biological Studies engineered mice to have extra copies of the gene encoding a
protein called peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta (PPAR-delta).
These mice could run twice as far a unaltered mice.

GRAPHIC: graphic by Susie Mah, Sun Media

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2008


                              54 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2008 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            August 2, 2008 Saturday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: CANADIAN; GIVING BACK; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 308 words

HEADLINE: A follow-up to his days as a vet;
The donor: Blake Graham

BYLINE: PAUL WALDIE

BODY:

   THE DONATION: Nearly $800,000

   THE CAUSES: Ontario Veterinary College and McMaster University

   THE REASON: Research into breast cancer and animal diseases.

    Throughout his 25-year career as a veterinarian Blake Graham was always
intrigued by different variations of animal diseases he came across.

    Mr. Graham had a second career in real estate but last year, after the
federal government changed the rules for donations of publicly traded
securities, he thought back to his days as a vet and donated $476,000 worth of
stock to the Ontario Veterinary College at the University of Guelph.

    The money funded research into zoonoses - diseases such as SARS that affect
animals and people. "There isn't enough known about these diseases," Mr. Graham
said from his home near Owen Sound, Ont.

    "I hope to get a lot more money into this research."

    The OVC gift isn't the only cause supported by Mr. Graham. In 1994, he
donated $300,000 to McMaster University in Hamilton in memory of his wife,
Barbara, who died of breast cancer.

    The money, later matched by a corporate gift, brings researchers from
McMaster and OVC together for cancer research. The effort has already led to
investigations into gene therapy for cancer treatment.

    "When my wife died of cancer I thought that was a terrible way to die and
I'd pretty much be happy to see people being able to have treatment that works,"
he said.

    In June, the OVC presented Mr. Graham with the Dean's Award in honour of his
contribution. Mr. Graham said he was honoured by the award, but he has not
slowed down.

    He recently wrote more than 80 people urging them to contribute to the
projects.

    "I'm not trying to press them, I'm just saying this money is needed," he
said.

    "I'm 82. I'm not going to last all that long so I thought I might as well
start something that has some merit."

   pwaldie@globeandmail.com

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2008


                              55 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2008 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             June 28, 2008 Saturday

SECTION: FOCUS; BREAKDOWN: SEEKING SOLUTIONS: MEDICAL SCIENCE: THE POWER TO LIFT
THE HUMAN SPIRIT; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 6041 words

HEADLINE: How to mend a broken mind;
What does sadness sound like? 'Cells firing five to 30 times per second,' and
making it stop is a matter of 'location, location, location,' says the surgeon
leading a team of Canadian pioneers who are restoring the lives of the deeply
depressed. Their results are so promising that researchers are already trying
the procedure on an array of other disorders. Globe and Mail medical writer
Carolyn Abraham and photographer Charla Jones uncover the magic of deep brain
stimulation

BYLINE: Carolyn Abraham

BODY:

    The first time I met Sean Miller, we were strangers waiting in a corridor at
the outpatient psychiatry unit of Toronto General Hospital. He was the redhead,
wearing a grey sweatshirt, jeans and a 100-watt smile. "Popular place," he said.

    He looked rosy and energized, as if he had been for a run. "Pretty warm out
there today," he added. He mentioned rain in the forecast and cracked a joke
about the "nice weather" we had been having. Then a door opened down the hall
and he waved goodbye - "See ya!"

    A few minutes later, Peter Giaccobe, a 33-year-old psychiatrist, beckoned me
to his office. "It's fine," he said. "You can come in."

    I had been waiting to observe Dr. Giaccobe's 4 o'clock emergency
appointment. Emergencies are routine in psychiatry. Patients turn up worried
about a medication, feeling manic or fighting off suicidal thoughts.

    But that May afternoon was something different: A 41-year-old patient had
placed an urgent call to have his battery checked. His depression had been so
severe that last year he allowed doctors to drill a hole in his head and thread
two battery-powered electrodes down into his brain. The operation made him the
21st subject in one of the more radical mood-altering experiments on the medical
books - a world-first, Canadian-led trial to treat depression with a procedure
called deep brain stimulation.

    The man had visited a lawyer friend at a courthouse, passed through a
security check and later felt a downswing in his mood. Had the metal detector
somehow short-circuited the electrodes in his head?

    Dr. Giaccobe opened his office door and that was the second time I met Sean
Miller.

    He laughed and tapped the top of his head. "Yeah, well, I was depressed -
before this went in," Mr. Miller said. "This thing saved my life."

    At a spitfire clip, he described the way he now bounds of out bed in the
mornings, impatient for the day. "Before the operation, I wasn't myself. ... I
love life, seriously love it, but I couldn't think straight. I couldn't work. I
hardly left my apartment for four and a half years."

    "You're the happiest person I've met all day," I told him, and meant it.

    "I know," he beamed. "Isn't that crazy?"

    From the home front to the workplace, from the schools to the streets,
mental illness presents one of the great challenges to modern society, a leading
cause of disability, absenteeism and deaths due to suicide. Not only does it
strike one in five Canadians, usually in their prime, but too often it defies
the ability of modern medicine to treat it.

    Depression, which affects one in 12 people in this country, is one of the
trickiest disorders to cure. While 80 per cent of patients find effective relief
with standard drug or psychotherapies, the latest numbers suggest that only 40
per cent truly feel well. Worse, experts estimate that, for 10 to 20 per cent of
sufferers, nothing works.

    To the shock of many, and the horror of some, the most promising treatment
for intractable depression on the horizon is not a designer drug, a new form of
talk or even genetic therapy. It's electricity. The same force that powers our
TVs and microwave ovens can lift the human spirit.

    With deep brain stimulation (DBS), surgeons implant metal rods that aim
steady pulses of electrical current at the faulty neural circuits believed to
underlie mental illness. Spaghetti-thin, the rods connect to a cable that snakes
invisibly down the neck to a cookie-sized, battery-operated regulator embedded
just south of the collarbone.

    DBS itself is not new. Doctors have used it to treat physical ailments for
nearly 60 years, first to counter chronic pain and since the 1990s as a therapy
for movement disorders. But society has long separated neurological diseases
from psychiatric ones, as though physical conditions can stem from concrete
malfunctions of the brain but maladies of the mind cannot.

    Then in 2003, working with just six patients, University of Toronto
researchers tested DBS on depression. It not only proved safe, it also made four
of them better. Since then, 50 patients in Toronto, Vancouver and Montreal, as
well as at least 30 in the United States, Europe and South America, have
undergone the procedure in a bid to see whether electrical implants can indeed
mend a broken mind.

    The Toronto trial, open only to people whose depression has proved
impervious to all other treatments, so far suggests that DBS is safe and offers
lasting relief in more than half of all cases. The early results are encouraging
enough that one manufacturer of the DBS device has already started down the road
to have the U.S. Food and Drug Administration officially approve it for treating
depression.

    "The emerging picture seems to be that, if you can get better [with this],
you can stay better," says neurologist Helen Mayberg, whose work at the Baycrest
Centre's Rotman Research Institute in Toronto laid the groundwork for the DBS
trial. Ivy League researchers in the U.S. are now investigating DBS as a
treatment for obsessive compulsive disorder and, at Emory University in Atlanta,
where Dr. Mayberg is now based, the target is type 2 bipolar disorder.

    Shocking the brain to behave is hardly a revolutionary concept. Doctors
first tried it in the 19th century, and in 1937, Italian researchers launched
electroconvulsive therapy, zapping patients' heads to induce seizures that
sometimes improved symptoms, but also damaged memories and muscles. Even now, a
gentler version of ECT remains an established, if controversial, treatment for a
narrow range of severe mental disorders, depression in particular.

    But the Toronto researchers point out that it's not the use of electricity
that makes their treatment a major advance - it's where they put it. "With brain
surgery, it's like real estate - it's location, location, location," says Andres
Lozano, the neurosurgeon and senior scientist who has led the trials at Toronto
Western Hospital.

    DBS offers a fresh opportunity to "de-stigmatize" mental illness, he says.
If a mechanical device can regulate mood, then "behaviour is modulated by the
same kind of circuitry. ... People have no control over it. ... They can't just
'pull up their socks.'

    "There has been this distinction between neurology and psychiatry that's
artificial and arbitrary."

    But brain surgery for psychiatric conditions has a long, unhappy history -
from head bashings in the Bronze Age to the 20th century's infamous frontal
lobotomy. After psychopharmaceuticals hit the market in the 1950s, cutting as a
treatment for mental conditions became as unfashionable as Brylcreem. Which
makes it all the more unlikely that any depression treatment involving drills
and electrodes is making such an auspicious comeback.

    "Some people say this is barbaric - One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest kind of
stuff," Dr. Lozano adds, but more than 40,000 Parkinson's patients have already
had DBS ease their tremors by targeting parts of the brain where motor neurons
misbehave.

    "People have no problem operating for Parkinson's, but they have a problem
operating for psychiatric conditions," he says, adding that "we can go anywhere
in the brain now. We can turn it up, we can turn it down .... regulating it,
just like a thermostat."

    The only difference in using DBS for depression is that the electrodes
target the brain area where sadness lives.

   'I LITERALLY FELL APART'

    A few weeks after we met at Toronto General, Sean Miller sits in a Yorkville
café. He downs a bottle of water and shrugs - nothing from his childhood
predicted his long spiral into despair, he say.

    He had grown up happy in Toronto's tony Rosedale, the second of three
children in a warm, supportive family. His father ran an import-export business.
His mother, a former social worker, stayed home to raise the kids. He had close
friends, attended good schools, flitted off to camp every summer, skied, played
tennis and flirted with serious hockey.

    He faced his only obstacle at 14, when he developed Guillain-Barré Syndrome,
an autoimmune disorder that temporarily paralyzed him. He spent a year in rehab
centres. When he returned to school, with a dropped foot and an awkward gait, he
could no longer play hockey. Even so, he says, "I felt frustration and anger,
but not depression."

    He did his last year of high school in the south of France, graduated from
university to an exciting film industry job and landed a serious girlfriend.
Life was grand.

    But at 24 he had his first bout of depression. It was mild, but left behind
a sense of "joylessness ... purposelessness." A psychiatrist prescribed an
antidepressant but he found the libido-killing side effects too much to bear. He
quit the medication after a year.

    The next episode, at 27, was tougher to beat. He left his girlfriend and his
job and flew to Thailand for an indefinite stretch of travel. While there, he
started smoking dope, which he suspects "changed the depression from feeling low
to something based on fear and anxiety."

    He returned home, resumed medication and, eventually, went back to work.

    In a bid to avoid a relapse, he regularly attended 10-day meditation
retreats, trying to train his mind "to stop the stream of negative thoughts." He
even volunteered to help others stay positive, answering the phones at a
distress centre.

    He remained well into his early 30s, climbed corporate ladders in sales and
marketing and became involved in another serious relationship. Then, once again,
he stopped taking the medication.

    "I know, it was crazy," he says, laughing now at what he did. "The side
effects bothered me - but also, I was kind of a health-conscious guy and I
didn't want to take drugs."

    But at 36 his depression returned and this time, the third time, the drugs
proved powerless. "I literally fell apart. The next four years were the worst of
my life."

    Most friends stood by him. His girlfriend at the time rarely left his side.
"But there were a few, who would be like, 'Sean, get a job .... get a life ...
get your ass out of bed.' I didn't even feel like I was a part of life," he
says. "It felt like being buried alive."

   WELCOME TO AREA 25

    Sadness lives behind the eyeballs, four centimetres back in from the
forehead. That's where Dr. Mayberg found it after 20 years of brain-imaging
studies, in Boston, Texas and then Toronto in the late 1990s.

    The pictures showed that a patch of the prefrontal cortex known as Brodmann
Area 25 flicked into high gear when healthy subjects were made to feel sad, for
example, by reading a personal essay about losing a loved one. At the same time,
significant swatches of the subjects' frontal cortex, the brain's chief
executive officer - its motivator and decision-maker - powered down. When their
minds moved away from sad thoughts, the cycle reversed. Activity shut down in
Area 25 and shot up in the frontal lobes.

    But in patients with depression, the cycle never shifted. The lights at Area
25 were always on, stuck in a constantly active mode, compromising cognition in
the frontal cortex.

    Sitting in the ancient limbic lobe passed down from our slithering
ancestors, Area 25 connects to the brain structures involved in human function -
emotion, memory, stress, sleep, libido, appetite, energy levels and learning.
"It's linked into all the core areas involved in depression," Dr. Mayberg says.

    The images led to a hypothesis: If they had found one of the sites where a
feeling runs amok, could they find a way to fix it? Would the type of DBS used
for Parkinson's charge the cells in Area 25 out of their "on" position?

    In 2001, in a moment of serendipity, Dr. Mayberg met Dr. Lozano at a
conference of neurosurgeons.

    Dr. Lozano was world renowned for his brain-stimulation operations. He had
performed DBS for Parkinson's and other neurological disorders since 1992 -
about six times a month. When Dr. Mayberg suggested that they try it for
depression, he thought it was "a long shot" - but right up his alley. "I don't
want to do the ordinary, the routine, the established," he says. "I'm not a fan
of incrementalism. I just want to take big steps."

   A HOLE IN THE HEAD

    In the spring of 2006, in the grip of depression in his downtown apartment,
Mr. Miller watched a television segment on the DBS procedure. His mother had
called to tell him to tune in.

    By that point, he had burned through 20 types of antidepressants, five
months of cognitive therapy and four rounds of ECT. He had been admitted to
hospital three times for two-week stretches. He had tried meditation,
acupuncture, vitamin regimens and a shop's worth of naturopathic remedies. He
had changed his diet and stopped eating dairy. His parents had even spent $4,000
so he could undergo transcranial magnetic stimulation, an experimental treatment
that uses rapidly changing magnetic fields to alter the brain's circuitry. None
of it helped.

    "I was suicidal every single day," he recalls, "but I was scared shitless to
die too."

    On the Internet, he researched painless ways to kill himself and wrote a
suicide note in the event he could ever bring himself to do it. It told family
and friends there was nothing anyone could have done, that he loved them and
that he was sorry.

    Until he saw the DBS segment, he did not hold out a glimmer of hope that he
could ever recover. The patient featured was just like him. She had tried
everything and everything had failed. Then, after doctors turned on those
electrodes, she finally emerged from her long black fog.

    As radical as brain surgery seemed, Mr. Miller knew instantly that he wanted
to be a test subject. Having been paralyzed as a teen, he had often thought of
tradeoffs he would be willing to make to be free of the anguish. "I used to lie
there and think, 'I'd give up an arm, or a leg, or both my legs ... I would take
paralysis over depression any day of the week.' "

    Fear, he says, drove him to seek DBS. "It wasn't having the guts to do it -
it was what would happen if I didn't do it."

    Having a hole drilled in his head seemed a small sacrifice.

   'MY LEGS ARE ON FIRE'

    On a May morning in operating room No. 6, Dr. Lozano peers down at a patch
of scalp, shaved and stained rusty red with iodine. He picks up a blade, cuts a
square and tugs back the flap of flesh.

    "Okay, John, you're going to hear some noise now. It sounds like an air gun
at Canadian Tire, the type they use to take the nuts off your tires," he says,
powering up the drill.

    It takes two minutes to pierce a stubborn centimetre of cranium and bore a
hole the size of a nickel. A nurse asks if the patient feels okay. He gives her
a thumbs up.

    Patient John McCutcheon, 38, doesn't have a mental disorder, but he is still
a pioneer - just the second person with multiple sclerosis ever to undergo DBS
in a bid to ease the phantom-like pain in legs he can hardly feel.

    "I've woken up dreaming my legs are on fire," he told Dr. Lozano before the
surgery began.

    "What is it on a scale of 1 to 10?" Dr. Lozano asked.

    "10-plus."

    Mr. McCutcheon's head has been immobilized by a thorny titanium crown
screwed into his skull. A chrome cradle grips his neck like a pipe in a vice.
The probe that will slide through the hole in his skull sits locked in an arced
frame that stretches over his head like a steel rainbow. The entire contraption
makes him look part person, part metal, and wide awake - as he must be, to tell
the surgeon what he feels as the probe plunges 8.5 centimetres into his brain.

    First, it will journey to Mr. McCutcheon's thalamus, to explore the rebel
neurons scorching his lifeless legs. The sensory circuits near the midbrain will
be the second destination, as the probe confirms exactly where the electrodes
should go.

    But for Dr. Lozano, every DBS procedure is about more than implanting
electrodes - it's an opportunity. Every dive beneath the brain's glistening
folds is a chance to glean its secrets, and often he has.

    He discovered how neurons that once governed limbs that are now gone can
misbehave to cause phantom pain, or take up new jobs to control other body
parts. He found mirror neurons, the cells responsible for empathic pain, which
can make you close your eyes or turn away when someone gets a needle. In
January, while operating on an obese patient, he stimulated part of the brain
that controls appetite and came across a crucial new area involved in memory.
Expected to talk about food urges, the man instead vividly recalled a date he
had had in a park more than 20 years ago ... right down to what he and she were
wearing.

    As a result, Dr. Lozano has launched a pilot study to see whether DBS can
improve the memory of early Alzheimer's patients. In the process, the
Spanish-born neurosurgeon - whose fit, six-foot-plus frame seems to tower over
everything - has become a celebrity scientist at 49 (the hospital's
public-relations director calls him the resident rock star), featured in The New
York Times, The Independent and 60 Minutes. Patients come from as far away as
the Philippines to have him operate, and doctors move to Toronto for year-long
stretches to watch him work. This particular morning, it's a surgeon from
Singapore and another from Manhattan.

    Up in his office, with his bookcases and antique surgical devices that have
the feel of old mariners' instruments, Dr. Lozano likens himself to an explorer
- to Christopher Columbus, he says, "describing the frontiers of the brain."

    "I want to go where no one else has gone before," he says, without irony.

   THE SOUND OF SADNESS

    The hands of a surgeon usually steal the show in an operating theatre. But
with DBS, the ears play the starring role. The micro-electrode probe that
descends into the brain one micron (a millionth of a metre) at a time detects
the electrical signals in the tissue it penetrates.

    Electrophysiologist William Hutchinson operates the probe, which is wired to
a bank of audio-visual tracking equipment that lines the rear wall of the
operating room like components in a stereo shop. There are oscilloscopes that
display volts in visual spikes, amplifiers that translate the firing pattern of
a single neuron into sound, suddenly filling the room with rhythmic pings and
rat-tat-tats like eerie signals from a distant planet. Everyone falls silent,
eavesdropping on the alien within.

    They begin to sample the sounds of Mr. McCutcheon's neurons 10 millimetres
above the target in the thalamus. The neurons talk and the probe talks back,
emitting a low-voltage current to elicit a response, and the cells can do one of
two things: cease or fire.

    "John, we're going to put some electricity into your brain now," Dr. Lozano
announces. "You'll hear a beep. Tell us if you feel something."

    After a zap several millimetres north of the target in the thalamus, Mr.
McCutcheon reports sensation in his cheek, then his jaw, then somewhere around
his ear.

    "Okay, onward," the doctor says, and the probe heads farther south to the
cells that once moved his legs.

    Periodically, Dr. Lozano puts his hands on Mr. McCutcheon, scratching his
chest, poking his hip, patting his leg as he listens for the neural response his
touch might trigger.

    "Cells make different sounds in different regions. They're like a guide;
they tell you where you are in the brain," he says. "It's like driving through
Europe. ... You know where you are by the language they speak."

    Neurons that control vision fire at different rates than those that control
movement. Some cells are idlers. Others burst and pop like the backbeat on a
jazz track.

    And how does sadness sound? "Cells firing five to 30 times per second," he
replies.

    In DBS operations for depression, Dr. Lozano runs a show-and-tell. Instead
of touching patients, he vies for emotion. He has them read moving stories or
shows them pictures, scenes of splendour, or violence, images of despair or a
sexual nature. He asks how it makes them feel, focusing on their words as well
as the noise their neurons make.

    But motion or emotion, the method is the same, he explains. When he tells
Mr. McCutcheon to try to move his right foot, for example, a cell fires fast in
the millisecond before the attempt. "Okay," he says, "so that's involved in
planning the movement."

    The erratic sound of the misbehaving neurons ring clear - like static from a
radio in need of tuning. "His neurons are firing abnormally, and we want to turn
them down," Dr. Lozano says. "It's causing a brainstorm in the pain pathway."

    A few moments later, he reaches the target deep in the thalamus and signals
Dr. Hutchinson to charge the probe. Mr. McCutcheon says it makes his legs tingle
from hip to toe. "This might be a good spot" to place the first electrode, Dr.
Lozano says.

    They move next to strike the second target in the midbrain, the
periaqueduct, where sensory circuits control the emotional response to pain -
involved when a soldier fights on, oblivious to an injury, say, or when an
athlete keeps playing despite a broken bone.

    As the probe slides down, it passes cells that seem strangely quiet. "Silent
neurons," Dr. Lozano says, "terra incognita" - no one knows what they do, and
electricity seems to have no effect on them.

    A moment later, he steps away from the patient to whisper a prediction:
"When we reach this target, he's going to tell us he feels good. ... Some people
say, 'Oh, I feel calm, mellow, like I had a double scotch.'

    "Go," Dr. Lozano says, directing Dr. Hutchinson to charge the probe.

    "How does that feel, John?"

    Suddenly, Mr. McCutcheon's face relaxes: "Oh, what did you do? That feels
good."

    Dr. Lozano asks if the feeling reminds him of anything.

    "Like when the kids were born" is the reply.

    Bingo. This will be the site for electrode No. 2.

    The sensory circuits in the periaqueduct happen to be directly connected to
Area 25 and the instant well-being Mr. McCutcheon felt when they charged it, Dr.
Lozano says, was the same response from the first patient who underwent DBS for
depression in May of 2003. "She suddenly said, 'What have you done? The room is
in colour.' "

   REGROWING THE BRAIN

    With depression, the electrodes seem to quiet the hyperactivity of Area 25
like a muzzle on a barking dog. Yet scientists suspect that the story is more
complex.

    Dr. Lozano, who grew up in Ottawa and holds the Canada research chair in
neuroscience, estimates that the currents directly affect up to 20,000 neurons,
but flow outward "like dropping a pebble in a pond." Research suggests it may
have an impact on the very structure of the brain.

    In the mid-nineties, University of Calgary cell biologist Samuel Weiss
discovered that the adult brain can actually produce new cells. Since then, some
researchers have come to believe the steady growth of new brain cells may be
crucial to mental health.

    For example, imaging studies show that people with depression have a smaller
hippocampus in their brains than healthy people do. Psychiatrist Glenda
MacQueen, head of the mood disorders program at McMaster University in Hamilton,
recently reviewed the brain images of more than 1,000 people with depression and
1,000 healthy control subjects, and found the hippocampus to be especially small
in those who had suffered several episodes of depression.

    Housed in the limbic lobe along with Area 25, the hippocampus is best known
as a mansion of memory - the great neural archive that records the context of
our lives. But it has also become a hot property in mood studies.

    People with depression have long reported problems with memory. As well,
half of people with depression have high levels of stress hormones circulating
in their blood and it is the hippocampus that controls the chemical cascade that
stress triggers. (When the brain mistakes a ruffling curtain for a tiger ready
to pounce, it's the hippocampus that says, "Relax, it's only a cat," Dr.
MacQueen explains.)

    Stress hormones, meanwhile, are particularly toxic to cells of the
hippocampus, which may explain why the structure shrinks with depression. In
animal studies, Dr. Lozano and colleagues have discovered that DBS can boost new
brain-cell growth - particularly in the hippocampus. Neuroscientist Scellig
Stone, who works with Dr. Lozano, has found that one hour of deep brain
stimulation in a rat doubles its production of new cells.

    Dr. Weiss speculated that depression that responds to therapy or medication
may be the result of chemical imbalances built up over the short term. But
deeply rooted depression may be more responsive to DBS if the procedure really
does boost brain-cell growth.

    Although Dr. MacQueen has tried to study the hippocampus size of depression
patients before and after DBS, images taken so far have not allowed accurate
measurements. For now, researchers must base their results on what the patients
tell them.

   PROS AND CONS

    Through 2006, Mr. Miller imagined his electric moment - lying on the
operating table, doctors flicking a switch and saving him. He had called his
psychiatrist for a referral to the trial as soon as he saw the TV segment. Then
he lobbied, pleading his case to the doctors running the trial, phoning and
writing letters.

    But he wasn't alone. Results from the initial experiment made headlines
around the world in 2005, and nearly 700 requests for DBS poured in. Even now,
the waiting list has more than 30 patients.

    Deciding who makes the cut is in part the job of Sidney Kennedy, the health
network's head of psychiatry. Deeply involved in planning the DBS trial, he
describes the procedure as a "major paradigm shift" in the treatment of a mood
disorder. "It has been an interesting role for the psychiatrist: He's evolved
from psychotherapies, to pharmaco-

    therapy ... to adjustments with stimulators. ... It's one of the best
examples where psychiatry meets neuroscience."

    Dr. Kennedy, 57, had no great expectations when the trial began. Even after
the initial heady results, he tried to wear "the hat of the skeptic." But "I
thoroughly believe now there are no five-year placebos," he says (referring to
how long the first patient has had relief of symptoms). "I do think a cycle of
depression continues for these people, but it's not as severe."

    Not that DBS is without its critics. For example, Jeffrey Schwartz, a
renowned research psychiatrist at the University of California at Los Angeles, a
leading proponent of cognitive behavioural therapy and co-author of The Mind and
the Brain: Neuroplasticity and the Power of Mental Force has called DBS
"essentially nothing more than an electrical prefrontal lobotomy."

    He told a U.S. newspaper that its pioneers have been careful, but that he
worries its widespread use could lead to abuse by companies or amateurs offering
it to anyone who wants to tune up his mental state.

    In response, Dr. Lozano stresses that, unlike other psychosurgeries, DBS can
be reversed, the electrodes removed, and five years since their first patient,
none has suffered serious side effects.

    Dr. Kennedy says he suspects that it does not work for all patients because,
like faces, no two brains are exactly alike. Different brain regions could be
involved in depression in different people, he explains. "Maybe in 30 years,
people will look back and say, 'How primitive - they stuck electrodes in their
brains and turned the batteries on.' "

    Still, all surgeries carry a risk, Dr. Lozano notes. The experience with DBS
for Parkinson's suggests that one in every 500 patients will suffer a hemorrhage
during the surgery. Four in a thousand will suffer a serious complication, such
as a permanent neural deficit or even death. If the numbers of patients being
treated rise appreciably, "it will happen" for depression as well, he says
flatly. "It is just a matter of time."

    Even the positive affects rarely appear right away. A few patients report
relief as soon as the electrodes have powered up. But for most, it takes weeks,
even months, to find the right voltage and frequency - "the sweet spot," as they
call it.

    After the operation, Dr. Kennedy and Dr. Giaccobe, their offices mere steps
apart, see each patient once a week to track their progress and tweak their
settings. As time passes, the appointments are less frequent, but they still
require adjustments.

    Unlike patients with pain, those with depression are not able, or allowed,
to adjust their own voltage. For one thing, researchers say the electrodes
should be on all the time. Adjusting them haphazardly could have negative
effects.

    "We're managing this ever-growing cohort," Dr. Kennedy says, which at the
moment includes 30 men and women from their late 20s to their 60s. "We haven't
had people very often who couldn't tolerate the stimulation. ... If it's up too
high, they feel an inner restlessness, you know, 'wired,' and turning it back
down relieves that."

    Even when they do find their sweet spot, Dr. Giaccobe says, it can be
difficult for people who have been profoundly depressed for so long suddenly to
reclaim their lives. "They still have ups and downs," and even their
relationships change. One patient grew frustrated with a partner who missed the
needy and vulnerable homebody he had been when he was sick.

    "In a way, this is like learning to walk on a new hip," Dr. Giaccobe
explains. "I help them adjust and I adjust them."

   AT LONG LAST RELIEF

    After nearly a year of lobbying, doctors eventually decided that Mr. Miller
fit the criteria of treatment-resistant depression. In February, 2007, a metal
crown bolted to his temples, he at last found himself on the operating table.

    But he did not have his electric moment then and there. He awoke from the
procedure, groggy, sore and "deeply depressed." A technician arrived at his
bedside to switch on the stimulator, and he felt ... nothing. "I was so upset. I
went home devastated."

    He began to suspect that the treatment had failed, but Dr. Giaccobe gave him
regular "pep talks" and, over several weeks, slowly increased the voltage. At
month five, and nearly seven volts - about enough to power a smoke detector -
the black fog finally lifted.

    "I just woke up one morning and I felt good. I actually wanted to get out of
bed. Ah, and I was hungry, I was so hungry - I couldn't wait to eat." He popped
out to a deli had a Reuben sandwich for breakfast.

    "I called my friends. I called my mom. I was, I don't know, excited. I felt
the joy of being alive."

    In the past year, Mr. Miller has rebuilt his life, visiting friends, playing
sports and launching a business. But he has had his low points too. His father
died of cancer last spring before he could see his son free of depression.
Somehow the grief didn't knock Mr. Miller back into the darkness. But certain
symptoms return - sudden flashes of anxiety, trouble sleeping.

    Dr. Giaccobe says patients can have their moods improve, but still have a
lazy libido or erratic appetite. Sometimes such symptoms seem like warning signs
that the treatment is failing - which is what happened to Mr. Miller after he
went through the metal detector at the courthouse.

    It seemed a reasonable concern - doctors give DBS patients exemption letters
to use at airport security - but at the emergency appointment, Dr. Giaccobe
reminds him that it can be tricky to distinguish depression from a mere mood
swing.

    "It's hard when you've been sick for so long," Mr. Miller says. "You have to
remember that every bump in the road is not a return of the depression."

    "Okay, so let's take a look," Dr. Giaccobe says.

    Mr. Miller pulls up his sweatshirt, exposing his chest, and looks down to
the slight bump of his battery pack. He says he had joked with his fitness
trainer that he would have to work out the "pecs" on the opposite side a little
harder "to make it even."

    Dr. Giaccobe aims a remote control at the power-pack buried in Mr. Miller's
chest and flicks through settings like he's changing TV channels.

    "You're at 6.75 volts," he says. "I'm keeping it there."

    "Am I the highest patient you have?" Mr. Miller asks.

    "No, there's another patient around seven."

    "You don't want to turn me up?" Mr. Miller asks, laughing.

    "No," Dr. Giaccobe says. "You're good."

   Carolyn Abraham is The Globe and Mail's medical writer.

   Tapping the brain

    Led by Dr. Andres Lozano, the Toronto surgical team prepares multiple
sclerosis sufferer John McCutcheon for an attempt to use deep brain stimulation
to ease the fiery phantom pain that plagues legs he can otherwise barely feel.
He is only the second MS patient to undergo the treatment. Once Mr. McCutcheon
is in position, his head is covered, secured and fitted with the 'stereotactic'
frame used to guide the equipment that will bore a hole the size of a nickel in
his skull and send a micro-electrode probe into the depths of his brain.

    Now the electrodes are being deployed in much the same way to hunt down the
regions of the brain whose malfunctioning is responsible for mental illnesses,
such as depression.

    Once the probe begins its descent, the doctors must listen closely as
sophisticated audio equipment tells them how the device is interacting with the
brain's neurons, information that is also displayed in graphic form. From time
to time, Dr. Lozano, above, touches the patient, scratching his chest or patting
his leg to see what response his touch may trigger. 'Cells make different sounds
in different regions ...,' he says. 'It's like driving through Europe. ... You
know where you are by the language they speak.' When operating on depression
patients, the neurosurgeon, shown above out of surgical garb, tries for emotion
instead. He has them read stories or shows them pictures and then asks them how
they feel, as he listens to the sound their neurons make.

   Brain food

    Brutal cut

    Egas Moniz, the Portuguese neurologist who invented the prefrontal lobotomy,
earned the 1949 Nobel Prize in medicine after proving he could calm behaviour by
cutting out a patient's frontal lobes. The so-called "white cut," which U.S.
surgeons later performed with ice picks, left a legacy of apathetic automatons,
suffering from incontinence, epilepsy and confusion.

    Fire power

    Researchers say deep brain stimulation boosts the brain just as a pacemaker
pumps the heart. But the human body has only one heart that beats roughly once
per second. The human brain has 100 billion neurons, any one of them firing up
to 130 times per second.

    Depressingly small

    In depressed people, the brain's hippocampus - repository of our memories -
tends to be about 10 per cent smaller than normal. In the worst cases, in
particular those linked to post-traumatic stress disorder, the deficit can be 20
per cent.

    Current events

    The lowest DBS setting thus far in the Toronto trial fires at two volts,
with seven volts the highest. In contrast, a neuron fires at one-millionth of a
single volt. Most people in the trial are in the three-to-four-volt range, a
setting that should provide a five-year battery life.

   Carolyn Abraham

   Surgical brainwave

    In deep brain stimulation, doctors implant metal rods emitting electrical
pulses to try to treat depression.

   THE OPERATION

    1. Exact co-ordinates of the target are mapped in 3-D with an MRI.

    2. Skin is frozen and a hole the size of a nickel is drilled in the skull.

    AIMING ARC controls angle of entry

    3. Dura is opened, blood vessels are cauterized and an electrode is inserted

    Surgeons begin listening for the right neurons about 10 mm above the target
point

    CANNULA inserted 8.5 cm deep

    4. Neurons fire at different rates and patterns depending on their function.
An oscilloscope reading and patient feedback confirm surgeons have hit the right
spot.

    *****

    Lead

    Thin, insulated, coiled wires are attached to electrodes, each of which have
four points of 'contact' that emit electrical current deep inside the brain to
Brodmann Area 25 neurons, which, in the case of depression, are overactive

    Extension

    An insulated wire connects the lead to the pulse neurostimulator

    Neurostimulator

    The electrodes are connected by wires to a type of pacemaker device
implanted under the skin of the chest below the collarbone. The device sends
continuous electrical pulses to the target areas in the brain and can be easily
programmed by a doctor by remote control. The dosage of the electrical impulses
is customized to the individual.

    TONIA COWAN/THE GLOBE AND MAIL; SOURCE: TORONTO GENERAL HOSPITAL,
MEDICINENET.COM

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2008


                              57 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2008 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             May 22, 2008 Thursday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS COLUMN; EUROPE: SCIENCE; Pg. B10

LENGTH: 759 words

HEADLINE: In the U.K., stem cell research affirms humans and plants aren't equal

BYLINE: CARL MORTISHED, carl.mortished@thetimes.co.uk

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

    They paid little heed to the Bible thumpers, they ignored dire prophecies
about the coming of monsters and they rode roughshod over the worried. The
British Parliament this week ditched attempts to stop embryonic stem cell
research, in particular cutting-edge research using hybrid human-animal embryos.

    MPs rejected several amendments to the Human Fertilisation and Embryology
Bill that would have banned hybrids and so-called "saviour siblings," a
technique that would allow parents to select by screening an embryo that would
provide a sibling for a child suffering from a genetic illness and enable the
sibling's umbilical cord blood to be used in therapy for the sick child.

    The vote is a statement of faith in science, technology and engineering and
it will bring huge relief to scores of scientists in labs across Britain who
were operating in a sort of legal limbo. It may also give some hope to families
afflicted by wasting diseases such as Parkinson's or Alzheimer's that stem cells
might one day regenerate ravaged bodies.

    It gives Britain's biotechnology industry a badly needed boost at a time
when competitors are on the march and, more importantly, it may signal a growing
impatience with a curiously British sentimentality about the natural world that
periodically grips the nation that invented the industrial economy. Fear of
technology caused the British to reject and abandon genetically modified foods,
despite the presence of cutting-edge research in leading British pharmaceutical
companies.

    The whole business of genetic modification fled to America and stayed there,
but Britain has secured some small advantage in stem cell research, in large
part because of a sympathetic regulatory regime and because of the fear of many
fundamentally religious Americans. The acceptance of research into hybrids,
where human genetic material is injected into an denucleated cow's egg, goes
well beyond other jurisdictions and prompted vigorous opposition in Parliament
and lurid tales of Frankenstein monsters. In fact, the hybrids are just a
technique, not an end in themselves, as the embryos must be destroyed in 14 days
and the reason for using denucleated animal eggs is not to make freaks, but
merely a solution to the problem of a shortage of human eggs.

    This liberal attitude to research persuaded some of the top U.S. stem cell
researchers - scientists such as Roger Pederson and Stephen Minger - to migrate
to Britain. Attempts to stop stem cell research in the U.S. were given comfort
by President George W. Bush, who in 2001 vetoed a bill that would have allowed
federal funds to support research. That and litigation against the research led
to a temporary reverse of the usual leaching of British scientific talent to the
high-tech fleshpots of Boston and San Jose. But California has fought back,
launching a funding program in 2004 for stem cell research worth $3-billion
(U.S.) over three years.

    In cash terms, Britain cannot compete. The total government funding last
year for stem cell research was about £40-million ($77.5-million Canadian),
which by British standards, is a generous amount reflecting the Prime Minister's
personal support of the work. This money must continue to grow and develop if
Britain is to have any chance of surviving in competition with the American
market where huge sums are lavished on even the most dubious projects.
Meanwhile, the investment community is jaded, having lost billions on
biotechnology companies that failed to deliver on promises. The memory of
flash-in-the-pan ideas such as gene therapy in the 1990s still resonates in the
heads of investors so we can expect less enthusiasm from the private sector for
anything but very solid research and very obvious commercial prospects.

    Unfortunately, while the British are good at ideas, they have a poor record
in transporting the clever thing onto a commercial assembly line. Indeed, it is
the factory that has troubled the British ever since they migrated from the
fields into the mills in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. Somewhere in
the public subconscious, the memory of satanic mills dogs commercial progress.
It was an attempt to bring the factory into the fields that horrified so many
and caused the rejection of genetically modified seeds.

    For the time being, the notion of genetically modified human beings is
acceptable. Perhaps it appeals to the British sense of adventure. We can do
crazy things to ourselves but we want the green and pleasant land intact, frozen
in time, like an embryo in a test tube.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2008


                              58 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2008 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                               May 2, 2008 Friday

SECTION: GLOBE LIFE; Health: STUDY: LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS; Pg. L4

LENGTH: 892 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy shines light on blindness;
An experimental procedure proves successful after patients with a rare disease
see much-improved vision

BYLINE: HAYLEY MICK

BODY:

    The doctors warned him to go slow after the surgery, but after 21 years of
being legally blind, Dale Turner wasn't about to obey.

    Just steps out the hospital doors, the Peterborough, Ont., native tore off
his sunglasses and feasted his eyes on something he'd thought he would never
see.

    "I'd never seen it in all its vibrancy," he said of the sunlit Florida sky.
"It was a brilliant blue. It was just an overwhelming moment."

    Mr. Turner, 21, recently became the first Canadian, and one of a handful of
patients in the world, to receive an experimental gene therapy for a rare
hereditary eye disease called Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA). There is no
treatment for the disease, which eventually leads to total blindness.

    Mr. Turner took part in an experimental procedure carried out by researchers
at the University of Florida in Gainesville. Two more teams in the United States
and Britain, each working separately on similar tests, reported their successful
findings earlier this week in the online edition of the New England Journal of
Medicine.

    Within weeks, the patients who took part in these trials reported varying
degrees of vision improvement; being able to see a mole on a loved one's face,
leaves on a tree, a few lines on an eye chart, and bright blue skies.

    If further tests show the treatment works, experts say the gene therapy -
which involves replacing faulty genes with normal ones - has the potential to
reverse blindness from other kinds of inherited eye diseases.

    "There are so many inherited eye diseases that it makes great sense to start
pursuing the others," said Barry Byrne, director of the Powell Gene Therapy
Center at the University of Florida, who is leading the trial in which Mr.
Turner received his treatment.

    Dr. Byrne stressed that the current trial is meant to ensure that the
treatment is safe. Further research will reveal if  the therapy could be a
potential cure for those with LCA, a degenerative disease that affects more than
2,000 North Americans.

    "I want to get the word out to people who have similar conditions," Mr.
Turner said. "I want to spread hope so these people have something to look
forward to."

    LCA is a group of inherited blinding diseases that damages light receptors
in the retina. It usually begins stealing light in early childhood and causes
total blindness during a person's 20s or 30s.

    When Mr. Turner was a baby, his parents noticed he would respond to their
voices, but not their faces. Growing up, he had tunnel vision and difficulty
seeing, especially at night. Faces were fuzzy, tree tops looked like green lumps
and the sky always looked blue-grey. On a sunny day, it took his eyes 40 minutes
to adjust to the dimness after he headed inside.

    When Mr. Turner was 7, his father's job took the family to Philadelphia. In
an incredible stroke of luck, they learned that one of the world's leading LCA
researchers, a University of Pennsylvania researcher named Sam Jacobson, was
based in the city.

    "Meeting him was just the most incredible thing," says Laura Turner, Mr.
Turner's mother. "We still scratch our heads."

    It was through Dr. Jacobson that Mr. Turner eventually connected to
researchers in Florida, who were gearing up to begin a clinical trail. Two other
teams - one at the University of Pennsylvania and one in Britain - were doing
similar studies. The treatment had already proven successful in dogs. Now they
wanted to try it in humans. Mr. Turner volunteered along with eight other
patients.

    On Jan. 31, doctors at Shands hospital at the university inserted a needle
into Mr. Turner's eye, injecting millions of copies of a working gene, called
RPE65, into the small area between the retina and the back the eye. Patients who
have LCA have a faulty version of the RPE65 gene. Only the right eye was treated
- the worst one - in case anything went wrong.

    Three days later, Mr. Turner caught his first glimpse of a bright blue sky,
and shed tears.

    "The degree that Dale, in particular, responded was very rewarding," Dr.
Byrne said. "It really pushes us toward doing this in a more comprehensive way,
toward bigger areas, or younger patients, or both eyes."

    While the prospect of a cure is exciting, it can also be scary for people
living with limited or no sight, said Maureen Hartnett of Oakville, Ont., who
has a son and daughter, ages 15 and 18, with LCA. They read in braille, and
daughter Roisin, 18, who studies at Queen's University in Kingston, has a guide
dog.

    "If they said, 'there's a cure, and you're going to be able to see,' they
wouldn't just jump out and say, 'Yes!' Because the whole world would change on
them," Ms. Hartnett said. "They've both been able to carry on with their lives
without sight. Then all of a sudden if you could see, it wouldn't make any
sense. ... They wouldn't be able to read. All these things are scary for them."

    About 5 per cent of Mr. Turner's right eye was treated and soon doctors will
treat the rest, as well as his left eye.

    Now in his fourth year of a business degree at Trent University, he hopes
his postgraduate education won't include the seeing aides that help him read his
textbooks.

    "I feel like a weight has been lifted off of me," he said. "The thought of
maybe one day down the road ... losing my vision. That's pretty scary. To know
there's something preventing that from happening is incredible."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2008


                              63 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2008 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             April 14, 2008 Monday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; HEALTH: THE HIGH COST OF RARE ILLNESSES; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 1148 words

HEADLINE: When an orphan drug is a patient's only hope;
Canada lacks a policy to treat rare - or orphan - diseases, but a motion today
in Parliament seeks to change that

BYLINE: LISA PRIEST

BODY:

    When Szymon Cajmer was six years old, he was denied entry into a clinical
trial to test the only drug to treat his rare disease because his lungs worked
too well. Now 11, he suffers from severe hearing loss and he easily loses his
breath.

    The drug he did not qualify to receive years ago - idursulfase - has since
been approved by Health Canada to treat his disease, called Hunter syndrome. But
now, Szymon can't obtain the enzyme replacement therapy for a different reason:
Though it is funded in British Columbia and Alberta, it is not in Ontario.

    At a cost of about $400,000 a year, the intravenous medicine, known by the
trade name Elaprase, is utterly unaffordable for Szymon's family without
government funding.

    So he continues to deteriorate, with spleen and liver enlargement, carpal
tunnel syndrome, damaged heart valves. His joints are so stiff, even the
simplest of acts - putting on a hat - escapes him.

    "It really changes the prognosis," Justyna Cajmer said of her son, a Grade 4
pupil. "Because it's a progressive disease, it [the drug] is the only hope for
us to pursue."

    Canada's lack of an orphan drug policy - to treat orphan, or rare, diseases
- and the unequal access to medications for these diseases is what North
Vancouver Liberal MP Don Bell is hoping to change when he introduces a private
member's motion today in the House of Commons.

    The motion seeks a definition for rare disorders, the possible creation of a
fund to improve access to rare-disease treatments and the consideration of
options to encourage research and development.

    Orphan drugs are exorbitantly expensive, largely because of the small
numbers of patients who require them.

    For that reason, evaluating clinical trial evidence is also challenging.

    Yet society is faced with this question: Can a drug, perhaps the only
primary treatment, be denied to patients if it can help?

    The private member's motion also seeks an internationally accepted standard
to evaluate clinical trial evidence.

    Without a new standard, drugs for rare diseases are far less likely to be
approved for provincial government funding.

    "It's important to have the government commit to a course of action and
acknowledge that there's a problem," said Mr. Bell, who has been working with
Conservative Party MP Steven Fletcher, parliamentary secretary to Health
Minister Tony Clement, on revisions to the motion.

    Durhane Wong-Rieger, president of the Canadian Organization for Rare
Disorders, described today's motion as a "huge step."

    "This would commit the House to doing something," she said.

    The European Union, the United States, Japan and Australia all have orphan
drug policies.

    Though the U.S. policy does not necessarily provide access to rare drugs, it
has been successful in providing incentives to pharmaceutical companies to find
treatments for rare diseases.

    Britain has one of the best models for orphan drug funding. A national
advisory group aims to help health-care providers by assuring a cash flow to
support rare and expensive treatments.

    The drug Szymon requires is funded in Britain; about 45 patients are on it,
according to Ed Wraith, consultant pediatrician at Royal Manchester Children's
Hospital.

    Though Elaprase does not cure Hunter syndrome, a progressive disease, it has
been shown to improve some outcomes in patients, such as lengthening walking
distance.

    Joe Clarke, senior associate scientist in the Hospital for Sick Children's
Research Institute, who treats Szymon, said some patients feel better on the
drug and have shown improvement in long-standing complications, such as better
airways, joint mobility and energy.

    Szymon, who lives in Tecumseh, east of Windsor, would be "an ideal candidate
for enzyme replacement therapy if enzyme replacement therapy was demonstrated as
effective as we hope it is," Dr. Clarke said of the treatment, in a telephone
interview.

    The therapy involves a weekly intravenous infusion, which takes about three
hours.

    Whether taxpayers should finance such drugs is a particularly troubling
ethical issue.

    "Most of us, and that includes any government official I've been involved
with, want very desperately to find a way to help patients in a way that is fair
and effective," said Dr. Clarke, who is also a clinical professor in the
University of Sherbrooke's faculty of medicine.

    Ontario Health Ministry spokesman John Yoannou said the Committee to
Evaluate Drugs recommended in June of 2007 that Elaprase not be funded under
Ontario's Public Drug Programs. He pointed out that the Common Drug Review, a
national body, has also recommended against funding the drug.

    According to that federal government decision in December of 2007,
Elaprase's high cost - $657,000 annually for a patient weighing 77 pounds - was
not justified given the "lack of evidence of improvement in clinically important
outcomes."

    Mr. Yoannou wrote in an e-mail that the government has limited public funds
to pay for all treatments and "decisions are made based on clinically relevant
evidence. In the case of Elaprase, there is insufficient evidence and large gaps
in information."

    Laurel Ostfield, press secretary to Ontario Health Minister George
Smitherman, said the ministry is developing a new and innovative approach to how
drugs for rare diseases are reviewed.

    "We will take into consideration any information emanating from the proposed
federal legislation as part of this review," Ms. Ostfield wrote in an e-mail.

    Paul McCabe, managing director for Canada of Shire Human Genetic Therapies
Inc. - the drug's manufacturer - said Elaprase is approved in about 30
countries. More than 20 of those countries pay for the drug, be it through
private insurance or government funding, he said.

    "These are degenerative diseases, patients are deteriorating slowly every
day," said Mr. McCabe, noting that the disease is so rare only 20 Canadian
patients would be eligible to take the drug.

    He described Szymon's situation as tragic, adding that "if he lived in B.C.
or Alberta, he probably would have been treated for over a year now."

    The disease, known medically as mucopolysaccharidosis II, occurs when the
breakdown of a chemical widely distributed in the body outside of cells is
defective. That chemical builds up and causes problems in the form of a large
skull, coarse facial features, joint trouble, abnormal function of multiple
organs and, in particular, heart-valve problems.

    For Szymon, it means coming to grips with not being able to do everything
his peers can. He loves playing soccer, though he becomes breathless quickly.
And like every child, he has dreams of what he wants to do when he grows up,
though even his dream - repairing hearing aids for children - is coloured by his
disease.

    "It never goes away. You live with it moment by moment," said Ms. Cajmer,
his mother, a registered nurse.

    "We feel very much like we have been left out."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2008


                              65 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2008 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           January 23, 2008 Wednesday

SECTION: HEALTH; HEALTH: GENE THERAPY AND MEDICAL TREATMENT; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 928 words

HEADLINE: Click here to unlock your DNA code

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM, MEDICAL REPORTER

BODY:

    A California company is offering Canadians a chance to delve into the
secrets of their DNA - to learn about their ancestry, their susceptibility to
certain diseases, and what their genes might reveal about their behaviour.

    The Google-backed genetic-testing firm also hopes to turn its customers, and
their genetic information, into study subjects for researchers and
pharmaceutical companies.

    The co-founders of 23andMe, which began selling its $1,000 genetic scan in
Canada this week, said they are in talks with drug firms to figure out how
customers can be used as a data pool for research.

    Since genome studies typically demand hundreds, if not thousands, of
subjects to make reliable connections between DNA and common medical conditions,
the company believes its customers could help push genetic research forward.

    Linda Avey, a biotechnology executive who started the firm in 2006 with
health-care investor Anne Wojcicki, wife of Google co-founder Sergey Brin, said
that customers would decide for themselves, perhaps through an online survey, if
they would participate, either as someone afflicted with a condition, or as
healthy control subjects.

    "I think people really want to help other people," Ms. Avey said. "We
wouldn't want people to think that pharmaceutical companies have access to this
information.

    "They would only release information they are comfortable with .. .they
could say, 'I think I will take a pass on this one ...' "

    As costs to sequence DNA have dropped dramatically in recent years, several
direct-to-consumer DNA-testing firms have sprung up, banking on the idea that
people will pay to learn what's written in their genetic codes. Many experts
criticize the trend, arguing that DNA can now be cheaply read but it is still
poorly understood.

    Yet no one disputes that scientific progress depends on having huge numbers
of people pony up their DNA and personal health information for study. Only this
way can researchers tease apart the effects of the multiple genes and
environmental factors behind common diseases.

    An international consortium of academic scientists announced yesterday, for
example, that it intends to recruit 1,000 volunteers from different regions
around the world to compile a more detailed map of the genetic variation among
people. Earlier this month, Cartagene, a publicly funded project in Quebec began
recruiting the first of 20,000 adults to study their lifestyles and genes. The
information is to be compared with similar bio-banking projects under way in
other countries.

    Steve Scherer, a senior scientist at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children,
which is involved in the Autism Genome Project that involves 8,000 people,
called the 23andMe plan to pool data for research an "interesting, unusual
business model." But he said it might work well only for conditions that can be
clearly diagnosed.

    Still, Dr. Scherer said that while "the instinctive reaction of many is that
the science [of these private testing companies] is suspect," he noted that
high-end firms such as 23andMe and Navigenics, another California DNA testing
company, use the same testing technology as hospital labs.

    "The point is the information that you can get from the tests will only
improve as the science advances. ... Personal genomics is here - personalized
medicine is still a long way off."

    Personalized medicine is based on the idea that health care could be
customized to match the genes and lifestyle of individuals.

    23andMe has attracted particular attention in the field with backers that
include biotech giant Genentech Inc. and Google Inc., which invested
$3.9-million (U.S.) in the Mountain View, Calif., startup. As Dr. Scherer put
it, researchers "are interested to see how Google will develop a genome
browser."

    The privately held firm also boasts an advisory board that includes
well-respected academic researchers from institutions including Harvard and
Stanford universities. Up until this week, its tests - in which DNA is extracted
from a mailed-in saliva sample - were sold only in the United States, because
the firm hadn't completed arrangements for cross-border shipping of biological
specimens.

    The company will not reveal how many customers it already has in its
database. But the founders said they had already received many e-mails from
eager Canadians.

    The 23andMe test scans 580,000 mutations across the genome known as single
nucleotide polymorphisms - or SNiPs, for short. These SNiPs are akin to
single-letter typos that have been linked to particular traits, or conditions to
which a person might be predisposed, or from which a person might be protected.

    Customers can learn a wide range of information about themselves - such as
their possible risks for diabetes, Crohn's disease, or whether they carry the
genetic quirk that makes their urine smell after eating asparagus.

    Tim Caulfield, director of the Health Law Institute at the University of
Alberta, called the site slick and very sophisticated. But he warned generally
that "consumers should make sure they know what they're paying for ... the
science has not caught up to the marketing."

    Ms. Avey and Ms. Wojcicki disputed the idea that consumers are not ready to
receive their own genetic information.

    "There is a lot of paternalism in the medical communities," Ms. Avey said.
She likened it to doctors' onetime concerns that women would be unable to handle
the results of home pregnancy tests on their own.

    "We're taking great strides to try to be as responsible as possible in
translating this information," she said.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2008


                              66 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2007 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            December 24, 2007 Monday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; IN BRIEF; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 84 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy allows child to go home for holidays

BYLINE: The Canadian Press

DATELINE: Centreville, N.B.

BODY:

      Two-year-old Katlyn DeMerchant is getting ready to experience her first
Christmas outside of the sterile hospital room where she has been confined for
most of her life.

    The New Brunswick girl, who is known in the province as the "bubble baby,"
was diagnosed with severe combined immunodeficiency, an extremely rare genetic
disorder that left her with virtually no immune system.

    But thanks to experimental gene therapy she received at an American
hospital, this year she's spending Christmas at home.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2007


                              68 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                           November 17, 2007 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 229 words

HEADLINE: High hopes for eye research

BYLINE: BY TARINA WHITE, SUN MEDIA

BODY:

   The mother of a partially blind four-year-old girl is thrilled Calgary eye
researchers may unlock the key to reversing blindness within her daughter's
lifetime.

   At a conference in Calgary today, eye experts will discuss new research that
is expected to make giant strides in preventing and treating blindness in the
coming decades.

   Natasha McDougald's daughter Rosie was born deaf and has been progressively
losing her eyesight since the age of two.

   "That's exciting for me because hopefully she'll be able to benefit from that
in her lifetime," she said.

   Rosie has Usher's Syndrome, a degenerative genetic condition that causes
hearing and vision loss.

   The four-year-old's hearing has been restored with a cochlear implant, but
there is no cure or treatment to prevent her tunnelling vision.

   Rosie has lost all peripheral vision, which includes the sides of her eyes,
as well as above and below, and is learning to use a white cane to get around.

   Doctors expect she will have severe vision loss by the age of 10.

   But U of C eye researcher Dr. Bill Stell, chair of today's sold-out Vision
Quest Conference, is hopeful of turning that around.

   "Research is progressing rapidly in the areas of gene therapy, stem cell
research and encapsulated cell technology," he said.

   "Some types of blindness could be prevented and some vision could be restored
to the blind within five, 10 or 15 years."

GRAPHIC: photo by Mike Drew, Sun Media Rosie McDougald and her mom Natasha at
their home in Calgary. The four-year-old girl has Usher's Syndrome, which causes
hearing and vision loss. Researchers meeting in Calgary today are hopeful some
blindness will be reversible in Rosie's lifetime.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2007


                              71 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                           September 16, 2007 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 536 words

HEADLINE: Gene transfer case baffles docs

BYLINE: BY AP

DATELINE: TAYLORVILLE, Ill.

BODY:

   A few hours before she died this summer at the age of 36, Jolee Mohr lay in a
Chicago hospital so swollen by internal bleeding and her failing kidneys that
her husband decided against bringing their five-year-old daughter to say
goodbye.

   The girl wouldn't have recognized her mother.

   Robb Mohr couldn't bring himself to watch her die and he spent his wife's
last hours talking with her helpless and puzzled doctors. One vowed to get to
the bottom of the illness, and there were several clues to go on.

   The most unusual was this: Jolee Mohr got sick the day after her right knee
was injected with trillions of genetically engineered viruses in a voluntary
experiment to find out if gene therapy might be a safe way to ease the pain of
rheumatoid arthritis.

   She was dead three weeks later.

   The sponsor of this countrywide experiment, Targeted Genetics Corp. of
Seattle, has halted the work and 127 patients are being evaluated, according to
a company spokeswoman.

   No other problems have been reported, and the company believes patients were
adequately informed of the treatment's risks.

   U.S. health officials are investigating Mohr's death, and the case is
expected to be discussed tomorrow by advisers to the National Institutes of
Health during a meeting in Bethesda, Md. There's a lot at stake, including
answers for Robb Mohr, and the interests of Targeted Genetics.

   But there are also questions about how medical studies are done and how much
study volunteers are told of the risks.

   "To me, it's an avoidable death," Mohr said in an interview at his home amid
the cornfields of central Illinois.

   "And you're going to have to really show me a lot of stuff to convince me
that it wasn't."

   There have been more than 800 gene-therapy studies involving 5,000 U.S.
patients since the NIH approved the country's first human gene transfer study in
1989.

   Yet there are no approved therapies despite 17 years of research, and the
only major success -- a cure for the rare inherited immune disorder known as
"bubble boy disease" -- came with a high cost: Leukemia linked in 2003 to the
virus that delivered the treatment.

   Still, the 1999 death of Arizona teenager Jesse Gelsinger is the only
reported fatality that has been definitively linked with a U.S. gene-therapy
study, an NIH spokesman said.

   And Dr. Theodore Friedmann, who once headed the NIH committee that oversees
gene-therapy experiments, said developments in medicine often come with
problems, even death.

   Even if gene therapy is found to be the cause of Jolee Mohr's death, the
method remains promising, Friedmann said.

   When Dr. Robert Trapp of the Arthritis Center in Springfield told Jolee Mohr
about the gene therapy study, she had lived with rheumatoid arthritis for 14
years, her husband said.

   The study used a genetically engineered virus that can infect cells without
causing human disease. In simple terms, the virus is used as a vehicle to carry
a new gene into the body. Targeted Genetics hopes the gene will help the body
make a protein that would ease arthritis pain.

   Jolee Mohr signed a 15-page consent form Feb. 12.

   Mohr's family asked the University of Chicago to lead the investigation into
her death, but the FDA is also investigating, spokeswoman Karen Riley said.

GRAPHIC: 1. photo by Seth Perlman, AP Robb Mohr cries during an interview at
home in Taylorville, Ill. Mohr's wife, Jolee, died in a Chicago hospital last
summer, three weeks after taking an experimental treatment for rheumatoid
arthritis. The cause of her death is being investigated by the FDA and by the
University of Chicago. 2. photo of JOLEE MOHR Patient died

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2007


                              75 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2007 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              June 22, 2007 Friday

SECTION: GLOBE LIFE; STUDY: GENE THERAPY; Pg. L4

LENGTH: 718 words

HEADLINE: Risky science offers Parkinson's relief;
Trojan horse technique uses disabled cold virus to deliver corrective genetic
code

BYLINE: Agence France-Presse

DATELINE: PARIS

BODY:

    The first attempt at gene therapy against Parkinson's disease has yielded
promising results and is safe, according to early data from this groundbreaking
experiment.

    The pilot study, conducted among 11 men and one woman in New York, marks the
first use of a Trojan horse technique against the disease.

    It entails taking a gene and tucking it inside a disabled cold virus, which
is then injected into a key area of the brain. The harmless virus "infects" the
local cells and thus stealthily delivers the corrective piece of genetic code.

    The 12 volunteers, all of whom have advanced Parkinson's, showed significant
improvement in trembling, jerkiness and other symptoms, and none had any side
effects, according to an assessment carried out a year after the operation.

    The paper, appearing tomorrow in the British journal The Lancet, could be an
important boost for gene therapy.

    In the 1990s, the dramatic rise of biotechnology spurred hopes of a "new
dawn" for medicine in which inherited diseases could be wiped out by simply
replacing the faulty genes in targeted cells with the right ones.

    But this vision became darkened by setbacks as scientists gradually realized
that an individual's genome is a complex, interwoven tapestry - and substituting
one gene with another can have far-reaching consequences elsewhere.

    In 1999, this frontier research was blighted by the death of an 18-year-old
U.S. volunteer, Jesse Gelsinger, whose immune system ran amok following a gene
transplant to fix a liver enzyme deficiency.

    In 2002, French researchers were stunned when three out of 10 children they
had cured with corrective genes to fix X-SCID, an inherited immunodeficiency
disorder, suddenly developed leukemia.

    In this climate of deep prudence, researchers led by Matthew During, a
professor at Cornell University's Weill Medical College in New York, were placed
under tight constraints in their experiment, which aimed primarily at testing
for safety.

    Parkinson's is an incurable, degenerative disease of the central nervous
system that causes uncontrollable shaking, along with impaired speech and
movement. In approximately one-third of cases, it also results in dementia. The
disease affects at least 1 per cent of people over the age of 65.

    The cause is a loss of dopamine, a chemical messenger that helps direct
movement. The substance is provided in a part of the brain called the substantia
nigra.

    Attempts to treat Parkinson's have focused essentially on providing a
pharmaceutical substitute for dopamine or on restoring or protecting
dopamine-producing cells.

    Dr. During's team took a different tack, though. They aimed at part of the
brain called the subthalamic nucleus, which becomes hyperactive as a result of
Parkinson's and "blocks" signals to the nervous system, thus hampering motor
control.

    Using a magnetic resonance imaging scanner to pinpoint their operations, the
team delicately delivered a gene that controls an enzyme, glutamic acid
decarboxylase, into the volunteers' subthalamic nucleus.

    The idea was to use the gene as a switch to reverse the subthalamic
nucleus's activity, turning it into an inhibitor rather than exciter of motor
output signals.

    None of the patients suffered ill effects from the surgery or from the
transplanted gene.

    Within three months of the operation, they reported substantial improvements
in the side of the body that was opposite to the brain hemisphere where the gene
was delivered, and the improvement continued until 12 months, the endpoint of
the trial.

    The researchers say the results, while preliminary, are encouraging,
especially as U.S. health watchdogs only gave them cautious authorization for a
gene transplant on one side of the brain, not both.

    But Jon Stoessl, a Parkinson's researcher at the University of British
Columbia, expressed caution.

    The long-term effect of this therapy on the subthalamic nucleus's role in
learning remains unclear, he said in a commentary also published in The Lancet.

    Another unknown is whether the virus, even though disabled and transferred
to only a tiny part of the brain, could affect neighbouring structures, he said.

    Finally, there was no proof yet that this technique was any more effective
than tried and tested implants to stimulate the subthalamic nucleus, Dr. Stoessl
said.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2007


                              76 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2007 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             June 16, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: FOCUS; MEDICAL RESEARCH: THE NASTIEST FORM OF MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY; Pg.
F8

LENGTH: 2522 words

HEADLINE: 'How far you would go for someone you love?';
To save his son, John Davidson walked 11,572 kilometres and raised $9.5-million,
Anne McIlroy reports. Why, then, is he so sad?

BYLINE: Anne McIlroy

BODY:

    Thirteen years ago, John Davidson came up with a plan to save his son.

    Jesse Davidson was born with a severe form of muscular dystrophy, and his
parents watched helplessly as it robbed their little boy of his strength. By the
fall of 1994, he was 14 and facing life in a wheelchair, a life that would be
increasingly restricted by his failing muscles. Duchenne muscular dystrophy, or
DMD, is almost exclusively a male affliction and it is invariably fatal.

    Research on a cure had stalled; funding was scarce for a disorder that
affects only about one in 3,500 boys. Mr. Davidson decided the only way to save
Jesse was to help the medical researchers working on DMD. He would push the boy
across Ontario to raise money.

    His wife, Sherene, thought the idea was crazy. So did Jesse. But they
eventually went along with it. Father and son started at the Manitoba boundary
in May, 1995, and spent 124 days on their wheelchair marathon. They hoped to
raise $100,000, but $2-million poured into the charity they set up: Jesse's
Journey - The Foundation for Gene and Cell Therapy.

    Mr. Davidson quit his job as a sports and news broadcaster in London, Ont.,
to devote himself to the cause full-time. The foundation quickly passed along
the $2-million and needed more money. So in 1998, at the age of 52, he walked
across the country - this time, without his son; Jesse was no longer robust
enough to endure such a trek.

    The fundraising went on even after Mr. Davidson made it to Victoria, and now
Jesse's Journey has $7.5-million in an endowment fund, using the interest to
finance medical research. Last year, that was $375,000.

    Mr. Davidson knows that some see him as a "super dad" for having walked
11,572 kilometres and raised $9.5-million. But he says he's no different from
anyone else who will be feted tomorrow on Father's Day.

    "Ask yourself a question," he says. "How far you would go for someone you
love?"

    Scientists working on DMD - including many supported by Jesse's Journey -
have made much progress since Mr. Davidson first asked himself that question 13
years ago. Many researchers now say they are close, if not to a cure, then to a
way of prolonging and improving the lives of those suffering from the disease.

    But it may not come in time for Jesse. Now 27, he has lived longer than most
young men with DMD. His heart muscles are starting to weaken. He has difficulty
coughing; a cold could be fatal.

    "He is 27 and he knows where we are at. He knows what the future is," his
father says.

    Still, Mr. Davidson continues his driven pace, finding solace in channelling
his grief into action. But his sadness is palpable. You can see it in his eyes,
in the slump in his shoulders when he thinks no one is looking. He is preparing
himself for the day when he will lose his boy.

   GREAT EXPECTATIONS

    In 1987, when Jesse was 7, researcher Ron Worton, then at the Hospital for
Sick Children in Toronto, discovered the gene that causes DMD. He declared that
a cure was in sight - perhaps within five years.

    Now, he regrets his optimism. "I knew in my heart I wasn't being completely
truthful."

    Finding a gene is one thing. Fixing it is quite another, says Dr. Worton,
who retired this spring from the Ottawa Health Research Institute.

    The gene that causes DMD is by far the largest in the human genome; it
instructs the body how to build a protein called dystrophin, which helps muscle
cells keep their shape as they stretch and contract. The instructions are
scrambled in the defective gene, and boys born with it produce no dystrophin.
Eventually their muscles break down.

    DMD affects males because it is carried on the X chromosome. Females have
two X chromosomes; if they inherit the faulty gene on one, they have a properly
functioning version on the other. But women can carry the gene (and in very rare
cases develop symptoms as they get older) - and they can pass it on. Their sons
have a 50-per-cent chance of getting the disease.

    Researchers are zeroing in on ways to repair or counteract the damage caused
by the gene. Dr. Worton once more tells families that help is on the way -
likely in five years. "This time, I mean it," he says.

    Gene therapy is one approach. It involves using viruses or some other
delivery mechanism to get a working copy of the dystrophin gene, or at least
essential sections of it, inserted into the muscle cells of boys with DMD.

    Stem-cell therapy is another potential treatment. Researchers would inject
patients with stem cells - which have the ability to become different types of
cells - to repair and rebuild damaged muscles.

    This might involve therapeutic cloning - taking embryonic stem cells,
sucking out the nucleus, and inserting the nucleus of a muscle cell from a
patient that has been modified to carry a working version of the dystrophin
gene. But older stem cells hold promise as well, and some groups are looking at
using cells taken from a matched donor - probably a close relative.

    As well, Johnny Huard, a Canadian researcher working at University of
Pittsburgh, says it may be possible for DMD patients to harness the power of
their own stem cells. When they were infants, these cells worked overtime to
replace muscle cells being damaged by the lack of dystrophin. Perhaps they could
be stimulated to work that kind of overtime again, he says.

    There is also the possibility of somehow "editing" the dystrophin gene to
block sections that are problematic, and let the body produce the protein.

    A combination of these approaches will probably be what works, says Dr.
Huard, originally from Quebec's Gaspé region. It will be easier to help boys
with DMD than young men in the advanced stages whose bodies are much more
damaged, he says.

    He is working on both stem-cell and gene therapy, and says: "My goal,
really, is can we improve their quality of life? Can we make them walk a little
longer? Can they use their arms to eat a little bit longer? That is a big deal
for us, and this is within our sight."

    Dr. Huard first encountered Mr. Davidson in 2003 and says he became quite
emotional upon hearing his story. "Jesse is special, but his father is even more
special. I have never seen someone so dedicated." He and his colleagues now
devote their own annual fundraiser to the charity.

    The sums Jesse's Journey hands out are relatively small, but they can make a
difference. For example, Dr. Huard received $100,000 that allowed him to engage
in a bit of "high-risk" research - projects so novel they have no chance at
support from a major granting agency.

    As a result, he discovered that, at least in mice, stem cells from a female
donor are better at rebuilding muscles than those from males, a finding that may
prove useful in developing a therapy.

    Researchers also say money from Jesse's Journey helps the top people in the
field work together. Michael Rudnicki, a senior scientist at the Ottawa Health
Research Institute, compares funding a large research initiative to putting
together a jigsaw puzzle. Big pieces come from granting agencies, like the
Canadian Institute for Health Research. But over the years Jesse's Journey has
supplied many important missing pieces; essential equipment, funding to bring in
a scientist or technician with a particular expertise; money for high-risk
research.

    "It has been incredibly important," he says, adding that he also considers
Mr. Davidson an inspiration.

    "When he speaks about Jesse, and kids who are really suffering and families
who are really suffering, he reminds us of the human relevance of what we are
doing. And that makes us work harder."

   THE PITCH MAN

    It is a warm spring evening, and 200 of the top muscular-dystrophy
researchers in the world are starting to arrive for an elegant dinner at the
Museum of Civilization in Ottawa.

    They have gathered to mark the 20th anniversary of the discovery of the
Duchenne gene, and to report on their progress.

    Mr. Davidson is nervous and eats very little. He is the after-dinner speaker
and says that, although he has given his spiel hundreds of times, he still gets
the jitters. As the scientists finish dessert and chat, a video begins to play.
It shows Mr. Davidson struggling across Ontario with Jesse, as well as his solo
trek. The room falls silent and he starts his standard speech. It is a
motivational pep talk, well paced, with a few funny lines. But its emotional
core is the story of his efforts to save his son.

    "Ask yourself," he says yet again, "how far you would go for your child?"

    He urges the scientists to conquer a disease that robs parents of their
children. To do that, he says they must collaborate and share results, rather
than seeking personal glory.

    He shares some of his lessons from the road and tells the story of Ed
Coxworthy, the Newfoundlander who grudgingly agreed to drive an escort van to
help Mr. Davidson start his cross-country walk near St. John's - only to still
be at the wheel when the trek ended 286 days later. "People will do amazing
things for you if you ask them," he says.

    He describes Jesse as a hero for overcoming so many obstacles, for working
so hard to raise money for research that "will in all likelihood not be in time"
for him. But it may be in time for someone else, perhaps a boy whose family has
just found out what lies in store for them.

    The researchers give Mr. Davidson a standing ovation. Fabio Rossi, a
stem-cell scientist at the University of British Columbia, has tears in his
eyes. "It always gets to me," he says.

    After the speech, he chats with Mr. Davidson. He, like so many of the
researchers, wants to know how Jesse is doing.

    "Jesse is okay," his father replies.

   THE EX-POSTER BOY

    Jesse Davidson lives on his own in a two-bedroom apartment. He graduated
from a hotel-management program at a community college and works one day a week
as an events planner for Heritage London, organizing an annual Halloween party
and croquet tournament.

    He has been at work all day and now is tired. Having his photo taken on a
hill near the apartment proved to be an ordeal, and he isn't looking forward to
having a conversation. Clearly his father has sweet-talked him into the photo
and the interview. "If I have to do it, I have to do it," he says, closing his
eyes.

    Jesse has grown weary of being part of the heroic enterprise and says he is
grateful that his father doesn't pull him in to it too much. "It is not as bad
as it used to be. I put up with it," he says.

    He is now a young man leading as independent a life as he can, but people
still see him as the little DMD poster boy. "I'm stuck as that kid," he says.

    He says he is glad other kids affected by DMD and their families are getting
involved with Jesse's Journey, which now raises money with charity walks, golf
tournaments and other events.

    "Let other people tell their stories," he says. "I've got my things to do -
living on my own, all the challenges of that."

    For example, he is redecorating the apartment, which he recently had painted
a bright yellow and blue, and he is taking a course on Web design with the help
of his mother.

    He manages his money and his household, although attendants help him bathe
and get dressed, and prepare his meals. He can still move his fingers, and
easily controls his electric wheelchair. But he can't raise his arms to brush a
piece of fluff that has landed on his face.

    His father does it for him, and gently smoothes his hair. But Jesse seems
irritated, saying, "Hey, Dad, you don't need to do that."

    Sherene Davidson is calmer, quieter and, today at least, less annoying to
her son. Jesse says that Mother's Day is a much bigger deal in the family than
Father's Day. In fact, his parents are out of town this weekend on a holiday.

    Is he proud of his dad?

    "He's done a lot," Jesse replies. "Sometimes I wish he wasn't doing so much.
It can be a lot of work."

    Over pizza, which Jesse can eat by himself if his father props up his arm on
a brace, the topic comes up again. Mr. Davidson is off the next day for
fundraising events in Nova Scotia and Newfoundland.

    "You work too hard, Dad," Jesse says.

    "It's okay," his father replies softly.

   FATHER AND SON

    Headquarters for Jesse's Journey is in an office in downtown London with
hand-me-down furniture and a kitchen with no sink. The foundation is run by
managing director Rick Moss with three full-time and two part-time staffers. A
scientific committee, made up of researchers and parents, decides which projects
are funded. Its website, www.jessesjourney.com, is regularly updated.

    Mr. Davidson is the charity's public face and, up close, he is as optimistic
and energetic as he is on stage. But more of the sadness shows through.

    Jesse is his middle child, the one who as a kid organized an elaborate
breakfast in bed, complete with menu, for Father's Day, the only one of three
brothers to share his love of sports. (The two watch a lot of hockey - the
National Hockey League and all the home games of the Ontario Hockey League's
London Knights.)

    Jesse loves cooking, and they recently took a course together - Passion for
Pasta - with Mr. Davidson acting as sous-chef.

    They also watch television together. Their initial conversation about
end-of-life issues happened during a program about the Terri Schiavo case, the
U.S. right-to-die drama that played out in 2005.

    "He said, 'When I'm not me any more, that's it.' He was telling me
something," says Mr. Davidson, who also thought about what life will be like
after Jesse is gone.

    He will keep raising money. "Some people drift away when their child dies,
but I'm in this for the long haul. I may not be in time to save Jesse. But maybe
I'll be in time for some other little boy whose dad isn't at the end of his
career and can't change directions."

    Not that he has given up hope. Every night, he prays that a call will come
from a researcher. "The scientist will say, 'Guess what we found?' And it will
be the happiest day of my life."

   Anne McIlroy is The Globe and Mail's science reporter.

   *****

   DMD's modus operandi

    There are nine forms of the degenerative disease commonly known as muscular
dystrophy, and the one named for Guillaume Duchenne, the French physician
credited with its discovery, is the most severe of all.

    The early phase It is usually diagnosed in boys 2 to 6, and often affects
the legs and hips first. The children may fall frequently, have trouble climbing
stairs or jumping from a standing position. They often develop big calves.

    The transitional phase From 6 to 12, boys with DMD will have trouble with
balance and walking, and may walk on the balls of their toes or with a slight
rolling gait.

    Loss of ambulation By about 12, many will need a wheelchair, at least part
of the time. Their weakened muscles mean they tire more easily. They need help
with activities that require the use of the arms. But most can still write and
use a computer.

    The final years By 15 or so, many young men develop heart muscle problems
and can have difficulty breathing. Many die in their 20s, from respiratory and
cardiac problems. It is rare for anyone with DMD to live past 30.

   Source: Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy, Muscular Dystrophy Association.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2007


                              83 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2007 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                            February 25, 2007 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SHOWTIME; Pg. SH13

LENGTH: 817 words

HEADLINE: Next not worth it;
Mishmash of fact and fiction overwhelms cardboard characters

BODY:

   NEXT

   Michael Crichton

   Harper Collins

   $32.95, 431 pages

   It would be simple to blame Dan Brown and the huge success of his Da Vinci
Code.

   But one suspects Michael Crichton had these tendencies all along.

   The "tendencies" involve deliberately confusing fact and fiction to such as
extant that, in the case of Brown's mega-seller, countless numbers have flocked
to Paris to search beneath the pyramid for the tomb of Mary Magdalene.

   With Crichton's Next, it's the controversy of genetic research which provides
the subject and ultimately the confusion.

   What in this novel is fact and what is fiction?

   We have a book which has more scientific references listed at the back than
many university papers.

   Is Crichton telling us all the crazy stuff which happens in the novel is
actually happening?

   Or is he hitching the outlandish to actual breakthroughs in science and
making a big buck in the process?

   Certainly talking chimps, gene therapy which can control people, and other
such stuff push the bounds of belief.

   And in the process, Crichton forgets most people buy his books for enjoyment
and to enjoy a novel, if that is what this is, you really do need to care for
the characters.

   His breakthrough success with the scripts of ER, after all, would not have
had the impact the show did were only about medical procedures and lacked a
George Clooney to lighten the load.

   Yet, after finishing Next, it is almost impossible to remember a single flesh
and blood character.

   Being prophet or scaremonger -- depending on your scientific or religious
viewpoint -- is all well and good.

   Wrapping your message in a story with people we actually care about would at
least justify the cost of the book.

   -- CHRIS NELSON

   ---

   THE SECOND HORSEMAN

   By Kyle Mills

   H.B. FENN

   The real danger facing the world is the threat of rogue terrorist groups
stealing and setting off nuclear warheads, according to the theme of thriller
writer Kyle Mills' new novel.

   The best-selling author of hits such as Fade and Rising Phoenix has another
winner in this taut tale, which begins with the breaking out of federal prison
of Brandon Vale, a career thief serving time ironically for a diamond heist he
did not commit.

   Vale just wants to keep his head down and serve out his sentence, but he is
forced to go on the lam by Richard Scanlon, the former FBI agent who framed him
in the first place.

   Scanlon has discovered a Ukrainian crime group is auctioning 12 nuclear
warheads to the highest bidder, but can't convince the U.S. government the sale
isn't a hoax.

   The only way he can come up with the $250 million needed to take the warheads
off the market is to have Vale steal it.

   The plot twists and turns as the characters double-cross one another and the
threat to world stability turns out to be different than anyone imagined.

   A riveting story told with both tension and humour.

   -- YVONNE CRITTENDEN

   ---

   PAINT IT BLACK

   (Little Brown)

   By Janet Fitch

   Janet Fitch's first novel, White Oleander, was a runaway hit and made into a
critically acclaimed film.

   Now the young California writer has written another powerful story, this one
about love and loss set in the 1980s punk-rock scene in Los Angeles.

   Josie Tyrell comes from a working class background and parents who don't give
a damn.

   Struggling to survive as an artist's model, she falls in love with art
student Michael Faraday.

   He happily moves in to her rather sleazy world, despite being the son of
wealthy parents -- his father is a novelist, his mother a renowned concert
pianist.

   The story opens with Michael's suicide, a violent act that throws Josie into
a complete tailspin.

   Searching for answers, she moves in and out of two worlds, her own and the
lavish life of Michael's grieving mother, a woman who hates her for not saving
her son and who is riddled with guilt for the part she played in Michael's
emotional turmoil.

   Josie's exploration of the complexities of love and the agony of loss is told
with insight and empathy.

   -- CRITTENDEN

   ---

   FRESH KILLS

   Random House

   By Reggie Nadelson

   The new Reggie Nadelson novel featuring her former New York City cop Artie
Cohen takes up the story of his nephew Billy Farone.

   The young man who was sentenced to a juvenile institution in Florida after
stabbing a teen called Heshey Shank to death in a previous novel, comes to visit
Artie on a two-week leave of absence.

   He has done well enough at the place to convince his caretakers that he's
reformed, although Artie, while he adores Billy, is wary of glib "cures" for his
emotional problems.

   Artie is now married to a divorcee with two daughters -- his wife hates and
fears Billy and won't have him in the house.

   Guiltily, Artie lets Billy stay with him.

   But events take over, as the father of the boy Billy killed makes threatening
phone calls and Artie's many memorable Russian immigrant friends (he is of
Russian origin) get him embroiled in their problems.

   Nadelson has written another exciting rollercoaster of a story.

   -- CRITTENDEN

GRAPHIC: 4 photos

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2007


                              85 of 545 DOCUMENTS


 Copyright 2007 The Globe and Mail, a division of CTVglobemedia Publishing Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           February 17, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 638 words

HEADLINE: Fragile boy defies odds, finds match;
Anonymous donor comes forward to help infant fight rare disease

BYLINE: DAWN WALTON

DATELINE: CALGARY

BODY:

    Evan Pogubila's short life has been defined by defying the odds.

    Perhaps one in 75,000 to 100,000 babies is born with severe combined
immunodeficiency disease, an inherited condition that renders tiny bodies
incapable of fighting off infection and usually kills those afflicted by their
first or second birthday.

    Nine-month-old Evan is one of those youngsters, forced to live in a sterile
hospital room in Calgary, isolated from his family, awaiting a cure.

    A bone-marrow transplant is his best shot at a normal life, but the chance
of finding a perfect match is about one in three million.

    This week, the cherubic-faced boy, who spends most of his time peering out
from behind the glass at the Alberta Children's Hospital, found one.

    "It's amazing news," Evan's mother, Melanie Pogubila, said. "It's been a
whirlwind."

    Evan was diagnosed with SCID, the so-called bubble-boy disease, in November
when his parents noticed he wasn't interested in food and stopped growing. It
took 10 days to diagnose SCID, the most serious of the 100 or so known primary
immunodeficiencies, and Evan has lived in a germ-free room ever since.

    His parents can visit him only when covered with sterilized gowns. His twin
sister, Jordan, and other pintsized germ incubators, aren't allowed contact,
except through windows.

    David Vetter brought the disorder to the public's attention when he was born
in Houston in 1971 and lived 12 years in isolator containment systems designed
by NASA space-flight engineers. He died in 1984 from a cancerous infection
linked to a bone-marrow transplant that doctors and family had hoped would cure
his disease.

    While transplants don't always work, the success rate can be high. Gene
therapy is also being studied - with varying degrees of success - as a possible
treatment.

    Neither Ms. Pogubila nor her husband, Frank, were a bone-marrow match.
Neither was Jordan or any other relative.

    This week, the family held a special donor clinic in a bid to find a
candidate.

    On Thursday, they got an e-mail about an unnamed donor, a perfect match, who
is willing to help Evan.

    Now Evan is preparing to move by month's end to Toronto's Hospital for Sick
Children where the transplant will be performed after he undergoes chemotherapy
treatment to prepare his system for the procedure, Ms. Pogubila explained.
Recovery could take up to a year.

    Had the Pogubilas known sooner about their son's condition, treatment would
have been less complex, but they didn't know anything was amiss until he got
sick.

    Wisconsin is about to become the first state in the United States to test
newborns for the condition. Catching the disease early may help babies get a
better chance at life. Some have died having never been diagnosed with the
disease.

    "We've been lobbying to try to get that," said Tina Morgan, president of the
Canadian Immunodeficiencies Patient Organization, adding that the condition is
so rare and the cost so high that it has been up to families and doctors to
choose to screen for the disease.

    (Health Canada is currently studying SCID in native communities, but the
Public Health Agency of Canada has not contemplated recommending widespread
screening.)

    Several hundred transplants have been performed on SCID children around the
world in the past 30 years with a survival rate of 60 to 70 per cent, according
to Ms. Morgan's organization.

    Chances of success improve if the donor is a sibling or other relative and
the procedure is performed without chemotherapy prior to the transplant. The
success rate rises to 95 per cent if the transplant is done soon after birth or
before the infant is only 3½ months old.

    "It's going to be a long road, but he's one step closer to being home, so
that's the exciting part," Ms. Pogubila said.

    And one thing is certain, Evan has a habit of beating the odds.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2007


                              91 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2006 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           December 12, 2006 Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 846 words

HEADLINE: Souped-up cells used to repair lung damage;
Human trial seeks to show gene therapy can restore pulmonary vessels

BYLINE: UNNATI GANDHI

BODY:

   Canadian researchers have developed a novel technique that can repair and
regenerate damaged blood vessels in the lungs, and are on their way to driving
the science of gene therapy in a whole new direction.

   After picking out highly specialized blood cells from a patient, the
scientists soup up their genes with a growth stimulant and inject the modified
cells back into the body to mend the atrophied blood vessels associated with
pulmonary hypertension, a rare and lethal condition.

   This method of combining cell and gene therapy, a world first for heart, lung
and blood conditions, was proven to be successful in lab rats.

   Then last month, researchers at St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto began
treating their first human patient, a 75-year-old woman.

   "Not only does it prevent disease in the animal models, it actually can cause
reversal, which is something you don't normally see," said John Granton, lead
investigator for the trial. The researchers are currently putting together a
larger clinical trial that is expected to conclude by mid-2008.

   The new method, already generating a buzz in medical circles around the
world, could have significant influence on research for curing chronic diseases
such as heart, lung and kidney failure, emphysema and even cancer.

   But so far, it is being tested only on pulmonary hypertension, a disease in
which some of the lung's narrow arteries are severely damaged. The blood pumped
into these damaged lungs  accumulates and creates pressure in the pulmonary
artery, the large blood vessel that leads from the heart to the lungs.

   Over time, some of the arteries become blocked, leading to fewer  places for
the blood to flow through. The heart is then forced to work harder to pump blood
through the lungs and this often leads to heart failure.

   Drugs being prescribed for the condition simply reduce some of the symptoms,
such as shortness of breath and fainting. Since there is no cure, patients may
need a lung transplant. Many of them die of heart failure.

   "[The new gene therapy] may represent a totally novel way of treating these
people who otherwise would have nothing else," said Dr. Granton, also director
of the critical care medicine program at Toronto General Hospital.

   The researchers were able to harvest specialized blood cells that typically
make up only 1 per cent of white blood cells. These endothelial progenitor cells
carry a gene that produces nitric oxide, a chemical that can stimulate the
regrowth of damaged blood vessels. But for people with pulmonary hypertension,
this small number of cells is not enough to repair their severely damaged blood
vessels.

   The harvested cells are first multiplied in petri dishes. Then, as many as
100 extra copies of the nitric oxide gene are inserted into each cell. These
high-performance cells are then injected directly back into the pulmonary
artery, where it is hoped that they will start reversing the damage done to the
blood vessels in the lungs.

   It's the one-two punch factor that plays an important role in the
regeneration of the vessel walls.

   "That combination of [extra] cells and genes really seems to be important in
repairing the blood vessels that are already damaged," said Duncan Stewart, a
cardiologist at St. Michael's Hospital, who has been researching this technique
for years and developed the trial. "It's now opened up a new era of treatment
for this disease."

   Sanjay Mehta, a specialist in pulmonary hypertension who is not involved in
the study, said that cell-based gene therapy is "exciting for all the potentials
it offers" especially because it uses a patient's own cells.

   "Just like transplants, you can't easily get the body to accept foreign cells
and tissues. This is the safest way to do it, to take your own cells and put
them back in with a special gene on board," said Dr. Mehta, a respirologist at
the London Health Sciences Centre.

   If successful, Dr. Granton sees the technique becoming "commonplace."

   "You could target it to a particular area and repopulate cells in the brain.
Who knows? The kidney, the liver - regrow damaged cells there. It just broadens
the imagination."

   It's that type of talk that got Junne Page excited.

   The 75-year-old Uxbridge, Ont., resident is the first patient in the world to
have received this type of cell-gene therapy.

   Ms. Page was diagnosed with pulmonary hypertension six years ago after she
noticed she was getting short of breath and was worried it had something to do
with her heart.

   "I was concerned and really teed off, because I couldn't ski any more, I
couldn't walk the way I used to."

   But when Dr. Granton told her about the research he was involved in, she
decided to take the plunge and be the first patient to be injected with the cell
therapy.

   "I was in pharmaceutical marketing for most of my business career, so I'm
well aware of the need for clinical research . . . ," she said.

   Ms. Page hasn't felt much of a change yet, but, then again, it has only been
a month.

   "You don't get new therapies without going through these stages and
somebody's got to be first. Weighing the odds, I thought, 'Why not me?' "

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2006


                              94 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2006 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 28, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: FOCUS SPECIAL REPORT; REPORT ON HEART & STROKE RESEARCH: GENETICS; Pg.
F10

LENGTH: 1002 words

HEADLINE: Cardiovascular researchers look for a 'master switch';
Findings could lead to tailored treatments for individuals and even entire
ethnic groups, WILLIAM ILLSEY ATKINSON writes

BYLINE: WILLIAM ILLSEY ATKINSON, Special to The Globe and Mail

BODY:

    Cardiovascular disease is the No. 1 killer in Canada, with heart disease
felling an estimated 70,000 people every year. It's estimated that half those
deaths are caused by coronary artery disease, which affects nearly 20 million
North Americans and is a leading cause of death in the developed world.

    Coronary artery disease (CAD) occurs when the arteries to the heart become
clogged with plaque, blocking the flow of oxygen-rich blood and starving the
heart muscle. While it is well known that factors such as smoking and high
cholesterol can contribute to CAD, much of the newer research involves genetics.
The goal is to find which people are most in danger.

    At Duke University Medical Center in North Carolina, for example, an
international team involving scientists from Quebec's Laval University is
investigating the role of a gene known as GATA2, a "master switch" for other
genes that govern the cardiovascular system.

    In August, the team reported that individual variations in GATA2 may make a
person more or less susceptible to coronary artery disease.

    While the role of any given gene in CAD "can be extremely difficult to nail
down," says the Duke team's senior investigator, Dr. Simon Gregory, the
scientists hope to establish a genetically based risk profile for every patient.

    The profile would not say conclusively whether that person would develop
coronary heart disease, Dr. Gregory says, "But [it] could tell individuals
whether they are more or less at risk for developing the disease."

    Broadly speaking, CAD has two main genetic causes. In the simpler type, a
single gene malfunctions, directly triggering the disease. In the more complex,
or oligogenic, types, a number of different genes cause CAD through an
interactive chemical "cascade."

    While the Duke project studies single-gene causation, a good example of
oligogenic research is the work of Dr. Choong-Chin Liew, professor emeritus of
molecular medicine at the University of Toronto.

    Dr. Liew's approach treats the entire human cardiovascular system as a
single organ. In 1997, his research team published a seminal paper announcing
the discovery and characterization of most of the key genes in the
cardiovascular system - a paper that has become one of the most cited in the
field.

    The cardiovascular system, Dr. Liew explains, has as many as 50,000 distinct
genes that are active in the growth and operation of the heart and blood
vessels.

    "Through a computer-based analysis we can learn how these genes work
together in the normal cardiovascular system, or their impact on conditions such
as coronary artery disease, stroke, hypertension and heart failure," he says.

    Dr. Liew is now expanding on his team's findings via a spinoff company,
ChondroGene Ltd. The Toronto company's ambitious goal is to develop a blood test
for every known human disease, based on recognizing the unique molecular signals
by which living cells communicate with one another through the bloodstream.

    Part of the complexity of CAD is its relationship with other scourges such
as hypertension, diabetes and obesity.

    In Quebec, Dr. Pavel Hamet is investigating causes of cardiovascular disease
by examining a specific, genetically linked group: 900 people from 120
pure-laine Quebecois families, all of whom live in the Saguenay-Lac St-Jean
area.

    Dr. Hamet, director of research at the University of Montreal Hospital
Centre, led a team that last year discovered 46 distinct genetic markers for
high blood pressure.

    "We have taken an important step toward the day when we will be able to
diagnose the cause of an individual's hypertension by simple blood test," Dr.
Hamet says.

    "By genetically identifying the underlying cause, treatment could become
more tailored to the individual, the family and even entire ethnic groups."

    At the University of Western Ontario in London, Dr. Rob Hegele investigates
the genetics of cardiovascular disease in native Canadian populations, including
the Northern Cree.

    Dr. Hegele is director and scientist at the Blackburn Cardiovascular
Genetics Laboratory at the Robarts Research Institute. A career investigator for
the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada, Dr. Hegele's work with the Cree sheds
light not only on CVD but Canadian social history as well.

    "In a [traditional] Cree community," he notes, "each food calorie was
treated as something precious - something worth locating, ingesting and
retaining. Since a member of this community never knew where his or her next
meal was coming from, the Cree evolved a physiology that conserved calories very
effectively."

    In the past, Dr. Hegele said, this adaptive strategy led to excellent
cardiovascular health: "As recently as 50 years ago, the level of cardiovascular
disease among the Ontario Cree was lower than that in Canadian society [as a
whole]."

    Then the modern world came crashing in. With the advent of a less strenuous
lifestyle, and with alcohol, tobacco and high-fat processed foods readily
available, the Cree suffered an explosive increase in cardiovascular disease.
CVD rates today are four times those of the rest of Canada, he says.

    As well as being a cardiovascular geneticist, Dr. Hegele is also a
physician, as concerned about his patients' health as he is curious about the
causes of disease. The single most important approach in reducing the incidence
of cardiovascular disease, he says,  hinges on lifestyle.

    Advanced treatments such as gene therapy may eventually dramatically reduce
the risk factors for cardiovascular disease. But statistically speaking, a
healthy lifestyle offers more protection than any drug or treatment yet
discovered.

    As a 17th-century adage advises, the three best physicians may still be "Dr.
Diet, Dr. Quiet and Dr. Merryman."

   Impact of CVD

    74,000

    Number of Canadians who died of cardiovascular diseases in 2003, the most
recent year for which data are available.

    $18-billion

    Cost to the Canadian economy of cardiovascular diseases each year.

   SOURCES: STATISTICS CANADA, PUBLIC HEALTH AGENCY OF CANADA

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2006


                              95 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2006 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 28, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: FOCUS SPECIAL REPORT; REPORT ON HEART & STROKE RESEARCH: RESEARCH
TRENDS; Pg. F8

LENGTH: 762 words

HEADLINE: New technologies help improve heart patients' quality of life;
From on-line advice to gene therapy, cardiac researchers are moving 'outside the
box,' MARY GOODERHAM finds

BYLINE: MARY GOODERHAM, Special to The Globe and Mail

BODY:

    When patients check out of the University of Ottawa Heart Institute these
days resolving to keep up with the exercise routines and smoking cessation
programs they learned during treatment, their willpower and good intentions
might get a boost from Big Brother.

    In the weeks and months following treatment for heart attacks and
cardiovascular disease, technology is helping to ensure patients mend their ways
and live healthier lives.

    "We're trying to build interventions for the future," says Robert Reid, a
scientist in the Prevention and Rehabilitation Centre at the Heart Institute and
a researcher with the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada. "The key is to help
heart patients live longer and avoid other cardiac events."

    The heart institute's use of technology to keep tabs on former patients is
among the many new advances in cardiovascular research in Canada, ranging from
interactive websites to genetic manipulation and drugs that help repair damaged
hearts and change how they work.

    In Canada, cardiovascular diseases cause almost 40 per cent of all deaths
each year and account for some $20-billion in direct and indirect health care
costs.

    Dr. Reid's team has created a Web-based system called CardioFit that
reinforces cardiac rehabilitation programs and is tailored to support individual
needs. Patients receive exercise prescriptions, activity calendars and
motivational messages and can log on to record how active they are, get simple
strategies to overcome barriers and communicate with on-line coaches for advice
and help.

    Early studies show the CardioFit program, which costs about $100 a person,
motivates patients to get 90 to 125 extra minutes of physical activity a week,
he says.

    The new frontiers in cardiac research go beyond engaging patients through
technology to improving hearts that are damaged, says Laura Syron,
vice-president of advocacy and health promotion for the Heart and Stroke
Foundation of Ontario. "Researchers are thinking well outside of the box," she
says.

    The hottest research these days is in regenerative medicine - the use of
tissue engineering, cell therapy and gene therapy to repair hearts damaged by
cardiac conditions.

    At the University of Toronto, Ren-Ke Li, a professor of cardiovascular
surgery and a Heart and Stroke Foundation career investigator, has worked for 13
years to identify healthy cells that can be isolated, replicated and inserted
back into patients to act as heart muscle or additional blood vessels.

    "We can improve heart function and delay heart failure," says Dr. Li, adding
that cell therapy is now going well in very early trials.

    In related research, cell biologist Massimo Cimini, who works with Dr. Li,
is developing therapies particularly for young children with heart defects. To
address congenital heart disease, which affects one per cent of all infants,
surgeons often repair damage using synthetic materials that break down or do not
grow, so they have to be replaced.

    Dr. Cimini is looking at patching damaged hearts using tissue grown from the
patient's own cells to make grafts that are strong, pliable and grow with the
patient to hasten regeneration of existing heart tissue.

    Another emerging field is therapies that optimize heart metabolism. The
heart requires a constant combination of fats and carbohydrates in the blood for
fuel. The problem is that fats require a lot more oxygen to produce the same
amount of energy, so damaged hearts do not function adequately to meet the
body's demands.

    "Heart disease is a problem of supply and demand," says Gary Lopaschuk, an
expert in cardiac energy metabolism and scientific director of the Mazankowski
Alberta Heart Institute in Edmonton.

    Dr. Lopaschuk's research is focused on developing drugs that inhibit fat use
or increase carbohydrate use by the heart so that it functions more efficiently.

    Therapies that change metabolism in such ways could also be used to target
one of the most significant risk factors for cardiac disease - obesity - by
ensuring the hypothalamus, the so-called food control centre, makes the body
more efficient at burning calories.

    New areas of study in heart disease prevention and rehabilitation, Dr.
Lopaschuk says, include research into the "built environment," with findings
that suburban living makes for more sedentary lifestyles than city living,
resulting in an increased risk of heart disease.

    At the end of the day, these technologies have applications among the
general population, not just heart patients, Dr. Reid says. "We can improve
quality of life in the long run."

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2006


                              98 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2006 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 23, 2006 Monday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1266 words

HEADLINE: A sobering setback in stem-cell research

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM

BODY:

    The progress of science is paved with stories of high hopes and heartbreaks.
But in a busy lab at the University of Rochester the two extremes have met in
one dazzling yet devastating experiment.

    Researchers there have for the first time essentially cured rats of a
Parkinson's-like disease using human embryonic stem cells. But 10 weeks into the
trial, they discovered brain tumours had begun to grow in every animal treated.

    "Here we have this method that works so well to reverse the symptoms of
Parkinson's," said lead investigator Steven Goldman, "But no matter how you look
at it, it's an expanding mass and that's bad news."

    None of the cells growing out of control were cancerous tumours. But as Dr.
Goldman pointed out, "In the brain, nothing's benign."

    The work, published today in the journal of Nature Medicine, is a sobering
setback for plans to use stem cells from human embryos to grow tissues for human
transplant.

    "My hopes are still high, but I think this injects real caution," said Dr.
Goldman, who spent four years on the experiment and a 23-year career building up
to it. "Some folks are portraying this as imminently useful and it's not.
There's still a lot that has to be sorted out."

    By definition, human embryonic stem cells have the almost mythical, immortal
power to grow and divide indefinitely as they become the various tissues that
make up the body. As a result, scientists have always known that any stem cell
therapy could result in an uncontrolled growth of cells that could give rise to
cancer.

    But that risk has remained largely theoretical since there have been few
attempts to transplant tissues grown from stem cells into live animals. The work
is difficult, expensive and tricky to pull off when several countries - Canada
included - have enacted tough laws that limit research on stem cells from human
embryos.

    "A lot of the representations of stem-cell research have resulted from the
initial excitement and speculation of what can be achieved. But we're still in
that early stage, we haven't seen real clinical breakthroughs," said Tim
Caulfield, director of the Health Law Institute at the University of Alberta.
"This [experiment] shows the incredible potential of the field, but it also
sheds a more realistic light on the near-future potential."

    For Mick Bhatia, scientific director of the Cancer and Stem Cell Research
Institute at McMaster University, it's a bit of déjà vu. In 2004, he succeeded
in growing human blood cells from embryonic stem cells but found transplanting
them into mice wasn't simple.

    "I pushed the program back," Dr. Bhatia said. "We need to do more on the
basic biology."

    Still, few scientific fields are hotter than stem cells as researchers
everywhere investigate the possibility of using them to grow replacement parts -
cardiac cells for heart patients or islet cells for diabetics.

    Parkinson's has been considered one of the prime candidates for a stem-cell
therapy because just a single cell type is needed - one that produces dopamine.

    Neurons that make dopamine are crucial for movement and degenerate in people
with Parkinson's, often leaving them stiff, unable to control their physical
gestures and suffering from tremors.

    Twenty years worth of studies have tried treating Parkinson's with
dopamine-cell transplants, in rodents, primates and people. In the 1990s, after
a Swedish study found some benefit to patients who received dopamine-cell
transplants from aborted fetal tissue, large human trials began in both Canada
and the United States.

    "These failed," Dr. Goldman said. "It made things worse; patients suffered
movement abnormalities." In part, he explained, this was because the transplants
contained all sorts of cells. Less than 10 per cent of the cells, and in some
cases, less than 1 per cent, produced dopamine.

    For this reason, Dr. Goldman, a neurologist and chief of cell and gene
therapy at the University of Rochester, and many others, considered embryonic
stem cells a possible source of growing only the cells that would be needed and
they were right. But no one had been able to grow enough for a transplant.

    In this experiment, however, Dr. Goldman and his team overcame the volume
problem by tricking the embryonic stem cells into behaving like they were
growing in the developing brain.

    To do this, they harvested glial, or brain-support cells, from the precise
brain region of an aborted fetus that would, at 11 to 22 weeks gestation,
trigger the development of the dopamine neurons needed.

    The researchers then used a retrovirus as a courier to deliver into the DNA
of these cells a gene, known as telomerase, which would immortalize them. This
way, Dr. Goldman explained, the support cells would continue to grow endlessly
and continuously give off the chemical cues to keep stem cells maturing into
dopamine cells.

    The dopamine cells had first been grown from the limited number of human
embryonic stem-cell lines that U.S. President George W. Bush made available to
government-funded researchers in 2000.

    Culturing the immortalized glial cells alongside the stem-cell derived
dopamine neurons - although not touching each other - resulted in a growth of
dopamine cells three to 10 times what is normally seen.

    But Dr. Bhatia, who read the report, said this step might have contributed
to the uncontrolled growth of the cells.

    Even though the immortalized glial cells and dopamine cells were not
touching each other, there could have been chemical cues exchanged that affected
the implanted cells, he said.

    "The number of cells they're getting is incredible," said Dr. Bhatia after
reading the report. "But at what cost did they gain that efficiency?" In a
series of trials, the researchers next implanted tissues of 500,000 cells each
into the midbrain region of dozens of rats, which, as a result of a chemical
injection, suffered a condition similar to Parkinson's. Seventy per cent of the
cells transplanted made dopamine.

    Before the treatment, rats with the Parkinson's-like disease suffered from
constant tremors and a lack of co-ordination. But four weeks after the
transplants, Dr. Goldman said, they showed a marked improvement from the control
group of untreated rats.

    "It was really a complete recovery on the part of the animal. By six to
eight weeks, they're normal," he said. "That's a more powerful effect than ever
seen before."

    But at 10 weeks, when the animals were autopsied,  the researchers
discovered that the implanted tissue had given rise to more than just dopamine
cells.

    Several cells had begun to divide at a fairly steady pace, the hallmark of
cells growing into a tumour.

    Where the dopamine cells once made up 70 per cent of the tissue implanted,
at the autopsy they made up only about 25 per cent.

    "They were undifferentiated neural cells that were expanding and dividing,
and those are cells you don't want there. You don't need to be a
neuro-oncologist to say, that's the start of a tumour," Dr. Goldman said.

    Dr. Bhatia also raised the possibility that the years-old and scant stem
lines available to government researchers in the United States may also have had
tumourigenic properties from the start that skewed the experiment.

    Dr. Goldman and his team are now redoing the experiment on the basis that
neural cells other than dopamine-cells in the transplanted tissue led to the
tumour growth.

    "We are going to have to absolutely purify the cell type of interest," Dr.
Goldman said. "This really pushes this [kind of transplant work] back in terms
of clinical use.

    "It's not ready for prime time, that's for sure."

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2006


                              100 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 199 words

HEADLINE: MELANOMA FIGHT ENLISTS T-CELLS

BYLINE: BY CP

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   U.S. researchers have genetically engineered immune cells in the blood,
transforming them into tumour fighters that eliminated melanoma in two men with
an advanced stage of the often-deadly disease.

   While 15 other patients with melanoma were not helped by the modified T-cell
treatment, its success in the two who responded was hailed yesterday as a
significant step forward in the field of gene therapy for cancer.

   Principal researcher Dr. Steven Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute
said his research team hopes to expand clinical trials of the gene therapy for
patients with other types of advanced malignancies, including breast and colon
cancer.

   "It represents the first time that we've been able to do gene therapy . . .
and treat cancer patients, to genetically engineer human cells and cause cancer
regression," Rosenberg, the NCI's head of surgery, said yesterday from
Bethesda., Md. "So we're very enthusiastic about it as a new approach."

   While the therapy "had no impact" on the other 15, who have since died,
Rosenberg said his team has found a way to strengthen the genetically engineered
T-cells in the hope of improving the success rate among other patients with
advanced melanoma.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              101 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Sun Media Corporation
                              All Rights Reserved
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Life Briefs; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 101 words

HEADLINE: MODIFIED GENES WIN CANCER BATTLE

BYLINE: BY AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Government scientists turned regular blood cells into tumour attackers that
wiped out all signs of cancer in two men with advanced melanoma. The striking
finding, unveiled yesterday, marks an important step in the quest for gene
therapy for cancer. But the genetically altered cells didn't help 15 other
melanoma victims, so scientists are trying to strengthen the shots. Still, the
National Cancer Institute called its experiment the first real success in cancer
gene therapy because it fought cancer's worst stage, when it has spread through
the body, unlike earlier attempts that targeted single tumours.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              102 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2006 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            September 1, 2006 Friday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 625 words

HEADLINE: Altered blood cells save two with melanoma

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD, Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

    U.S. government scientists turned regular blood cells into tumour attackers
that wiped out all signs of cancer in two men with advanced melanoma. The
striking finding, unveiled yesterday, marks an important step in the quest for
gene therapy for cancer.

    But the genetically altered cells didn't help 15 others with melanoma. So
scientists are trying to strengthen the injection dosage.

    Still, the U.S. National Cancer Institute called its experiment the first
real success in cancer gene therapy, because it fought cancer's worst stage,
when it had spread through the body, unlike earlier attempts that targeted
single tumours.

    And the U.S. government hopes to soon begin testing the gene therapy in
small numbers of patients dying from more common cancers, such as advanced
breast or colon.

    The hope is that one day, such treatment might provide long-lasting tumour
suppression.

    "It's not like chemotherapy or radiation, where as soon as you're done,
you're done," said lead researcher Steven Rosenberg, the NCI's chief of surgery.
"We're giving living cells which continue to grow and function in the body."

    The first two successful patients appear melanoma-free almost two years
after infusions of tumour fighters made from their own blood. Doctors can't
predict how the men will fare in the long term. Melanoma, the most aggressive
skin cancer, is notorious for returning years after patients think they've
subdued it.

    Cancer specialists praised the work, published in the journal Science, but
warned that years of additional research are needed.

    "Clearly this is a first step," cautioned Dr. Len Lichtenfeld of the
American Cancer Society. "We have to be very cautious about not raising hopes
too much."

    But "it is exciting," he added.

    Dr. Rosenberg has long led a tantalizing research field: how to harness the
body's immune system to fight cancer. White blood cells called T-lymphocytes (or
T-cells) hunt down germs and other foreign tissue. But cancerous cells look a
lot like healthy cells, making it hard for those T-cells to spot a problem.

    By 2002, Dr. Rosenberg had made a breakthrough. He found small numbers of
cancer-fighting T-cells inside some patients with advanced melanoma. He
literally pulled those cells out of their blood, and grew billions more of them
in laboratory dishes, enough to have a chance at overwhelming a tumour when
they're pumped back into patients. About half significantly improve after this
so-called "cell-transfer therapy."

    But few melanoma patients make enough cancer-fighting T-cells naturally for
scientists to spot in their bloodstream, and T-cells that attack other cancers
are virtually impossible to find. So Dr. Rosenberg's team set out to create
those tumour fighters from scratch.

    The scientists took normal lymphocytes - ones that don't recognize cancer -
out of 17 patients with advanced melanoma who had exhausted their treatment
options. They infected those cells with a virus carrying genes that create
T-cell receptors, essentially homing devices for, in this case, melanoma.
(Different genes create receptors for other cancers.)

    In 15 of the 17 patients who tried it, the newly armed cells took root and
grew at low levels for a few months. But only two saw their tumours gradually
fade away.  Why did the genetically altered cells flourish in only two people?
"That's the critical question," said Patrick Hwu at the University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center.

    Picking the right lymphocyte to genetically alter isn't easy - there are
many different kinds - or perhaps more precise T-cell receptors were needed, Dr.
Hwu suggested.

    But "these are all solvable issues," he said, calling the study "one of the
first documented, effective cases of cancer gene therapy working."

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              112 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2006 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 20, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 599 words

HEADLINE: . . . but not on AIDS

BODY:

    Twenty-five years after the U.S. Centers for Disease Control first reported
the existence of a mystifying illness, AIDS is a global epidemic, debilitating
and often fatal. So it is hugely disappointing that Prime Minister Stephen
Harper has no plans to attend the 16th International AIDS Conference to be held
in Toronto from Aug. 13 to 18.

    What can he be thinking? Superstars Bill and Melinda Gates, who have just
invested an astonishing $325-million in 16 grants to focus on the search for an
AIDS vaccine, will be the keynote speakers on the first evening. Ontario Premier
Dalton McGuinty and Toronto Mayor David Miller will welcome the 20,000 expert
participants. Governor-General Michaëlle Jean will deliver the official opening
declaration. Former U.S. president Bill Clinton, ever smart and empathetic, will
attend. So will actor Richard Gere and United Nations special envoy Stephen
Lewis.

    But unless Mr. Harper has a change of heart and mind, there will be no sign
of the leader of the host government. That is a signal no politician should send
as the world wrestles with a virus that has killed 25 million people and now
infects an estimated 40 million, including roughly 60,000 in Canada. Despite
world efforts, the number of infections continues to grow, especially among
young women. Last year, three million people died of HIV-AIDS-related causes.
The inequities are striking. Fully 96 per cent of those with HIV live in the
developing world, most in sub-Saharan Africa.

    Next month's conference is the crucial annual AIDS event, a key scientific
forum for the exchange of effective HIV-AIDS prevention and treatment
strategies. Officially titled Time to Deliver, this year's gathering will offer
400 workshops, sessions and meetings with such participants as the World Bank,
Unicef and the World Health Organization. There will be discussions of
everything from the plight of women to gene therapy to the reduction of the
HIV-AIDS stigma to anti-viral effectiveness. This is where the global AIDS
community reports its best efforts on the search for a cure.

    The high profile of the participants underlines the urgency of the issue.
But last month Mr. Harper's office wrote the organizers to say that he would not
attend. This week, officials have modified that message, insisting that they
never confirm the Prime Minister's attendance so far in advance of an event.
That would be news to Mr. Harper's partners at this week's Group of Eight
Summit. But this latest excuse leaves a diplomatic opening for Mr. Harper to
change his mind.

    Ottawa is one of the major funding sources for the conference, putting
roughly $4.5-million toward its cost. Federal Health Minister Tony Clement will
participate. International Co-operation Minister Josée Verner will be the
co-chair of the conference leadership committee. But the Prime Minister's
absence would send the unfortunate message that the issue isn't important enough
to command his attendance. Because HIV-AIDS is often transmitted sexually, there
is a stigma attached to the disease. This spring, Ottawa even funded an
attitudinal tracking survey, struggling to pinpoint the extent of that stigma.
That way, officials can adjust national information campaigns to improve
people's knowledge of HIV and to reduce discrimination. The issue needs all the
promotion it can get. Mr. Harper's absence would undermine the force of his
government's actions.

    The conference runs for six days. The Prime Minister should issue a
bulletin: Somehow he has found the time, and he will be there on the front lines
of this epic, epidemic battle.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              113 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2006 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              July 17, 2006 Monday

SECTION: BRITISH COLUMBIA NEWS; Pg. S1

LENGTH: 588 words

HEADLINE: Researchers solve genetic puzzle;
B.C. team pinpoints cause of inherited form of dementia, opens door for
treatment

BYLINE: WENDY STUECK, With a report from Canadian Press

DATELINE: VANCOUVER

BODY:

    A team of Vancouver researchers has pinpointed the cause of an inherited
form of early-onset dementia, opening the door to possible treatments for a
fatal disease that hits both men and women, usually strikes people between 50
and 60 years old and wreaks havoc on speech and behaviour.

    "This is an illness that robs people of their mental faculties in their
middle life," said Howard Feldman, director of the UBC Hospital Clinic for
Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders. "And it's particularly noteworthy for
the devastation it has on behaviour and social conduct."

    Dr. Feldman was part of a team that saw clinicians, neuroscience researchers
and geneticists working together to solve a genetic puzzle.

    They traced an inherited form of frontotemporal dementia, or FTD, to
mutations in the progranulin gene.

    Until this discovery, most inherited forms of dementia, such as familial
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, have been associated with mutant genes
that cause a buildup of damaging proteins within brain cells.

    The researchers found that mutations in the progranulin gene result in an
underproduction of progranulin protein, which is required for nerve-cell
survival.

    By uncovering that mechanism, scientists can now look at potential
treatments, which could involve delivering progranulin to nerve cells.

    The findings were reported yesterday on-line in the journal Nature. FTD
accounts for about 15 per cent of all dementia and is inherited in about half of
cases.

    The research team plans to work on screening tests for families with FTD as
well as working toward genetic and non-genetic therapies.

    In addition, researchers will look at whether the gene plays a role in more
common degenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS.

    The project began a couple of years ago when Ian Mackenzie, of the
University of British Columbia's department of pathology and laboratory
medicine, told Dr. Feldman that he'd heard about some interesting abnormalities
in nerve cells that were visible through a microscope.

    "So he looked at some of his autopsy material and said to me, 'We'd better
start looking at some of these,' " Dr. Feldman said.

    The researchers, studying brain tissue from autopsies of patients of the
UBC's Alzheimer centre, found the abnormality was running in families.
Researchers then decided to gather more information on the families, by putting
together background medical records and gathering DNA.

    Working with colleagues at the Mayo Clinic in the United States, researchers
launched a program that involved getting in touch with families, providing
counselling and, in some cases, obtaining blood samples that formed the basis
for additional studies.

    The collaboration came about in part because Mayo's Michael Hutton had
obtained research funding to look at the genetic aspect of dementia, while the
UBC team had lined up money to gather family information, Dr. Feldman said.

    That was a lengthy, painstaking process that involved putting feelers out
throughout North America and Europe, he added. One researcher spent 18 months
gathering information on a single family.

    "For families that are affected by this, they are usually interested to
learn more about this and understand this illness better. " Dr. Feldman
said.Mario Masellis, a neurologist at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre in
Toronto, said progranulin is the second mutated gene found to relate to
inherited cases of FTD. The other, known as tau, was isolated in DNA from a
group of families in Europe.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              114 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2006 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              July 17, 2006 Monday
                                National Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 556 words

HEADLINE: B.C. scientists link gene mutation to dementia;
Group plans to work on screening tests for families with inherited form of
disease

BYLINE: WENDY STUECK

DATELINE: VANCOUVER

BODY:

    A team of Vancouver researchers has pinpointed the cause of an inherited
form of early-onset dementia, opening the door to possible treatments for a
fatal disease that hits both men and women, usually strikes people between 50
and 60 years old and wreaks havoc on speech and behaviour.

    "This is an illness that robs people of their mental faculties in their
middle life," said Howard Feldman, director of the UBC Hospital Clinic for
Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders. "And it's particularly noteworthy for
the devastation it has on behaviour and social conduct."

    Dr. Feldman was part of a team that saw clinicians, neuroscience researchers
and geneticists working to solve a genetic puzzle.

    They traced an inherited form of frontotemporal dementia, or FTD, to
mutations in the progranulin gene.

    Until this discovery, most inherited forms of dementia, such as familial
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, have been associated with mutant genes
that cause a buildup of damaging proteins in brain cells.

    The researchers found that mutations in the progranulin gene result in an
underproduction of progranulin protein, which is required for nerve-cell
survival.

    By uncovering that mechanism, scientists can now look at potential
treatments, which could involve delivering progranulin to nerve cells.

    The findings were reported yesterday on-line in the journal Nature.

    FTD accounts for about 15 per cent of all dementia and is inherited in about
half of cases.

    The research team plans to work on screening tests for families with FTD as
well as working toward genetic and non-genetic therapies.

    In addition, researchers will look at whether the gene plays a role in more
common degenerative diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS.

    The project began a couple of years ago when Ian Mackenzie, of the
University of British Columbia's department of pathology and laboratory
medicine, told Dr. Feldman that he'd heard about some interesting abnormalities
in nerve cells that were visible through a microscope.

    "So he looked at some of his autopsy material and said to me, 'We'd better
start looking at some of these,' " Dr. Feldman said.

    The researchers, studying brain tissue from autopsies of patients of the
UBC's Alzheimer centre, found the abnormality was running in families.

    Researchers then decided to gather more information on the families, by
putting together background medical records and gathering DNA.

    Working with colleagues at the Mayo Clinic in the United States, researchers
launched a program that involved getting in touch with families, providing
counselling and, in some cases, obtaining blood samples that formed the basis
for additional studies.

    The collaboration came about in part because Mayo's Michael Hutton had
obtained research funding to look at the genetic aspect of dementia, while the
UBC team had lined up money to gather family information, Dr. Feldman said.

    That was a lengthy, painstaking process that involved putting feelers out
throughout North America and Europe, he added.

    "For families that are affected by this, they are usually interested to
learn more about this and understand this illness better. They have this morbid
fear that they are going to get the same thing that's been running through their
family, and often with good reason," Dr. Feldman said.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              115 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2006 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             June 15, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 401 words

HEADLINE: Ottawa pact provides drugs to fight Fabry disease

BYLINE: LISA PRIEST

BODY:

    Federal Health Minister Tony Clement announced a $100-million agreement late
yesterday that will provide two extraordinarily expensive drugs to those with
Fabry disease, a rare disorder.

    Patients - some for the first time - will be able to access the drugs
licensed to treat Fabry disease so long as they participate in a research
protocol, part of a three-year agreement reached among provincial, federal and
territorial governments and two drug companies.

    "This is a very important research project as our country faces more and
more drug therapies that are available for persons suffering from relatively
rare diseases," Mr. Clement said in an interview from Ottawa yesterday.

    Though no start date has been established on when patients receive the drug,
Mr. Clement said it will begin "very, very soon."

    An estimated 5,000 people worldwide, including more than 200 in Canada, have
Fabry disease, which primarily afflicts men. Those who inherit the abnormal gene
cannot produce enough of a particular fat-eating enzyme. Consequently, they
typically experience pain, have difficulty sweating and suffer skin rashes.

    In the latter stages of the disease, patients have strokes, heart failure
and kidney failure. The life expectancy of untreated men is 60, according to
Michael West, who runs an adult Fabry clinic at the QEII Health Sciences Centre
in Halifax. Women typically experience mild to moderate symptoms.

    Although Health Canada had licensed two drugs to treat it - Fabrazyme and
Replagal - provinces have struggled to pay for them.

    Treatment is generally available in Alberta. In British Columbia, it is
funded through hospitals. In Ontario, some patients obtain it through a
compassionate-access program run by drug companies.

    The Canadian Expert Drug Advisory Committee, a national advisory body that
studies the cost-effectiveness of orally ingested drugs and makes
recommendations to provincial government drug plans as part of the Common Drug
Review, did not recommend either medication be funded, largely because it did
not find them to be cost effective.

    The committee described Replagal, marketed by Shire Human Genetic Therapies,
as typically costing $239,200 for a year's supply before pharmacy markup.

    It costs $275,000 to treat the average patient for a year with Fabrazyme,
according to Susanne Courtney, spokeswoman for Genzyme Canada Inc., the company
that markets the drug.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2006


                              124 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2006 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 6, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: FOCUS; HEALTH; Pg. F9

LENGTH: 1457 words

HEADLINE: Dr. Google is in;
More and more people are turning to the Internet for medical advice - and even a
diagnosis. And why not? On-line help is available 24/7 and no question is too
embarrassing. But does it really do no harm? DR. MICHAEL EVANS explores

BYLINE: DR. MICHAEL EVANS

BODY:

    Heather Copeland had a bad rash. It hurt even before you could see it. It
was just on one side, blistery, and very red. Heather's mother had a similar
affliction 10 years ago. Heather and her mom both had shingles. The only
difference between Heather and her mother was that Heather knew exactly what it
was before she went to the doctor. Heather has something her mother never had:
Dr. Google.

    A just-released survey by Pew Internet and American Life reveals that the
next time the average person is seeking reliable information about a health
problem, they are more likely to first turn to the Internet for an answer before
their health-care provider.

    As the number of people turning to cyberspace for help increases, so does
their faith in the results. Research in the esteemed Journal of the American
Medical Association showed that patients perceived (which may be different than
the truth) that the Web increased their understanding and allowed them to
self-manage their acute or chronic problems 30 per cent of the time.

    Why wouldn't you visit Dr. Google? She is accessible, available 24/7 and has
all the time in the world for you. No waiting room filled with coughing people.
No speculums or rubber gloves - in fact, none of that yucky physical exam stuff.

    You can check with the doctor, the naturopath, the trainer and your old
girlfriend's aunt, who was pretty hot and smart at the same time. You can talk
to other sufferers down the street and across the world. You can ask
embarrassing questions. Even doctors, many of whom swore they would always
divorce the Internet from the clinic, are prescribing websites daily.

    The business case for Web self-care is very powerful as it is much cheaper
than a clinic visit or ringing up a call centre (which is why it is extremely
difficult to find an actual person to talk to on that website for the gizmo you
just bought but can't quite turn on).

    Dr. Google is not a cure-all, but she has most certainly become a powerful
member of the health-care team. But just how effective is she?

    Can you separate the e-wheat from the e-chaff?

    The Pew study showed that e-patients do what you think they do: They
tentatively diagnose their own diseases, confirm their doctor's diagnosis and
research all treatment options (not just those recommended by the doctor), give
themselves a crash course on a specific medical condition when they (or someone
they love) is diagnosed and exchange information and support with other patients
with the same disease.

    Most do it in a scattershot manner, but a small percentage actually use
targeted e-mail health news, participate in on-line support groups or e-mail
lists for people concerned about a particular health issue.

    However, the same study also shows that only 50 per cent of e-patients
actually check the validity of Internet sources. A Stanford study indicates that
even those who think they can detect validity are easily misled.

    Investigators had users look at three sites, all of which had the exact same
health information. The first version provided the content only, the second
version included a handsome 30-year-old with a dishevelled frat-boy appearance,
and the third site showed the same guy but with slicked back hair, beautiful tie
and, of course, the white jacket (picture a young Florida dermatologist). Users
felt that each site was progressively more believable, credible and trustworthy.

    Who is better: Dr. Google

    or Dr. Welby?

    The answer depends on who is asking, but likely the real question is what is
the right combination? Family-medicine research has shown again and again that
the relationship between provider and patient is a key determinant of health.

    The Web could augment or deteriorate this relationship and a FirstHealth
survey of 1,000 people in the United States revealed this mixed message. On the
one hand, 77 per cent believe that doctors will miss subtle clues in on-line
interactions that they would normally pick up in a face-to-face visit; 60 per
cent feel technology will replace much in-person care, driving doctors even
further from their patients.

    Yet the survey also showed patients want more: 83 per cent of health-care
consumers want lab tests available on-line and 69 per cent want on-line charts
managing chronic conditions. We are developing a study in our shop where we look
at the effect of sending you an "after visit e-summary." When I discuss the idea
with the people I see, they just look at me as if to say, "Of course you should
be doing that!"

    Cyberchondria, fear and hope: the downsides of Dr. Google

    People tend not to tell the story of their cough that went away after two
weeks. What you will hear about is the nosebleed or the bump that became cancer,
the bruise that was a hidden clotting disorder, the fatigue that was really
heart failure. A cardiologist once told me, "Mike, everybody gets chest pain and
that's why I have a house in Rosedale."

    Similar to the many medical students who drop by my office halfway through
their training certain they have a serious illness, e-patients with partial
health information and no context typically suffer from "cyberchondria."

    When you cruise through our media-rich world, you are constantly in touch
with marketing and product placement. Where this gets tricky, especially for the
vulnerable person, is when it is sickness or hope being sold. If you don't take
this megavitamin, this tea, this drug, this immune booster, this bowel cleanser,
you will get ill. If you use this ab machine, this nutritional supplement, this
diet, this skin replenisher, all will be well.

    Hope is grand. Can you blame the more than 80 per cent of people with cancer
who are on some form of alternative medicine beyond what their (Western) doctor
has prescribed? I don't think so. It's worth a shot and certainly Western
medicine does not have all the answers.

    But it's also important to know that this is a $4-billion industry and Dr.
Google takes you right to the sellers' door.

    Dr. Google provides 11,900,000 cures for acute low-back pain, a condition
that resolves itself 95 per cent of the time regardless of what you do or whom
you see. High profit margins and satisfied customers - this is good business.

    We need Dr. Google - but only if she changes

    Like two spouses in a struggling marriage, Dr. Google and you need therapy.
Let's face it, you are in love, but there are some basic tenants of your
relationship that need to be sorted out and upgraded.

    On the upside, the possibilities of your alliance are endless: personalized
charting of how you are doing with your chronic disease, laypersons' versions of
the most recent research, flash video of expert caregivers and patients
providing practical quality health advice, and universities moving out from the
ivory tower to support health decision-making in real time.

    This is not the future, it is now. At Healthyontario.com, the government
health portal for the public, a new diabetes centre has all these things as well
as the opportunity to e-mail questions to an expert.

    The downside is that the chances of you finding this site are minimal in a
general Google search on diabetes.

    Dr. Google needs

    a librarian, stat

    Anecdotal advice is fine if you are searching for a good holiday read or a
new barbecue, but troubling and perhaps harmful if you are searching for new
treatments for your rheumatoid arthritis or answers for your suicidal feelings.
We need more than a library when it comes to health, we also need an expert
filter - we need a top-notch librarian.

    I recognize that Google will make more money if it brings all the sellers of
health together with the buyers, and that this request is likely naive, but I
can't help wondering if it isn't time for the true Dr. Google to realize her own
potential.

    Imagine if we could improve the answers at the location where most people
ask the questions. Imagine if Google contacted 100 universities, 100 hospitals
and 100 governments and asked them each to create a multimedia centre of
excellence around a particular disease or health communication. Imagine if all
the societies you give money to actually got together and created uber-resources
for the common elements of each disease such as stress management, healthy
lifestyle and strong local community networks.

    We invest a lot in MRI machines and gene therapy. Maybe it's time to invest
in the better-informed decisions. Maybe it's time for Dr. Google to go to
medical school.

   Dr. Michael Evans is an associate professor of family and community medicine
at the University of Toronto and a staff physician at the Toronto Western
Hospital. He is director of both the Mini-Med School for the Public and the
Health Knowledge Lab at the Centre for Effective Practice.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2006


                              126 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2006 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            March 25, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: FOCUS; Pg. F3

LENGTH: 1498 words

HEADLINE: Oxford at war;
As an animal-rights battle rages at the famed university, researchers aren't the
only targets. Anti-vivisection protesters have yelled at construction workers,
spit on students and even stolen a body. HAMIDA GHAFOUR reports

BYLINE: HAMIDA GHAFOUR

DATELINE: OXFORD, ENGLAND

BODY:

    The scene could have been a black-comedy sketch. A male student protester
walked in circles, avoiding the determined-looking security guard chasing him
with copies of a court injunction. Meanwhile, a young woman blocked the guard's
path with a huge photograph of a monkey with its brains spilling out.

    "You are scum! Come out, you gophers!" the man yelled at the construction
workers in the building across the street.

    The focus of the demonstrators' anger was a biomedical research facility
being erected by the University of Oxford where some of the leading scientists
in Europe will carry out experiments on animals, including primates.

    The campaign is being carried out by an anti-vivisection group called Speak,
which is determined to stop what it calls the "primate lab."

    "Vivisection is an archaic practice," says Erica Barclay, 54. "It has been
going on for 400 years. In the 21st century, we should be making a change and
stopping this."

    Oxford, a hallowed institution of higher learning that has educated the
great and good for nine centuries, is taking the demonstrations seriously - so
much so that it has gone to court to make sure protesters stay 50 yards away
from the research laboratory and 100 yards from faculty members, students,
contractors and their families. In addition, they are not allowed to use
whistles, cameras or megaphones.

    The demonstrators say the measures are Draconian because they are not
violent, but Oxford says it is trying to protect itself.

    The Animal Liberation Front, an extremist organization with branches in the
United States, has declared on its website that anyone associated with the
university is a "legitimate target."

    Last year, a boathouse belonging to a student rowing club was set on fire
and an ALF cell claimed responsibility. Students have been spat at, professors
have been threatened with death and companies that donate money to the
university - not necessarily to medical research - have been the target of
boycott campaigns.

    Barbara Davies, of the Research Defence Society, says anti-vivisectionists
have changed their tactics over the past decade, going after breeding farms that
supply animals for research or secondary targets such as contractors and
corporate donors.

    "If you are a director of a company supplying cleaning supplies, the
activists will paint graffiti on your house, send letters to neighbours saying
you are a pedophile," she says.

    The most infamous case of this indirect protest style is that of Darley Oaks
Farm, a guinea-pig breeding operation in Staffordshire county that supplied
animals for medical research. Last year, the remains of Gladys Hammond, the
mother-in-law of one of the farm's owners, Chris Hall, was dug up and stolen
from a churchyard. Her body has not been returned and the farm has since shut
down.

    Last August, one relative said: "Gladys was a relative of the Halls by
marriage and had no involvement in guinea-pig breeding. She was a kind, gentle,
country lady who loved animals. . . . The reason Gladys was taken from her
family no longer exists. There is no reason why her body cannot be returned to
those of us who loved her."

    Oxford University has struggled for the past five years to build the
research centre. Work was delayed for 17 months because the last construction
company pulled out. Its employees received death threats and its share price
slumped.

    The name of the new company, which restarted work last November, is a
closely guarded secret and the workers wear balaclavas on the job because they
fear that they will be attacked.

    The £18-million centre will not increase the amount of experiments on
animals, but replace existing labs and streamline the work of a range of
scientists from different departments. They are carrying out research on heart
disease, arthritis, cancer and Parkinson's and are pioneering the use of gene
therapy for muscular dystrophy. Oxford scientists are also developing vaccines
for malaria and HIV-AIDS.

    The university expects 98 per cent of animals housed at the facility will be
rodents and fish. Less than 1 per cent will be primates.

    "So what?" says Bob Smith, 49, a protester with Speak. "To us here, a
rodent's life is as important as human life. If I went to a hospital and were
offered a drug that was tested on animals and a less effective drug that was not
tested on an animal, everybody here would take the less effective one. Even if
it was putting our own lives at risk."

    A five-minute walk from the site is the office of Professor John Stein, a
neurologist, who along with a colleague, Professor Tipu Aziz, are the only
English academics willing to speak out in defence of their work.

    Prof. Stein, who has been in the field of neurology and physiology for 40
years, shakes his head when he hears about the protesters' arguments. He says no
major medical advance in the past 100 years has been achieved without testing on
animals.

    "Anybody who can rate a rat as high as a human . . . just doesn't make sense
to me," he says.

    "The lab will get built. It must be built. Myself and Tipu Aziz have put our
heads above the parapet because we think it is absurd that anti-vivisectionists
are winning the argument by default because they terrorize anyone who
disagrees."

    Prof. Stein and his family have received death threats for years and he has
police protection because of his work on Parkinson's disease using monkeys.

    Over the past decade, he has prodded electro-rods into the brains of a total
of 10 monkeys to pioneer a technique called deep brain stimulation to help
alleviate the symptoms of Parkinson's.

    Where patients have previously been chair-bound and under 24-hour care, they
can now move around, Prof. Stein says. "We have worked out techniques by which
they can live normal lives," he says.

    "And these animals are not tortured at all. The anti-vivisectionists neglect
to tell others, or maybe they don't understand, that the brain does not have
pain receptors. Therefore, putting in an electro-rod is not painful to the
animals.

    "We have the strongest legislation protecting animal welfare in the world
and they simply tell lies about the so-called torture. They also show pictures
of animals clearly under anesthetic."

    He adds that he uses "Rhesus monkeys, lower primates who do not have
self-awareness. Higher primates are apes and chimpanzees. Nobody is allowed in
this country to work on higher primates."

    Prof. Stein says crucial advances in the treatment of Parkinson's have been
delayed because of increased bureaucracy associated with the arguments of
extremists.

    "I want to make it clear that we are not against tough regulations, but what
we are against is unnecessary bureaucracy. I have to go to three separate
committees to get animal procedures accepted. Last time we went, it took us two
years to get permission for the procedures involving deep brain stimulation."

    Speak was founded by protesters who were buoyed by their success a few years
ago at Cambridge University, where they helped to end plans for a neurological
research centre. The university decided that the security costs were
prohibitive.

    Now, the group is urging the public to boycott Vodaphone, a cellphone
company that donates money to Oxford, though not necessarily for medical
research. E-mail addresses of senior managers are published on Speak's website
and it encourages supporters to send "courteous" and "polite" messages to
publicize what it says is the cruelty of the biomedical centre.

    "I cannot be responsible for the actions of everyone in the animal-rights
movement, but what we are doing is a legal campaign," says Mel Broughton, a
co-founder of Speak. "It is absolutely legitimate for us to tell people what's
going on."

    But there may be a sea change. Some Oxford students have decided enough is
enough and have formed their own group defending animal research called
Pro-Test.

    Last month, they held a demonstration in support of the lab and 800 students
came out. Many were not science students. Prof. Stein and Prof Aziz gave
speeches.

    Co-founder Iain Simpson, 26, a second-year politics and economics student,
said he was tired of abuse being shouted at fellow students.

    "There is a sense that everyone is fed up with it. We've been trying to
create an environment where academics and pharmaceuticals can come out. We are
beginning to see a change. When it is just one or two people, it is easy to feel
besieged. But the more people come out the safer it becomes."

    Mr. Simpson has been invited to Parliament to speak to a committee on animal
welfare and received support from the leaders of the Liberal Democratic Party.

    As Chris Bickerton, 26, another member of Pro-Test who is studying for a PhD
in philosophy, put it: "The animal experiments at the Oxford lab will push the
frontiers of science, and the boundaries are what the public believes are
acceptable. We need to make sure that debate is not hijacked."

   Hamida Ghafour is a Canadian journalist currently in England.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2006


                              127 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2006 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            March 11, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 2569 words

HEADLINE: CODE 2;
Our lifestyles - what we eat, how much we exercise, whether we smoke - may play
a role in a chemical switching system that activates or deactivates our genes.
There are signs that our behaviour may program sections of our children's DNA,
and that how we live may even affect our grandchildren's genes. ANNE McILROY
investigates the emerging field of epigenetics, the study of genetic changes
that don't involve mutations in DNA

BYLINE: ANNE McILROY

BODY:

    Scientists are rewriting the laws of heredity as they learn more about a
mysterious second genetic code that turns our genes on and off.

    The traditional idea that we are the passive carriers of our genes is being
challenged by the notion that we are their custodians. Our lifestyles - what we
eat, how much we exercise, whether we smoke - may play a role in a chemical
switching system that activates or deactivates our genes. There are signs that
our behaviour may program sections of our children's DNA, and that how we live
may even affect our grandchildren's genes.

    "It introduces the concept of responsibility into genetics," said Dr. Moshe
Szyf, a researcher at McGill University in Montreal and a pioneer in the field
of epigenetics, the study of genetic changes that don't involve mutations in
DNA.

    "It changes the whole way we think about inheritance."

    If DNA is the hardware of inheritance, the epigenetic operating system is
the software, controlling the 30,000 genes that carry instructions for the
proteins that make up our bodies and keep them running.

    Scientists are still deciphering what has been described as the second
genetic code. They know, Dr. Szyf said, that a number of chemicals in our bodies
act like dimming switches and determine whether every gene in each cell produces
a lot of a particular protein, very little or none of it.

    They suspect this chemical switching system can be affected by diet, the air
pollution we inhale, whether we smoke, and the stress we endure. It may be a
mechanism through which our environment affects our genes.

    In mice there is proof some of these changes can be passed down from
generation to generation. There are signs this may be the case for humans, as
well, if the environmental changes affect genes in sperm or eggs.

    A recent study found that found men who started smoking before puberty are
more likely to have overweight male children. Dutch women who went hungry in the
Second World War gave birth to small babies, but their children also had small
babies, even though they had enough to eat.

    There is also evidence, at least in rats, that a mother can turn genes on
and off in her offspring. Mothers who lick their pups activate a gene that
restricts the production of the stress hormone cortisol. As a result, their
babies are more laid back.

    Canadians scientists in Montreal and Hamilton are now doing an unprecedented
experiment in humans, and want to find whether a mother's behaviour affects
similar genes in young children. They should have preliminary results by the
fall.

    A recent study in Spain found that as identical twins get older, they become
genetically less similar. They start out with the same genes, but as they age,
the switches that control their genes start to look different. The changes are
barely noticeable in three-year-old twins, and most pronounced in elderly twins,
especially those who have spent less of their lives together.

    This helps explain why, in the Spanish study, a 35-year-old woman developed
breast cancer but her identical twin didn't. It may also explain why when one
identical twin develops schizophrenia, it is estimated that the other one has
only a 50-per-cent chance of developing the mental illness.

    Pamela Spiro Wagner started hearing voices the day John F. Kennedy was
assassinated. Carolyn Spiro, her identical twin, became a psychiatrist. She was
on call at a Boston hospital when her sister was admitted in a catatonic state,
one arm extended into the air.

    "This can't be my twin," she recalls thinking at the time. The two wrote a
memoir, published last year, called Divided Minds: Twin Sisters and their
Journey through Schizophrenia.

    Identical twins can look less similar as they get older, and often act very
differently. Epigenetics may help explain why.

    Connie Millar, 31, says she began noticing more physical differences between
herself and identical twin Kendra four or five years ago.

    The sisters share a home in Welland, Ont.

    "My hair is nice and full," Connie said. Kendra, younger by 11 minutes,
conceded her hair is little thinner.

    "Hers is more curly."

    Their noses are a little different. Connie's turns up a little more, Kendra
said. Connie weighs about 30 pounds less than her twin, and likes to curl and
dance and go to the racetrack. Kendra is more of a homebody, and is fascinated
by royalty.

    Darrick Antell, a plastic surgeon in Manhattan, began doing face lifts on
identical twins so he could compare the two surgical techniques. But he found
that one twin was always an older version of the other. Smoking, sun exposure,
diet and the amount of stress they had endured took a toll on their faces. But
some of the differences were not so easily explained. One set of twins lived
together, but one smoked and the other didn't. The smoker had much more grey
hair than his twin.

    "I think there is more at work here," said Dr. Antell, who has performed
plastic surgery on more than 30 sets of twins, more than anyone else in the
world.

    But epigenetics may help explain more than the differences between people
who are genetically identical.

    Scientists are also looking at many common diseases to see if they might be
caused, at least in part, by problems with the switching system that activates
and deactivates genes. In Canada and around the world researchers are looking at
the role epigenetics plays in various kinds of cancer, schizophrenia, bipolar
disorder, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, lupus and other illnesses.

    Genes seem to play a part in all of these diseases, but not always the
starring role. One patient with Alzheimer's can't recognize the faces of their
loved ones, while someone else with the same gene linked to the disease is lucid
at the age of 90.

    The difference is not a mutation, or a change to the four chemicals - known
as nucleotides - that make up the long strings of DNA in our chromosomes that we
inherited from our parents. The problem may be an aberration in the operating
system that controls which genes are turned on and off, and how much protein
they produce.

    In a number of kinds of cancer, a gene that suppresses tumour growth appears
to get turned off, Dr. Szyf said. He and his colleagues believe they have
discovered a way to turn it on again, with one of two epigenetic cancer drugs
now being tested in clinical trials by the Montreal company MethylGene.

    They aren't alone. Researchers say dozens of new epigenetic cancer drugs are
now being tested around the world, almost all attempting to turn on genes that
stop the growth of tumours. One, azacitidine or Vidaza, has been approved in the
United States, but not yet in Canada. So far, however, it is not a miracle drug.
It appears to help 16 per cent of those who take it.

    Dr. Szyf is also exploring what role the switching system plays when cancer
metastasizes, or spreads from the original site to other parts of the body.

    He is also interested in the role gene switches play in behaviour, including
suicide. He is working on epigenetic profiles of men who committed suicide,
studying cells from their brains to see if there is a pattern in the genes that
are turned on or off. So far, he has studied cells from 14 men who killed
themselves, and says the preliminary results are promising.

    Arturas Petronis, at the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health in Toronto,
is working on the epigenetic profiles of both schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder, which used to be known as manic depression. He is studying the brain
cells of people with those mental illnesses who died, and comparing them with
cells from the brains of people who didn't have either disease. He is looking
for a pattern of on-off switches that is distinctive in schizophrenia and in
bipolar disorder.

    There is no evidence that lifestyle factors - like drug use - play a role in
switching genes on or off in people who suffer from mental illness. Neither is
there proof that lifestyle causes epigenetic changes that lead to other
diseases, like cancer. But it may that be that smoking, for example, alters the
activity of genes in lung cells.

    Dr. Petronis characterizes the epigenetics explanation as a promising
theory, one that may answer many perplexing questions about cancer and other
diseases.

    But first, he and other researchers caution, many mysteries need to be
solved. No one knows how the switches in all our cells are controlled. Also
unknown is to what extent changes in them are passed down from generation to
generation.

    Some researchers, however, believe epigenetics holds enormous promise for
treating disease. It may be possible - eventually - to turn genes on or off, to
increase or decrease the production of protein that is part of a disease. It may
prove easier than conventional gene therapy, where new genes are inserted into a
patient's genetic code.

    "Epigenetics will completely change the face of medicine," Dr. Szyf
predicted.

    It also may change the way we think about pollution, or the chemicals in
many products we use every day.

    A number of scientists suspect that heavy metals, pesticides, diesel exhaust
and tobacco smoke and other chemicals in the environment may be interfering with
the human genetic switches. They fear that endocrine disrupters, the so-called
gender-bender chemicals, may somehow be switching genes on and off, resulting in
fish with both male and female sexual organs and male alligators with shrinking
penises.

    Michael Skinner a professor at Washington State University, briefly exposed
pregnant rats to high levels of two endocrine disrupters, and insecticide and a
fungicide. He and his colleagues found that their male offspring had lower
fertility and sperm production for not one, but four generations.

    Dr. Syzf said that in the future, chemicals should be evaluated not only for
whether they cause changes to DNA, but whether they affect the amount of protein
a gene produces.

    He is working on a way to do this, and said the first step is to identify
the sites in the genome that are most vulnerable to these changes.

    Scientists are also intrigued about the role epigenetics may play in
evolution. Switching genes on and off may be a way for animals, including
humans, to adapt to the environment more rapidly than the glacial speed allowed
by evolution, which depends on relatively rare mutations to DNA.

    "You inherit DNA, but it doesn't tell you if you are living in a rich or a
poor environment. If it is rich, you don't have to store fat, don't need to be
anxious," Dr. Szyf said. "But if you are going to be thrown in a ghetto, that is
a different thing."

    Take the mother rats that don't lick their pups much. They tend to be at the
low end of the rat social hierarchy, and as a result lead more stressful lives.
It is probably a good thing that their pups produce more cortisol - a stress
hormone - and are more uptight. Cortisol makes rats less aggressive, and less
likely to get into fights they can't win.

    Researchers in Montreal have found that the boys in neighbourhoods with high
crime rates who don't get in much trouble tend to have higher levels of cortisol
than boys who join gangs or steal cars. Their higher stress level seems to make
them more fearful, and less likely to engage in risky business.

    As for our modern lifestyles, exercise is good, but not just for burning
calories. It may reprogram our genes, Dr. Szyf said.

    Fat may do more than add extra body weight and clog arteries; it may also
switch a number of genes on and off that in the past were helpful in preparing
humans for a long winter without much food.

    Epigenetics may revolutionize medicine, said Dr. Szyf, and it also could
change the way we think about daily decisions like whether or not to order fries
with a meal, or to go for a walk or to stay in front of the television. You
aren't eating and exercising for yourself, but for your lineage.

   Loosening the strands of DNA

    Flicking genes on and off.

    It would mean chaos - and probably death - if every gene in every cell of
our body were active at once. Brain cells would get clogged with the proteins
the kidneys, liver, heart, lungs and skin need to function, and vice versa.

    The body needs a way to orchestrate our genes - especially when an embryo is
developing. Scientists are learning more about the chemical switching system
that determines what genes get turned on or off, and when.

    Most genes carry instructions about what cells they will be used in, says
Tom Hudson, a researcher at McGill University in Montreal. But they still need
to be activated or deactivated.

    Scientists know that for easy storage, the DNA in cells is tightly wrapped
around blocks that are called histone proteins. Think of string around a
grapefruit, says Michael Meaney, a McGill researcher who found that mother rats
can turn a gene on in their pups by frequently licking them.

    For a gene to work, and make a protein, the string has to loosen, or the
grapefruit has to move or change shape. So far, scientists know of at least five
ways this happens, and are exploring how the different chemical reactions that
turn genes on and off may be linked. The process they perhaps understand the
best is called methylation, in which chemical tags are added to the DNA,
tightening the string around the grapefruit so that a gene is silenced, or
partially silenced.

    Scientists are now mapping these tags, much as they mapped the human genome.
They are marshalling resources for an international effort, similar to the human
genome project. So far, scientists have mapped the differences in 25 genes that
suppress the growth of tumours, says Manel Esteller, a Spanish researcher who
did an experiment that showed identical twins become less genetically similar as
they age.

    They say the human epigenome project will produce profiles of diseases, a
map that would show which genes are turned on or off in people with various
forms of cancer, as opposed to people who don't get the disease.

    Canadian researchers are working on their own on similar epigenetic profiles
of schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and other diseases.

    It most cases, it seems that epigenetic changes are not passed from parents
to their offspring. Scientists aren't sure how - but genes seems to be wiped
clean after a sperm fertilizes an egg.

    But they are intrigued by the notion that some changes may be passed on from
generation to generation, and may be influenced by our diet or behaviour.

    There is proof this sometimes happens in plants, yeast flies and mammals.
Researchers in Australia and the U.S can get yellow mice to have brown babies if
they feed them nutritional supplements like folic acid and vitamin B12 during
pregnancy. But genetically identical yellow mice not given the supplements had
yellow babies.

    All of the animals had the same gene that helps determine fur colour, known
as the Agouti gene. But in the mothers who were fed the dietary supplement - and
their babies - the gene had extra chemical tags attached. It was methylated, and
produced much less of the protein that colours mouse hair.

    It has not been proven that changes to the epigenetic switching can be
passed from generation to generation like this in humans, but there are signs it
may happen, especially as it relates to diet. Swedish researcher Gunnar Kaati
and his colleagues have looked at records from 1890 to 1920. They found that
boys who matured in times of plenty had grandchildren with a higher rate of
diabetes.

   Anne McIlroy

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2006


                              128 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2006 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           February 25, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; SCIENCE; Pg. D15

LENGTH: 816 words

HEADLINE: Recycling box

BYLINE: ALISON MOTLUK

BODY:

   The Golden Cell

   Gene Therapy, Stem Cells,

   and the Quest for the Next

   Great Medical Breakthrough

    By Karen van Kampen

    HarperCollins, 292 pages, $34.95

    Sometimes you really can judge a book by its cover. In this case, the title
gave it away, that faint hint of hype in the word "golden," for instance. And
the ominous combination of "gene therapy," "stem cells" and "quest for the
next." That led me to wonder what other sexy but unrelated topics this book
might include. Gene hunting? Biotech finance? Eugenics? The patenting of life?

    Regrettably, the answer is yes, all of these and more. And therein lies one
of The Golden Cell's main flaws: It is not really about anything in particular.
It's a sampler, rather than a main dish.

    Take the search for the Huntington's gene. Karen van Kampen, a Calgary
Herald writer who specializes in health and business, relates the magnificent
story of how the daughter and husband of a Huntington's victim doggedly join the
effort to track down the gene that causes the disease. Nancy Wexler, now a
neuropsychologist at Columbia University, was in her twenties when she realized
her mother had Huntington's. She travelled to a town in Venezuela where half the
10,000 residents had the disease. There, she helped persuade people to donate
blood samples; these were pivotal in ultimately pinpointing the genetic mutation
that causes Huntington's.

    The tale is worth a book all on its own - and guess what, it has already
been written, by Nancy Wexler's sister Alice (Mapping Fate: A Memory of Family,
Risk and Genetic Research). Ditto the saga of how Iceland became one big
genetics laboratory and the people's collective medical history became research
fodder. An amazing story, but there's only so much you can say in 14 pages.
Luckily, Ingrid Wickelgren wrote a more detailed treatment in her 2002 book, The
Gene Masters: How a New Breed of Scientific Entrepreneurs Raced for the Biggest
Prize in Biology.

    It's not just that these stories have been told before. Great new books on
old topics come out all the time, and they can offer novel insights, draw
conclusions about the bigger picture, or even explain things in a better or
clearer way. But van Kampen's book doesn't really do any of these things.
Instead, she offers a sort of grab-bag of the past two decades' hottest
scientific advances.

    Perhaps because there's simply too much material, the book becomes
simplistic at points. "Science is magic," van Kampen writes. "It uses what is
within all of us - our common genes and proteins, the cells that make our hearts
beat and our brains compute - to unlock the codes of the diseases that plague
our bodies. . . . But like any other production, this magic show will come to a
screeching halt if one main ingredient is missing: money."

    Nor does she make it particularly easy to understand the science she is
writing about. For instance, she describes how a scientist tried to home in on
the Huntington's disease gene: "He cut up pieces of DNA using restriction
enzymes, making RFLPs - in other words, genetic markers - that he labelled using
a radioactive tracer. These markers had many forms, so individuals could be
distinguished from one another. Pieces of DNA were placed on a gel that
separates fragments by their size. Then [he] added the radioactive marker, and
when it met its DNA counterpart he had a match." Get it?

    Perhaps most disappointingly, van Kampen relies very, very heavily on
secondary sources: Rather than interview sources directly or cite scientific
papers, she too often consults popular science magazines, newspapers, TV
programs, websites and other books. (For instance, the two books I mention
above.)

    Often, what passes for her own quotations are from other places. For
instance, when you read someone quoted as saying, "It isn't that I want to buck
the establishment. It's just that I don't really care what they say or what they
think . . ." you may be forgiven for assuming it came from an interview. But
check the footnote and you will find it comes from the Arizona Heart Institute's
promotional website. This happens again and again.

    Going back to primary sources is one of the most important things an author
can do for her readers. This is especially true in science. Each time a study is
popularized, a little clarity is lost. Relying too much on a source that has
been through the simplification mill risks distorting the findings. Or, at the
very least, dumbs them way down.

    If you want to get up to speed with some of science's recent big
developments, The Golden Cell might be a useful Cole's Notes-type primer. But if
you read a daily paper, or magazines, this book may not add a lot to what you
already know. It tells you a little bit about a lot of things but, ultimately,
nothing much about anything.

   Alison Motluk is a Canadian journalist who writes mainly for the British
science weekly New Scientist.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2006


                              133 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                           December 29, 2005 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 311 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS PREDICT TECHNOLOGICAL BLISS

BYLINE: BY CP

DATELINE: VANCOUVER

BODY:

   Do you remember the old futuristic science-fiction B movies, where life was
found on another planet, robots and computers took over menial tasks and mad
scientists grew a brain in a jar?

   Well, that future is here but it has just enough dissimilarities not to send
us screaming into the streets.

   "I would say the majority of astronomers believe there is life elsewhere, and
the best place to find it would be on a planet that has conditions like the
Earth," said Jaymie Matthews of the University of British Columbia's department
of physics and astronomy.

   He said techniques used by the world's "planet hunters" are just on the verge
of being able to find those kinds of worlds.

   "There may be life that's completely different than we understand," said
Matthews, who was asked along with a number of other experts at UBC to make
predictions for 2006 and beyond.

   Alan Mackworth can foresee intelligent vehicles getting you to a destination
with only a voice command.

   "You could imagine a wheelchair that was semi-autonomous where it could
figure out what's in the local environment, where the furniture is, where the
cat is ... and navigate from the living room to the kitchen," said the computer
science professor.

   One of the most obvious areas where the rapid advance of technology is being
used is in the health sector, where scientists are working on gene therapy for
brain disorders such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.

   At the university's centre for blood research, doctors say crisis-driven
blood donor drives could be a thing of the past as the research grows into
artificial blood platelets.

   In the psychology department, Prof. Stanley Coren predicts health care will
soon be going to the dogs -- prescription dogs.

   "Some physicians nowadays are going to say pet a puppy twice and call me in
the morning, as a prescription for a whole lot of problems," Coren said.

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2005


                              135 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                            December 11, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 57

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: MP FACING UNSEEN FOE;
CHUCK STRAHL REFUSES TO LET CANCER STOP HIM

BYLINE: BY CP

DATELINE: CHILLIWACK, B.C.

BODY:

   After beating his nearest opponent by 15,000 votes in last year's federal
election, it's fair to say Conservative Chuck Strahl has no real opposition in
his bid to retain the bucolic Fraser Valley seat he's held since 1993.

   Unless you count the incurable cancer enveloping his lungs.

   Since being diagnosed last August, Strahl has learned to pronounce
mesothelioma, a rare form of cancer linked to asbestos exposure that attacks the
pleura, the lungs' protective lining.

   Although it was caught at a very early stage when Strahl went to the doctor
with a collapsed lung, it's inoperable.

   "They also clearly have no idea of how it'll develop," says Strahl, his
resonant basso voice undiminished by the disease.

   Neither radiation nor surgery would be effective. There are chemotherapy
options and Strahl, 48, is also investigating experimental gene therapy.

   Ironically, Strahl's relative youth -- most mesothelioma patients are elderly
-- and vigour could screen him out of the drug trial.

   "There's always a possibility I'll be rejected because I'm not sick enough,"
he says with no trace of irony.

   But treatment decisions are months away, if not longer. The former logging
contractor who spent years inhaling asbestos brake dust from heavy equipment is
doing what he's always done, just getting on with things.

   "For someone to say 'You have cancer, I think you should go home now and pull
the sheets over your head,' it's just not in my personality to do that," says
Strahl.

   Since first being elected as a Reformer 12 years ago, Strahl earned a
reputation as a work horse, rising to become deputy speaker in the
Liberal-dominated House.

   Strahl's decision to seek a fifth term in Parliament in his Chilliwack-Fraser
Canyon riding apparently encountered no opposition from his wife, Deb, nor his
four grown children to run in the Jan. 23 election.

   "Once we got the initial word (and) the doctors told him to keep living his
life, keep running, keep working, keep doing it all, there was no real
discussion," says son Mark, 27, who works for Tory incumbent Randy Kamp's
campaign in adjacent Pitt Meadows-Mission-Maple Ridge.

   Aside from regular medical checkups, little has changed.

   Strahl's wife of 30 years, Deb, accompanied him back to Ottawa more
frequently on his weekly commute.

   - - -

   QUICK GLIMPSE

   * Age: 48, born Feb. 27, 1957, New Westminster, B.C.

   * Family: Married Debra Bateman, April 1975; four children, Karina, Mark,
Loni and Kayla.

   * Education: High school.

   * Political career: First elected in 1993 for Reform party, re-elected, 1997,
2000 for Canadian Alliance, 2004 for Conservatives; held posts of Opposition
whip in 1997, Alliance house leader 2000, deputy Commons speaker in last
Parliament.

   * Riding: Chilliwack-Fraser Canyon.

GRAPHIC: SUN file photo REPRESENTATIVE ... Chuck Strahl will be running in the
upcoming federal election despite doctors discovering he has cancer. Strahl
holds the seat for the Chilliwack-Fraser Canyon riding in B.C.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2005


                              138 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2005 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 19, 2005 Saturday

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; SOCIAL STUDIES; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 1243 words

HEADLINE: Age cannot wither us - can it?

BYLINE: HEATHER MENZIES

BODY:

   The Long Tomorrow:

   How Advances in Evolutionary

   Biology Can Help Us

   Postpone Aging

    By Michael R. Rose

    Oxford University Press,

    161 pages, $34.95

   The Coming Age Revolution:

   When Growing Older Will Be Great

    By Reg Stackhouse

    Warwick Publishing,

    157 pages, $14.95

    Seeing the faces from Pakistan after the recent earthquake was a shock:
People who looked 10 years older than me were often at least 10 years younger.
It was also a reminder that the books I was about to review were written for
people like me, with a fair amount of privilege already when it comes to aging.

    One book, The Long Tomorrow, is about using genetics to postpone aging. It's
a popular account of a Canadian-born scientist's career studying natural
selection, evolution and aging. The second, The Coming Age Revolution, is a
hortatory 80-year-old's call for seniors to defy attitudinal and other obstacles
(such as mandatory retirement) to living well in what is considered to be "old
age." Both books tell us a lot about our society, where a third of the people
seeking Botox treatments in "medical rejuvenation" clinics are under 40, and a
Montreal film executive could lose her life to complications arising from seven
hours of nips and tucks to rejuvenate her looks.

    In The Long Tomorrow, evolutionary biologist Michael R. Rose does a credible
job of recounting new insights into the aging process arising from research he's
done with that slave of genetic research, the prolifically fecund fruit fly. The
idea is to apply natural selection to the lifespan of organisms, and exploit how
this culling force eases up when an organism stops reproducing, seeming even to
yield a non-aging phase to aging.

    Rose's breakthrough came when he developed what he provocatively dubbed a
"Methuselah" line of fruit flies whose longevity seemed linked to having been
the progeny of older parents for whom the force of natural selection was still
strong. While he wasn't involved in sequencing the genome of the fruit fly, he
saw the potential in identifying genetic differences that affect senescence and
in using these to somehow "slay the many-headed monster" of aging. Moving into
slaying mode himself, he teamed up with a TV game-show producer to create a
corporate bridge from fruit flies to humans. But the collapsing dot-com bubble
stopped his venture-capital efforts, thwarting his hope, as he envisaged it, to
have medications in clinical trials by now.

    It's hard to judge how credible this hope is, in part because of how
narrowly Rose focuses the book on his own career trajectory to the exclusion of
the larger context. For example, we learn that he has been subject to criticism,
but aren't told on what grounds or even by whom. He refers only to the
"assembled elders of American aging research," who "just don't want to tango
with me at scientific meetings any more," and "one fellow, bald with a big black
moustache," who got "red in the face" from questioning Rose "repeatedly."

    On checking for myself, it seems that while mainstream gerontology research
had aimed to mitigate the effects of aging, Rose dared to presume that science
could postpone it by tweaking "natural selection" to augment fitness.
Subsequently, Rose seems to have been exonerated, winning the Busse Prize in
Gerontology in 1997 while the journal Evolution now describes the whole field of
gerontology as featuring a "post-Rose" phase, with many labs (including one at
McGill University) creating longer-lived strains of other organisms, such as
worms.

    That might have been the end of the story for me, too, except that something
about the book's self-serving self-absorption snagged me. I started rereading it
as a palimpsest, shedding light on the larger story of 20th-century genetics and
its association with eugenics. From the earliest days when scientists first
imagined the existence of some identifiable stuff whereby traits were inherited
(Darwin called it the gemmules of pangenesis, which others shortened to pangens
before Wilhelm Johannsen coined the still shorter word "gene" in 1909),
storytelling about this has featured the archetypal heroic individual and,
equally, individual genes acting out a drama of survival associated with natural
selection and survival of the fittest.

    It was more fiction than fact all along; the scientific advances associated
with the Genome Project have now discredited this as a legitimately dominant
motif in the story of life on Earth. As Evelyn Fox Keller writes in her review
of the lessons learned from this unprecedented interdisciplinary collaboration (
The Century of the Gene), scientists have been humbled by the realization that
this "gene" stuff is not clearly divisible, but enmeshed in complex,
inter-dependent "genetic, epigenetic and post-genomic metabolic networks," with
everything being contingent, everything context-specific.

    Many scientists had already distanced themselves from the determinism of
genetic agency by the 1930s when eugenicists took it up with notions of some
people being fit for reproduction and others not. All the more reason to wonder
at the seeming persistence of this notion today. Although now, if this is
eugenics, it's not couched in totalitarian population control, but as private
consumer choice. As Rose spelled out in a 1999 Scientific American article,
"people are going to have to spend a very significant fraction of their
disposable income on" whatever gene-related products emerge. It's a privatized
form of eugenics, domesticated by the marketplace and its tireless capacity for
dreams.

    The article generated three mild letters to the editor, one from the Harvard
Medical School saying that "we don't need a genetic miracle to prolong healthy
life," just good diet, exercise and a healthy social environment. Gene therapy
to "postpone aging," then, might best be filed in the "let them eat cake"
category of concern, rather marginal to the bread-and-butter issues most aging
people and the people who care about them face.

    Still, you can age with attitude. While Rose tackles aging as a biological
problem, Reginald Stackhouse treats it as an increasingly obsolete set of myths,
which he begins the book by debunking: The elderly "can't learn" and "can't
remember," "they're de-sexed" and "out of date." Part prediction, part polemic,
The Coming Age Revolution argues that the boomer generation might well be
changing how being older looks and feels. More and more seniors are taking
part-time jobs at McDonald's and Wal-Mart or becoming self-employed, turning
retirement into something "voluntary, flexible and partial," Stackhouse writes.
Thanks in part to Viagra and partly to changed attitudes toward cohabiting, more
seniors are also getting involved in the wink-wink way. They're forming
investment clubs to make their wealth grow.

    All in all, it's a delightful work of cheerleading - complete with a
manifesto vested in what Stackhouse, a former research professor, human-rights
commissioner and post-retirement consultant, calls the "four Vs: vitality,
vocation, venture and value."

    I'd be cheering a lot more if Stackhouse hadn't extrapolated so much from
individual and often exceptional success stories. In short, if he'd been more
inclusive and democratic in his analysis of what's needed for growing older to
be "great" for most of us - and even an option.

   Heather Menzies is the author of No Time: Stress and the Crisis of Modern
Life, and is learning to love the lines on her face.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              143 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2005 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                          September 10, 2005 Saturday

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; IN BRIEF; Pg. D26

LENGTH: 409 words

HEADLINE: RECENT ARRIVALS

BODY:

    The Acadians: A People's Story of Exile and Triumph, by Dean Jobb, Wiley,
296 pages, $24.99

    The 250th anniversary of the 1755 expulsion of the Acadians from Canada's
east coast has been marked by a flurry of books, not least among them this
lively, popular account by a respected Halifax writer of "Le grand dérangement,"
which created a diaspora that persists in, for instance, Louisiana's Cajun
culture.

    Reflections on Liszt, by Alan Walker, Cornell University Press, 277 pages,
$47.95

    Walker, a distinguished musicologist at Hamilton's McMaster University and
author of a three-volume biography of Franz Liszt, offers a collection of essays
that not only probe the composer/pianist's music, but the cultural life of
19th-century Europe.

    Film Festival Confidential, by William Marshall, McArthur & Company, 122
pages, $19.95

    With film festival season in full screening, cineastes will gobble down this
gossipy, informative, behind-the-scenes view of the not-so-glamorous life, by
the first director of the Toronto International Film Festival, as if it were a
bag of popcorn.

    A Brief History of Medicine: From Hippocrates to Gene Therapy, by Paul
Strathern, Carroll & Graf, 414 pages, $18.95

    The prolific Strathern - many works on science, economics, writers and
philosophers - has produced an anecdotal history of a subject consistently on
all our minds.

    A Serpent in Eden, by James Owen, Little, Brown, 288 pages, $39

    The murder of mega-rich Sir Harry Oakes in the Bahamas in 1943 has never
been solved. Its supporting cast featured the Duke and Duchess of Windsor,
Ernest Hemingway and Nazi spies, and Erle Stanley Gardner called it "the
greatest murder mystery of all time." British journalist James Owen thinks he
has a solution.

    A Voyage to Newfoundland, by Julien Thoulet, translated by Scott Jamieson,
McGill-Queen's University Press, 195 pages, $44.95

    In 1891, Thoulet, a French geologist-oceanographer, published this observant
account of Newfoundland after an 1886 stint aboard a vessel patrolling the cod
fishery. Long out of print, it is now valuably translated into English for the
first time by Scott Jamieson of Memorial University.

    Revelations: Personal Responses to the Books of the Bible, Viking Canada,
398 pages, $32

    This single volume collecting the very popular Pocket canons series features
the likes of Mordecai Richler on Job, A. S. Byatt on Solomon, Bono on Psalms and
the Dalai Lama on the General Epistle of James.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2006


                              146 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2005 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 26, 2005 Tuesday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 1473 words

HEADLINE: At war with their illness and their government;
Patients of a rare, deadly disease are forced to lobby provinces to pay for
treatment

BYLINE: SHAWNA RICHER

DATELINE: HALIFAX

BODY:

    Graham Crouse was in the backyard with his father-in-law, sowing grass seed
and raking dirt on the first warm day of summer when he noticed his T-shirt was
clammy.

    For the first time in 42 years that he could recall, he was sweating.

    "Most people wouldn't be able to relate to that feeling, but I thought,
'Hey, good. That's how it's supposed to work,' " Mr. Crouse said. "Normally, in
the heat I start feeling like an overinflated balloon and I throw off heat for
hours."

    Mr. Crouse, who suffers from Fabry, an extremely rare and potentially fatal
disease that clogs cells with fats and ravages vital internal organs, was
perspiring normally thanks to enzyme-replacement therapy. The treatment, which
costs $300,000 a year, has been approved by Health Canada, but the Common Drug
Review, an independent panel that advises governments on drug funding,
recommended the provinces not pay for it.

    Now Fabry patients are not just at war with their bodies; their battle
against the government is also heating up.

    In the fall, the provincial health ministers are scheduled to discuss drug
funding with the federal government. In the meantime, Fabry patients are
lobbying the provinces to pay for the treatment until a comprehensive drug
policy is formulated.

    They are to meet today with Nova Scotia Health Minister Angus MacIsaac in
the province that is ground zero for the inherited disease - about 90 of
Canada's 200 or so sufferers live in the Bluenose province. So far, only British
Columbia and Alberta have agreed to pay for ERT on a compassionate and temporary
basis.

    Ed Koning, a Fabry sufferer and president of the Edmonton-based Fabry
Society of Canada, is leading the charge and called it "heartless, unethical and
immoral" for the provinces to refuse to pay for ERT as well as drugs for other
rare or so-called "orphan" diseases.

    "We have a proposal for all the provincial stakeholders to develop a
long-term solution," Mr. Koning said. "Some provinces have listened, to a large
extent because they believe in the treatment. It's a national problem that
deserves resolution.

    "We know it's much broader than just us. But the Fabry patients just happen
to be first up to bat."

    Roughly 5,000 people in the world have Fabry. The disease's arrival in
Canada can be traced 16 generations back to a woman named Anna Catherina Barbara
Loy, who arrived on Tancook Island, N.S., from Germany in 1750.

    Mr. Crouse, a graphic designer who lives in West Porter's Lake, N.S., and
was diagnosed when he was 9, has received Replagal, one of two drugs that appear
to halt the progression of Fabry. He is one of about 20 patients in Nova Scotia
involved in a clinical trial of that drug. His participation ends in August. He
dreads the day.

    The life expectancy of a man with Fabry is roughly 55; women can live
considerably longer. But the disease, an enzyme deficiency that causes fats to
accumulate in the blood vessels and cells, is a death sentence. Patients
typically die of heart disease, stroke or kidney failure. And quality of life
leading up to that is severely diminished.

    For years, Mr. Crouse experienced searing pain in his hands and feet, until
the nerve endings became so plugged they died. The walls of his heart thickened.
He suffered severe stomach cramps and had no stamina. He had two leaky heart
valves, rising creatine levels, compromised kidney function and high blood
pressure. Fatty deposits clog the blood vessels that surround sweat glands,
making patients intolerant of exercise and heat. Some Fabry patients are in such
pain they require morphine. Other indignities are too personal to detail.

    "Wherever you go you always take stock of where the bathrooms are," Mr.
Crouse said. "Sometimes, the need arises and you have no say in the matter.

    "You limit yourself in small ways every day and it just becomes what you do.
Things most healthy people could do in an afternoon would take me three or four
days because I have to stop, cool down, get my breath back."

    But since he's been on Replagal he has more energy, no pain and spends half
his usual time in the bathroom. The drug seems to have curtailed the progression
of the disease.

    "There's no doubt in my mind the therapy works," Mr. Crouse said. "This drug
would definitely allow me to live a lot longer. Without it, the damage continues
to be done every day. One day will be too much and that will be it."

    Health Canada approved the two Fabry drugs - Fabrazyme and Replagal - last
year. The Health Canada stamp means that they are safe but is no endorsement of
their effectiveness.

    The Common Drug Review, a committee set up in 2000 to advise provincial
governments on drug funding, recommended against paying for both drugs because
of a lack of clinical evidence suggesting they work, although provinces can
ignore the advice, as Alberta and B.C. have done.

    Fabry is so rare it is difficult to find enough patients for trials and the
drugs have not been around long enough to assess long-term impact.

    "When you're dealing with conditions like Fabry, it's extremely difficult to
prove that the drugs meet an end point, such as preventing kidneys from failing
or extend their life," said Alicia Chan, who works with Fabry patients at the
University of Alberta and is also calling on Ottawa to come up with a policy
that would cover all orphan diseases. "It's sad to say, but a lot of the Fabry
patients who are fighting for this are in a life-and-death situation."

    But the Fabry drugs, licensed in the United States in 2003, are considered
effective and funded by governments in about 40 other countries, from Australia
and Bulgaria to Yugoslavia.

    "It's baffling that the drugs are approved by [Health Canada] but another
government authority won't approve they be paid for," said Jack Johnson,
president of the Missouri-based Fabry Support and Information Group. Mr. Johnson
has been receiving ERT since 2000 and reports improved organ function, no pain
and more energy while taking them.

    "It's extremely frustrating for patients, and unless something is done and
done soon they will die. Every other government seems satisfied the treatment
helps. It's the best we've got. There is no cure."

    For now, Jeffrey Medin at the University of Toronto is working on finding a
treatment - with money from the National Institutes of Health in the United
States - that would involve a one-time gene therapy treatment. He said it is
realistically a few years off, but ERT should be funded until a cure is found.

    "I understand why governments are waffling in relation to the cost, but
patients are suffering because they need ERT," he said. "I'm surprised that
countries with a lot less money have approved it. There should be a balanced
discussion about this, but ultimately it should be approved, maybe with
negotiated cost."

    Ontario announced in May that it would abide by the Common Drug Review's
advice and not pay for ERT for its 30 Fabry patients, who were outraged by the
decision. Last month, after Health Minister George Smitherman said he would
fast-track approval of Herceptin for breast-cancer patients, the Opposition
demanded that Fabry patients be given the same courtesy.

    "If this was cancer, we wouldn't even be talking about it," said Michael
West, who treats Fabry patients in Atlantic Canada. "It's one of the worst
examples of politicized health care there is. What the government is basically
saying is that some lives are worth more than others.

    "We need a national policy on orphan drugs. They may be expensive and not
cost-effective, but it's the only treatment available. What choice is there?"

    Like Alberta, B.C.'s Health Ministry authorized the ordering of Fabry drugs
on a monthly basis for its eight patients after clinical trials ended in
February, pending the health ministers meeting in the fall.

    "There's a great deal of compassion for the Fabry patients," said Michelle
Stewart, spokeswoman for the B.C. Health Ministry. "The situation really
underscores a need for the national pharmaceutical strategy with the priority on
developing an orphan-drug policy."

    In the meantime, while waiting for government-funded ERT and counting the
days until his clinical-trial supply is cut off and his body turns on itself
again, Mr. Crouse is hoping that today's meeting with Mr. MacIsaac yields good
news.

    "It's important to get enzyme therapy to people like me who are relatively
healthy now," Mr. Crouse said. "If we wait too long, we're all going to be very
sick. And there are people who won't survive.

    "It's like they say our lives don't matter because there's so few of us.
Everyone seems to agree that the first step has to be the implementation of an
orphan-drug program, and what we're asking for is the government to fund ERT in
the meantime. Give it to me now, while I can still hold down a job and pay my
taxes."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2006


                              147 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2005 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 23, 2005 Saturday

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; PSYCHOLOGY; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 1002 words

HEADLINE: Forget therapy! Take drugs!

BYLINE: ROBIN ROGER

BODY:

   Against Depression

    By Peter D. Kramer

    Viking, 353 pages, $36

    Apolemic with the word "against" in the title, such as Susan Sontag's
Against Interpretation or Laura Kipnis's Against Love, is usually a bracing
rebuttal of an attitude that is "for" something. But what attitude is
psychiatrist Peter D. Kramer, of Listening to Prozac fame, opposing when he
calls his book Against Depression?

    Simple common sense will tell you that while there are masochists who appear
to relish suffering, most people do not seek depression What Kramer really means
is that we resign ourselves to depression too readily, do not fight it
vigorously enough and, in order to make virtue of a necessity, invent
compensatory attitudes toward that wretched state. Of course, a book called
Against Tolerating Depression just wouldn't sell, hence the contracted title.
The glossing distortion of the phrase, which doesn't really say what he means,
exemplifies Kramer's bewildering style.

    Kramer's central thesis, that our culture tolerates and even celebrates
depression, rests on two lines of argument. One is a review and commentary on
depictions of depression in Western culture. The second is an extensive
discussion of recent grand strides in depression research which in his view
prove that depression is as much a disease as diabetes or epilepsy. His reading
of culture stands or falls on the strength of his scientific argument. If
depression really is a disease, then depictions of the melancholy malaise as
variants of lovesickness, theological angst, ennui or tests of spirit, to name a
few presentations of the dark dog, are misguided rationalizations.

    Certainly Kramer makes an overwhelmingly thorough case for the
depression-as-disease model. The notes that support this section of the book
list more than 250 studies and other publications on everything from twin
studies to gene therapy to prenatal stress in monkeys to adrenal gland
enlargement to glucocorticoids to hippocampal atrophy and much, much more.

    Not all of this is well explained, particularly the critical link between
genetic propensity to depression and causal experiential factors such as sexual
abuse, early parental loss and other severe traumas that occur during
development. What does seem indisputable is that depression acts on the body as
much as the spirit, inflicting severe physiological consequences, and that it
ought to be diagnosed with greater alacrity, treated more aggressively and
prevented more vigilantly.

    While presenting scientific evidence to support his view of depression makes
a great deal of sense, Kramer focuses on research at the expense of critical
questions he either does not answer clearly, or doesn't bother to address. For
one thing, his rallying cry to attack depression as a medical disease does not
have much of a battle plan. The great advances in understanding the physiology
of depression have not yet resulted in many new treatments. Kramer writes as if
the use of anti-depression medication, notably selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs), has been an unqualified success, even though there is well
known concern about their efficacy, side effects and withdrawal problems. These
issues he consigns to small type in the notes.

    His faith in medication, his admiration of the research and his mission to
medicalize depression have left Kramer with mixed feelings about psychotherapy.
It doesn't lend itself to research, for one thing, and can't be proved to work
in quantifiable terms. But if new treatments are not yet available, it seems
premature to declare old therapies ineffective. (He is particularly severe with
psychoanalysis, which he misrepresents.) What are we to do if we do not use
psychotherapy?

    Nor does Kramer seem aware that the redefinition of depression as disease
places it in the same category as other maladies that cannot truly be understood
by those who suffer from them. In his scheme, mental health becomes the province
of the scientific expert in the lab and the psychiatrist in the consulting room.
Although his case studies resemble the cases of all mental-health practitioners,
he refers only to psychiatrists and is partial to the word "doctorly." It's as
if lay therapists, psychologists, social workers, pastors and other healers have
never contributed anything to this field in the past, and will not be expert
enough to manage the newly understood disease in the future.

    The dystopic scenario that emerges is one in which we cope with despondency
and despair by going for lab tests administered by a rarefied specialist who has
studied molecules, cells and genes, but who has not had time to cultivate
compassion or insight. Should Kramer be right, then so be it, but in a sustained
polemic on depression, he ought to consider such ramifications.

    Kramer's contention that we find depression charming, while ultimately
unconvincing, would still be worth pondering if his prose were lucid. His
scattershot attack on every cultural artifact he can find simply attenuates his
argument. When he ranges on a single page from La Rochefoucauld in mid-
17th-century France to Marsilio Ficino in late-15th-century Florence to Rufus of
Ephesus and Galen of Pergamum in the second century, it seems more like
name-dropping than erudition.

    Trying to glean a coherent point from Kramer's writing is like trying to
concentrate on a lecturer who leaves his cell phone and beeper on while he
soothes a fussy baby and juggles several flaming hoops. Grammatical errors,
missing words, non sequiturs, tautologies, confusing and garbled word order and
sweeping oversimplifications are so abundant that a careful reader soon
discovers there is no core meaning in many of the statements. It is truly odd
that a crusader against depression would write a text that induces irritability,
one of its symptoms.

   Robin Roger is an associate editor of the Literary Review of Canada, senior
editor of Ars Medica: A Journal of Medicine, the Arts and Humanities, and a
psychotherapist in Toronto.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2006


                              148 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2005 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 19, 2005 Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 889 words

HEADLINE: Canadians find gene tied to late miscarriage;
Discovery raises possibility of screening women at risk, developing treatment

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM, MEDICAL REPORTER

BODY:

    Ottawa researchers have discovered the molecular glitch that explains why so
many women lose their babies late in their pregnancies - a condition that is
also the second leading cause of infant deaths in the developed world.

    Scientists at the Ottawa Health Research Institute have found that a
particular gene can produce an underactive enzyme that interferes with the
proper growth of a woman's placenta, the crucial organ that forms within the
walls of the uterus to feed a developing fetus.

    Too many times, obstetrician and scientist Andrée Gruslin felt helpless and
heartbroken watching excited mothers-to-be with "big bellies" and big plans
miscarry more than 20 weeks into their pregnancies. In one case, a woman lost
eight babies in a row.

    "This is a lot more dramatic than [an early-stage] miscarriage," which
usually happens within the first trimester, Dr. Gruslin said. "These are
pregnancies that can end in a delivery room or the neonatal intensive-care
unit."

    But finding the condition's cause - a gene that can also result in the birth
of underweight babies who battle health problems all their lives - may make it
possible to screen pregnant women at risk and develop a treatment.

    "If we can find out about the women at risk very early on, we can monitor a
baby a lot more closely and possibly save the baby," said Dr. Gruslin, co-author
of the report published in the current issue of the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences.

    The Ottawa team is now setting up a study to run blood tests on roughly
2,000 pregnant women for signs of the underactive enzyme, to ensure the
discovery can translate from research into clinical practice.

    Known as fetal-growth restriction, the condition strikes 3 per cent of all
pregnancies and is the second leading cause of infant deaths in industrialized
countries, after premature birth.

    Carole Aylwin and her husband Dominique Ratté knew nothing about
fetal-growth restriction when last year they saw the troubling ultrasound images
of their first child, 17 weeks into the pregnancy.

    "At the hospital, [doctors] realized the baby was looking very small. At
first, they thought they had mixed up the dates . . . that the baby was two
weeks younger than they thought," Ms. Aylwin said.

    But after ruling out a genetic problem with the baby and a maternal
infection, the doctors realized during regular ultrasound scans that her
placenta looked "weird" and "dense," she said, and the baby's growth was
discouraging. By the 24th week, Ms. Aylwin - nearly six months pregnant - and
her husband learned their tiny baby could be severely handicapped if he or she
survived at all.

    "So then it was a matter of what would happen and when would it happen,"
said Ms. Aylwin, describing a nearly unbearable level of stress during what was
to be such a happy time.

    Last October, their baby was delivered stillborn at 26 weeks.

    "All the time, you are asking how come this is happening," Ms. Aylwin said.
"Knowing now that they have discovered this molecule that could offer a
preventative treatment . . . would be a relief."

    Dr. Gruslin teamed up with OHRI researchers Qing Qiu, Ajoy Basak, Majambu
Mbikay and Benjamin Tsang to study the molecular biology behind the growth of
placentas.

    Earlier research had shown that a gene producing a protein known as
insulin-like growth factor 2, or IGF2, was critical.

    This growth factor invades the muscle cells of the uterus to allow blood and
oxygen in to feed the fetus, and helps fetal cells divide and grow. Mice born
without the IGF2 gene were very tiny and also grew abnormally small placentas.

    But the Ottawa research showed that the normal form of this IGF2 protein has
a very long chemical structure.

    However, to function properly when helping to build the placenta, another
molecule has to effectively cut it down into a smaller form.

    That molecule, a so-called PC4 enzyme, is produced by a gene known to be
active in the ovaries, the testes and now the placenta.

    Dr. Gruslin said it acts like scissors, which cut down the growth-factor
protein to a length that is crucial to a healthy pregnancy.

    "We have found the scissors in some women are just not sharp enough, or they
just don't have enough scissors," Dr. Gruslin explained.

    The team tested its theory in a study that found seven pregnant women who
suffered from fetal-growth restriction carried longer, or "uncut" forms of the
IGF2 protein in their blood.

    Eight women without the condition carried shorter forms of the protein.

    "This is pointing to a gene that is not active enough in these women," Dr.
Gruslin said of the women who suffer from fetal-growth restriction.

    There are no immediate medical or genetic therapies to treat the condition
and screening for it still remains in the research phase.

    Dr. Gruslin has found some success with certain interventions, but she
stresses that she can offer no scientific research to explain their
effectiveness at this point.

    In the case of the women who suffered eight consecutive miscarriages, for
example, she prescribed a high-dose of folic acid and a baby Aspirin daily.

    That woman has since given birth to a healthy child.

    Now Ms. Aylwin who is once again pregnant, currently 14 weeks along, is
trying a similar regimen. "They are following me closely," Ms. Aylwin said, "So
far everything is fantastic."

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2006


                              149 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                              July 11, 2005 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Your Life; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 64 words

HEADLINE: GENE HELPS FIX MICE GONE BAD

BODY:

   An experiment that saw extremely aggressive mice transformed into gentle
creatures raises the possibility of the same change in vicious people. B.C.
scientists used a human gene on lab mice that had turned vicious three years ago
after researchers accidentally deleted a gene that affects brain development.
The results raise the possibility gene therapy could make nasty people good.

NOTES:  Health

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2005


                              151 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2005 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 6, 2005 Wednesday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 780 words

HEADLINE: Rampaging mice made more human

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM, MEDICAL REPORTER

BODY:

    A breakthrough experiment has used a human gene to turn vicious mice into
very gentle creatures - holding out the prospect of doing similarly sweet things
to violent people.

    Scientists at the University of British Columbia's Centre for Molecular
Medicine and Therapeutics created a strain of extremely vicious lab mice three
years ago after accidentally deleting a gene that affects brain development.

    The mutant mice were so aggressive they killed their mates, chewed their
siblings' tails and even attacked their lab handlers.

    The unanswered question was whether the human form of the gene also plays a
role in aggression in people. The new research now suggests that it does.

    By giving mutant mice embryos the human version of the gene they were
missing, the UBC team found the nasty rodents grew into a rather nice strain
instead.

    As such, the experiment raises the possibility of designing a gene therapy
to counter aggression - as well as the eerie spectre of enhancing it.

    More immediately, it means mice can act as models to study human genes
involved in abnormal behaviour and psychiatric disorders.

    "Mice have been used to study human genes for cancers and other diseases
lots," said UBC geneticist Elizabeth Simpson, senior author of the report
published today in the Journal of Neuroscience. "But this is the first time [a
human gene] is being used in a mouse to study the brain and behaviour."

    After UBC researchers created the so-called "fierce mice" in 2002, they
searched the human genome looking for a gene with a sequence that closely
matched the one missing in their mutant mice.

    That gene, Dr. Simpson said, called NR2E1, is found on a region of
Chromosome 6 in humans that has been repeatedly associated with bipolar
disorder, a serious medical illness resulting in dramatic mood swings. The gene
itself produces molecules that regulate other genes, suggesting it plays many
roles in the human body, including those involved in brain development and
function. That a similar version exists in the mouse suggests the gene is a
primitive one, passed down to mice and people from a common ancestor many
millenniums ago.The team ordered the human gene by mail and then inserted it
into a mouse embryo at the earliest stage of development. This way the new human
gene would be absorbed into the animal's genome as the embryo cell divided and
grew.

    Mice without any form of the NR2E1 genes were, as predicted, violent. Those
with two copies of the mouse gene were normal, as were those with one mouse copy
and one human copy. But most surprising was that mice that carried only the
human NR2E1 gene also appeared to be normal.

    "They were indistinguishable from mice in the wild," Dr. Simpson said.

    The researchers also were careful to control for environmental forces that
could result in different behaviours, feeding all strains the same food, in the
same kinds of cages and offering them the same social interactions: "The only
thing that differed in these mice was their genetic constitution."

    University of Lethbridge neuroscientist Bryan Kolb, who studies early brain
injuries in rats, said the experiment amazed him.

    "This [paper] is saying that by interfering with the cells that build the
brain you can get this profound effect in behaviour," Dr. Kolb said. "The fact
that a single gene is controlling this is astounding."

    Dr. Kolb, a professor with the university's Centre for Behavioural
Neuroscience, said he could envision all sorts of experiments that could flow
from this kind of human-animal model.

    Yet Margaret Somerville, founding director of the McGill Centre for
Medicine, Ethics and Law, said concerns already have been raised that some
country or group might try to use such research to design perfect soldiers whose
genes are manipulated to make them fearless killers.

    A field of "neuro-ethics" has already sprung up to discuss issues around
genes, free will and criminal law, she added.

    "We've got to be very careful here," Dr. Somerville said, "in thinking we
understand more than we actually do understand."

    Dr. Simpson acknowledged the report may leave people uncomfortable because
it highlights the power of biology in shaping behaviour. But, she said, "For
some reason we think the brain is different from your liver, yet we should see
the brain as no different than any other part of our body."

    Although genes do not tell the whole story, she said, they can illuminate an
important aspect of it. She noted that Huntington's disease, a neurodegenerative
disorder that can have an impact on speech, movement and thought, was once seen
as a psychiatric disorder before scientists realized the condition stems from a
mutated gene.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2006


                              153 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                            April 27, 2005 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 1010 words

HEADLINE: SLIPPERY SLOPE;
HUMANLY POSSIBLE -- PART 4 OF 4

SERIES: Part 4 of 4

BYLINE: BY DOUG BEAZLEY, SUN MEDIA

BODY:

   It's a revolution: In medicine, engineering, ethics and law. And it's
happening right here in Canada, of all places.

   In today's fourth and final instalment of Humanly Possible -- our series on
new medical technologies -- the Sun's Doug Beazley looks at the ethical
minefield all of these advances have opened up.

   How can we enjoy the benefits of gene science while preserving the
individual's right not to be discriminated against because of his DNA?

   Can we prevent startling advances in brain science from turning into
frightening new technologies for coercion and control?

   The future could be everything we want it to be.

   Or, unfortunately, everything we're afraid of.

   - - -

   "Now I say this, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of
God; neither does corruption inherit incorruption.

   "Behold, I shall show you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all
be changed."

   - 1 Corinthians 15: 50-51

   "Long live the new flesh."

   - Videodrome (1983)

   - - -

   In the 1980s, an American named John Moore was being treated for a form of
leukemia. During treatment, his doctor stumbled across a natural compound in his
spleen cells that looked to have great potential as a pharmaceutical. He sold
the commercial rights to a drug company for millions.

   Moore sued for property theft. In a landmark 1990 decision, the California
Supreme Court ruled five to four that the doctor was right and Moore was wrong
-- he had no legal property interest in his own body.

   Intellectual rights one, biological rights nil.

   We've seen a revolution in the science and technology of medicine: Gene
therapy, stem cells, prosthetics, mind-machine interfaces, anti-aging science --
so many impossible things are possible now, or on the horizon.

   But science is a sword that cuts two ways: The same technologies that may
free us from old forms of pain and death promise to bring us new ethical
headaches.

   "The problem is that science moves incrementally. You're tinkering with small
things, focusing on the problem at hand," said Katherine Young, a religious
studies professor at McGill University who studies cultural concepts of death.

   "But the small things always lead to big things, and by the time we know the
big things, we haven't done the ethical work to decide whether we want the kind
of world we've already built. The slippery slope is very real."

   Take stem cells, for example. These wonderfully plastic cells, which can grow
into any one of the dozens of tissue types making up a person, are found in only
a few parts of the adult body and in very early embryos.

   Scientists want to use them to restore human tissue, a therapy that could
cure everything from heart disease to Alzheimer's. But the work remains
extremely controversial, especially among those devoutly religious Canadians who
believe life begins at conception.

   Canadian law allows researchers access to embryos left over from human
fertility clinics, but bans all forms of cloning, including "therapeutic"
cloning used to create new stem cell lines.

   The cloning process that created Dolly the sheep is famously flawed -- most
embryos produced by it are far too damaged to be brought to term.

   But without studying cloning in the lab, many researchers say, science may be
missing new methods to grow and use stem cells without harvesting them from
human embryos.

   "Reproductive cloning is so clearly dangerous right now, there's a clear-cut
justification for banning it everywhere," said Tim Caulfield, Canada Research
Chair in health law and policy at the University of Alberta.

   "But I think it's inappropriate to ban therapeutic cloning. I know there's a
concern that we may be 'commodifying' the human body, but I think it's a weak
argument. It hasn't stopped us from performing liver transplants to save lives."

   And yet, lawmakers are right to be alarmed at cloning technology, which opens
up the possibility of manufacturing humans without legal rights as sources of
medical tissue.

   The "commodification" argument sees biotechnology racing ahead of law,
turning the human body into a resource to be mined for profit.

   "There's a saying: Science and law march together, but law has a limp," says
Margaret Somerville, a medical ethicist at McGill.

   At least the law in Canada is fairly clear. In the U.S., it's a basketcase.

   President George W. Bush, an evangelical Christian, has banned all research
on stem cell lines created after Aug. 9, 2001 (the ban is up for debate in the
U.S. Senate).

   But individual states can make up their own funding rules -- California has
pledged $3 billion for therapeutic stem cell work. And researchers spending
privately-sourced grants can do virtually whatever they like.

   "The law in the U.S. can only be described as incoherent," said Rosario
Isasi, a post-doc at the University of Montreal who has advised the UN on
biotechnology law.

   It's also easier in the U.S. to patent genes. In Canada, said Somerville,
researchers have to prove they're patenting a process and not a living thing
before they can get the OK from the courts -- the same argument that worked in
the Moore case.

   The whole field of biotech ethics becomes more perilous when you introduce
efforts to link human minds with machines.

   Two years ago, a research team in California announced it was going to start
testing the world's first brain prosthesis -- an artificial hippocampus. The
hippocampus controls the formation of long-term memories, but in people who've
suffered strokes or Alzheimer's, it doesn't work very well.

   The device offers hope victims of brain-wasting illnesses might get their
memories back. But it also threatens a whole new form of electronic coercion --
a device that could directly control memory and mood.

   If you're thinking Big Brother, you're not the first.

   "It's theoretically possible to model any information in or out of the
peripheral nervous system -- to modulate pain, pleasure, dreams, to measure
sensation," said Stephane Bedard, CEO of Victhom Human Bionics in Montreal.

   "It's possible now to play with the perpheral nervous system -- to control
people. I think we have to be very, very careful."

NOTES:  Humanly Possible

GRAPHIC: 1. photo ETHICAL QUESTIONS ... As scientists probe ever more deeply
into the human mind and body, ethicists such as Margaret Somerville worry about
the moral and legal questions that arise from such cutting edge research. 2.
photo of MARGARET SOMERVILLE

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2005


                              155 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                             April 26, 2005 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 308 words

HEADLINE: STOP AGING

SERIES: Part 3 of 4

BODY:

   Here they are: Aubrey de Grey's Seven Deadly Sins of Aging. If we can fix
them, he says, we can all live to see the Oilers win another Stanley Cup (or
even a regular NHL season, for that matter).

   Keep in mind that this stuff is all blue-sky theory -- no one knows how to do
any of it. Still, they laughed at Edison.

   - - -

   * CELL LOSS

   Cells die over time, and as they die our organs begin to break down. Stem
cells, generic cells that can turn into any kind of tissue, could be used to
replace the loss.

   - - -

   * CELL AGING

   As some cells get older, they stop dividing without dying. Biologists think
they may be causing some types of cancer. Gene therapy could be used to get
these cells to "commit suicide." Or the immune system could be tricked into
destroying them.

   - - -

   * EXTRACELLULAR JUNK

   Waste also collects between cells, a process that's been linked to heart
disease and Alzheimer's. Again, gene therapy could teach cells to absorb this
waste so the lysomes can get at it.

   - - -

   * SUGAR-PROTEIN MOLECULAR BONDS

   As we get older, sugar molecules bond with protein and cause hardening of
tissues that leads to, among other things, high blood pressure. Drugs are in
development that can break these bonds.

   - - -

   * LYSOSOMAL JUNK

   Lysomes, organs in cells that break down cellular waste products, get swamped
by metabolic garbage over time. Gene therapy could give them new enzymes to take
out the trash.

   - - -

   * MITOCHONDRIAL MUTATIONS

   Free radicals are unstable molecules left over from respiration, the process
that powers our cells. They can mutate DNA in the mitochondria, the cell organ
where respiration happens, and that can cause diseases. Moving all cellular DNA
into the cell nucleus could protect it from harm.

   - - -

   * NUCLEAR MUTATIONS

   Mutations in the DNA of the cell nucleus can cause cancer. Radical gene
therapy could make our cells more or less immune.

NOTES:  Humanly Possible

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2005


                              159 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                             April 24, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 891 words

HEADLINE: OUR BOLD NEW WORLD

SERIES: Part 1 of 4

BYLINE: BY DOUG BEAZLEY, SUN MEDIA

BODY:

   It's a revolution: In medicine, engineering, ethics and law. And it's
happening right here in Canada, of all places. Over the next four days, Sun
Media writer Doug Beazley is going to take you on a wild ride through the new
medical science. From stem cells to gene therapy, from bionics to mind-machine
interfaces and the biology of religion -- theories and therapies are being
pioneered here and around the world that are going to change what it means to be
human.

   - - -

   It could be the magic bullet, the medical technology that puts surgery
permanently in the shade -- if we can just figure out how to make the damn
things work.

   Stem cell therapies will be (eventually) the biggest revolution in medicine
since penicillin. Their potential applications are almost limitless --
everything from heart disease to brain damage. At the moment, however...

   "There are very few practical uses for stem cells right now," said Dr. Fabio
Rossi, Canadian Research Chair for Regenerative Medicine at the University of
British Columbia.

   "Stem cells are starting to get over-hyped. We worry about a backlash, like
we saw with gene therapy. A lot of people thought that (sequencing the human
genome) was going to have some sort of immediate therapeutic application, but
these things take time."

   What is a stem cell? You are -- or at least you were, when you were just five
days old. Stem cells are generic tissue, capable of "differentiating" into some
or all of the hundreds of different types of tissue that make up the human body
-- bone, blood, muscle, nerves, everything you are.

   There are two types of stem cells: Embryonic and adult. Embryonic stem cells
are harvested from very early embryos at the "blastocyst" stage, when the embryo
is basically a tiny ball of identical cells.

   Scientists typically take stem cells from embryos discarded after fertility
treatments.

   Adult stem cells are found in several parts of the body -- in bone marrow,
for example -- and have a far more limited ability to divide and differentiate
than embryonic stem cells. They're also harder to grow in the lab than embryonic
cells.

   Embryonic cells, on the other hand, can be grown in the lab indefinitely into
stem cell "lines," frozen for storage or shipped to other labs. That virtual
immortality, coupled with their knack for turning into any tissue, makes them a
lot easier than adult cells for scientists to work with.

   But the moral implications of using human embryos for research have made stem
cell work a legal minefield. In Canada, scientists can legally obtain embryonic
stem cells from existing lines, or grow their own from embryos donated from
fertility treatments. The only thing they're not allowed to do is clone human
embryos.

   "Despite all the discussion of stem cell research, there aren't actually a
whole lot of people working with embryonic stem cells," said Tim Caulfield,
Canada Research Chair in health law and policy at the U of A.

   "The emotional nature of the debate could be making them reluctant."

   That said, there's some exciting work going on in this country. Dr. Rossi is
using adult cells from bone marrow to create what he hopes will be a new hip
replacement therapy.

   "One of the problems with standard hip replacements is that they don't always
work," he said. "The metal spike holding the hip together sometimes works itself
loose, which leads to a great deal of inflammation and pain -- a real mess."

   Rossi's team is working on a "bio-glue" made of stem cells, protein molecules
called "growth factors" and minerals. The idea is that a patient requiring a hip
replacement would get a series of injections. The stem cells, using the minerals
and urged on by the growth factors, would re-grow the missing bone -- a new bone
in a syringe.

   The Edmonton Protocol treatment for Type 1 diabetes made a huge media splash
when U of A researchers announced positive results in humans in 1999. But
knowing how to transplant insulin-producing islet cells isn't much use if
donated pancreases are in short supply -- which they are.

   "In theory it should work," said Dr. Jonathan Lakey, director of the U of A's
clinical islet isolation lab. "Practically, it's more difficult. An islet is
made up of at least four different types of cells -- it's really an organ inside
an organ. Also, the stem cells we've been producing in the laboratory seem to
lose the ability to produce insulin after a while."

   Ultimately, what scientists are chasing is a technique that would get adult
stem cells to differentiate and divide on-cue. That would allow doctors to
inject the patient's own stem cells to treat anything from liver failure to
Alzheimer's, without any risk of the body rejecting the new tissue.

   "We're beginning to understand how cells talk to one another through the
exchange of growth factors," said Dr. Janet Rossant, a Toronto researcher
studying mouse embryos with the Mount Sinai Hospital.

   "There's a very complicated network of these factors, regulating cell-to-cell
interaction. In the long run, we see science getting around the use of embryos
as stem cell sources. Stem cell therapy could lend itself to all kinds of
degenerative diseases, blood-borne diseases, cancer."

   In other words, stem-cell therapy should revolutionize the whole concept of
"surgery" and provide treatments for diseases currently considered untreatable.

   But, like the man said, we're not there yet.

NOTES:  Humanly Possible

GRAPHIC: photo

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2005


                              160 of 545 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun Media Corporation
                             Calgary Sun (Alberta)

                             April 24, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 787 words

HEADLINE: CLOSER THAN YOU THINK;
REVOLUTIONARY THERAPY GOING MAINSTREAM

SERIES: Part 1 of 4

BYLINE: BY DOUG BEAZLEY, SUN MEDIA

BODY:

   It hurt to breathe. Walking was no picnic either, and as for lifting anything
-- forget about it.

   Four years ago, Roger Archer, 66, held a custodial job at an Edmonton
Catholic school.

   He was scrubbing the hall floors early one morning when the first wave of
pain hit him, like a brick thrown squarely at his chest.

   "The pains went away. Then they came back," he said. "Every time I took a
breath, it hurt."

   At the hospital, the doctors diagnosed it as angina pain due to
atherosclerosis -- in Archer's case, all of the arteries feeding oxygen to his
heart were jammed with fatty deposits.

   Untreated, it would kill him. Nobody knew how to treat it.

   "They said there were too many plugged arteries for them to work on," said
Archer. "My dad and my uncle both died of heart attacks in their 50s. I figured,
well... it's my turn now."

   But the widespread arterial damage that made Archer a poor candidate for
traditional bypass surgery made him a perfect fit for something totally new. His
cardiologist referred him to scientists at the University of Alberta working on
a way to convince the heart to repair itself, without surgery.

   The so-called Northern Trial is being conducted on human patients at six
cardiac hospitals across the country, including the U of A and St. Michael's in
Toronto. It's one of the more promising applications of gene therapy -- the use
of cloned DNA to urge the human body to heal itself.

   "It's exciting. This is where it's at," said Dr. Wayne Tymchak, one of the U
of A cardiologists working on the trial.

   Here's how it works. Using a computer mapping system called NOGA, doctors
build up a 3-D image of the damage in the patient's heart. A catheter is
inserted through an artery in the groin, and a surgeon makes about 10 injections
directly into the heart muscle.

   The injection is a serum of "naked DNA" --in this case, a lab clone of a gene
that encourages the growth of new blood vessels. The whole process takes an
afternoon. Patients don't even need to stay in hospital overnight.

   "It should be only a couple of years before it's ready for wider use," said
Dr. Duncan Stewart, lead investigator on the Northern Trial and head of
cardiology at St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto.

   "If it works very well, I'd like to see it made available on a compassionate
basis."

   It seems to be working. In Archer's case, the injections led to the growth of
a whole new network of vessels that end-run around his clogged arteries -- an
injectable bypass.

   "It only took about a week before I noticed the pain was pretty much gone,"
he said. "I haven't needed to take any medication. I couldn't work anymore and I
have to take it easy, but hey, I'm alive."

   The Northern Trial stands on the front line of practical gene therapy -- one
of the first working attempts to exploit the potential unlocked by the
sequencing five years ago of the human genome, the body's 'book of
instructions.'

   "I think that when the human genome was fully sequenced, a lot of people out
there thought we'd immediately know everything and be able to cure everything,"
said Dr. Chris Backhouse, U of A engineering.

   "Not true. All we've got is the gene sequence of some French guy. The real
challenge now is to find ways to make use of that information, to make it pay."

   Backhouse has built a gadget he calls a "tricorder" (like a lot of engineers,
he's a Star Trek fan). The tricorder uses a spinoff of nanotechnology called
"microfluidics" to conduct tests for specific genetic diseases.

   The incredibly tiny scale on which the tricorder operates allows a lab to use
the very smallest amounts possible of the re-agents needed for gene tests --
some of which cost up to $1 million per gram. Gene sequencing made it possible
-- nanotech is making it affordable.

   "When we analyse a tumour using conventional techniques, it's like taking a
Swiss watch apart with a hammer," said Backhouse.

   "We don't understand cancer. If we could do genetic workups quickly and
cheaply, we could come up with much more effective cancer treatments."

   Across the hall at Chemical and Materials Engineering, Dr. Hasan Uludag is
using a special polymer to insert short lengths of DNA into cells. He hopes the
technique will be used some day to cure genetic diseases of the blood, such as
hemophilia and sickle-cell anemia.

   "In hemophilia, for instance, there's a blood protein called Factor 9 that is
either not present or not working as it should," he said.

   "We're focussing on delivering DNA to the bone marrow.

   "We're still at the experimental stage, and at least five or 10 years away
from testing on human subjects."

   Five or 10 years away from new medical techniques that could address the
biggest killers on the planet -- from AIDS to cancer. The future is closer than
you think.

NOTES:  Humanly Possible

GRAPHIC: photo by SHANNON JONES, Special to the Sun Roger Archer, above right,
is living proof of the wonders of gene therapy. The Edmontonian had the therapy
in 2002 on the blocked arteries of his heart, and now lives a normal life.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2005


                              163 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2005 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             April 22, 2005 Friday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: CANADIAN; BUSINESS TICKER:; Pg. B9

LENGTH: 136 words

HEADLINE: Shire moves to expand its portfolio of medicines

BODY:

    Britain's Shire Pharmaceuticals Group PLC agreed to buy U.S. group
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. yesterday for $1.6-billion (U.S.) in a long-awaited
move to broaden its portfolio of medicines. Analysts said the deal looked
expensive and warned it would take several years to boost earnings for Britain's
third-biggest drug maker. "Clearly they're paying quite a full price," said Paul
Diggle at Code Securities in London. "This de-risks the [Shire] business by
spreading the product base, but none of [TKT's] products are a given." Shire
said it would pay $37 a share in cash for TKT, some 21.6 per cent above the U.S.
firm's closing price on Wednesday. TKT specializes in developing complex
products to treat rare genetic disorders. SHP (LSE) fell 47 pence ($1.11) to
559.5. TKTX (Nasdaq) rose $4.76 to $35.20.

   Reuters

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2006


                              171 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2005 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           February 5, 2005 Saturday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 718 words

HEADLINE: ALS fight now personal for ailing neurologist

BYLINE: PAUL ELIAS, Associated Press

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

    The shocking self-diagnosis dawned slowly but inevitably on Richard Olney, a
top neurologist who has dedicated his career to helping those afflicted with the
fatal Lou Gehrig's disease.

    Three surgeries to relieve a compressed disk in his back didn't help the
weakness that started in his right knee and spread to both legs. When his arms
started to fail, he knew he was in the grips of a neurological disorder. Then
his worst fears were realized: He had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS.

    "I expected to live into my 80s like my parents did," said Dr. Olney,
struggling to get his words out through an amplifier resting on his lap as he
sat in his motorized wheelchair at the University of California, San Francisco.

    "But I've done more in my 56 years than most people have done in their whole
life. I can't complain too much."

    Dr. Olney resigned last year as head of the university's renowned ALS
centre, which he founded in 1993, turning it over to his protégé Cathy
Lomen-Hoerth.

    But he is not giving up his struggle against the disease, which mystifies
experts today as much as it did when New York Yankee slugger Lou Gehrig died of
it in 1941.

    Dr. Olney has signed on as the first human guinea pig in a trial of two
drugs that slowed the disease's progress in mice, and he is also using the time
he has left to raise awareness and money to combat ALS.

    He was famous for spending countless hours counselling patients, and that
spirit lives on at the ALS centre, where Dr. Lomen-Hoerth said she tries to
summon the same soothing words and advice as she attends to her own patients,
who now include Dr. Olney.

    Approximately 30,000 Americans have ALS, a small number when compared with
other brain diseases. But that's because ALS typically kills quickly, often
within a year or two after diagnosis. (Astronomer Stephen Hawking, who was
diagnosed with the disease 40 years ago, is a notable exception.)

    About 10,000 new cases are diagnosed every year. And while about 10 per cent
of the cases have genetic roots, it is not known how the other 90 per cent
occur. The disease isn't contagious, so Dr. Olney did not get it from one of his
patients.

    With ALS, only the brain cells that control muscles die. The intellect
remains intact even as the disease immobilizes the victim's body.

    "That's the internal horror for all of us working in ALS and who know Rick,"
said Jeffrey Rothstein, a Johns Hopkins University ALS researcher who spoke at a
December symposium held in Dr. Olney's honour.

    There is no real treatment for ALS. The one drug approved by federal
regulators extends life by a few months for some.

    Dr. Rothstein is among a handful of researchers developing possible
treatments using gene therapy. Later this year, he and his colleagues hope to
test in humans a common virus they have engineered to carry a gene that produces
a growth factor directly to the brain and spinal cord.

    This technique significantly extended the lives of ALS-afflicted mice. Dr.
Rothstein and others also hope to turn stem cells into replacement brain cells.

    The latest technologies seem promising, but breakthroughs will probably come
too late for Dr. Olney. He knows this, and has made peace with it.

    "In the last few months, I haven't felt very sad," he said.

    Such bravery keeps everyone around him going, says his wife, Paula.

    More than anyone, Dr. Olney knew the kind of storm that was brewing. He even
purchased a bed that moves his body every 15 minutes. Now, his wife, a nurse,
doesn't have to get up every hour to turn him over.

    Still, other smaller indignities have piled up for the couple as Richard, a
former marathon runner, has became trapped inside an increasingly useless body.

    A cherished family painting that Dr. Olney's mother shipped right before she
died last month was badly damaged in transit, putting Mrs. Olney in a Catch-22
bureaucratic battle with the shipping company to make good.

    "I'm so mad at God," she says, spitting out a bitter laugh when asked
whether religion played any role in helping her cope. "How can He be so mean?
This is such a royal shaft."

    She pauses for a second, gathers her composure. The one-task-at-a-time
coping mechanism that helps them get through the day kicks back in.

    She sighs. "All I want to do is get the painting fixed before he dies."

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2006


                              174 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2005 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           January 12, 2005 Wednesday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 948 words

HEADLINE: Daring test targets fatal lung disease

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM, MEDICAL REPORTER

BODY:

    Eighteen people with less than a year to live are to take part in an
unprecedented medical experiment that is as dazzling as it is daring.

    A group of Toronto doctors has received Health Canada's permission to test
in humans a combination of medicine's hottest ingredients: stem cells and gene
therapy.

    The molecular concoction is a potential treatment for an incurable lung
condition called pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) that can leave people
breathless just combing their hair. It affects more than 7,000 Canadians as the
blood vessels of their lungs shrivel.

    Drugs usually offer little more than five years of survival after a
diagnosis. Many patients die waiting for a lung transplant. But the Toronto
group is betting its shot of stem cells - genetically primed to repair and
regenerate new blood vessels - could be a life saver.

    In animal models, the treatment rescued dying rats.

    "No one thought you could grow new blood vessels in the lung," said St.
Michael's Hospital researcher Duncan Stewart, director of the cardiology
division at the University of Toronto.

    "What we really need to do now is establish that [this treatment] is safe in
humans."

    The test would rank among the earliest attempts to combine the cutting-edge
technologies of stem cells and gene therapy to treat disease.

    "This is pretty novel," said Michael Rudnicki, director of molecular
medicine at the Ottawa Health Research Institute and incoming director of
Canada's Stem Cell Network. He said blending these technologies, however, is
"where this field is going."

    If the Toronto therapy ultimately proves successful, it could offer a future
template for treating many other diseases, especially those that strike the
heart. But if it fails, it could stand as another setback in the field of gene
therapy, which has seen at least two clinical trials end tragically in the past
five years.

    In September, 1999, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died four days after
receiving a genetic injection to treat a rare liver disorder at the University
of Pennsylvania. In 2002, French doctors reported a gene therapy that cured 10
boys of a fatal immune disorder known as X-linked SCID - or "bubble-boy disease"
- also gave two of the children leukemia. Still, John Granton, director of the
pulmonary hypertension program at Toronto General Hospital and one of the
researchers involved in the project, said patients have heard of the trial in
the works: "They keep asking about it. They're lining up."

    Dr. Stewart, who is also the chief scientific officer with Canadian biotech
firm Northern Therapeutics Inc., which is backing the PAH research involving St.
Mike's, TGH and Princess Margaret Hospital, noted that there are key differences
between this trial and other gene-therapy experiments.

    He explained that this therapy involves collecting stem cells from the
patient's blood stream.

    These are not like the controversial stem cells harvested from human
embryos, which have the power to multiply indefinitely and grow into any tissue
type in the body. These are instead precursor stem cells already on their
biological way to becoming endothelial cells, which form blood vessels.

    These cells are then coaxed in a lab dish to become more like endothelial
cells and multiply into the tens of millions. Researchers next use electrical
pulses to spur these cells to open so they can load them up with multiple copies
of the so-called ENOS gene that dramatically boosts the cells' power to create
blood vessels.

    Dr. Stewart, who is also director of regenerative medicine at U of T's
McLaughlin Centre for Molecular Medicine, said the therapy is to be delivered by
inserting a catheter into one of the patient's large veins, either in the neck
or a leg, threading it through the right side of the heart and into the
pulmonary artery. Doctors would then inject the cells into the catheter to be
carried by the blood stream into the lungs, where they would remain.

    The doctors, who are still awaiting ethics approval from their Toronto
hospitals, plan to slowly escalate the dose of cells each patient receives, to a
maximum of 60 million cells in a single dose.

    Unlike other gene-therapy trials, Dr. Stewart stressed the corrective cells
are being delivered straight to the site of the body where they are needed. He
also pointed out that they are not using a virus to deliver the cell therapy.
Scientists typically use modified viruses as gene-delivery vectors since viruses
naturally invade cells. But with little control over where these genes actually
land, vectors run the risk of triggering other genes to malfunction. The method
remains attractive, however, because it has the potential to permanently place
the new gene into the host's cells.

    More than 90 per cent of cases of PAH are not gene-based, but occur
sporadically. Doctors are therefore not as interested in replacing an inherited
gene that's defective, said Dr. Stewart, but bolstering a gene that becomes
lazy.

   Life's breath

    The blood vessels of the lungs oxygenate  all the blood that circulates
throughout the body and remove the carbon dioxide from it. If you unravelled the
lung's vessels and laid them flat, they could cover the surface of two tennis
courts.

    In pulmonary arterial hypertension, it's the early loss of the lungs'
smallest arteries that poses big problems. These vessels are less than one-third
of the diameter of human hair and literally "hang in the breeze between air
sacs." Losing them leaves patients fatigued and short of breath. Eventually,
they suffer heart failure.

    The condition can affect newborns and the elderly. But for reasons unknown,
women in their 20s and 30s face the highest risk.

   Carolyn Abraham

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2006


                              175 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2005 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           January 12, 2005 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS INDEX; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 465 words

HEADLINE: 10 Today;
YOUR TIPSHEET TO TODAY'S NEWS

BODY:

    Mad-cow woes

    Yet another Canadian cow has been found to have BSE, fuelling fears that the
United States could delay reopening its market to shipments of Canadian live
cattle.

    Page A1

    Klein's third way

    Alberta Premier Ralph Klein has revealed his solution to medicare's problems
- a mix of government-funded and private for-profit health services that is
being dubbed the third way to health-care reform.

    Page A1

    Tsunami donors dig deep

    Canadians donated $123-million for tsunami victims prior to the end
yesterday of the federal government's program that will match individuals'
contributions.

    Page A7

    Sponsorship judge challenged

    Former prime minister Jean Chrétien's lawyer has challenged the impartiality
of Mr. Justice John Gomery and cast doubts on the objectivity of the inquiry
into the sponsorship scandal he is heading.

    Page A4

    Execs pay back bonuses

    Nortel has cut its audited profit for 2003 by 41 per cent, announced senior
executives will pay back millions in bonuses and overhauled its board of
directors.

    Page B1

    Doctors try gene therapy

    A group of Toronto doctors has received permission to treat patients
suffering from an incurable lung condition in one of the first attempts to
combine the technologies of stem cells and gene therapy to tackle disease in
humans.

    Page A1

    Diet's impact on cancer

    Two new studies on links between diet and cancer have bolstered evidence
that red-meat consumption may raise colorectal cancer risks but cast doubt on
whether eating fruits and vegetables can help prevent breast cancer. In Health

    Page A13 A bite of tiny Apples

    Apple Computer has introduced a new line of Mac Mini PCs and a tiny version
of its wildly popular iPod - the iPod Shuffle - that will sell for under $100
and is smaller and lighter than a pack of gum.

    Page B1

    Summit Series to be a movie

    The magic of the 1972 Summit Series, which saw Paul Henderson score for
Canada to secure the country's greatest hockey victory, will be celebrated next
year on the CBC in a two-part, four-hour movie.

    Page R1

    Long trip to El Mirador

    Few tourists see the ancient Mayan city of El Mirador. Only about 300 a year
make the five-day, 128-kilometre trek through the Guatemalan jungle to visit
what is believed to be North America's first great city. In Travel

    Page T1

    Today on the Obituaries page S7 Fabian O'Dea, Newfoundland's fourth
lieutenant-governor, was a devoted cartographer who knew every corner of the
province.

   Count Lennart Bernadotte gave up his claim to the Swedish throne to marry a
commoner.

    Today on globeandmail.com

   Web-exclusive Comment: The vast challenge posed by the devastating Indian
Ocean tsunamis opens the possibility of reshaping relations in the region within
the conceptual framework of human security, Ramesh Thakur writes.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2006


                              177 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2004 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            December 3, 2004 Friday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: CANADIAN; PHARMACEUTICALS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 706 words

HEADLINE: Inex (again) sees drug plans turn to 'zero value'

BYLINE: LEONARD ZEHR, BIOTECHNOLOGY REPORTER

BODY:

    It's déjà vu all over again for David Main as he prepares to makes Inex
Pharmaceuticals Corp. "smaller" again.

    Inex's flagship cancer drug - the very project that Mr. Main focused the
company on five years ago - received a surprising regulatory setback on
Wednesday, practically wiping out its stock price yesterday

    When Mr. Main moved into the executive suite of Inex in 1999, the
Vancouver-based drug developer's outlook was shaky. It had fallen out of favour
with investors because of missed milestones and a risky development program. And
its stock price was hovering at about $1, down from an initial public offering
price of $10 in 1996.

    Rather than focus on drug-based gene therapies for cancer, which were
pie-in-the-sky dreams, Mr. Main and the board overhauled the company, trimming
staff, cutting spending and streamlining research and development to
commercialize its Marqibo drug.

    Wednesday's crushing regulatory verdict in the United States on Marqibo will
force Mr. Main to make many of those tough decisions again. Specifically, he
said Inex's current work force of 150 people and its monthly rate of spending of
$1.5-million will be cut.

    "I'm getting too good at this," he said, largely with tongue in cheek.

    But he promised to forge ahead with development of Marqibo in a late-stage
clinical study, avoiding a repeat of the accelerated approval process that a
panel of medical experts rejected this week.

    Inex's fall from grace is nothing new in the high-stakes biotech business,
where clinical testing and regulatory decisions can bring one-drug wonders to
their knees. And safety issues like the recent recall of arthritis drug Vioxx
can not only hammer investors but also make other medications suspect.

    At least eight analysts yesterday downgraded Inex's stock, which lost more
than $180-million or 86 per cent of its market value.

    After being halted for two days, the stock plunged $4.69 to close at 76
cents on the Toronto Stock Exchange yesterday.

    Volume skyrocketed to 28.2 million shares, which represents more than 70 per
cent of its total stock outstanding.

    "We now view the Marqibo asset as having zero value," said Raymond James
analyst Brian Bapty, who figures the company now has a breakup value of 50 cents
a share. There are almost 39 million shares outstanding.

    Added Sprott Securities analyst David Dean: "At this time, there is no
reason to own Inex."

    An advisory committee of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday
said it will urge the FDA to reject Marqibo because the drug is no better than
existing chemotherapy treatments already on the market for relapses of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

    The panel also criticized the research data submitted by Inex, saying it was
insufficient for accelerated approval, which requires a drug to demonstrate it
is better than available therapies.

    Several analysts suggested that in the Marqibo review, the panel expanded
its definition of available therapy to include any therapeutic, even if it is
used off-label, or beyond its approved guidelines.

    Leading up to the panel hearing on Wednesday, analysts were generally
predicting a favourable decision, largely because there are no drugs on the
market to treat aggressive and recurring cancer of the lymphatic system.

    "We were surprised about how little debate there was about the merits of the
drug," Mr. Main said yesterday. "But there's no point in going back [to the FDA]
unless we have a robust data package, and the best way to do that is in a Phase
III study. I want to be clear that Marqibo remains our main focus and our duty
is to get back to the FDA as quickly as possible."

    He said Inex and its marketing partner Enzon Pharmaceuticals Inc. are
studying protocol designs to continue testing the drug, but won't choose one
until the FDA's full review is released on Jan. 15.

    "As long as Enzon sticks with us, we'll have the money for a Phase III
trial," which is likely to study Marqibo as a first-line therapy, he added.

    Inex has already invested about $100-million in the drug, which is
effectively a lipid, or fat envelope around the generic chemotherapeutic
vincristine.

   Inex Pharmaceuticals

    Daily close, IEX-TSX

    Yesterday's close: 76¢, down $4.69

   SOURCE: THOMSON DATASTREAM

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2006


                              183 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                         Calgary Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                    September 13, 2004 Monday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 54

LENGTH: 178 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC DOPING EXPECTED IN '08

BYLINE: BY CP

DATELINE: ST. JOHN'S, Nfld.

BODY:

   The most recent Olympics may be the last genetically unmodified Games.

   Experts in genetics are warning that it is already possible to give athletes'
DNA a boost -- and predict that such competitors might take the field in the
2008 summer Olympics.

   While doping watchdogs have made major advances in combating drug use among
athletes, advances in gene therapy has potentially put a whole new arsenal into
the hands of cheats, says Dr. Colin Higgs, vice-president of scientific services
for the International Council for Sport Science and Physical Education.

   "We may see the first gene-doped athletes by 2008," said Higgs, who is also
the director of the School of Human Kinetics at Memorial University in St.
John's and one of the organizers of a pre-Olympic sports science congress last
month in Greece.

   "If you had $1 million you could probably get the technology now to do that."

   Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania who injected a gene-loaded
virus into mice saw their overall size increase 15 to 30% -- and saw the mice
double in strength.

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2004


                              185 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2004 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            August 21, 2004 Saturday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. F8

LENGTH: 1934 words

HEADLINE: Next: the Olympic mutant;
A super baby and mighty mice have drawn plenty of notice in the sports world.
Genetic modification could be the new wave of illegal performance enhancement.
ANNE McILROY reports

BYLINE: ANNE McILROY

BODY:

    Even as a newborn, he had bulging muscles that attracted the attention of
curious doctors. By the time he was 4, he could lift almost seven pounds with
each hand, with his arms fully extended - something adults can find difficult.

    There was something so innocent in the baby Popeye pictures published this
summer in the New England Journal of Medicine, along with details about the
genetic mutation that explains the German boy's extraordinary strength. (It has
nothing to do with spinach.)

    But there was nothing innocent in the buzz his strong arms and legs created
in the athletic world. It had little to do with the fact that the baby, whose
mother is a former professional sprinter, has the potential to be a future
champion.

    The ugly truth is that the German super baby may offer a genetic template
for cheaters of the future. By the time he is 20, Olympic athletes may be
genetically modified to grow muscles like his.

    Forget about the next generation of steroids or growth hormones. Researchers
say the future of cheating is athletes who have been genetically altered so that
their bodies produce performance-enhancing substances on their own.

    Many experts believe that the first genetically modified athletes could be
competing at next Summer Olympics.

    "I would think the Beijing Olympics may be the time to pick it up on a
widespread basis," says Geoffrey Goldspink, an expert in muscle regeneration at
the University College Medical School in London. He is already working on a test
to detect genetic cheaters for the U.S. anti-doping agency.

    The technology for gene therapy already exists. It involves using viruses to
deliver new genetic instructions that become incorporated into muscle or other
tissue and change the way they work. It has already been used in several labs
around the world to create super-muscular rodents, dubbed mighty mice or
Schwarzenegger mice. In many cases, the new genes often don't work all the time
- only when researchers deliberately turn them on by a simple action such as
rubbing a leg muscle.

    Some, including Dr. Goldspink, suspect that the practice - dubbed gene
doping - is already being used in thoroughbred horse racing.

    In humans, experts say, the only issue is safety. This means that there is a
good chance that in a private lab somewhere in the world, researchers are
getting ready to make a performance-enhancing addition to an athlete's DNA.

    The World Anti-Doping Agency, led by Canadian Dick Pound, has pronounced
that gene doping is cheating and has added it to the list of banned substances
and methods for Olympic athletes.

    Still, many athletes and their coaches are avidly following the latest
scientific developments, which have been made by doctors hoping to find cures
for muscle-wasting diseases such as muscular dystrophy or for blood disorders
such as anemia.

    When H. Lee Sweeney, a professor of physiology and medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, first used gene therapy to create super-muscular
mice in 1998, he was swamped by e-mail messages from athletes and coaches
wanting to use his discovery to improve athletic performance. One request came
from a high-school football player who wanted to inject all the kids on his
team.

    They were excited by the news that Dr. Sweeney had found a way to inject a
gene into rats and mice that instructs their bodies to make a hormone called
insulin-like growth factor. The mice also take part in an exercise program, and
after two months, they can lift 30 per cent more weight and have a third more
muscle mass than normal mice.

    Dr. Sweeney is still years away from testing his discovery in humans, but
that didn't seem to matter to the would-be athletic guinea pigs who contacted
him offering to volunteer.

    Given the level of interest, and the millions of dollars at stake for those
competing for Olympic gold in high-profile sports, the fact that gene therapy
has so far proved risky for humans is probably not a deterrent for some
athletes.

    At the University of Pennsylvania, where Dr. Sweeney works, 18-year-old
Jessie Gelsinger died in 1999 after receiving experimental therapy for an
inherited liver disease that was treatable with drugs and diet.

    For reasons researchers don't understand, the virus used to deliver the DNA
they hoped would cure the young man caused his fever to run dangerously high.
His major organs began to shut down, and his father made the decision to take
him off life support.

    Two "bubble boys" in France were successfully injected with genes to build
their non-existent immune systems, but later developed leukemia.

    Setting the safety issue aside for a moment, genetically altered athletes
raise interesting ethical questions. In the years to come, gene therapy may not
have the same Frankensteinian overtones it has now. It may turn out to be the
best way to save the lives of patients with serious diseases, or even to help
heal sports injuries such as torn muscles.

    It is clear simply by looking at the bodies of many gold-medal Olympians
that they have a natural genetic advantage.

    In 1964, Finnish cross-country skier Eero Mantyranta was suspected of blood
doping after winning two gold medals because he had so many red blood cells in
his system. Three decades later, he was cleared when researchers found that he
and many of his family members have a genetic mutation that increases their
red-blood-cell count by 20 per cent.

    Is it so wrong for athletes without this kind of extraordinary natural
capacity to want to level the playing field?

    It's cheating, says Mr. Pound, head of the World Anti-Doping Agency. At a
recent meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, he
suggested that regulators not approve clinical trials for gene-transfer therapy
unless the scientists have developed a way to detect if the procedure has taken
place. He urged researchers developing gene therapies that might have athletic
applications to work on detection methods.

    Dr. Goldspink is happy to help. He is developing a test to look for traces
of the viruses scientists would use to deliver new DNA into an athlete's body.
Those viruses have been altered so they don't cause disease, and so can be
detected, he says. All that would be required would be a scraping of cells from
inside an athlete's mouth. "We've got the techniques."

    Others researcher, including Dr. Sweeney, argue that it won't be that easy
to catch genetic cheats and may require invasive tests such as muscle biopsies,
which wouldn't be practical at the Olympics.

    Dr. Goldspink says it makes him feel better to try. After all, it bothers
him to think that a lifetime of work designed to prevent muscle wasting in the
sick or the elderly might help a sprinter gain an advantage over a competitor.

    It is true, he says, that many elite athletes already have a natural genetic
advantage over some of their competitors. For example, the ancestors of Kenyan
long-distance runners needed to be able to cover a lot of ground at great speed
to keep track of their cattle and stay out of the jaws of predators.

    "Why can't other athletes do what evolution had done for the Kenyans over
thousands of years, but speed it up by injections and genes?" Dr. Goldspink
says. "I think, once you open that door, the whole thing becomes meaningless. It
all comes down to who has access."

    Others disagree.

    Andy Miah, a lecturer at the University of Paisley in Scotland and author of
the book Genetically Modified Athletes: Biomedical Ethics, Gene Doping and Sport
, says it is wrong to ban gene doping without a broad, social debate.

    "What is the rationale for banning genetic modification? If we are concerned
about fair play, then actually gene doping might promote fairness. If we are
concerned about health, then getting the technology right could actually be
safer for athletes than current forms of doping," he says.

    He argues that Mr. Pound and the World Anti-Doping Agency have acted
precipitously in lumping genetic modifications in with taking steroids or growth
hormones.

    No question, there are going to be some blurry lines to define. What, for
example, is the difference between an athlete who was selected as an embryo in a
lab for genes that would make her a good sprinter and one who is modified as a
teenager to have the same advantage?

    Researchers are already studying the genetics of strong athletes. In the
United States, scientists have recruited 900 subjects in a bid to find which
genes predict who will have a muscular body and who is doomed to get sand kicked
in their face at the beach.

    Volunteers are asked to lift a weight with their weakest hand, and then to
lift weights with that arm twice a week for three months. The researchers then
look at the genes of the 10 per cent of subjects who bulked up after the
training, and the 10 per cent who stayed pretty scrawny. So far, they've
identified 25 different genetic differences between the two groups.

    It is not hard to imagine the day when genes for athletic prowess can be
screened for, either in sperm, eggs, embryos or children.

    Mr. Pound, for now, is focusing on athletes who choose to become genetically
modified. He has warned that if the practice becomes widespread, and goes
undetected, it will be the end of sports as we know it.

    "I want human beings," he told the American Association for the Advancement
of science. "Not mutants."

   How to do it

    Scientists willing to overlook serious safety concerns could inject new
genes into muscle or other tissue in an athlete's body. Viruses would be used as
the delivery vehicle, a way to get the new genes into cells.

    This is a localized approach to genetic engineering. Egg or sperm cells
would not be altered, which means that the changes would not be passed on to any
offspring produced by a genetically altered athlete.

    Here are a few of the possibilities for using gene therapy, also known as
gene doping, to build a winning athlete:

   Boosting red-blood-cell production. In our bodies, a protein called
erythropoietin, or epo, regulates the production of red blood cells, which carry
oxygen to our muscles. The more epo you have, the more red blood cells you make.
Cheaters are already using a synthetic version of epo designed to treat anemia.
Researchers are working on injecting a gene that would allow the body to make
far more epo than normal, without thickening the blood with too many red blood
cells. This would help patients with blood disorders, as well as cyclists,
runners and other long-distance athletes.

   Encouraging muscle repair and growth. Insulin-like growth factor, also known
as IGF-1, is produced by our bodies and repairs the everyday damage caused to
muscle fibres when they are used. Cheaters are now orally taking versions of
IGF-1. Researchers in the United States have turned normal mice into super
rodents by injecting the gene for IGF-I directly into their muscles. Other
researchers are working on other even more effective growth factors, including
one called mechano growth factor. Their work could help people with muscular
dystrophy and other muscle-wasting diseases, as well as sprinters and
weightlifters.

   Removing the natural check on muscle growth. Myostatin is a protein that
regulates muscle growth in normal humans. The New England Journal of Medicine
recently reported that a German baby born with bulging muscles had a mutation
that blocked the production of myostatin. Researchers may be able to do the same
thing for athletes through gene therapy. This could help sprinters,
weightlifters and football players.

   - Anne McIlroy

   Anne McIlroy is The Globe and Mail's science reporter.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2006


                              188 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                         Calgary Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                      August 1, 2004 Sunday Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. S11

LENGTH: 339 words

HEADLINE: NEW WAVE OF CHEATING;
DOPING'S FUTURE IS IN THE GENES

SERIES: Part 2 of 2

BYLINE: BY JIM KERNAGHAN, SUN MEDIA

BODY:

   There's a frightening new kid on the performance-enhancing block.

   It sounds like science fiction but gene therapy, if the cheats in sports are
able to harness it, could make all the stimulants and steroids look like child's
play.

   Imagine this: A shot putter steps up and rockets the iron ball 40 metres.

   Or a field-goal kicker thumps one between the uprights from 80 yards.

   Or a high jumper clears three metres.

   The potential for a new wave of sports cheating isn't far away via genetic
engineering, it appears.

   Researchers have used gene therapy experiments on mice and rats, to promote
exceptional muscle growth, such as powerful shoulders and haunches, and it can
be replicated in humans.

   The research is designed to benefit the elderly and those with muscle-wasting
diseases but the sports applications are obvious.

   The therapy produces increased levels of IGF-1, an insulin-like growth factor
and a protein that promotes muscle growth and repair.

   Lab rats showed a 35% strength gain in targeted muscles and didn't lose any
of it when experiments at the University of Pennsylvania ceased.

   "I wouldn't be surprised if somebody (in sports) is trying it as we speak,"
University of Western Ontario genetics expert Dr. Shiva Singh said.

   "If you can do it for a diseased muscle, why can't you do it for a normal
muscle?"

   The University of Pennsylvania's Lee Sweeney, chair of the physiology
department, says researchers have been inundated with calls from weightlifters
and bodybuilders.

   Even a high school football coach wanted his team treated.

   He says it's an easy process for, say, a strengthened leg.

   "I would put the whole leg on bypass," he said.

   "I would isolate the leg and put in the virus through the blood. This is
nothing a vascular surgeon couldn't do."

   Here's the scary part from the standpoint of those seeking to weed out the
cheats: It would be hard to detect. Gene therapy would not be detectable through
the normal tests -- blood, urine or saliva samples -- only through muscle
biopsies.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2004


                              199 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2004 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 1, 2004 Saturday

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; MEDICINE; Pg. D10

LENGTH: 935 words

HEADLINE: Illness, where is thy sting?

BYLINE: MARNI JACKSON

BODY:

   His Brother's Keeper:

   A Story from the Edge of Medicine

    By Jonathan Weiner

    HarperCollins, 356 pages, $36.95

    The Heywood brothers, Jamie and Stephen, were part of a family with
all-American, Kennedyesque qualities: handsome, charming, talented and bound for
glory. Jamie became a mechanical engineer who joined a high-powered creative
team at a neuroscience institute. His more laidback brother Stephen worked as a
carpenter, buying and turning San Francisco dumps into million-dollar houses.

    Then, one day at the age of 29, Stephen tried to turn a key in a lock and
his wrist didn't work. It was the first symptom of ALS, or Lou Gehrig's disease,
an incurable nerve-death disease with a life sentence of two years.

    When he got the diagnosis, Stephen was philosophical. ("I'm toast," he said,
and went on working despite his weakness). But his brother Jamie wouldn't buy
it. He quit his high-paying job and immersed himself in the frontier world of
gene therapy, stem-cell injections, neurovaccines and other risky strategies
from the "edge of medicine." He consulted cloning experts who were well beyond
any qualms about "playing God." While Stephen's strength slowly deteriorated,
Jamie went about enlisting scientists who might be willing to try gene therapy
on his brother. As his own marriage suffered, Jamie became obsessed with curing
his brother - and possibly setting up a multimillion-dollar "moral venture firm"
in the process.

    The story has the compelling ingredients of a Lorenzo's Oil, where faith and
love push through the cautious, conservative barriers of science to save a son
or a brother. The author originally wrote about the Heywoods' story in The New
Yorker, and he is the winner of a Pulitzer Prize for his earlier book The Beak
of the Finch, about Darwin.

    In other words, the DNA profile of His Brother's Keeper couldn't be more
promising.

    But in human beings, genes still aren't everything, and in human-engineered
books, sometimes the richest narrative elements don't guarantee a compelling
read. For all his determination, Jamie kept hitting roadblocks in his mission to
cure his brother. And despite great craft and compassion, Jonathan Weiner can't
get his story up and running.

    The author has taken on a challenging task - to deliver the science at the
same time that he creates a portrait of a family in crisis. But I kept getting
the impression that the story was both simpler and more complex than the one he
gives us. He leads us into the world of regenerative medicine, patiently
explaining the internal government of cells, the mechanics of gene therapy and
the lure of other radical strategies such as neurovaccines, which are designed
to train the immune system to work on the brain.

    He explores the ethical questions connected with the ability to engineer
better babies, and considers the role gene therapy could play in treating the
devastation of Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and ALS, not to mention many other
diseases. And he makes it all personal. Weiner's mother suffers from a related
nerve disorder, and he toys with the idea of putting the gene people to work on
her, too.

    There are intriguing parallels between the ethical quandaries Weiner
confronts and the writing task he has undertaken. He is writing about real
people, and a young man facing one of the cruellest forms of death: a slow
suffocation as motor nerves die and the body's muscles refuse to work. He must
turn this sad and uneventful arc into a narrative with suspense and compelling
characters. And he admits that he loses perspective in the process. He became
close to the Heywoods, almost part of the family, and yet this has the curious
effect of distancing us from Jamie and Stephen. Sometimes too much tact on the
part of an author can be as distorting as a more exploitive tack.

    I began to feel the same unease with the author's intrusion into this true
story as some people feel with the idea of gene therapy. First, he seems to
invest too much faith in his rather manic hero, Jamie. Then, as Jamie's marriage
fails and the prospect of actually trying gene therapy on Stephen fades, a
reader can sense the author falling out of love with his characters. For me, the
family story would have been compelling enough, without the promise of miracles.
There is too much engineering of the narrative elements here and not enough
focus on the thoughts and feelings of the man around whom all this swirls -
Stephen.

    There might be an obvious explanation for this lack of focus. Weiner wrote
the New Yorker article first, when he was fired up about the possibilities, both
of gene therapy and his adopted characters. By the time the book contract came
along, he might have been having second thoughts about the motivation of his
hero, the visionary and ego-driven brother Jamie. And - small point - nothing
much happens in this story.

    Weiner tries his best to salvage his story with regular forays into
literature - John Donne, Kafka, Lucretius. He makes analogies between a human
cell and Kafka's castle walls. But should extreme measures be taken to turn a
tragic story into something with more suspense? How much should a writer fiddle
with the facts? Are writers free to knock a few genes out of a true story in an
effort to make things more palatable to a reader?

    All writers are guilty of a certain amount of Frankenstein invention in
order to breathe life into their work. Eventually, I found the efforts of this
writer to keep his story alive more provocative than the true story he labours
to reconstruct on the page.

   Marni Jackson's most recent book is Pain: The Fifth Vital Sign.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2006


                              208 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2004 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              April 5, 2004 Monday

SECTION: SCIENCE; STARTING FROM ZERO: PART 4: WHAT SHAPES US; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 2193 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY, THE NATURAL WAY;
Is it the end of the nature-nurture debate? As ANNE McILROY reports, new
research implies that the quality of parental care can alter children's genetic
makeup

BYLINE: ANNE McILROY

BODY:

    o an infant, a mother's touch is warm and comforting. Now a Canadian
researcher has found out how it can also trigger profound changes beneath the
skin - how a caregiver's touch can physically alter a baby's genes. McGill
University's Michael Meaney's revolutionary findings may finally end the long
debate over whether heredity or the environment play the primary role in shaping
an individual's personality.

    The nature-nurture debate has become less fierce in recent years: Many
scientists now accept that a mysterious dance between genes and environment
determines who we become. Dr. Meaney and his colleagues have uncovered an
important step in that dance, by showing for the first time how conditioning can
change the chemical structure of the genes we inherit - in effect, switching
them on or off.

    Their work is with rats. But his team has just begun a $4-million, five-year
study that could be the first in the world to confirm that it also applies to
humans.

    There are two different kinds of rat mothers - those that lick their pups a
lot and those that don't. Dr. Meaney found that, under provocation, the
high-licking mothers' offspring produced less of the stress hormone cortisol.
They are more stable individuals that are not as easily panicked.

    Picture half a dozen rats in a cage, eating. Dr. Meaney claps his hands
loudly, and all the animals freeze. Some rats almost immediately go back to
gobbling their food, realizing that the researcher doesn't pose a real threat.
But others will remain immobilized for up to 10 minutes, and may never go back
their lunch. The difference? The timid rats are the offspring of mothers who
didn't lick them much.

    How can licking make that much of a difference in personality - is it due to
their genes, or the way they were raised? The answer is both. In essence, the
high-licking moms produce changes in their babies' DNA. Their pink tongues
somehow flick on the same chemical switch that turns genes on and off in a
developing embryo.

    In the fetus, this process - which scientists call methylation - allows
development of the brain and organs to proceed in an orderly fashion. In the
baby rats, the high-licking mothers somehow switch on a gene that restricts the
production of cortisol. The low-licking mothers do not, so their pups produce
much higher levels of the stress hormone.

    Cortisol helps prepare the body to deal with a threat - such as the
possibility that a clapping researcher means them harm. In short bursts, it can
save an animal's life. But over the long term, a heightened stress response has
been linked to diabetes, heart disease, mental illness and other serious
ailments in both humans and lab animals.

    "We have now studied that particular gene down to the level where we know
what maternal care is doing to turn it on or off," says Dr. Meaney.

    He sees his work as helping to reframe the nature-nurture debate, which
dates back to at least the 13th century. Extremists on one side have argued that
all animal behaviour is instinctive. Hard-liners on the other side have taken
the position that experience alone determines behaviour. The argument flares
every decade or so, most recently with the mapping of the human genome. Now, the
question is no longer whether genes are more important than the environment,
says Dr. Meaney. The question is how the environment physically alters genes to
produce individual differences.

    The genetic changes in the baby rats affected not only the stress response
but also cognitive development, since high levels of cortisol inhibits the
growth of the hippocampus, a part of the brain involved in memory and learning.
Cortisol may also influence how well young animals pay attention. Alison
Fleming, a researcher at the University of Toronto, has found that rats brought
up without mothers - and that don't have attentive researchers stroking them
with paint brushes to stimulate licking - grow up with more attention problems
than animals that get that physical stimulation.

    Could the same things be true in humans? We don't regularly lick our babies
or stroke them with paint brushes, and Dr. Meaney isn't suggesting that anyone
start. His hypothesis is that tactile contact has the same effect. "Mothers
don't lick their babies, but they hold them. And they probably tickle them and
touch them and stroke them and rub their hair."

    There is already indirect evidence that parental care influences how future
adults will respond to stress. In one study, young men and women who said their
mothers and fathers did a poor job in raising them became much more stressed in
an experiment designed to test how they react under pressure. They were asked to
perform rapid mental arithmetic problems, and a buzzer would go off every time
they were wrong.

    Now Dr. Meaney and his number of colleagues across the country are looking
for evidence of genetic changes related to human parenting, from touching to
more subtle interactions. They want to know how parental care affects genes in
human babies.

    Does the kind of parents you have influence your genes, causing you to
produce different amounts of the proteins involved in stress and learning and
behaviour? And do those changes make a major difference in children's lives?
Most intriguing to Dr. Meaney is the question of whether early damage can be
reversed.

    To find answers, they are turning to a group of depressed and pregnant women
in Hamilton. Mothers suffering from severe depression often have trouble bonding
with the children and tend not to respond as quickly to their cues.

    "Some don't bond, some don't bond well. Some of these moms will do the
instrumental things, but not the affectionate things. They will feed, bathe,
change [diapers]. But there is nothing on their faces," says Dr. Meir Steiner, a
McMaster University researcher. "Some women are so irritable, they cannot
tolerate the behaviour of the baby, the noise, the crying. They say they want to
crawl out of their skin."

    In an ambitious experiment called the MAVAN project, for Maternal Adversity
Vulnerability and Neurodevelopment, Drs. Steiner, Meaney and others will follow
both the depressed mothers and a control group of healthy mothers before they
give birth, and closely monitor the moms and their children for more than four
years afterwards. The $4-million study is funded by the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research.

    All of the depressed women will be offered treatment - it wouldn't be
ethical to withhold it. But past studies have shown that a third are likely not
to respond. When the babies are born, they will be tested for 22 genes that may
make them vulnerable to aggressive or anti-social behaviour as well as learning
disabilities such as attention deficit disorder. Researchers suspect these genes
are affected by parental care. Their goal is to find out whether a child with a
genetic vulnerability and a depressed mother will get into more trouble than a
child with similar genes but with a healthy mother.

    Researchers will monitor the children's cognitive and social development for
five years. They'll perform brain scans to monitor the physical development of
various brain regions. They'll also test the children's cortisol levels.

    Most of the concrete data currently available about how a human mother
affects the development of her child come from prenatal studies, says Stephen
Matthews, a professor of physiology at the University of Toronto and a lead
investigator in the MAVAN

    project. The most obvious example is fetal alcohol syndrome: Babies born to
mothers who drank heavily during pregnancy have smaller, less developed brains.

    Researchers also know that women who smoke, drink, are highly stressed or
are deprived of protein during pregnancy are more likely to give birth to babies
with low birth weights. These babies are more prone to a variety of health
problems, including high blood pressure, and are more at risk for attention
deficit disorder.

    The second group that will be studied is in Montreal, selected from a group
of 5,000 children who took part in an earlier study on pre-term labour. Some
were born with low birth weights, while others were of average size. These
children will also undergo genetic tests. The researchers already have reams of
data about the mothers' pregnancies, and will go on to monitor how they interact
with their children.

    These data should show, for example, whether low-birth-weight babies
genetically predisposed to attention deficit fare better with attentive mothers
than similar children whose mothers are less engaged.

    New rat studies in Dr. Meaney's lab certainly offer hope that there will be
a difference. Researchers have found that poor maternal care means that a number
of genes in the brain involved in memory don't get activated. But if you take
those rats - including those who are past puberty - and put them in an enriched
environment, the genes are turned on.

    "You really, literally can reverse it," he says.

    Not only that, but if you have a female rat pup born to a low-licking mother
removed to live with a high-licking surrogate mother, she will become a
high-licking mother when she grows up. On the other hand, if a high-licking
mother is subjected to high stress, she will pay less attention to her
offspring.

    However, Dr. Meaney emphasizes that the consequences of less-attentive
maternal care may not always be bad. Dr. Meaney's theory is that the low-licking
rats are at the bottom of the social hierarchy, and as a result lead more
stressful lives. In this situation, helping offspring develop a strong response
to stress may be a good thing. For example, the extra cortisol makes the animals
less aggressive and so less likely to get into fights. It may be nature's way of
helping the animals adapt to their future environment.

    In human studies, researchers in Montreal have found that in poorer
neighbourhoods with high crime rates, the boys who don't get into much trouble
actually have higher levels of cortisol than boys who join gangs and begin
stealing cars. Their stress levels seem to make them more fearful and less
likely to partake in risky business.

    There are many other examples in the natural world of organisms preparing
their offspring for the specific environmental challenges they will face.
Radishes that are harassed by caterpillars produce chemicals that are toxic to
the insects, and grow spines on their leaves. Plants that come from those
radishes' seeds will also have spiny leaves, and high levels of the toxic
chemicals.

    "We are looking at something that happens pretty generally across all
biology," says Dr. Meaney. "Nature didn't rip up the blueprint when it got to
us."

    Much remains unknown, but Dr. Meaney believes the mechanism he identified in
the gene that restricts cortisol production in rats is the same one at work in
all cases where a parent influences the expression of a gene. His work is part
of the burgeoning field of epigenetics - the study of changes to genetic
material that don't involve altering the sequence of the four nucleotides - C,
G, T and A - that make up our genetic code.

    "The whole world knows it really isn't just a question of genes, or just a
question of environment," says Dr. Meaney. "It is the interaction between the
two of them. Fine, it makes sense intuitively, but what does it mean when the
environment interacts with the gene. How? That is what we are showing."

   Anne McIlroy is The Globe and Mail's science reporter.

   Stress test

    Researchers have evidence that stress may actually start to harm children in
the womb. Among infants and toddlers, high and chronic levels of stress can make
learning more difficult, perhaps even shrinking the part of the brain associated
with memory. Stress may also make kids fat.

    Experts say the following may be signs a child is unduly stressed. If the
problem persists more than a few weeks, medical assistance may be in order.

   Physical problems: Stomach trouble, headaches or difficulty falling asleep
can be signs of childhood stress.

   Worrying out loud: A stressed youngster may seek continual reassurance, and
ask parents repeatedly about hypothetical disasters (for instance, their divorce
or death).

   Avoiding situations: If children don't want to go to class or shun
after-school activities, it may be because they find those environments overly
stressful. - Anne McIlroy

   Mother nature

    Can parents help their offspring adapt to the particular environment they
will face?  Plants and animals do.

    Radishes

    When infested by caterpillars; radish plants grow spiny leaves and produce a
natural insecticide.  The seeds will produce radishes that already have those
defences.

    Skink lizards

    If you expose a skink to the smell of its predators, a snake, it will become
hypersensitive to that smell.  The offspring of that skink will be four times
more sensitive to the smell of snake than their skink babies

    Rats

    Rat pups born to mothers that do not lick them very much develop high levels
of the stress hormone, cortisol.  Researchers suspect these rats are born into a
lower status in the social hierarchy and a strong stress response may help them
avoid dangerous confrontations.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2006


                              209 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Sun Media Corporation
                         Calgary Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                     March 20, 2004 Saturday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 37World Watch

LENGTH: 79 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC CHEATING

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   Advances in biotechnology and gene therapy could result in genetically
modified athletes, with the bodies of Greek gods and the prowess of Superman,
overwhelming ordinary mortals at future Olympics. "If the science develops and
the regulatory and ethical frameworks are not properly established, I think
there is a danger. We've seen it with the use of drugs that were developed for
therapeutic purposes," said Dick Pound, president of the World Anti-Doping
Agency.


LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2004


                              213 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2004 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           February 7, 2004 Saturday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. F6

LENGTH: 2475 words

HEADLINE: In search of a SARS vaccine: 'It's been a heck of a ride';
It usually takes years to develop a vaccine for a particular disease. A B.C.-led
team came up with three strong candidates in about 12 months. MARK HUME tells a
story of many 'eureka moments'

BYLINE: MARK HUME

DATELINE: VANCOUVER

BODY:

    After keying in a security code, Martin Petric cracks the outer door to the
laboratory where he first grew the deadly SARS virus and watches valve needles
jump as air rushes in.

    "This is already negative pressure to the outside so that if anything should
ever happen in the lab, there will never be air puffing out," says Dr. Petric,
head virologist at the British Columbia Centre for Disease Control, which is at
the forefront of a global search for a SARS vaccine.

    Inside the lab, through the clean anteroom ahead, past the "dirty room"
beyond that, on the other side of a purifying shower for lab technicians and a
scalding autoclave that kills microbes in a bath of 133-degree steam, is a
thriving population of the SARS virus.

    It is the key to a Canadian project that is on the verge of developing a
vaccine against severe acute respiratory syndrome, which rattled the world last
year and is still surfacing intermittently in China, where four people with the
disease have been in hospital since December.

    While all the Chinese patients were quickly quarantined, containing the
disease, medical officials remain concerned because the source of infections has
not yet been determined, and as long as SARS is "out of the bottle," it remains
a potential global threat.

    Whenever he goes into his lab, Dr. Petric pulls on scrubs, booties, a mask,
a hat and double gloves. As he works, a constant flow of air moves through the
room, streaming down over the hooded lab stations, funnelling into a
particulate-filtering system that is designed to keep viruses from escaping.

    The safety precautions are a reminder of just how dangerous SARS is, and how
risky the work is on the front lines of disease research.

    At first, Dr. Petric was wary of working with SARS because when he began, an
outbreak was racing around the world and scientists knew little about the cause.
It would eventually infect 8,500 people in 30 countries, killing 800, including
44 in the Toronto area.

    Although the Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre in Vancouver (named after
the late University of British Columbia professor who won a Nobel Prize in 1993
for his work in chemistry) was about to stun the medical world by becoming the
first to sequence the DNA for the SARS virus, nobody was quite sure then how
dangerous it would be to grow. The virus was new to the world and may have
mutated from an animal coronavirus, or, according to one theory, fallen to earth
with space dust.

    "Initially, it was a bit of ticklish situation, but it worked out," Dr.
Petric says. "Ticklish because we had no idea what the virus was and, you know,
a containment Level 3 is fine for some viruses, but there are others where you
need containment Level 4 [the highest security]."

    Dr. Petric, a relaxed, somewhat rumpled scientist whose research interests
include viral gastroenteritis, soon became comfortable growing the virus at the
B.C. CDC, housed in a sleek low-rise building near Vancouver's City Hall.

    "It's one of the friendlier viruses to work with," he says, speaking almost
affectionately of a disease that last year scared people so badly that many wore
face masks in public. "It's not a very fit virus. It's not like influenza, which
can spread through the population repeatedly and quickly. With SARS, the spread
is not that effective."

    Under Dr. Petric's care, the virus flourished, taking just 36 hours to
explode in a cell culture. The sample he began with came from the National
Microbiology Laboratory in Winnipeg and was taken from one of the first SARS
patients to die in Toronto. Known as the Tor2 virus, it has become the base for
Canadian research in the race to find a vaccine.

    In China, where 349 people died and more than 5,000 became infected with
SARS last year, scientists have also been pushing hard to find a vaccine. Health
authorities there announced on Wednesday that they were ready to start testing a
vaccine candidate on 30 volunteers over the next three months. The development
puts China at the leading edge, but the Canadian SARS Accelerated Vaccine
Initiative (SAVI) is close behind and is developing three vaccine candidates
with the idea that if one falters, another may come through.

    The first candidate, called a whole killed vaccine, was developed at the
B.C. CDC. Using a simple approach, scientists grew the SARS virus in tissue
culture. After it infected cells, the virus was inactivated or "killed" with
chemicals to make it harmless. Injected into a human, a whole killed vaccine
will produce antibodies without causing the disease itself, thereby immunizing
the recipient against infection. The typhoid vaccine is an example of this
approach.

    The second candidate is an adenovirus vector that was developed at
Hamilton's McMaster University, where Professor Jim Mahony scored a breakthrough
by cloning the gene that marks a nuclear protein in the SARS virus. A research
team headed by Jack Gauldie, chairman of the department of pathology and
director of the Centre for Gene Therapeutics, inserted the nuclear protein gene
into an engineered common cold virus, or adenovirus vector. The adenovirus
produces both the adenovirus protein and the SARS protein, triggering an immune
response.

    The third candidate, a recombinant spike protein prepared at the University
of Toronto, is still being worked on, but should be ready soon. The vaccine will
interfere with the way SARS virus binds to host cells.

    The recombinant spike protein exists on the surface of the SARS virus,
allowing it to attach to cells that are susceptible to infection.

    "Since we know the gene for that protein, we can take that gene and put it
into another cell, which will begin to manufacture the protein," states a SAVI
background paper. "We then purify the protein so it can be used as a vaccine,
with the idea that the human body will make antibodies to the protein that will
interfere with the binding of the virus to the cell."

    The whole killed and the adenovirus vaccine candidates have already produced
antibodies in mice in tests in Canada and have just been shipped to the United
States, where they will be tested in a Level-4 lab on larger animals.

    In those tests, known as challenges, animals such as ferrets will be
inoculated and then exposed to the SARS virus to see if they can fight off
infection. Researchers are confidant that within months they will have proved
that at least one, and perhaps all three, of the Canadian vaccine candidates
work.

    Going from knowing nothing about a disease to being able to neutralize it
with a vaccine in about a year is almost unheard of.

    "It's been a heck of a ride," says Brett Finlay, the head of SAVI. He says
the project has disrupted his micro-organism studies at UBC and thrust him into
a research project unlike anything ever undertaken in Canada before.

    The call that recruited Dr. Finlay into the fight against SARS came one
night last April when Dave Patrick, an epidemiologist with the sexually
transmitted diseases unit at the B.C. CDC, phoned him at home.

    Dr. Finlay, whose boyish good looks belie the fact that he is a top expert
on the molecular mechanisms of bacterial pathogenesis, recalls the urgent tone
in his friend's voice. SARS was spreading through Asia and had emerged in
Toronto. It was infecting nurses and other front-line health workers.

    Dr. Patrick put a troubling question to Dr. Finlay: "What happens if it
breaks our ability to control the quarantine?"

    For years, medical experts have been fearing a pandemic, an outbreak of a
new virus that would rip through the human population, killing millions before
it could be identified and fought.

    "So we had a long discussion about what could potentially be done
scientifically," Dr. Finlay says. "What would it take to actually do something
from the public-health perspective? . . . We discussed other measures and
everything really pointed to a vaccine because there were coronavirus vaccines
that were successful in animals. . . . We realized immediately for this to be
effective, . . . we had to do things differently."

    By differently, he meant fast - faster than anyone had thought possible. "In
science, you spend three months writing a grant [application] that goes in for
review, it spends six to nine months getting reviewed and another six months
getting funded, so often it's 18 months from when you decided you wanted to do
this and you get the funds to do it," Dr. Finlay says.

    "We knew that wouldn't hold here. If we were going to do something, it had
to be done quickly."

    By early April, there were 275 cases of SARS in Canada, 223 of them in
Ontario, and 13 people were dead. Globally, 2,950 were infected, 119 were dead
and the count was growing.

    On April 12, the Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre sequenced the SARS
virus, outpacing even the huge U.S. Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, and
two weeks later the B.C. government provided $2.6-million in seed money for
SAVI.

    After Dr. Finlay and Dr. Bob Brunham, medical director of the B.C. CDC, were
appointed directors of SAVI, they quickly drew in researchers from across
Canada. Scientists retooled their labs almost overnight and began tackling the
SARS puzzle.

    "The response was overwhelming." Dr. Finlay says. "Everyone was excited to
do this. There was a bit of patriotism, the sense of doing something for the
country, but also it was a chance to do some really neat science on something
very exciting that we knew little about."

    Early on, the team decided to pursue three different strategies to find a
vaccine, hoping that at least one would succeed.

    That started a headlong rush that led to a series of successes in all the
labs involved in the quest. Among other things, they grew an unknown virus,
constructed an adenovirus vector, produced neutralizing antibodies and figured
out how to kill the virus in ways that could be used in a vaccine.

    Dr. Finlay said the breakthroughs came fast and furious. "I mean, in science
most things don't work and when they do, that's a eureka moment. Here there were
many eureka moments. Each step is a milestone that you've got to overcome and
there are always problems and trying to figure out ways around it . . . and then
you are on to the next one."

    The next big challenge is seeing how the vaccine candidates respond in
animals that have been exposed to SARS. Can they fight off the disease? "That is
truly the acid test," Dr. Finlay says. ". . . Three months from now, we will
have the answer as to which is the best to go forward with."

    While the tests are under way, the SAVI team is already moving ahead, doing
"what if" scenarios so that the best vaccine candidate can be pushed toward
production.

    When SAVI was set up 10 months ago, it got funding for only 18 months. Dr.
Finlay says the work will be done before time runs out. "We will at the end do
what we said we'd do. Get a vaccine. At the end, I believe we will be there.

    "In theory, we already have vaccine candidates that could be used if SARS
suddenly got really ugly. Not that you'd want to. They are not approved for use
in humans, but these things do exist."

    Two big problems still loom: human testing and mass production of the
vaccine.

    "The whole trick with this SARS vaccine is, how are you going to test it?
Because to test it in a large-scale field trial you need large-scale SARS in the
environment, in the community. Now, it doesn't exist. At the very least, you can
prove it's safe in humans and humans are giving the responses you'd expect, such
as neutralizing antibodies, but to actually test the thing in people is very
different," Dr. Finlay says.

    "And that brings up another dilemma. If there's no SARS in the world, who's
going to make this vaccine? Because from a vaccine company's point of view,
there's no money in it to be made. So why should they make this in the first
place?"

    Dr. Finlay's team is pondering those problems and working on solutions. He
is confident that everything will fall into place - because SARS is still out
there somewhere, just waiting to move on a puff of wind and find a new host. If
it does explode again, the world will need a vaccine.

    The path of a virus

   Nov. 16, 2002: The first cases of an "atypical pneumonia" are detected in
Guangdong province, China, but officials keep the news hidden.

   Feb. 11, 2003: The World Health Organization is finally advised of the
Guangdong outbreak: 305 people are sick and five have died.

   Feb. 20: The first cases are detected in Hong Kong in two members of a family
that had travelled to Fujian province, China.

   Feb. 21: A doctor who had been treating patients with atypical pneumonia in
Guangdong checks into a hotel in Hong Kong and is given a room on the ninth
floor. Within days, he infects 12 people on the same floor; one will carry the
disease to Hanoi, another will take it to Toronto.

   Feb. 28: Dr. Carlo Urbani sees a pattern of sudden acute respiratory ailments
in a Hanoi hospital and alerts the WHO.

   March 5: An elderly Toronto woman who stayed on the ninth floor of the Hong
Kong hotel dies in Scarborough Grace Hospital.

   March 12: The WHO issues a global bulletin advising health officials to be on
the watch for cases of severe atypical pneumonia.

   March 14: Health authorities in Ontario alert doctors that there are four
cases of atypical pneumonia in Toronto and two deaths.

   March 15: The WHO declares that SARS is "a worldwide health threat."

   March 16: More than 150 SARS cases are reported around the world. Two days
later, the number jumps to 210, with four dead. Two days after that, there are
360 sick, with 10 dead. By March 26, the world total is 1,323 infected, 49 dead.

   March 29: Dr. Urbani dies of SARS.

   April 2: The WHO warns against travel to Hong Kong and Guangdong.

   April 12: The Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre becomes the first in the
world to map the genomic sequence of the SARS virus.

   April 23: The WHO issues travel cautions for Beijing, Shanxi province and
Toronto.

   April 29: The B.C. government funds the SARS Accelerated Vaccine Initiative.

   April 30: The WHO lifts the travel advisory for Toronto.

   May 8: The world total passes 7,000 cases in 30 countries. The WHO issues a
travel advisory for Tianjin and Inner Mongolia, China and Taipei.

   May 13: The outbreak begins to relent. The numbers are 8,500 people infected
and 800 dead, including 44 in the Toronto area.

   Oct. 2: Researchers at McMaster University in Hamilton produce a potential
vaccine to combat SARS. Researchers at the B.C. Centre for Disease Control and
the University of Toronto also have vaccine candidates.

   Jan. 20, 2004: In China, government officials announce that 30 volunteers
have signed up for the first human tests.

   Jan. 26: The SAVI project begins animal testing, on two vaccines, with the
third slated to start within weeks.

   Mark Hume is a member of The Globe and Mail's British Columbia bureau.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2006


                              216 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2003 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           December 13, 2003 Saturday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. F4

LENGTH: 1452 words

HEADLINE: Medical researchers are thinking small;
Nanomedicine is the next frontier, and anything seems possible: minuscule robots
to help diagnose disease, itsy-bitsy tweezers and tiny capsules to deliver drugs
to specific spots in the body. ANNE McILROY reports

BYLINE: ANNE McILROY

BODY:

    Tiny cameras that would travel through your arteries and provide regular
road reports on plaque buildup and other damage. Microscopic gold-plated bullets
that would seek out and destroy tumour cells without hurting healthy tissue.
Molecular scaffolding that would provide a base for new nerve cells to grow on
after a spinal-cord injury. Itsy-bitsy devices that give new meaning to the word
miniature may be the future of health care.

    Nanomedicine, still in its infancy, is already changing the way doctors
work. Some patients now have the option of swallowing a pill that contains a
tiny camera, which travels through their digestive system, transmitting images
that allow their physicians to look for worms or signs of disease in their
intestines.

    The traditional endoscopy involves running a fibre-optic instrument up a
patient's rear end. A pill spying on your insides might sound like the cult
movie classic Fantastic Voyage, in which a surgical team is shrunk to travel
inside a sick man's body, but hey, it sounds a heck of a lot more comfortable
than an anal probe.

    Medical researchers in Canada and around the world are thinking even
smaller, and have begun collaborations with engineers and mathematicians in the
burgeoning field of nanotechnology, which involves building things atom by atom,
molecule by molecule. The field takes its name from the nanometre, which is a
billionth of a metre. Scientists measure viruses in nanometres.

    The scientific journals are full of small steps forward. Canadian Bob
Wolkow, for example, has found a way to get the tiniest wire in the world to
assemble itself.

    It is hard sometimes to tell where it is all leading: faster computers and
smarter robots, almost certainly. But critics, including Prince Charles, have
fretted that scientists will unleash invisible self-replicating robots that will
destroy the atmosphere or tiny particles that will clog people's lungs and
penetrate their brains.

    In the medical field, proponents enthuse about replacing blood with complex
robots made of a diamond-like material, or making robotic red blood cells that
would allow people to breath underwater for hours.

    The future - at least for the next decade or so - probably holds more
prosaic, but still important, developments such as cancer drugs that work better
without so many devastating side effects.

    "Nanomedicine is the next frontier in the medical field," says Rémi Quirion,
director of the Institute of Neurosciences, Mental Health and Addiction at the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research, or CIHR.

    Dr. Quirion is in charge of setting up a nanomedicine program at the CIHR,
which distributes federal funds to medical researchers in Canada. Next year, he
is hoping to give up to nine teams $300,000 a year for five years.

    The United States and Japan are world leaders in both nanomedicine and the
broader field of nanotechnology, which is being touted as the next technology
boom. An estimated $4-billion was spent developing nanotechnology around the
world in 2002.

    U.S. President George W. Bush announced this month that he was seeking a 10-
per-cent increase in funding for nanotechnology research, bringing the total to
$849-million (U.S.) a year. Canada is spending $120-million on a new national
institute for nanotechnology at the University of Alberta.

    The Canadians are well behind other countries in terms of spending, but Dr.
Quirion is confident that researchers here will find a small niche in the
nanomedicine field in which to excel.

    Several dozen research teams are already working on it. John Samuel, in the
pharmacy department at the University of Alberta, wants to develop a vaccine
that will protect patients from cancer. He was pursuing this idea before
nanotechnology began making headlines, but he says the field offers new tools
that may help him succeed.

    His goal is to stimulate healthy immune systems to recognize a tiny particle
containing an antigen that is common to many cancers, including most breast,
prostate and lung cancers. Antigens are like the licence plates on cancer cells;
they identify them.

    The idea is to embed the antigen in a tiny synthetic ball a few hundred
nanometres in diameter. (A hundred nanometres is still only a 100,000th the
width of a human hair.) These tiny balls would be injected into the body to
stimulate dendritic cells, the sentries of our immune systems that grab
invaders.

    Our immune systems sometimes don't recognize cancer cells and troublemakers
because they aren't invaders from the outside, but rather our own cells gone
awry. Injecting a vaccine full of tiny antigen particles would give dendritic
cells advance intelligence of what the bad guys looks like, which licence plates
to look for.

    If the vaccine works - and it is still a big if - it could be a lifesaver
for cancer patients who are in remission. It would find and destroy new cancer
cells before they can proliferate into tumours.

    And if it works, it will take 10 years to do the clinical trials required to
prove the vaccine is safe, says Dr. Samuel, who is organizing an international
nanomedicine conference next year in Alberta.

    More ambitious projects, such as building tiny robots that would attack
invaders or repair damage, could be 20 years away.

    These are the dreamy days in nanomedicine, when almost anything seems
possible. A recent editorial in the British medical journal The Lancet outlined
potential advances. It said nanocapsules and nanoparticles could be used to
deliver drugs and gene therapies to a specific destination in the body, which
could eliminate many side effects. New surgical tools, such as nanotweezers, are
already in development, and tiny new probes, including nanorobots, may make it
easier for doctors to diagnose disease.

    At this point, however, nanomedicine involves a lot of basic research
figuring out how the human body works at the molecular level. In Laval, a team
of neuroscientists is working with physicists to understand the electronics of
brain cells, Dr. Quirion says. Eventually, they are hoping to find ways to
repair damaged ones.

    In the beginning, it can be difficult for medical researchers to build
collaborative relationships with mathematicians and engineers, Dr. Quirion says.
"At first, it is like someone who speaks French, like myself, trying to talk to
someone who speaks only Chinese or Japanese," he says. "Then, it is a lot of
fun."

    David Colman, head of the McGill University's Montreal Neurological
Institute, says nanotechnology has to be more driven by biology if it is going
to lead to new medical treatments. His team is working on the basic biology of
nerve cells in the hope of finding ways to coax them to grow in damaged spines.

    There doesn't seem to be any obvious ethical implications to this kind of
work, and some argue that each new nanomedical device will have to be assessed
once it is developed to see if there are potential problems.

    But some critics worry that nanotechnology in general is a Pandora's box,
and that ethical questions must be debated now, before it is opened. Pat Mooney,
executive director of the environmental group ETC, has called for a moratorium
until scientists at the very least agree on the rules for safely handling
nanomaterials.

    Peter Singer, a bioethicist at the University of Toronto, argues that
researchers may be heading for a showdown similar to the one that occurred over
genetically modified foods in Europe. Consumers there are vehemently opposed to
GM foods that Canadians have been eating for years.

    Peter Hackett, vice-president of research at the National Research Council,
says it is important to educate Canadians about nanotechnology so that they
understand both the risks and benefits. One of the problems, however, is that
the research is still at such an early stage that is difficult to do that.

    Richard E. Smalley, a Nobel laureate and chemist at Rice University in
Texas, argues that one of the most troubling potential nanodevelopments,
self-replicating robots, will never be invented. It would be impossible to
construct something that complex atom by atom because of unwanted chemical
reactions between atoms, he says. But while he pooh-poohs the idea of tiny
robots that would repair individual cells, he says other developments in
nanotechnology hold great promise.

    Many experts believe that nanodevices will be widely used in hospitals and
laboratories in 10 to 15 years, and that the researchers who invent them have
enormous potential to profit from their work. The American National Science
Foundation recently estimated that the nanomedicine market could be worth as
much as $1-trillion (U.S.) by 2015.

   Anne McIlroy is The Globe and Mail's science reporter.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2006


                              217 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2003 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 10, 2003 Friday

SECTION: SPORTS; In Brief:; Pg. S7

LENGTH: 143 words

HEADLINE: Testing almost ready to catch gene dopers

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: Athens

BODY:

     The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) is close to unveiling tests that will
detect "gene doping," a leading scientist told Reuters yesterday. The move
follows mounting concern that gene therapy, used to treat chronic medical
conditions such as muscular dystrophy, is being misused by unscrupulous athletes
and coaches. Professor Geoff Goldspink, from University College London, speaking
on the sidelines of the four-day International Olympic Committee medical
congress in Athens, said testing technology was "almost there. We can already
detect illicit DNA and introduced gene products," said Goldspink, who has been
compiling a report due to be handed to WADA in Lausanne in two weeks. Congress
delegates warned that gene doping presents a "clear and present danger" and that
international sports authorities are facing the next generation of sports
cheats.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2006


                              220 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2003 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                          September 11, 2003 Thursday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: TECHNOLOGY; e-insider; Pg. B12

LENGTH: 953 words

HEADLINE: Electronic health records offer big payoff

BYLINE: DAVID TICOLL

BODY:

    Remarkably, the provinces and federal government have come together on a
plan, under the leadership of an organization called Canada Health Infoway, to
transform the health care system using information technology.

    Infoway drew its original mandate and $1.1-billion budget from the federal
government. Its board of directors includes provincial deputy ministers of
health - all of them. Last week, Infoway gained board approval for its latest
business plan, with an aggressive timetable of investment initiatives. The plan
forecasts a need to fill 1,500 to 2,000 jobs with a new and rare-breed expert in
health informatics, system integration and change management.

    Infoway is sowing the seeds of a health care system that holds the potential
of better care, improved cost management and opportunities for Canadian
companies.

    At the centre of the plan is the electronic health record (EHR).

    Today, your medical diagnostic and treatment files are chaotically dispersed
among a variety of physicians, pharmacies, test labs and hospitals. Information
management by most doctors, with scrawled notes and near-illegible
prescriptions, has yet to enter the 20th century, let alone the 21st. As the EHR
rises over the next decade, your health information will be organized in one
virtual spot, ready to be tapped at a moment's notice - anytime, anyplace, by
any authorized person.

    The case for EHR is broad and compelling. Infoway's interim president and
chief executive officer Myrna Francis lists three benefits: improved
productivity; better access to care for patients; and better outcomes. Infoway
will produce these benefits by sticking only a subset of your records -
prescriptions, medical images, and test lab results - into the EHR. Not to
belittle the complexity of this task, but these clumps of information are much
slimmer and easier to automate than the heaps of scrawls in doctors' files and
patient hospital charts.

    It's Pareto's Law writ large: 80 per cent of the benefit from 20 per cent of
the data.

    What's the payoff? One big problem with prescriptions is that patients end
up with multiple drugs that interact to create havoc in their bodies, or fail to
take their drugs properly. (What do you expect? These people are sick and/or
elderly.) A study on electronic prescriptions found that EHR would slash such
problems, saving Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Alberta and British Columbia
$184-million a year on hospitalizations and physician visits. Another study by
McGill University epidemiologist Dr. Robin Tamblyn found that transcription and
legibility problems in handwritten prescriptions produce a 15-per-cent error
rate, of which 2 per cent can be quite serious. Electronic prescriptions would
help a lot.

    A U.S. survey estimates that clinical errors kill 7,000 people a year. Our
health system is very different, so the traditional Canada/U.S. 10-per-cent rule
may not apply. But if errors kill 700 Canadians in 2003, that's more than 10
times the number stricken by severe acute respiratory syndrome.

    Infoway also plans to switch diagnostic imaging - X-rays, ultrasounds and
the like - from film to digital. This will cut costs. It will also help offset a
global shortage of the radiologists who interpret X-ray results.

    You can send digital X-rays over networks to a focused firm that operates
efficiently and provides better career paths for radiologists. Shipping digital
X-rays from one health provider to another is also a snap.

    A barrier, says Infoway's Ms. Francis, is that fewer than a quarter of
Canadian health facilities - much less than in other rich countries - have the
technologies they need to go digital. Resource sharing is the answer, a
wrenching cultural change for many hospitals. It will happen. Kodak, watch out.

    The fruits of Infoway's efforts appear late next year. But it will be three
years or so before, say, 40 per cent of Canadians gain practical use of
electronic prescriptions and imaging.

    In the grand scheme of things, and given the normal pace of
government-sponsored innovation, this is pretty darned fast.

    There are all sorts of opportunities at the other side of this rainbow. Jobs
for new kinds of high-tech knowledge workers. Outsourcing diagnostic imaging and
other activities.

    A massive, full-population treasure trove of data for biomedical research.

    And this is only the beginning. Patients' genetic and proteomic data will
eventually be added to the mix. Here, Canada is a bit behind the curve. The
entire population of Iceland is already on track for genetic coding, along with
other health data that goes back to

    900 AD.

    Sal Causi, a life sciences business development executive at IBM, describes
information-based medicine as a form of personalized medicine whereby data about
your genes, phenotype, lifestyle, medical history, drug history and medical
images are all stored in a comparative database. Treatments - based on
objective, detailed evidence - will be customized to you specifically.

    This is not merely about costly designer drugs. It's more practically about
zoning in on your unique treatment plan using a variety of therapies. Says Mr.
Causi: "We're going from the world of white powdery drugs to biologics, gene and
cell therapies, and inoculations of molecules that are very different from
today.

    "It's not a cost problem. You can do it within existing operating costs. The
challenge is sharing records from one hospital to another."

    Looks like we're stepping up to this challenge. And for once, Canada might
be a leader - in no small measure thanks to a public health system where the
provinces are co-operating around a nationwide initiative.

   David Ticoll is an author, speaker and consultant.

   dticoll@globeandmail.ca

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2006


                              221 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2003 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             August 29, 2003 Friday

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 1024 words

HEADLINE: The human condition hurts: We'd be fools not to better it;
If we can cure disease and slow down aging, it would be unethical not to, says
transhumanist JAMES HUGHES

BYLINE: JAMES HUGHES

BODY:

    The year is 1943, and Mary Hunt has just found a nice mouldy cantaloupe at
her supermarket in Peoria, Ill. Responding to an appeal from antibiotics
researchers at the local government laboratory, she turns it in. The cantaloupe
is covered with a robust new strain of penicillin, which can be grown in
industrial-sized tanks, making it possible to mass produce and save millions of
lives.

    But wait. Emerging from time portals to the 21st century, legions of anxious
activists descend on the lab.

    Fundamentalist preachers inveigh against penicillin as an effort to play
God, and save lives that God clearly intended to gather to heaven. Radical
environmentalists descend, chanting the precautionary-principle mantra: No
technology should ever be used until we understand all of its long-term
consequences for human health and the environment. Deep ecologists warn that
antibiotics will facilitate factory farming of animals, and leech into the
environment. Eventually bacteria will evolve past our antibiotic defences, and
become dangerous superbugs.

    And anti-technology leftists insist that penicillin will exacerbate social
inequality, allowing pharmaceutical corporations to reap mega-profits. Only the
rich will be able to afford the drug, and they will use it strategically to
disenfranchise women and people of colour. Since infectious disease is the
principal killer of soldiers, antibiotics will facilitate war and could even
lead to the creation of terrible new weapons of mass destruction.

    Even if penicillin had been under such attack, we probably would still have
produced it, and because of these attacks, we might have avoided some of our
mistakes. But hindsight is 20-20, and all we knew in the 1940s was that millions
of lives could be saved. Thanks to penicillin, they were. Along the way, we
dealt with the problems that arose.

    Once other medical technologies - birth control, in-vitro fertilization and
organ transplantation - were said to be harbingers of a new soullessness. But
people of faith have begun to believe humanity may have been divinely empowered
with reason for a reason. Gene therapy, kidney dialysis and pacemakers are no
longer regarded as a spiritual threat.

    True, some advances have made pharmaceutical companies rich and powerful,
and these companies have tried to subvert regulation. But activists have created
powerful agencies to oversee medical research and drug safety, and protect
research subjects and consumers. As we see with the agreements to make AIDS
drugs affordable in Africa, democratic activism and good governance can
guarantee both profits for medical innovation, and access to expensive drugs for
the world's poorest citizens.

    The new technologies have been used in military labs to develop new
biological weapons, so we have come up with vaccines and countermeasures with
that same science, and created global agreements to control these new weapons.
(True, the United States doesn't sign those agreements, and uses allegations of
other countries' biological weapons as a pretext for neo-imperialism, but that's
not the fault of medical progress).

    These are among the lessons I bring to my debate with medical ethicists such
as Margaret Somerville over the emerging technologies of life extension,
cloning, nanotechnology and genetic engineering: New medical technologies do
pose risks, but in democracies they are manageable risks, well worth the
benefits. Democracies should ensure that technologies are safe and effective,
but democracies do not have a right - on the basis of vague anxieties or
religious orthodoxies - to refuse free, informed individuals the use of
technologies that relieve human suffering.

    Take the example of therapeutic cloning for stem-cell research. If you
believe, as I and many other North Americans do, that an embryo is not a person,
then it is self-evident that we should use embryonic tissue to allow the lame to
walk and the blind to see, to grow new organs for the sick and new brain tissue
for the demented.

    We can regulate the procurement of eggs and embryos to protect women's
health, and we can regulate embryo research to ensure that modified or cloned
embryos aren't used to produce children. We can control the buying and selling
of embryos, and ensure that the benefits of stem-cell cloning and embryonic
research are available to all.

    But once research shows that reproductive cloning can safely be used to
produce children without genetic defects, we must respect the rights of parents
to make their own reproductive decisions. I'd argue that it is precisely those
who want to ban the use of safe, effective genetic engineering who are the
eugenicists, because they're the ones who are telling people what kind of
children they must have. New technologies don't make an authoritarian "brave new
world" more likely, authoritarianism does. New technologies don't make society
more unequal, lack of universal access to technology does.

    A second lesson is that technological progress allows us to fix the problems
our technologies create. We need to ensure that the new nanotechnology tools are
environmentally safe, but we also desperately need new nano-materials and
nano-devices for more ecologically sustainable manufacturing. We may make
mistakes with the genetic engineering of enhanced humans, but our rapidly
improving genetic and nanotech tools will allow us to fix both our imperfect
bodies and any of the mistakes we make trying to improve them.

    If we allow liberty, equality and solidarity to govern technology instead of
fear and dogma, we can conquer disease, achieve radical life extension and be
smarter, happier and more able-bodied. The four camps gathered at the laboratory
gates - religious fundamentalists, conservative bioethicists, and Luddite
environmentalists and egalitarians - have legitimate concerns. But they have too
little faith in democracy and human intelligence.

   James Hughes teaches health policy at Trinity College in Hartford, Conn. He
is secretary of the World Transhumanist Association, a non-profit organization
encouraging the use of technology to transcend the limitations of the human
body.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2006


                              223 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Sun Media Corporation
                         Calgary Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                     August 21, 2003 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 228 words

HEADLINE: GENE PATIENT UP AND ABOUT

BYLINE: BY REUTERS

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Two days after becoming the first adult to receive gene therapy for
Parkinson's disease, Nathan Klein said he was glad to have taken "a big step
forward, or maybe backward" to help himself and others with the progressive
movement disorder.

   The 55-year-old television producer was up and about, and in wise-cracking
good spirits yesterday, at a press conference at New York-Presbyterian Hospital,
where surgeons performed the risky five-hour brain operation on Monday.

   "It feels good to get all this attention. I've never been on this end of the
camera before," said Klein, who helped produce the syndicated television program
Everyday with Joan Lunden in the early 1990s.

   Klein said he felt no better or any worse than before the operation, during
which Dr. Michael Kaplitt delivered gene therapy droplets to the target area of
his brain through an opening in his skull.

   The droplets contained countless copies of a normally occurring gene, called
GAD, that doctors hope will begin producing its designated protein. The protein,
in turn, is meant to produce a molecule called GABA, whose role in the brain is
to calm overexcited nerve cells.

   The genes are unable by themselves to enter brain cells. So each copy was
stuffed into a seemingly harmless virus called the adeno-associated virus, which
can penetrate human cells and drop off its gene cargo.

GRAPHIC: photo of NATHAN KLEIN

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2003


                              224 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2003 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             August 11, 2003 Monday

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 871 words

HEADLINE: Blood system still needs watchdog

BYLINE: JERRY TEITEL

BODY:

    In the final report of the 1997 Commission of Inquiry on the Blood System In
Canada, Justice Horace Krever described the systematic shortcomings and missed
opportunities that led to the tragedy of transfusion-transmitted HIV in the
early 1980s. In response, federal health minister Alan Rock created an external
advisory body, the National Blood Safety Council. Last month, on July 17, Mr.
Rock's successor Anne McLellan disbanded this council, referring in her news
release to the unprecedented degree of safety of Canada's blood system and to
the overlap of the Blood Safety Council's mandate with other advisory bodies.

    Since the health and lives of Canadians are at stake, the wisdom of the
Minister's decision to disband this council deserves careful scrutiny.

    Although the risk of contracting HIV or hepatitis B or C from a blood
transfusion is now extremely low, the blood supply will always be vulnerable to
the threat of new or unknown organisms, a lesson reinforced by the transmission
of West Nile Virus through blood. And, blood safetyextends from the donor clinic
to the hospital bedside. No unit of blood is safe if it is administered to the
wrong patient, or if it is not available when it is needed.

    These considerations alone would not justify the existence of the Council
if, as Ms. McLellan evidently believes, it was redundant. However, in announcing
the "consolidation" of the Council with another body: the Expert Advisory
Committee on Blood Regulation (EAC-BR), because "both committees are responsible
for advising the government on matters pertaining to blood safety", the Minister
betrays a misapprehension of important differences between the two bodies. It is
instructive to compare their roles and functions.

    The EAC-BR provides expert scientific advice to the Biologic and Genetic
Therapies Directorate of Health Canada on issues of federal responsibility
within the national blood system. It collaborates closely with the director
general of the Directorate, who participates in its meetings. The members of the
EAC-BR require security clearance, and all its meetings are closed to the
public. A significant proportion of its agenda and its minutes are "protected",
and are thereby censored from public view. Secrecy and selective release of
information to the public constitute disturbing behaviour in an agency dealing
with issues of public health.

    The Blood Safety Council, on the other hand, had a different, broader
mandate. It was charged by the ministry to review and comment on all aspects of
blood safety under federal jurisdiction. The Council scrutinized all the players
in the blood system, including the federal regulator, the national operators
(Canadian Blood Services and HemaQuebec), and blood product manufacturers. Of
necessity, the Council also reviewed and commented on the hospitals where blood
products are prescribed and infused. The Council was thus unique in overseeing
all aspects of blood safety in Canada independently and objectively.

    Justice Krever found that the organizations that were responsible for
operating and regulating Canada's blood system in the early 1980s believed that
it was "safe". The harm that befell thousands of Canadians might have been
mitigated if an external, independent council had existed to oversee this closed
and defensive system. With the disappearance of the Blood Safety Council there
is again no watchdog to provide independent oversight to the blood system. This
function will not be restored by "consolidating" the two bodies. In her news
release, Ms. McLellan lauded the Blood Safety Council for its "invaluable" work
in providing "scrutiny of the system as it underwent a significant transition."
By dissolving the Council, she implies that this oversight role is no longer
necessary. In this, she is wrong. The blood supply remains vulnerable, and the
blood system must be continually scrutinized and held accountable.

    Equally importantly, the Council provided a forum for communication among
regulators, operators, blood product recipients, and the general public. Ms.
McLellan espoused these principles (ironically citing the Council's 2002 report
as her inspiration) by resolving to move towards "increasing public involvement
and transparency" in the blood system. Unfortunately, by dissolving the Blood
Safety Council the Minister has moved the system farther away from this ideal.
The Council membership included interested laypeople as well as experts in many
fields related to blood transfusion. It held biannual open forums on different
topics in cities across Canada, open to public participation. Through these
avenues, a variety of advocacy and interest groups such as the Canadian
Hemophilia Society, the Thalassemia Foundation, the Aplastic Anemia and
Myelodysplasia Association and many others were able to influence the blood
system.

    On behalf of all Canadians, we ask the Minister to restore independent
oversight, transparency, and public participation to our blood system. We
believe that these are essential if we are to avoid a repetition of past
tragedies.

   Dr. Jerry Teitel, head of Hematology and Oncology at St. Michael's Hospital
in Toronto, was chairman of the National Blood Safety Council.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2006


                              225 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2003 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            August 9, 2003 Saturday

SECTION: FOCUS; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 3011 words

HEADLINE: Resuscitating Rover;
How far would you go to save your furry friend? A blood transfusion? A liver
transplant? Round-the-clock nursing care? TRALEE PEARCE discovers the new world
of intensive pet care, where extreme measures and extreme expense have become
routine. It's a dog's life

BYLINE: TRALEE PEARCE, With a report from Jill Mahoney in Edmonton

BODY:

    It is well past midnight on Friday, the fourth of July. Six-year-old Murphy
lies unconscious, intravenous tubes jutting in and out of her limbs. Despite the
flurry of doctors and nurses around her, it is the first relatively quiet moment
in a night of whimpering and pain.

    After a tricky emergency diagnosis - triggered by a dangerously low platelet
count, bleeding gums and broken blood vessels on her ears - Murphy has been
rushed to this hospital, the only one in Ontario where she has any hope of
making it through the night with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMT).

    Her family is told to go home to Newmarket, Ont., and rest, since Murphy is
stable. But after a mere four hours, Carol Humphries and Alison Fraser get an 8
a.m. phone call: Murphy has taken a turn for the worse. While being monitored
for stomach hemorrhaging (a frequently fatal risk in IMT), she had a seizure,
and the doctors realized that the bleeding was not in her stomach but in her
brain.

    Ms. Humphries and Ms. Fraser speed back, expecting to say their goodbyes.
However, one blood transfusion, three rounds of medication, a nurse's all-night
bedside care and a bout of temporary blindness later, Murphy may not be out of
the woods, but she is alive.

    It sounds like a nail-biting, real-life episode of ER. Except that in this
case, Murphy is a usually frisky cocker spaniel, and the ICU belongs to the
Ontario Veterinary Clinic at the University of Guelph.

    Small-animal veterinarian Karol Mathews, an associate professor and service
chief of emergency and critical care, says Murphy's case showcases what
veterinary medicine is capable of now: blood transfusions, and sophisticated
diagnosis and monitoring.

    Dr. Mathews says zealous pet owners are the driving force behind it all.
"There are people who want to keep them alive. It's the same as if it was a
child," she says.

    "We're so lucky. She's the sweetest dog in the world," Ms. Humphries says.
"Every trip back and forth to Guelph, we were crying the whole time."

    Still, paying $600 a day is daunting, even for excellent care. "You don't
know what you're in for," Ms. Humphries says. "You're so far in you can't stop."

    Unlike the medical system for humans in Canada, veterinary medicine is
pay-as-you-go. On top of the $600 a day in hospital fees, ongoing medication -
Murphy now takes four, including steroids and a cancer drug, and will for life -
drives the cost up toward the $5,000 mark. The dog is somewhat incontinent, and
at risk for similar seizures in the future. "We don't know if we can put her
through that again," Ms. Humphries admits.

    As Murphy's case shows, animal care has come a long way, Dr. Mathews says.
"The critical-care specialty has grown tremendously. . . . What has become more
the norm today was unusual 10 years ago."

    But for animal owners, those great leaps can lead to self-inflicted
emotional blackmail: Just how much do you love your pet?

    In these days of raw-food diets, pet psychologists, doggie yoga, Burberry
pet beds and gourmet cat treats, prolonging the lives of our furry friends may
seem relatively unfrivolous.

    But what about a $10,000 cancer treatment or $4,000 hip replacement? What
about a kidney transplant? Should you make sure Rover gives blood, in case he or
another domestic companion ever needs it? Should pet collars come with an organ
donor's card?

    Dr. Mathews's colleague, Stephen Kruth, a professor of small-animal medicine
in Guelph's department of clinical studies, points to the "almost manic" drive
by pet owners to keep their dogs and cats ticking and a boost in the ability to
diagnose diseases such as cancer.

    As in the human medical biz, MRIs are all the buzz. "In the last five years,
the availability of advanced cross-sectional imaging, CT and MR, has increased,"
Dr. Kruth says. The only difference between human and animal treatment is the
avoidance of the term "cure."

    "We're here to palliate, to use relatively gentle interventions, gentle
chemotherapy, radiation, surgery that's usually not seen as very aggressive. We
do things that are compatible with keeping a high quality of life for the
animal," he says. "We expect that the animal is still going to die from its
cancer - what we're trying to do is maintain a quality of life primarily for as
long as it's reasonable."

    Among pet owners, though, the definition of reasonable has made quite a
stretch. A survey conducted by the American Animal Hospital Association found
that 47 per cent of pet owners in the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico
would spend any amount to save their pet's life, and 73 per cent would spend
$1,000 or more.

    A day off work to care for an ailing animal? Forty-eight per cent have done
it, the survey found.

    Michael O'Sullivan, executive director of the Humane Society of Canada, says
his research indicates that Canadians own a total of a little more than six
million dogs and 6.4 million cats. And we're just starting to get our heads
around the idea of paying for their care.

    "We're lucky in Canada. We don't have to argue with doctors about the costs
of health care," Mr. O'Sullivan says. "My wife had two children in the hospital.
I have no idea how much that costs. Vets, on the other hand, have to argue about
bills."

    If you don't have to pay for a child to be vaccinated, he says, it's a
psychological leap to pay for it for an animal.

    However, he adds that "my view is that if people work hard to earn their
money, it's their business how they spend it."

    And they are spending it on Fifi and Fido. A Statistics Canada Spending
Patterns survey released last month found that 49.5 per cent of participating
households reported pet expenses. Canadians spent an average of $286 on all pet
expenses and $89 on veterinary and other services per household in 2000 -
amounting to a total of more than a billion dollars in vet bills.

    Then there is the personal labour: Ms. Fraser, a police officer, and Ms.
Humphries, a hospital lab technician, deliver Murphy's drugs in shifts
throughout the day.

    Nevertheless, someone like Toronto optician Josephine Bruckner would tell
you her love of her dog Medy - who emigrated to Canada with her from Romania in
1981 - ranks up there with loving a child.

    A couple of years ago, she watched as vets and technicians nursed the
15-year-old poodle through two separate two-month comas brought on by a tumour
on her neck and the surgery to remove it. The hospital time was broken only by a
two-month convalescence at home, during which Medy was blind and deaf and had
limited mobility.

    When she fell back into a coma, Dr. Bruckner was no less gung-ho about
continuing her treatment. Her vet gently asked her if she had considered
euthanasia. She refused, but Medy died the next day.

    Dr. Bruckner put the $10,000 bill on her Visa card and regrets neither the
expense nor what some might consider a selfish desire to keep a pet alive. "She
was my baby. She never asked anything in life, just for me to love her," the
doctor says, her voice trembling on the phone.

    Likewise, Ottawa writer E. Kaye Fulton scoffs at the suggestion that the
$10,000 and hours of nursing she has expended on her cat, Kid Chocolate, is in
any way extreme.

    Two years ago this March, KC was hit by a car, dragged himself home and
began a medical odyssey. He had a degloved left leg, his pelvis was separated
from his spine, and he was partly paralyzed.

    After two operations, the ailing KC was able to go home. Ms. Fulton carried
KC around in a knapsack, sought kitty holistic medicine, $80-a-pop acupuncture,
and $45-per-session physiotherapy, and even installed a 94-degree therapeutic
cat pool in her yard.

    She hauled her mattress out to the living room for an extended convalescent
slumber party.

    In addition, Ms. Fulton learned to "express" KC's bladder when he couldn't
urinate, rig up a catheter and modify human incontinence pads for her cat.

    A profound anthropomorphism is clearly a prerequisite to this kind of
empathy. "The way I looked at it, I wasn't keeping him alive, he had decided to
live and my job was to help him. He had an incredible life force."

    KC learned to walk again and remains on a cocktail of drugs. His favourite
perch is on a chair that once belonged to Glenn Gould. "It would be nice if he
were covered by OHIP, but when I look at him every day, I am pleased he's here."

    Ms. Fulton could afford to pay. Other pet owners face a kind of economic
euthanasia.

    After Lori-Ann Lozyk's seven-year-old great dane, Cheyenne, collapsed in
their Masham, Que., home, she was rushed to Ottawa's Alta Vista Animal Hospital.
"But they wouldn't even look at her unless I was able to put 50 per cent down,"
Ms. Lozyk says. After a battery of tests, it turned out to be a severe thyroid
problem.

    Thankfully for Cheyenne, Ms. Lozyk is one of a growing number of Canadians
who have taken out pet insurance. Her company, Winnipeg-based Pet Plan, faxed
its guarantee of 80 per cent of the $11,000 cost.

    "She's my life. I would have had to put her to sleep."

    You can see why pet insurance is a growth industry in Canada. Available in
Europe since the 1970s, here it has just begun to hit critical mass. There are
three major Canadian providers: Winnipeg's Pet Plan Insurance, Oakville's
Pethealth Inc. (in its insurance wing, PetCare) and Vancouver's Vetinsurance.
The first two of those account for 95 per cent of the Canadian market.

    A publicly traded company,

    Pethealth boasted 11,736 new "core" policy sales during the second quarter
of 2003 and 42,761 ShelterCare policies (a cross-promotion with petfinder.com),
an increase of 173 per cent over the same period in 2002.

    Randy Valpy, vice-president and general manager of Pet Plan, says the
company's overall sales are up 130 per cent this year over last. Accident and
illness coverage starts at about $15 for cats and $26 for dogs monthly. Ninety
per cent of claims, according to Mr. Valpy, are based on illness, not accidents.

    While the number of insured pets in Canada has not yet cracked 100,000, Mr.
Valpy says the industry expects it to hit 400,000 in the next five years, thanks
to spiking demographics. "As baby boomers age," he says, "kids move out of the
house and are replaced by pets - some of them better treated than those kids!"

    But the business is not yet profitable, because of the high rate of claims -
Pet Plan's payouts to customers are up by 23 per cent over last year. Mr. Valpy
acknowledges that pet insurance prompts owners to use more extreme medical
measures to prolong their pets' lives.

    Studies in North America and the United Kingdom show that insured owners
spend 43 per cent more than the uninsured on veterinary procedures. Forty per
cent of people who buy pet insurance will use it, Mr. Valpy says, and double
that among people with older pets. Only 10 per cent of house-insurance
policyholders and 20 per cent of those with auto insurance make claims.

    Another new development in the veterinary infrastructure is the growth in
dog blood banks. At the canine blood-donor clinic at the Northern Alberta
Institute of Technology in Edmonton, for instance, dogs like Zig the golden
retriever are king.

    "Why not? If you can help other dogs and whatnot, it's just a great thing to
do," says Michael Denis, Zig's owner. "To me, it's just one of those things that
makes sense to do."

    For her part, six-year-old Zig - who is giving blood for the first time -
sniffs around the waiting room of NAIT's animal health clinic, which is the site
of the Edmonton branch of the Winnipeg-based Canadian Animal Blood Bank. She
welcomes pats on her head and thick reddish coat and slurps water from a bowl
set out by clinic staff.

    When her time comes, she is hoisted up onto a stainless steel table covered
in towels, a mauve and pink one rolled to support her head. Volunteers and her
owners hold her still. After squirming for a while, she lies limp as a noodle,
looking balefully at the room full of people. Dr. Charlene Stevens inserts the
needle, and a steady stream of dark red blood - 450 millilitres in all - flows
through a tube into a human collection bag that is marked with a prominent
"Canine" label and hooked to a machine.

    "You're saving dogs' lives," Dr. Stevens tells her. "You're a very brave
girl, yes you are."

    Afterward, Zig is lifted off the table and given treats. A red bandana that
says "Pat me! I donated to the Canadian Animal Blood Bank" is tied around her
neck.

    The clinic opened in 2001 and is one of only a handful of facilities in
Canada that collect canine blood. It is looking to expand its roster of about 60
regular donors - dogs can give blood every 90 days as long as they are healthy,
friendly, vaccinated, between 1 and 8 years old, and more than 23 kilograms in
weight.

    In the past two years, the clinic has collected more than 250 units of
blood, enough to help some 500 dogs. The blood is sent to the Winnipeg bank for
processing into different blood products and distribution to veterinary clinics
and hospitals.

    So far, there are no facilities to draw cats' blood, because the necessary
scaled-down equipment is not available.

    But is there a point at which we're overindulging the pet-human bond? Maybe
when kitty MRIs are easier to get than human ones. Meanwhile, though, experts
say our own health may be improved, not only by the companionship of animals,
but also by the advanced treatments they receive.

    The AAHA survey found that 92 per cent of pet owners feel that their pet has
provided them with some personal health benefits. In October of last year, the
Humane Society released a report called Silver Paws: The Role of Pets in
Reducing Human Health Care Costs. Citing studies such as an Australian report
that estimated that dogs and cats save that country $1.82-billion a year in
health costs, Silver Paws suggested granting senior citizens a pet tax break of
$750.

    Mr. O'Sullivan also calls dogs and cats sentinel species - the proverbial
canary in the coal mine. Watch them for signs of environmental diseases, he
suggests.

    California veterinarian Alfred J. Plechner also raises this concern. In his
upcoming book, Pets At Risk: From Allergies to Cancer, Remedies for an
Unsuspected Epidemic, he documents what he sees as an explosion in health
problems at younger ages in dogs, cats and horses, including chronic diseases,
immunological illnesses and cancer due to a deficiency in the endocrine-immune
system.

    Dr. Plechner blames inbreeding, poor diet and environmental factors, and
cites a type of hormone-replacement therapy as both a treatment and a
prevention. "You can take a six-week-old puppy and tell people whether they need
to correct something before a medical effect happens," he says.

    "I will probably do more for my animal than I will do for myself. These are
honest little people that depend on us and would never hurt you or bite you
unless you hurt them. Unlike your neighbour. I think God's most unhappy animal
is man."

    But Dr. Plechner is on that case too: Chapter 16 is called "Implications for
Humans."

    Guelph's Dr. Kruth agrees benign animal testing is a positive byproduct of
pet owners' willingness to go to the wall. "We do a lot of work with the human
medical community using our patients as - I don't want to say experimental
models because that could be misinterpreted - but they are recognized as having
the same type of cancers that people have so there are interventions that are
not available in people that can still be worked out."

    Yet Dr. Mathews looks at it the opposite way - she says she sees human
medicine as her laboratory. "We've done a 180. Animals used to be used for
research. Now, I look at the human literature and see what they do to inform
what I'm going to do. I look at people as laboratory animals."

    Dr. Kruth routinely swaps information with human medicine researchers, most
recently at McMaster University in Hamilton. "Both sides benefit. We're not
using animals as research tools, but using them to get the interventions like
gene therapy into them first because of the long, long regulatory process
associated with people. It helps it move more quickly into people."

    It's not uncommon now for veterinarians to submit articles to human medical
journals, for instance. Dr. Mathews contributed part of a piece on veterinary
critical care for a human medical journal called Critical Care Clinics of North
America.

    So where do we go from this ever-widening edge of the wedge? Well, if you
believe in cryogenics, into the future. Alcor, the Arizona-based company that
will freeze your head after death for $50,000 (U.S.), to be thawed in some
distant century, says on its Web site that it has some small pets in cryostasis.
But the kicker is they won't do it without doing the pet owner too.

    As in life, a pet's suspended animation is nothing without its doting owner.
As the site reads: "If resuscitation becomes possible in the future, (for both
member and pet), the member will then be there, in the future, for the pet. It
does not make sense to place a pet into cryostasis if there is no plan to
resuscitate the pet when the technology becomes available. Further, it makes no
sense to send a pet into the future if the owner will not be there for them."

   Tralee Pearce is a feature writer for The Globe and Mail.

   What price health?

    Depending on the seriousness of the illness and the method of treatment,
expect to see the following bills for your cat or dog:

   Hip Dysplasia: $400-$5,000 (on average, about $2,000 per hip)

   Fractures: $1,000-$3,000

   Knee problems: $1,000-$2,500

   Spinal disc problems: $1,000-$4,000

   Cataracts: $1,000-$2,000 each

   Corneal ulcers: $200-$1,000

   Eyelid problems: $500-$1,000

   Heart problems: $500-$3,000

   Respiratory problems: $500-$2,000

   Digestive disorders: $500-$2,000

   Liver disease: $1,500-$4,000

   Tooth and gum disease: $300-$1,000

   Thyroid problems: $200-$300 a year

   Diabetes: $500-$1,000 a year

   Urinary infections: $200-$1,000 (a year if chronic)

   Skin allergies: $500-$1,000 a year

   Ear problems: $150-$500

   Epilepsy: $250-$500 a year

   Cancer: $250-$10,000

   Source: Pet Plan Insurance

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2006


                              229 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2003 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 26, 2003 Saturday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. F9

LENGTH: 1363 words

HEADLINE: It'll grow back;
Scientists are studying newts, starfish and even some mice, all of which can
regenerate lost or damaged body parts, reports ANNE McILROY . The question is,
can they teach humans a genetic trick or two?

BYLINE: ANNE McILROY

BODY:

    One newt has a fleshy stump where its arm should be. Another has short, but
promising, little fingers. All of the newts in the amputee tank in Cathy
Tsilfidis's lab have had limbs lopped off and are growing new ones.

    Amputations are more of a bother than a tragedy for the tiny lizard-like
creatures. Unlike humans, newts can grow back new arms, legs, tails and parts of
their hearts and eyes. Dr. Tsilfidis is studying how they do it, searching for
the genes that govern this process of self-repair - which would revolutionize
medicine, if it could ever be applied to humans.

    Lose a kidney to disease? Grow a replacement. Chop your finger off cutting
bagels? Grow a new digit. That's the dream, but the work is in the very early
stages.

    "Hopefully we will be able to trigger regeneration in humans, but the type
of regeneration remains to be seen," says Dr. Tsilfidis, who works at the
University of Ottawa's Eye Institute.

    She is one of only a dozen researchers in North America probing the genetic
mysteries of regeneration in creatures like newts. Which genes are switched on
when a newt grows a new arm or leg? Do humans have any similar genes?

    It has taken years to figure out how to breed newts successfully, and their
genes have proved difficult to manipulate and study in the lab. There have been
no dramatic breakthroughs, although progress has been made in recent years
because of new genetic techniques.

    Work on regeneration has gained new prominence in recent years, however, as
part of the excitement around stem cells.

    Stem cells are the body's master cells, which can develop into more
specialized cells - hair, skin, teeth, bones, blood, brain, whatever. One day
they may be used to repair damage done by heart disease, Alzheimers, diabetes
and Parkinsons, to help severed spinal cords work again, or to grow new organs
for transplants. The catch is that the best source of them, at least so far, is
embryos or aborted fetuses.

    Regeneration, on the other hand, is more self-contained, and researchers
believe it could lead to people growing new hearts, kidneys or other organs
inside their bodies.

    It also involves stem cells. But in regeneration, the developmental pathway
is reversed from normal human development, in which stem cells differentiate
into something more complex. In regeneration, a fully developed cell with
specialized functions - a muscle cell, for example - is reverted into a
primordial stem cell. It is the equivalent of an adult morphing into a baby, or
a baby changing into an embryo. Scientists call it de-differentiation.

    Newts are the poster animals for the process, because they can regenerate so
many different parts of their bodies, but worms, starfish and other amphibians
also have regenerative abilities, as do some species of fish. Dr. Tsilfidis
works with newts because they are vertebrates, and therefore closer to humans in
evolutionary terms.

    There is some evidence of regeneration in mammals, but it was discovered by
accident. Ellen Heber-Katz, an immunologist in Philadelphia, was working with
mice suffering from a disease similar to lupus. To tell her mice apart, she
pierced different patterns of holes in each animal's ear.

    Within a month, the holes had disappeared. She did other experiments, and
found that her mice could regenerate parts of their hearts, tails and spinal
cords, something normal mice can't do.

    Dr. Heber-Katz speculated that the difference was that the lupus mice were
unable to form scar tissue. Mark Keating, a cell biologist and cardiologist in
Boston, who works with zebrafish, is also studying whether scar-tissue formation
prevents regeneration.

    In an experiment published last year in the prestigious U.S. journal
Science, Dr. Keating and his team surgically removed large chunks of heart
muscle from tropical fish. They found the fish quickly regrew the missing
muscle.

    Humans can't do this. When human hearts are damaged, in a heart attack, for
example, the cells don't regenerate. Instead, the damaged cells are replaced by
scar tissue. Too much scar tissue makes it hard for the heart to function
normally.

    Dr. Keating believes there is some sort of biological balance between
scarring and regeneration. Some of the zebrafish in the experiment had a genetic
mutation that restricted their ability to regenerate. They grew scar tissue
instead.

    Scar tissue can be a good thing. It is a protective mechanism that fights
infection by forming a physical barrier around a wound. When you cut your skin,
for example, it quickly scars over to prevent microbes from settling in.

    "It may be that if you regenerate, you don't scar, but if you can't
regenerate, you scar," Dr. Keating said. He is now looking for the genes that
allow the fish to grow new hearts, and then will look for similar genes in
humans. This work has attracted $9-million (U.S) in venture capital to his
company, Hydra Biosciences.

    Dr. Tsilfidis, too, has also found that newts don't form the same kind of
scar tissue when their arms are cut off as they do when other parts of their
bodies are injured. The scar tissue seems to prevent crucial interactions
between cells that are essential for regeneration.

    But Dr. Tsilfidis cautions there are many obstacles to overcome before work
can begin with humans. One potentially serious problem is the similarities
between regeneration and tumour growth. "At the early stages," she says,
"regeneration resembles a tumour, with cells dividing uncontrollably. We have to
know what we are doing when we regenerate so we don't cause cancer."

    Newts appear to be more resistant to cancer than humans are. Researchers
studying regeneration in the late 1960s and 1970s applied cancer-causing
chemicals to different parts of newts' bodies. If the chemical was dabbed on
near a limb, the animals grew an extra arm or leg. On non-regenerating parts of
the body, tumours grew instead.

    Cancer may be one of the reasons humans don't regenerate like newts, Dr.
Tsilfidis says. Our immune systems may have evolved to detect rapidly growing
cells and shut them down, which would be incompatible with growing a new arm or
a new leg. Humans may also have made an evolutionary tradeoff, developing
super-specialized cells that help us think and talk, but which don't easily
revert to the primordial stem-cell status.

    "The higher you move in evolution, the less regenerative ability there is,"
Dr. Tsilfidis says.

    Humans still have some, however. Human muscle can regenerate to some extent,
as can the liver. If you remove the liver's right lobe, the total mass can be
replaced in a few weeks.

    In 1974, a child in England lost the tip of her finger. She was taken to
hospital, but the doctor didn't have time to close the wound. A day later, it
had already started to regrow. Some doctors now choose to give kids who lose
fingertips a chance to let the digit regrow. Researchers are divided over
whether regeneration is taking place, or whether cells are simply growing
rapidly, as they do in all children.

    Either way, humans still have nowhere near the regenerative ability of
newts, starfish, worms or zebrafish. The idea now is to stimulate the process,
either with drugs or genetic therapy.

    Dr. Tsilfidis believes that is still many years away. She is working to
isolate the newt genes, or even bits of genes, that direct regeneration in
newts, and study the proteins they produce.

    She amputates their limbs, and studies what happens at the molecular level
when they regrow. She isolates genes that are active, or expressed, in the newts
that are regenerating new arms. Then she looks for those same pieces of genetic
material in newts with all their limbs intact. If the genes aren't present in
the normal newts, it means they are likely involved in regeneration. So far, she
and her colleagues have identified 59 fragments of DNA, or sections of genes,
that may be involved.

    Dr. Tsilfidis has become attached to the creatures she studies, creatures
that may someday show us the way to grow new limbs or organs. When her newts are
finished regenerating, she donates them to a local pet store.

    "They grow on you."

   Anne McIlroy is The Globe and Mail's science reporter.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2006


                              239 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Sun Media Corporation
                         Calgary Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                      April 11, 2003 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 227 words

HEADLINE: REGULATIONS TO GIVE BLOOD BOLSTERED

BYLINE: BY CP

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   Health Canada placed new restrictions on the collection of blood yesterday to
help preclude the possibility of SARS-tainted donations getting into the blood
supply.

   Dr. Paul Gully of Health Canada announced the changes at a SARS briefing in
Ottawa "although there is currently no evidence of transmission of SARS through
blood or blood components."

   The temporary deferral of donations affects people who travelled within the
previous 10 days to an affected area -- China, Hong Kong, Hanoi, Singapore and
Taiwan.

   As well, those people who have been a patient in, worked in, or visited a
facility that is under quarantine for SARS are asked to temporarily defer giving
blood.

   Those facilities are in the Toronto area, and include Scarborough Grace
Hospital, where some of the first Canadian SARS cases were treated, and York
Central Hospital in Richmond Hill, Ont.

   "The blood-safety system in Canada is one of the best in the world, precisely
because we take careful measures," said Julia Hill, director general of the
biologics and genetic therapies directorate at Health Canada.

   "We are simply saying that there is a theoretical risk, so why take the
chance? It's a temporary deferral."

   Canadians are very responsible, she said, and don't donate blood when they
don't feel well, or when they're concerned they may have been exposed to
viruses.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2003


                              242 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2003 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             March 25, 2003 Tuesday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 438 words

HEADLINE: Ottawa tells clinic to suspend high-tech cancer test

BYLINE: BRIAN LAGHI

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:

    Health Canada has ordered a private medical clinic providing high-tech
cancer diagnoses at $2,500 each to suspend the service, The Globe and Mail has
learned.

    The order came after a letter of complaint from Ontario Health Minister Tony
Clement, who said the department was opening the door to two-tier health care.

    Federal officials said yesterday that their order had nothing to do with the
fact that the company, CareImaging, was charging for the tests, but, rather,
that the tests were being done on the wrong type of patient.

    Ottawa gave CareImaging the right to open its doors two weeks ago, allowing
it to operate a positron emission tomography machine, which is used as a
diagnostic tool for cancer and heart disease and other ailments. Like other PET
scans, the Mississauga machine was to be used in clinical trials, because the
drug needed to facilitate the scan is still considered experimental.

    A federal spokesman said yesterday that CareImaging's approval to operate
was strictly for patients with heart problems, not those suffering from cancer.

    "There was a variation from the approved protocol. They weren't following it
exactly the same," said Ken Moore, risk process manager of the department's
Biologics and Genetic Therapies Directorate.

    "They will need to get approval before they would be able to start enrolling
patients again."

    One of CareImaging's owners, Dr. Robert Stodilka, would not say yesterday
whether it has shut down.

    Critics said Health Canada was behaving unethically by allowing the company
to charge fees for what amounted to an unapproved treatment.

    Mike McBane of the Canadian Health Coalition said the federal government
should now accept the recommendations of Health Care Commissioner Roy Romanow,
who said last year that diagnostic equipment should be covered under the Canada
Health Act, which would prevent private firms from charging for such services.

    "This should not be in the hands of private entrepreneurs," he said. "It's a
perversion of medicare and of government."

    Federal officials have said there is nothing that prevents firms from
charging for clinical trials.

    Typically, however, companies such as large pharmaceutical companies don't
levy charges because of the experimental nature of the trial.

    Normand Laberge, chief executive officer of the Canadian Association of
Radiologists, said the order is unfortunate because it may mean that many needy
patients will go without the service. "This could be a real disaster for
patients in need," he said.

    "It may close down access to PET scans in Canada. If that's the effect,
clearly people are going to die."

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2006


                              244 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2003 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            February 21, 2003 Friday
                                National Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 529 words

HEADLINE: Tissue bank standards still years in making

BYLINE: ROBERT MATAS, With a report by André Picard

DATELINE: VANCOUVER

BODY:

    Federal rules for accreditation of tissue banks in Canada are two years away
despite concerns raised this week about the distribution of possibly tainted
tissue from British Columbia's Ear Bank.

    Federal and provincial health officials have been involved in a process
since the late 1990s to set national standards, Julia Hill, a spokeswoman for
the biologics and genetic therapies directorate of Health Canada, said yesterday
in an interview from Ottawa.

    Standards on the safety of cells, tissues and organs for transplants are
expected to be published by March 1, and official regulations based on the
standards are to be ready two months later.

    However, regulations dealing with accreditation and surveillance will take
another two years of discussions, Ms. Hill said. The pace reflects a complicated
process of discussion with 1,300 organizations, including 20 tissue banks in
Canada, she said.

    The B.C. government urged Health Canada this week to launch a comprehensive
review of tissue banks across the country after the federal agency advised the
B.C. Ear Bank to recall all unused tissue distributed since 1975.

    The ear bank closed in October, after gaps were discovered in documentation
on whether tissue from the facility had been properly screened for infectious
diseases, such as HIV and hepatitis B or C.

    The risk of contracting disease from the tissue is considered extremely low.
No one has reported transmission of a disease from a specimen from the B.C. Ear
Bank.

    The facility has distributed 6,016 specimens to physicians and hospitals
since 1985 but does not have proper records showing how many were sent out
between 1975 and 1985. The specimens could be used for teaching, research or ear
reconstruction.

    A patient in Calgary who received tissue from the B.C. bank contacted the
Calgary Health Region in response to publicity about the facility. Another 10
people in the Lethbridge, Alta., area were notified about the issue and advised
to see their doctors.

    Health authorities, however, refused to release the names, citing patient
confidentiality.

    The tissues can transmit disease because they can become repositories for
infectious agents such as viruses and bacteria, which can survive a short time
between transplant from a cadaver to a recipient.

    The ear bank collects and distributes dura mater, pericardium and ear bones.
Dura mater is the tough membrane that envelopes the brain. It is used to repair
brain aneurysms and hernias, to fashion sheaths for peripheral nerves and spinal
fusions, and to repair cleft palates.

    The pericardium is the sac that encases the heart. A new one is needed after
a heart transplant. Ear bones are used to reconstruct ears that are damaged.

    Dura mater is of particular concern because the substance has been involved
in documented cases of transmission of Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease, the human
equivalent of mad-cow disease.

    In fact, the closing of the B.C. Ear Bank is the latest blow to the supply
of dura mater. Last year, Health Canada halted the import of brain patches made
from dura mater. More than 100 people worldwide, including at least four in
Canada, contracted CJD from these products.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2006


                              246 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2003 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           January 16, 2003 Thursday

SECTION: LETTER TO THE EDITOR; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 130 words

HEADLINE: Hamburger didn't help

BYLINE: TRACEY McCOWEN

DATELINE: Maple, Ont.

BODY:

     I agree with Jackie Smith (Trust Us: We're Medical Researchers - Jan. 14)
that the University of Pennsylvania gene-therapy trial was mired in conflict of
interest.

    However, Jesse Gelsinger died because of excessive nitrogen in his blood.
The other six subjects are still alive and might have benefited from the trial,
which was halted after Mr. Gelsinger's death, had Mr. Gelsinger not consumed an
excessive number of hamburgers the night before he was supposed to go on a
strictly vegetarian diet. That diet would have reduced the nitrogen in his
blood.

    As research uses increasingly more subtle technology, the risks become more
complex and less obvious. As a bioethicist, I wish there were more research
focused on preventive measures. Sadly, no one makes money off prevention.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2006


                              250 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2003 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 14, 2003 Tuesday

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 667 words

HEADLINE: Trust us: We're medical researchers

BYLINE: JACKIE SMITH

BODY:

     The stranger-than-fiction, self-promoting Raelians are by no means alone in
their attempts to pervert science. History is full of stories of poor and
desperate people subjected to dangerous medical experiments - some leading to
progress, some only to harm. It's no surprise that the genetic era is seeing
legitimate and rogue scientists lose sight of human rights and dignity in a race
for publicity, scientific glory and lucrative contracts.

    The Nazi doctors are the best-known perpetrators of abuse, but there are
many more. In the late 1700s, England's Dr. Edward Jenner used his infant son in
research for a smallpox vaccine. In the 1800s, Dr. J. Marion Sims, now known as
the father of gynecology, operated 30 times on a slave named Anarcha without
anesthesia before finding a cure for vesico-vaginal fistula, a condition causing
incontinence and difficult reproduction (a serious problem in a slave economy).

    In the 1950s, following the Nazi medical trials and passage of the Nuremberg
Code, medical scientists were supposed to make sure research was socially
useful, not unnecessarily risky, and only done on those who consented
voluntarily. This didn't help children at New York's Willowbrook State School
for the Retarded infected with live hepatitis virus, or senile patients at the
Brooklyn Jewish Chronic Diseases Hospital who were given live cancer cells to
test their immune response, or prisoners subjected to radiation experiments. Nor
the patients subjected to "psychic driving" (memory-erasing) experiments at
Montreal's McGill University, courtesy of Dr. Ewen Cameron and his funders, the
Canadian government and the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency.

    The fact is, new science often results in new abuse, which leads governments
and medical associations to pass new regulations to prevent further abuse. In
response to abuses of the 1950s, protections increased in the 1960s - and
loosened in the 1990s after AIDS activists and cancer patients demanded access
to experimental, potentially life-saving drugs.

    One of the last decade's best-known cases was that of Jesse Gelsinger, 18,
who had a mild form of a rare and often fatal liver disorder known as ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency. Jesse died in a 1999 gene-therapy experiment at the
University of Pennsylvania so riddled with scientific problems and financial
conflicts of interest it should never have passed ethics review.

    Jesse's disease had been under control; Paul Gelsinger says his son thought
he had more chance of dying in a plane crash than in therapy, and that his
doctor was blinded by his desire to be the next Jonas Salk, who discovered a
safe, effective vaccine for polio. Jesse wasn't even expected to benefit from
the research, which violates the ethical principle that benefits to research
subjects must be greater than risks.

    Canadian James Dent, 66, died prematurely as a result of a 1997 gene-therapy
experiment for brain cancer at the Toronto Hospital. This experiment also passed
ethics review.

    With the Raelians, we automatically suspect their "science." We should do so
with reputable researchers working in reputable institutions, given the tens of
thousands of clinical trials involving millions of research subjects taking
place in North America today, and the limited number of people to monitor their
ethics. Even when researchers want to warn the public about unethical research,
lack of legislation to protect whistle blowers may prevent them.

    Finding the balance between protection and participation will be one of the
genetic era's greatest research challenges. History tells us that when it comes
to individual rights, more protection is often better than less protection (that
also goes for therapeutic stem-cell research to cure killer diseases). Unless,
of course, we're willing to rely on the consciences of those approving, doing,
and paying for the research. This would be quite a leap of faith.
Jackie Smith consults in bioethics and teaches nursing ethics at York
University.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2006


                              255 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Sun Media Corporation
                         Calgary Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                     December 6, 2002 Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 539 words

HEADLINE: HIGH-TECH BOND TOYS CLOSER THAN WE THINK

BYLINE: TIM FRIEND, USA TODAY

BODY:

   Can evil geniuses change their identity with gene therapy?

   Will releasing the passenger ejector seat upright your speeding car after it
flips upside down on an ice lake due to missile fire?

   Is it scientifically possible to make your car appear invisible?

   The answers are yes, yes and yes -- if your name is James Bond and you are
saving the world from destruction in the new film Die Another Day.

   So what about the real world? A brief USA TODAY investigation examines these
questions.

   What about the ability of an ejector seat to flip your car right-side up in
an emergency?

   Die Another Day features the Aston Martin V12 Vanquish -- a car to die for.
Aston Martin has built cars for five Bond movies. The 1964 release of Goldfinger
marked the debut of the DB5. Company officials say it had an ejector seat.

   The V12, however, only has an ejector seat button, says spokeswoman Cristina
Bruzzi. She explains that the Die scene in which Bond turns his car back over
using a passenger ejector seat was actually a "special effect."

   Bruzzi says a real car ejector seat released on an ice lake might punch a
hole into the ice, which "would not be a good thing."
   NOT AN OPTION
 She adds that a passenger ejector seat is not an option on the commercially
available V12 Vanquish because "it might be hard on relationships."
Nevertheless, the Vanquish is a fairly remarkable piece of real-world
technology:

   * The six-litre, 460-horsepower engine can blast you from zero to 100 km/h in
five seconds and aid your escape from real villains at a top speed of 305 km/h.

   * The Formula 1 six-speed manual transmission has no clutch. You zip through
the gears by flicking paddles on the steering console with your fingers. Just
remember to ease off the accelerator between first and second gear.

   * Pricetag: $234,260. Not only does Pierce Brosnan as Bond get to drive it in
the movie, the studio gave him one as part of his deal.

   The Bond version has some rather unique options not provided by Aston Martin:

   * Two 9-mm machine guns that rise from the hood on hydraulic lifters.

   * Five heat-seeking missiles that fire from behind a retractable grille.
   * Two shotguns in the grille.
 "These options could give a new meaning to road rage," Bruzzi says.
   NOW YOU SEE IT
 But perhaps they will have more meaning for the video game.
   Finally, what about invisibility?
 The U.S. military is developing new materials for battlefield vehicles that can
change colours to match the environment.

   Though they are not invisible, the vehicles would be very difficult to see
during the day.

   Materials scientists are also working to reduce heat emissions to make
aircraft and ground vehicles invisible to infrared sensors.

   Last April, the U.S. Department of Defence funded a new nanotechnology
research program at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

   That program will be developing microscopic robots that one day, in theory,
could make a vehicle appear invisible.

   One thing that is certain in the realm of real science: The U.S. military is
funding much of the most exciting research on the planet.

   But the most sophisticated technologies will be in use for years before the
public ever finds out.

NOTES:
Auto Market

GRAPHIC: photo; TO DIE FOR?

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2002


                              257 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            November 22, 2002 Friday

SECTION: COMMENT; MEDICARE; Pg. A23

LENGTH: 980 words

HEADLINE: We're headed the wrong way;
Any health-care system that makes visits to a family doctor;
freely available but rations high-cost treatments for;
life-threatening ailments has it backward, says BRIAN LEE CROWLEY

BYLINE: BRIAN LEE CROWLEY

BODY:

    Canadians cannot sustain medicare if we stay on our present course. We've
bought a modest slowdown in the rate of spending increases - chiefly by reducing
services, closing facilities, reducing the number of health professionals,
increasing waiting times and forgoing innovative, but expensive, new
technologies. But medicare as we know it can only be "sustainable" if Canadians
are willing to accept less service or more taxes. Polls indicate that neither is
acceptable. Yet our expectations are increasing - for expensive health
technologies, drugs and procedures, and for the normal demands of an aging
population. Medicare's problems are only going to grow.

    Roy Romanow, head of the Commission on the Future of Health Care in Canada,
has rejected these arguments, making it clear that he will recommend not only
retaining but even expanding the centrally planned, government monopoly model of
health care in Canada.

    Virtually every other major inquiry into health care, including Kirby,
Mazankowski and Fyke, says sustainability is the system's key challenge. Mr.
Romanow's own former minister of finance in Saskatchewan underlined this when
she testified before his commission.

    But Mr. Romanow denies there's a problem. We're spending the same share of
GDP on public health care as 30 years ago. If a little more than 7 per cent of
GDP was sustainable in 1972, why is that same percentage unsustainable today?

    It's the wrong question. The problem is not how much we're spending, but how
we're paying for it and what we're getting in return. For years, we borrowed and
spent on health care (and other services), so we got more than we were willing
to pay for. Today, we pay the full cost of current services, plus the interest
on money we borrowed for health care and other things in the past. While the
spending has remained constant as a share of GDP, the taxburden has grown and
quality has declined.

    The irresistible force of demand for services is running headlong into the
immovable object of unavoidably limited health budgets. To date, we've relieved
the pressure by letting infrastructure crumble, forgoing access to the latest
medical innovations, and allowing queues to lengthen and the number of medical
professionals to decline.

    By and large, people have access to ordinary, low-cost services like GP
office visits, but they find it increasingly difficult to get vital services
such as sophisticated diagnostics, many types of surgery, and cancer care (where
the waits can be measured in months if not years).

    This is the exact reverse of what the rational person would want. We should
use the public sector to pool everyone's risk of expensive interventions to
ensure that they're available when needed - but let individuals bear the cost of
ordinary interventions (supplemented by private insurance and subsidies for
those on low incomes).

    Hardly anyone can afford cancer care, bypass surgery, gene therapy or a
serious chronic illness on their own. These are the things that, without
insurance, destroy people's finances. But as much as 30 per cent of the services
consumed under medicare are of marginal or no value. No one would be financially
ruined by having to pay for an ordinary doctor's office visit if we ensured that
people on low incomes were subsidized, and there was a reasonable maximum anyone
would be called on to pay. No one would be harmed by an incentive not to go to
the emergency room when a visit to the family clinic would do just as well.

    The world's biggest health-care study, the RAND experiment, found that
people who had to pay something toward the cost of their care consumed less of
it, but that their health was every bit as good as those who got totally free
care.

    The extra infusion of taxes Mr. Romanow will recommend will merely put off
the day when we must concentrate scarce public health-care dollars where they'll
do the most good, and give users of the system incentives to be prudent about
how they spend them. We spend vast sums on procedures of little or no value,
while we place patients with life-threatening conditions in lengthening queues.

    But there's hope. If we put these facts before Canadians, they will rise to
the challenge of defining the list of health services they believe merit full
public insurance. They will also accept having to pay for minor services out of
pocket if they're sure that the poor won't suffer (the list can be developed
through public consultation, under appropriate rules and safeguards, where
Canadians decide how much they should pay and what medicare should cover).

    Oregon has already moved in this direction. A recent paper by health
economist Julia Witt for my institute makes a powerful case that the
shortcomings of the Oregon experiment can be overcome by more sophisticated
rules and consultation techniques.

    Canadians have resisted plans to reduce the range of services insured by
medicare; they suspect that the outcome will reflect what bureaucrats, not
citizens, actually want.

    Engaging Canadians in each province in a dialogue on the services to be
insured, and treating them like responsible, intelligent adults, might produce
results that would pleasantly surprise our political elites.

    Mr. Romanow is wedded to an old paternalistic model - one that's been
overtaken by technology and by rising public expectations. It suggests experts
know best which services we should get, how much they should cost, and how long
we should wait.

    Let's tell Canadians the truth about medicare's unsustainability and involve
them in making the tough choices to ensure that medicare's best features are
there when we need them.
Brian Lee Crowley, president of the Atlantic Institute for Market Studies, is
co-author of the forthcoming Definitely Not the Romanow Report: Achieving
Equity, Sustainability, Accountability and Consumer Empowerment in Canadian
Health Care.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2006


                              258 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 21, 2002 Thursday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; THE BLOOD SCANDAL; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 429 words

HEADLINE: Ottawa rejects Tory call to reconsider package

BYLINE: SHAWN McCARTHY AND BRIAN LAGHI, With a report from Daniel Leblanc

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:

    Health Minister Anne McLellan has rejected calls from opposition MPs to
reconsider the government's compensation package for tainted-blood victims, a
plan which excluded hepatitis C sufferers who were infected before 1986.

    In the House of Commons yesterday, Progressive Conservative Leader Joe Clark
said that, in light of the fact that the charges against Health Canada officials
cover a period from 1980 to 1990, the Liberal government should revisit its
compensation plan.

    In 1998, health ministers announced a $1.2-billion federal-provincial
compensation offer limited to hepatitis C victims infected by tainted blood from
1986 to 1990. Since then, some provinces have moved to compensate those excluded
from the original federal-provincial offer.

    "Is the government prepared to reconsider its decision to limit compensation
and will it now help all the victims of the tainted-blood scandal?" Mr. Clark
demanded.

    Ms. McLellan replied, "The short answer to that question is no, we are not
going to reconsider our position.

    "It would be singularly inappropriate for anyone to comment at this point.
Charges have been laid. These matters will be dealt with before the courts.
Obviously we need to await the outcome of that litigation."

    She added that the government did provide $525-million to assist with care
of those left out of the compensation plan, but critics complain that assistance
did not provide cash for lost income.

    The Health Minister's brusque rejection of calls to expand the compensation
to cover people infected before 1986 irritated some members of her own caucus.

    "I wish we could do the right thing for these people in a policy perspective
not based on legal liability," said MP Carolyn Bennett, who wept four years ago
when she had to vote with her party on an opposition motion that opposed the
plan.

    Ms. Bennett said the government should have followed the advice of Mr.
Justice Horace Krever, who headed an inquiry into the tainted-blood scandal and
recommended that the government should proceed on a "no-fault" basis to
compensate people for costs and lost income.

    Julia Hill, director-general at the biologics and genetic therapies
directorate at Health Canada, said that Canada has learned the necessary lessons
from the tainted-blood debacle. She said that monitoring, prevention and
inspection of the country's blood supply are better now.

    "It wasn't only in Canada. It was a systemic issue across the whole world.
So all of these countries came to terms with this new emerging pathogen that we
were really not aware of at the time."

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2006


                              261 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            November 5, 2002 Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH; CYSTIC FIBROSIS; Pg. R5

LENGTH: 1402 words

HEADLINE: 'It's like breathing through a straw';
The defect is tiny - one error in one gene - yet the effects;
are devastating for the victims of CF, writes SHAFIQ QAADRI

BYLINE: SHAFIQ QAADRI, Special to The Globe and Mail

BODY:

    Kim MacGregor knew something was wrong as soon as her baby girl was born -
the infant's stomach was swollen to three times the normal size due to an
intestinal blockage. Told that the condition was critical, Kim and her husband
watched as their daughter was rushed into emergency surgery, which saved her
life.

    "We were devastated." Mrs. MacGregor said. ". . . We went home with a
car-seat but no baby, bags full of clothes but no baby to fill them."

    Their daughter, Madison, spent her first six weeks recovering in hospital,
and the MacGregors learned that she had cystic fibrosis. Like one million
Canadians, they didn't know they were both silent carriers of a faulty CF gene.
"We had never heard about CF. . . . My husband and I are both healthy people."

    The CF gene was discovered in 1989 at the University of Toronto by Dr. Lap
Chee Tsui, a professor of molecular and medical genetics. Madison had inherited
one copy of this defective gene from each parent, resulting in the illness.

    Parents of CF patients find it hard to believe how one error in a single
gene can affect the body so profoundly, since the defect is tiny: the equivalent
of a single misspelled word in one volume of a multivolume encyclopedia. Yet the
effects are devastating, and there is no cure.

    People have heard of clogged arteries, but CF leads to a clogged body.
"Thick mucus, too much salt, not enough water," is how doctors describe CF in
simple terms. And no part of the body is spared.

    Patients with CF have excessively salty sweat and are prone to dehydration
in hot weather. This is the basis of the sweat test to diagnose CF.

    The chest stays congested, like a never-ending chest cold, making it
difficult for a person to breathe. A CF patient coughs constantly and is prone
to infections from hard-to-treat bugs.

    "It's like breathing through a straw," says one CF patient. Respiratory
illnesses account for most of the complications, hospitalizations and premature
death.

    The pancreas is the master gland of digestion. All the various food groups -
proteins, sugars, fats, oils - are at least partially digested by pancreatic
enzymes. In the case of CF, the pancreas is clogged with thick mucus which
impairs the secretion of insulin. That's why CF patients often have diabetes
requiring daily insulin injections. A scarred, blocked pancreas also condemns CF
patients to taking pills every time they eat.

    Thick mucus and salt imbalances predispose CF patients to diarrhea and bowel
irritation; weak, brittle bones; a clogged, failing liver; delayed puberty in
girls; slow growth; and male infertility. For example, the tube that carries
sperm outside the body is either clogged or absent in 98 per cent of men with
CF, rendering them unable to father children naturally.

    Feeding finicky kids is always a challenge, and parents often have to
legislate meals. But a proper high-calorie diet - low in fat, high in protein -
is vital for children with CF. Without a balanced, vitamin-enriched diet and
digestive-enzyme supplements, children will lose weight, be prone to frequent
chest infections and literally waste away.

    For example, the MacGregors' daughter Madison, now 3, has a healthy appetite
and is doing well with one or two capsules with each meal. But it is common for
adults with CF to take dozens of enzyme pills and nutritional supplements daily
to maintain their health.

    Randy Ferguson, 41, is something of a miracle. He has outlived many of his
friends with CF, who died in their 20s, and bested the expected lifespan of 34
years.

    Describing himself as "very fit," Randy credits his longevity to his regimen
and Olympic discipline. He breathes medications by mask-inhalation for 20
minutes three times a day, does one hour of chest-clearing exercises, enjoys
martial arts and weight-training and micromanages his sugar levels by injecting
insulin five times a day. By his own tally, Randy devotes five hours a day to
staying ahead of his CF.

    Over the years, Randy has watched the treatment of CF evolve. In the
sixties, he can remember sleeping in an oxygen tent every night for years, and
taking 130 pills a day. He also values the specialized, multidisciplinary CF
clinics, which have nurses, physiotherapists, psychologists, geneticists,
educators and physicians in one location.

    But the majority of CF patients aren't as fortunate as Randy.

    Maggie Finch watched her teenage son Joseph die because of an exotic
infection that plagues CF patients. Since the chest is always full of thick
phlegm, and the patient has received repeated antibiotics, it acts as a stewing
cauldron breeding superbugs. Joseph contracted one such microbe, B. cepacia,
and, says his mother, "It sped up his lung destruction 10 times."

    This hearty microbe can live without oxygen, is contagious, resistant to
most antibiotics and has "an unusual adaptive capacity," according to Dr. Josée
Chiarot, medical director at the Canadian CF Foundation. Strangely, the B.
cepacia microbe is harmless to people who do not have CF.

    As this microbe eats away at lung tissue, breathing begins to rapidly
decline, and replacing your lungs may be the only option.

    Maggie Finch's younger son Jason, 16, also has CF, and is doing well after
receiving a double-lung transplant in 1998. Before the surgery, Jason couldn't
breathe without pain and coughing, and says his breathing was "like someone was
stepping on my chest."

    Receiving an organ donation cannot be scheduled, as it depends on the death
of the donor. Mrs. Finch confesses that she became addicted to traffic news,
waiting for any accident report that might yield lungs for her remaining son. In
1998, they were phoned at 1 a.m. at their Hamilton residence and told to be in
Toronto within two hours for the transplant surgery.

    Asked how he feels breathing with someone else's lungs, Jason replies, "I
was overwhelmed with my first deep breath. . . . I'm just shocked and surprised
that I made it."

    Parents of CF children provide the needed strength and comfort, trying to
give their kids as normal a childhood as possible, but many need help
themselves. Many attend counselling, and several start antidepressant
medications and psychotherapy. Kim MacGregor is writing an inspiring series of
children's books, Tales of Madison Faith, which features information about CF,
and is donating part of the proceeds to the CF Foundation.

    Asked how she coped, Mrs. Finch replies with dark humour, "You mean how did
I manage with two terminally ill kids? No problem." But she says her
Hamilton-based self-help group, comprised of CF families, became "a part of our
life."

    Since the discovery of the CF gene in 1989, scientists have hoped to remedy
the genetic defect by inserting new genes into people. But gene therapy for CF
is still experimental.

    Correcting a genetic defect is like sending in a micro-editor to proofread
the entire gene text, identifying the misspelled word and splicing in the
correct one.

    An example of applied evolution, a common-cold virus is engineered to pick
up a hitchhiking CF gene. Patients inhale this man-made bug, and scientists hope
the editing takes place. So far, scientists have only temporarily corrected the
spelling of CF genes. Further research is needed, and gene therapy is still a
decade away from wide application.

    Some jurisdictions advocate population-wide screening. Health authorities in
the United Kingdom call CF "the most common life-threatening inherited disease."
Thus legislation is being introduced for all newborns in the U.K. to be screened
for CF.

    Informed parenting and correction of the faulty gene before birth - at the
earliest stages of pregnancy - may be a future cure, eliminating the coughing,
pills, infections and premature death that CF patients suffer.
Dr. Shafiq Qaadri is a Toronto family physician.

A CF primer

   Parts of the body affected:

    * Skin, salty, leading to rapid dehydration in hot weather

    * Lungs, leading to chronic congestion and infections

    * Pancreas, leading to poor digestion requiring supplements

    * Kidneys, leading to kidney failure

    * Liver, leading to liver failure

    * Bowels, leading to diarrhea and undigested food

    * Bone, leading to early osteoporosis and slow growth

    * Testes, leading to infertility

    * Ovaries, leading to delayed puberty

   For more information:

    * The Canadian Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
   www.cysticfibrosis.ca

    * The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (USA):
   www.cff.org

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2006


                              264 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 22, 2002 Tuesday

SECTION: COMMENT; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 808 words

HEADLINE: Is egg freezing safe? No;
We need more fact and less fiction on what reproductive and;
genetic technologies can and cannot do, says lawyer MAUREEN McTEER

BYLINE: MAUREEN McTEER

BODY:

    If the press reports from last week's meeting in Seattle of the American
Society for Reproductive Medicine are anything to go by, the problems of
balancing career and family for women are over.

    At puberty, we can freeze our eggs, where they will stay in suspended
animation until we have reached middle age and (I assume) the pinnacle of our
careers. Then, at 45 or so, when we have reached the glass ceiling or just want
a change of pace, we can "retire" and have a family. No more need to worry about
changing society to meet women's needs as professionals and parents. We just
change women.

    Over and above the sheer nonsense of it all (what woman in her right mind
would want to be racing around after her toddlers during menopause?) is a
troubling question: Is any of this safe?

    When human eggs are thawed, their fragile chromosomal structure can be
easily damaged. This would lead to severe defects in any child born using these
eggs, assuming that a viable pregnancy could even be established. No evidence
that I have seen suggests that the issues raised by egg freezing have been
properly addressed or solved.

    Indeed, at a conference on reproductive technologies and the law that I just
attended in London, in vitro fertilization specialist Robert Winston emphasized
the experimental nature of this technique. His colleague, Joyce Harper, renowned
for her work in pre-implantation diagnosis of IVF embryos, insisted that little
animal work had been done on egg freezing, and that what has been carried out
shows that genetic abnormalities are common.

    Dr. Harper's concern was with the lack of research and development that has
been done on several reproductive techniques now in use in the United Kingdom,
and the lack of genetic expertise within the country's licensing body, the Human
Fertilization and Embryology Authority. In effect, we have a system that allows
experimental research to be done on patients under the guise of reproductive
therapy - euphemistically called "experimental therapy."

    An example, in Dr. Harper's view, is assisted hatching, where she insists
there have been few controlled randomized studies that show it is safe. In
assisted hatching, the egg shell of a human IVF-created embryo is thinned using
either a laser or acid to facilitate its escape and later attachment to the
lining of a woman's uterus once it is transferred there.

    In their often desperate search for a child, women (and the children they
might bear) can easily become experimental subjects. What worried me was the
fact that no one at this seminar could tell me how a reproductive technology or
practice could be both an experiment and a therapy at the same time, even though
different legal rules, especially for the protection of the research subject
(i.e., the woman), would normally apply.

    Canadians should take note of this concern among world experts about the
need for more research and development before these reproductive and genetic
technologies are used on women as routine reproductive "therapies." Requiring
this as a matter of licensing will be critical in the new Canadian law to
regulate IVF clinics and research on embryos, now before Parliament again for
debate and decision.

    Why should we worry about this? Isn't the goal of a baby for an infertile
couple sufficient reason to proceed, despite the dangers?

    Of course we must continue to help the infertile found a family. That is the
main purpose of IVF and its reproductive spinoffs. But I do not believe that
this should be done at any cost. We must ensure that we preserve a real balance
between the needs of infertile couples and the science that makes these
reproductive and genetic techniques safe and successful. It's time we had more
fact and less fiction on what these technologies can and cannot do, and at what
price to the women (and now men) who are undergoing them.

    For example, either there have been 30 live births from egg freezing, as
some insist, or there have been a hundred, as others claim. Even my
mathematically challenged brain knows there is a big difference in numbers here.

    The more I hear from these public relations and media exercises that promote
the interests of commercial clinics looking for new patients, the more convinced
I am that we must move quickly to pass an effective law to regulate IVF clinics
and the embryonic research that flourishes from them.

    One thing is clear from the British experience, though - a law alone will
not protect women. We urgently need funding for the scientific research required
to ensure that women and men wanting a family are not experimental guinea pigs.
After all they've been through, that's the least we can promise them.
Maureen McTeer, a lawyer, is a visiting research fellow at the Sheffield
Institute for Biotechnological Law and Ethics at the University of Sheffield in
England.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2006


                              265 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 18, 2002 Friday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: MANAGING; The Strategist; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 824 words

HEADLINE: The high cost of ignoring technology

BYLINE: DAVID TICOLL

BODY:

    Canadians need to start thinking about technology in a different way: as an
investment, not as a cost.

    The federal government's innovation strategy white paper cites many reports
that show how technological innovation is central to labour productivity, which
drives the standard of living. But Canada's standard of living is declining
relative to competitors like the United States precisely because we are not
investing enough in technology.

    Health care illustrates our myopic thinking on this subject.

    In its February interim report, the Commission on the Future of Health Care
in Canada says that "new drugs and drug therapies, the growth in diagnostic and
therapeutic technology, rapid advances of new technological innovations, and new
gene therapies hold enormous potential but will undoubtedly drive costs in the
health care system." Technological innovation, by this theory, would improve
results for patients at the cost of new financial threats to a system already
under siege.

    Of course, some technological breakthroughs - such as drugs tailored to the
genetic coding of specific individuals - will push costs up. But this doesn't
mean that technology can't be applied in patient treatment to improve
productivity and reduce costs. If we can find ways to improve results - by
getting better at diagnosis and treatment - costs should decline, since fewer
people would require treatment, and those who do would recover faster. And if we
are truly innovative, we may create export opportunities to boot.

    This is precisely the kind of thinking behind eDiamond, a major project led
by IBM and researchers from Oxford University, which launched in Britain this
week. With $6-million (U.S.) in funding from the British government and IBM,
eDiamond will use a next-generation technology - known as grid computing - to
tackle what can be described as a serious productivity problem in the diagnosis
of breast cancer.

    The productivity problem has three parts:

    * Misdiagnosis: Some women who get a positive diagnosis via mammogram don't
actually have a tumour, while others, with a tumour, get a negative reading.

    * A severe labour deficiency: There is a worldwide shortage of radiologists
qualified to read a mammogram, with the result that underqualified personnel
provide many diagnoses.

    * A humdrum, but very real, information management problem: X-ray films are
frequently lost or misfiled, require costly and time-consuming shipment, and are
expensive to organize.

    In the eDiamond project, a collection of scattered computers, linked by a
network, will share data, computing power, software and storage. The essence of
"grid" is that many computers in a network function as if they are one "virtual"
computer on your desktop, vastly increasing the available speed, power and
storage. In this case, computers in a number of diagnostic labs will be
networked, enabling radiologists, physicians and researchers to store, share,
analyze, and compare X-rays and other diagnostic data.

    The technology promises to address all three parts of the breast cancer
diagnostic industry's productivity-cost problem.

    It will improve the accuracy of diagnosis in at least a couple of ways.
Drawing on the system's huge future library of comparative data - not just
X-rays, but also other information like lifestyle and demographics data -
researchers and clinicians will build predictive models that reduce the number
of false positives.

    Because X-rays will be stored electronically, consultations on borderline
cases will be quick and cheap. The labour shortage, too, will be eased through
remote electronic consultation and use of the system as a training tool.

    And finally, information management costs will be slashed dramatically when
X-rays are made available via the digital network.

    On top of this, there is an economic benefit for a small company that spun
out from Oxford to create software for the project, as well as IBM's British
operation. eDiamond will be the first grid built entirely with commercially
available technology (such as personal computers), including software to
standardize new and existing digital mammogram images. Because of this
clear-eyed preparation for commercialization, success of the initial project
will open the door to international markets and developing the eDiamond platform
for other applications. This project clearly suggests that the British
government understands the links among innovation, health care technology and
national competitiveness.

    Health care is not just an expensive perk of Canadian citizenship. It's an
industry - nearly 10 per cent of gross national product. We need to realize that
we can harness technology to simultaneously improve health care results, reduce
costs, improve productivity, and make our country an innovation leader.
David Ticoll is a business strategy consultant and co-author of Digital Capital:
Harnessing the Power of Business Webs.
dticoll@surenet.net

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2006


                              266 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 11, 2002 Friday
                                National Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; World in Brief; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 51 words

HEADLINE: Parkinson's gene therapy to be tried on humans

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

    Gene therapy that stopped the damage of Parkinson's disease in rats was so
successful that procedure will be tried on a few people, researchers said
yesterday. Scientists in the United States and New Zealand put new genes into
the brains of the rodents, whose Parkinson's symptoms were then reduced.
Reuters

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2006


                              271 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 13, 2002 Friday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 917 words

HEADLINE: Man of steel uses his will and electricity to beat odds;
In the world of spinal-cord injuries, Reeve's recovery;
equals leaping a tall building in a single bound

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM, MEDICAL REPORTER

BODY:

    The star who used to play Superman before a 1995 equestrian accident turned
him into a quadriplegic can - as media continent-wide have reported - now wiggle
his toes a bit and twitch his left index finger.

    Christopher Reeve's heroic progress might seem modest by the relative
measures of an able-bodied society, like some tale the cult of celebrity blows
out of proportion: The 49-year-old still can't feed himself or go to the
bathroom on his own. He relies on a ventilator to breathe and remains wedded to
a mechanically operated wheelchair.

    But in the bleak world of long-term spinal-cord injuries, Mr. Reeve's case
stands out as spectacular - a very big deal indeed. Recovering the faculties to
feel even the slightest sensation, a pinch, a tingle, a breeze, or the power to
flex just a single joint is a feat on par with leaping a tall building in a
single bound. It's never happened before.

    Nowhere in the annals of medicine has anyone been known to regain motility
and sensation after spending seven years completely incapacitated. Now doctors
aren't ruling out the idea that one day he may walk again.

    "This is all way beyond our expectations," said his doctor, John McDonald, a
neurologist at Washington University in St. Louis, Mo. "I really can't say what
might be possible."

    So how did it happen?

    With its advances in stem-cell research, tissue engineering and gene therapy
, science seems to step ever closer to the biblical scenario of enabling the
paralyzed to rise out of their beds.

    But new technologies have played no role in the Reeve case. Instead, he owes
his accomplishments, at least in part, to electrical stimulation - a routine
therapy as old as penicillin.

    The same sort of pulsing probes physiotherapists apply to strained muscles
appear to have paved the road to his rehabilitation by simulating intense
exercise.

    More than three times a week for the past four years, the actor has been
strapped into a modified exercise bike that fires short electrical pulses into
his leg and buttock muscles, allowing him to "cycle" for an hour at a time.

    Unlike most patients who try the widely used therapy, Mr. Reeve has had the
bike stationed in his house since 1999 and ridden it with religious commitment.

    He certainly has the resources to pursue treatments aggressively - he is
reported to spend half a million dollars yearly on medical bills. But Richard
Stein, a University of Alberta professor of neuroscience and physiology who uses
the same kind of bike with spinal-cord patients, doubts that money has much to
do with his unprecedented results.

    "What may be different here is that the motivation for many people might not
continue year in and year out," said Dr. Stein, who has twice heard speeches
from Mr. Reeve, who often says he cannot accept living with a disability.

    Dr. Stein, who read the report on the Reeve case published this month in the
Journal of Neurosurgery, described the recovered abilities as surprising, but
also intriguing.

    While electrical therapy is known to build bone density and strengthen
muscles, Dr. Stein said there has been no evidence in patients that it can
restore function to damaged nerve routes, or trigger the growth of new ones.

    "The remarkable aspect of this is that he recovered sensory and motor
function that were not there at all between his brain and his body," Dr. Stein
said.

    Mr. Reeve's exercise regimen, which included daily physiotherapy and, by
2000, aquatherapy, did bolster his cardiac and immune-system function. For
example, Dr. McDonald said Mr. Reeve spent 600 days on antibiotics before 1999
and only 60 days since.

    Dr. McDonald admits that "nobody knows" whether the electrical stimulation
is responsible for restoring some function. But from the day he designed the
exercise program for his famous patient, that was what the doctor had hoped.

    The plan, he said, was to re-create the same sort of physical challenges a
newborn encounters. If children never move, their bodies do not learn how to
move. It is by doing that circuits in the brain that communicate to the rest of
the body are laid down.

    Without steady physical demands, he felt adult nerve cells could never
rewire themselves, be repaired, or even regenerate. It was the cliché
"use-it-or-lose-it" hypothesis, he said.

    So bombarding a body with activity, especially repetitive activity, forces
the heart to pump and muscles to contract and, over time, this might
theoretically coax spinal-nerve cells out of a funk so that they grow new fibres
and reconnect with the brain. New cells might even sprout.

    This might have smacked of heresy a decade ago, when people were thought to
be born with all the brain cells they would ever have. But now, Dr. McDonald
said, there is evidence thousands more might be created every day.

    There is no doubt that signs Mr. Reeve was regaining function coincided with
the intense therapy he began in 1999 and "over the last three years, he has
recovered steadily," Dr. McDonald said.

    Mr. Reeve now has sensitivity in his upper torso and can move muscles in his
hands and arms, though fewer in his legs. He can breathe more than an hour a day
without his ventilator, and can even roll his wheelchair.

    "This case tells us that we need to develop these home-based, lifelong
programs for patients with spinal-cord injury," Dr. McDonald said.

    "In most cases we put in the effort for the first six months [after an
injury] and then we just say, 'Okay, that's it, you're on your own.' That's got
to change."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2006


                              277 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                          September 4, 2002 Wednesday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 587 words

HEADLINE: West Nile spurs probes of donor histories

BYLINE: ALLAN WOODS

BODY:

    Health Canada has ordered two public-health units to probe the blood
histories of the country's first suspected human cases of West Nile virus in
light of the investigation into a U.S. organ donor who passed on the potentially
deadly virus to at least three people.

    "Health Canada has given the request that we would ask that question," said
Bob Nosal, medical officer of health for Halton Region, where a 51-year-old man
from Burlington, Ont., is believed to have been infected with the disease. Dr.
Nosal would only say that the question - whether the man donated or received
blood - is being "investigated appropriately."

    In Peel Region, the two people suspected of having the disease have not
donated or received blood, said David McKeown, the region's medical officer of
health.

    Health Canada's directive is likely the only step it will take until the
investigation by the Atlanta-based Centers for Disease Control determines
whether West Nile virus - thought to be transmitted only by mosquitoes - has in
fact found a new vector to infect humans.

    "Health Canada has been and is monitoring all the developments around this
case and the potential impacts on other areas such as blood," said Farid
Hindieh, head of blood and vaccines for Health Canada's biologic and genetic
therapies division. "We're waiting for the results of the American tests."

    Last night, U.S. health officials confirmed that a Georgia woman who
suffered severe injuries in a car accident and received 63 units of blood had
indeed contracted West Nile Virus before her death. Her organs went to two
people in Florida and two others in Georgia. One of the recipients from Georgia
contracted the virus and died on Aug. 29 of encephalitis, or massive brain
swelling. CDC said two of the other three recipients have the virus and have
developed encephalitis. West Nile has not been confirmed in the third person,
who is recovering from a milder infection.

    "I think we have to aggressively pursue the possibility that a blood product
was responsible for this," said James Hughes, director of the CDC's national
centre for infectious diseases. However, he added that there is no evidence the
organ donor didn't contract the disease from a mosquito bite.

    "The means of the donor's infection remains under investigation," he said,
adding that the virus is a good example of an emerging infectious disease and
therefore little is known about it.

    The virus is so new - the first North American case emerged in New York in
1999 - that there is still no cost-effective screening process to protect the
Canadian or U.S. blood supply from infection, said Heather Hume, acting
executive vice-president of medical, scientific and clinical management for the
Canadian Blood Service.

    "There is no simple blood-donor screening test available," she said. "Today,
it is an impossibility for us to do.

    "If a test became available, would we use it? Certainly."

    Until now, there was only the "theoretical possibility" that the virus could
be transmitted through blood, Dr. McKeown said.

    Health officials emphasized that the threat of West Nile virus contaminating
the country's blood supply remains low.

    "The viruses that are the largest threat are those that remain silent for a
very long time," Dr. Hume said. West Nile virus symptoms usually appear between
three and 14 days after infection.

    However, the West Nile death toll is rising each day and moving west through
the United States. This year, 37 Americans have died and almost 650 have been
infected.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2006


                              285 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              June 28, 2002 Friday
                                National Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 352 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy cures rare immune disorder

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

     Using an experimental technique that alters genes in bone-marrow stem
cells, doctors cured two children who were born with the "bubble-boy" disease,
which leaves patients defenseless against infection.

    The children were born with a form of Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
Disorder (SCID) caused by a gene flaw that blocks production of an enzyme called
ADA, which is essential to make disease-fighting immune cells.

    Doctors in Italy and Israel cured the children with injections of
bone-marrow stem cells that had been altered to contain the missing enzyme gene.
Both children had healthy immune systems within a matter of months, the
researchers report in this week's edition of the journal Science.

    French Anderson, a University of Southern California researcher and a
pioneer in the field of gene therapy, said the research is an important advance.

    "This gives a boost to the whole field because it proves our basic premise
that if you can get enough gene-engineered cells into the patient, it will cure
the disease," Dr. Anderson said. "That is very important and, therefore, this is
a very exciting paper."

    Dr. Anderson was the first to try genetic engineering to cure the
adenosine-deaminase (ADA) form of SCID. His technique changed the gene in blood
cells instead of the bone marrow. Two of his early patients have led normal
lives since the 1990 procedure, but they require periodic shots of ADA enzyme to
ensure they maintain healthy immune systems.

    The technique used by the Italian and Israeli researchers, Dr. Anderson
said, appears to be a cure that will require no further shots.

    SCID is rare, striking only about 50 children a year. In the past, the
disorder was always fatal, with the children usually dying in infancy of
uncontrollable infections.

    Starting in the 1960s, doctors treated SCID patients by isolating them in
sterile environments. One such patient was a Houston boy who spent all 12 years
of his life in a plastic bubble filled with filtered air. He became known as
David, the bubble boy. He died in 1984 when, at his insistence, doctors tried a
bone-marrow transplant.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              288 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             June 22, 2002 Saturday

SECTION: WEEKEND REVIEW; Pg. R2

LENGTH: 2113 words

HEADLINE: Pitching to the choir;
If a week of hustling doesn't work for would-be;
documentary makers at the Banff TV festival,;
GAYLE MacDONALD writes, there's always the;
three-minute horse race

BYLINE: GAYLE MacDONALD

DATELINE: BANFF, ALTA.

BODY:

     It's documentary day at the 23rd Banff Television Festival. And the Van
Horne Ballroom - so named for the 19th-century Canadian Pacific visionary,
William Cornelius Van Horne who built the lavish Banff Springs Hotel in 1888 -
is slowly filling up.

    It's still before 9 a.m. And the six finalists who will soon be taking part
in what's been enthusiastically billed as the "world's richest pitch" (the
second annual CTV Canadian Documart, which hands out $100,000 to three lucky
winners) are nervously milling about the front of the massive room.

    Toronto's Dugald Maudsley, who won the $50,000 first prize last year, is up
first. Like the others, this 41-year-old filmmaker will have three minutes to
try to convince a rather grim-faced looking panel of 34 commissioning editors
from around the world that his documentary proposal is of the highest quality
and most viable to pull off.

    His palms are sweating. His legs feel weak. And he's guzzling water. (Nerves
have made his voice a bit scratchy so he ducked into an empty broom closet on
the third floor of the hotel's convention centre to practise his pitch, in his
best anchorman's voice, out the window, just minutes before.)

    All the finalists are antsy, eager to get the event under way. They've been
preparing for weeks. And the past few days, they've been schmoozing the
commissioning editors at the local pub, in hallways, lounges, patios, and at the
ever-raucous Karaoke Night the evening before. At this point in the game, the
suspense is killing them.

    At 9:15, Maudsley steps up to the mike. He faces the panel of editors lined
up in front of him like a Roman emperor's court waiting to give him a thumbs up.
Or not.

    A giant stopwatch, with the glass removed so it ticks louder, stares him in
the face. Maudsley's face is plastered on two giant video screens so the crowd
can watch him deliver his pitch - and sweat.

    Maudsley asks for a still photograph to be projected on a screen. "This is
the liver of a mouse riddled with cancer." The stopwatch starts, and his pitch
to do a one-hour, one-off documentary called The Holy Grail, about a cure for
cancer using gene therapy, begins.

    It's clear from this spectacle that documentary-making in 2002 is something
of a bloodsport, where substance counts, but so do theatrics.

    Up next is a pitch about contaminated, sunken ships in India that are
killing people and destroying the environment; a piece on a forgotten spy; one
about the past 65 million years of evolution in North America; a pitch on the
precarious state of the music industry; and last, a feel-good series about the
universality of humour, called Do You Know Where We Can Get A Donkey?, presented
by Kids in the Hall comedian Scott Thompson.

    The crowd loves Thompson's shtick. He cracks people up with a Middle Eastern
fart joke (don't ask), among other things.

    At about 9:45, the three winners are announced. Thompson takes home the
$50,000 grand prize for his ribald pitch; Maudsley gets second place and a
$30,000 cheque; and the pair who want to analyze North American history from the
time the asteroid hit, get $20,000.

    Unquestionably, the money is a much-needed shot in the arm for all these
filmmakers. The real test in the coming months will be to see which project
actually gets off the ground.

    As Maudsley, and many other aspiring documentarians in this country attest,
ideas are no problem. It's the financing in this highly competitive environment
that is the uphill battle.

    As glamorous and noble as the profession seems to be, the reality is that
the life of an independent documentary filmmaker is one of extraordinary
fulfilment one instant, and extraordinary uncertainty the next. For most, it's a
hand-to-mouth existence that is immensely rewarding, and unbelievably
frustrating.

    For aspiring docmakers such as Maudsley, Banff - along with Hot Docs,
Toronto's little festival that keeps growing, in early May - is not to be
missed. It's a place to be seen, to make contacts, to compare battle scars,
share success stories, swap strategies, and shake hands with power brokers who
hold the purse strings to future projects. Also, it's an opportunity to hunker
down in the comforting confines of this tiny, incredibly picturesque town that
is abuzz with shoptalk from the mingling mass of docmakers.

    Peter Raymont, a veteran documentary maker and founder of Toronto's White
Pine Pictures, has been making the pilgrimage to Banff since the late 1970s.
"It's a must-attend event for people like me," explains Raymont, maker of
programs such as The World is Watching (a critical examination of the role of
the media in Nicaragua) and A Scattering of Seeds: The Creation of Canada.

    "It's kind of like being in a club, and if you're in the club you go to the
annual meeting," he explains. "I come primarily to see the commissioning
editors. The good thing about Banff is they're accessible, and you can have a
relaxed conversation with these people. You're here to find partners for new
projects and make presales. Rarely will they commit on the spot. Usually they
take it home and discuss it at the next programming meeting. But it's better
than sending your proposal cold.

    "The contacts you make might not pay off immediately, but they'll pay off a
year or two down the road. Banff is the crucible of deal-making."

    The festival is an unpretentious, suck-in-that-clean-air woodsy event that
offers a combination of polished showmanship and aw-shucks affability. In this
beauteous Rocky Mountain setting, there is pressure and stress. But deals can be
struck in hot tubs, on the golf course, or over a pint at the St. James pub, the
unofficial gathering place of the festival's 1,800 delegates at the end of each
day.

    At this event, the commissioning editors from more than 42 countries seem to
check their attitude at the front desk of the Banff Springs Hotel. By and large,
the people who green-light programs for networks such as Britain's Channel 4,
HBO, A&E, Life Network, The Learning Channel, History Channel, CTV, or CBC (with
a mind-blowing 98 people at Banff this year to celebrate its 50th birthday) are
an amenable group, who will pack their schedules full of 15-to-30-minute
meetings with people such as Maudsley and Raymont.

    Stories are legion about bygone days when wannabe documentary makers at
Banff had to pass pitches under bathroom stalls. These days, the modus operandi
is to set up as many meetings as possible before you come to this five-day
event. If you've got schedule holes, you scour the hallways, social events and
master classes, waiting to pounce on the unsuspecting programmer - as Maudsley
did after an afternoon session by the renowned British docmaker David Dugan.
Ever enterprising, Maudsley managed to wheedle his way into the Brit's cab as he
set off back to his hotel.

    "I feel like a bit of a vulture," admits Maudsley, a father of two boys
under 4. "You're always looking for the main chance to grab someone, and you're
always trying to figure out, how far am I willing to go? I don't feel
comfortable about it, but it's what you've got to do."

    For Maudsley, the whole Banff experience is a relatively new thing. After
more than a decade reporting and producing nightly current affairs for
hard-hitting shows such as ABC's Foreign Correspondent in Sydney, Australia,
Maudsley moved his family back to North America three years ago. Eager to try
something new, he set his sights on documentaries. In two years, he has produced
two one-hour programs, The Summer of '48 (a father-son reconciliation story
built around Little-League baseball) and Breaking The Code: The Race to Uncover
the Secret of Life.

    It's been a tough slog, with some emotional highs but little financial
payout. His wife, he adds, has been remarkably patient.

    Last year, Maudsley walked away with the $50,000 paycheque from Banff for
his eerily omniscient pitch on bioterrorism, with a piece he called Demon in the
Freezer. At his pitch, he passed out envelopes to each member of the judging
panel with baby powder inside. "You have all just been exposed to smallpox. You
each have 14 days to live."

    Bob Culbert, vice-president of documentaries at CTV, commissioned the
documentary, but Sept. 11 overtook Maudsley, and the film has never been made.
This year, he came to this Alberta resort with three more documentary proposals:
The Prince's Violin (the Nazi theft of instruments); The Holy Grail; and
Creating a Monster, the search for the source of AIDS.

    This year's $30,000 prize will help jump-start the gene therapy-cancer
story. But it's a drop in the bucket compared with the thousands Maudsley, whose
company is called Infield Fly Productions, still needs to get that documentary
researched and shot.

    "There is no doubt, more and more of my time is spent on fundraising and
less and less on actual production," Maudsley says. "Sometimes it gets rather
debilitating, and you lose the ardour for the idea that made you passionate to
do the story in the first place."

    There are some in the documentary business who think this is the best time
for documentaries in a long, long while, that in the past five years there has
been a kind of documentary renaissance, mainly because the cable stations
require so much documentary product.

    By all accounts, new filmmakers are entering classes or grabbing digital
cameras in record numbers, dreaming of becoming the next Robert Flaherty, the
legend behind such documentary classics as Nanook of the North and Man of Aran,
or Albert Maysles, whose Gimme Shelter chronicled the 1969 Rolling Stones tour
that culminated in a free concert at the Altamont Speedway near San Francisco
where a man was murdered.

    There is a flip side to this school of thought, however. Raymont, for one,
says the proliferation of channels and the flood of factual entertainment on the
airwaves means it's getting tougher for filmmakers interested in politically
committed, passionately authored stories to get funding and shelf space. The
worldwide clamour for docutainment - dreck such as Killer Cyclones or The Long
Island Lolita - is squeezing out the serious-minded stuff. (It's also worth
noting that making documentary is a fraction of the cost of drama.)

    In the past couple of years, Raymont contends, there's been a glut of "cheap
and dirty" documentaries. "Broadcasters, especially the specialty ones, have
licensed a large volume of documentary that I wouldn't define as document. It's
reality or factual-based programming, but not much point of view, no real guts.
And that's eaten up a lot of the public funds."

    Still, he adds, thankfully some broadcasters are still looking for programs
that have a "special stamp" or a "real signature to them." Highly personal,
occasionally disturbing subject matter. Or the unique, off-the-wall kind of
stuff.

    Pat Ferns, head of the Banff Television Foundation, believes this year's top
two winners of the Documart - Maudsley and Thompson's take-a-donkey-to-Syria
sketch - show that both types of documentary production are valid. "In a way,
you could say these are two ends of the spectrum of documentary programming,"
Ferns says. "The Holy Grail is the traditional, conventional type of
documentary, whereas Do You Know Where We Can Get A Donkey? is a form of
docutainment. One is not more worthy or better than the other - they're aiming
at different audiences."

    CTV's Culbert acknowledges times are tough for filmmakers interested in
hard-hitting, sociopolitical programming. But he's encouraged by the fact that
at last year's Hot Docs festival, there were lineups (primarily of young people)
to see documentaries. "Not long ago, that would have been unheard of," Culbert
says. "We're putting [documentary] in prime time, and there is more hunger now
than ever before. People love documentaries if you tell them great stories. It's
a genre people are going back to."

    Maudsley, certainly, is smitten with the genre. "It's not something you're
going to get rich at," he says with a rueful smile.

    He concedes he wouldn't still be doing this if he wasn't still freelancing
in current affairs and his wife, Gillian, didn't have a good job with an
international health-care company.

    But he's still at it because documentary making is about discovery. "I could
never make a feature film because it's about controlling everything and leaving
nothing to chance," he shrugs.

    "Documentary lets the drama unfold naturally. It's spontaneous and often
quite profound. It is not scripted."

    In an era in which audiences seem more captivated with mindless reality fare
such as Bachelorettes in America or Dog Eat Dog, documentary reminds us that
there is real life out there. Somewhere.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              290 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Sun Media Corporation
                         Calgary Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                     June 13, 2002 Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: Entertainment; Pg. 60

LENGTH: 494 words

HEADLINE: COMIC MAKES $50,000 PITCH

BYLINE: KEVIN WILLIAMSON, CALGARY SUN

DATELINE: BANFF

BODY:

   The Sun's Kevin Williamson is covering the Banff 2002 TV festival
    - - -
 A pitch-perfect day has netted Kids in the Hall's Scott Thompson $50,000.

   The comic was one of six finalists out of 120 entries pitching documentary
proposals at the Banff Television Festival's CTV Canadian Documart yesterday.

   He won for Do You Know Where We Can Get a Donkey?
   Yes, you read that correctly.
 "I didn't win a Rockie (award), but the Rockies don't come with $50,000!"
Thompson said afterwards.

   "Besides, they only gave that Rockie to John Cleese because he's British."

   The entire 90-minute session played out in the Fairmont Banff Springs Hotel
like a cross between Who Wants to be a Millionaire? and The Player, with
would-be filmmakers trying to convince a panel of 35 commissioning editors --
ie: people who sign cheques -- their documentary deserved the top $50,000 prize.

   Joining Thompson in the pitch was Hilary Jones-Farrow, executive producer
from Victoria-based The May Street Group Film, Video and Animation Ltd.

   As described by Thompson -- who had the audience and the commissioning
editors in stitches for much of the allotted three minutes -- Do You Know Where
We Can Get a Donkey? will send him and journalist Brian Preston around the world
to investigate how humour cuts across cultural and geographical lines. They'll
take with them three questions:

   * Who's the funniest person you know?

   * Who's the funniest person in your country?

   * Do you know where we can get a donkey?

   "(Donkeys) say hee-haw and in case we bomb, we need someone to laugh,"
Thompson said.

   Global events -- war, terrorism -- inspired the idea. "I wanted to prove that
humour is universal ... that everybody laughs."

   The program will run the gamut from Oscar Wilde to the crudest joke, he said.

   Thompson wasn't the only one claiming cash after the Documart.

   Dugald Maudsley, who the Sun spoke to just before the festival began, won
$30,000 for his proposal entitled The Holy Grail, which will follow two U.S.
scientists as they begin a ground-breaking gene therapy treatment on
terminally-ill cancer patients.

   "I'm absolutely thrilled," Maudsley said.

   The third place prize of $20,000 went to Chris Hilton from Australia and
Arnie Gelbart of Montreal for The Eternal Frontier, an examination of the
evolution of the North American continent.
   - - -
    FUNNY BUSINESS
 Not everyone came away a winner, though.

   CBC arts journalist and former MuchMusic VJ Laurie Brown, with Matt Zimbel,
made a pitch for their project, With A Bullet, about the crumbling and seemingly
doomed music industry. Other hopefuls were Canadian: Betrayal -- Forgotten Spy
and Terminal Voyage, about toxic shipyards in India.

   Of course, none of them had a member of Kids in the Hall in their corner. And
Thompson admitted being a celebrity helps his cause. "I think so ... I think it
helps to open doors.

   "But it also helps just being funny."

GRAPHIC: photo; THE KID ... Scott Thompson had the best pitch yesterday at the
Banff Television Festival.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2002


                              292 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             June 1, 2002 Saturday

SECTION: FOCUS; CYBERNETICS; Pg. F7

LENGTH: 2124 words

HEADLINE: Kevin Warwick is a borg;
In a quiet laboratory at the University of Reading, England,;
the line between science and science fiction has just been;
crossed. Meet a mild-mannered man-machine who's contemplating;
humanity's next evolutionary leap

BYLINE: DAVID AKIN

BODY:

    For nearly 30 years, ever since he read a Michael Crichton novel about it,
Kevin Warwick has wanted to be a cyborg. On March 14 at 8:30 a.m., in a small
hospital in Oxford, England, he became one.

    A team of neurosurgeons spent about two hours tucking a computer chip just
under the skin atop his left wrist. The chip contains 100 tiny pins, connected
to his wrist's neurons. The chip is also connected to a wire conduit that runs
under the skin up his arm to just below the elbow - where a junction box, for
lack of a better word, pokes out of his skin.

    A professor of cybernetics at Reading University, Prof. Warwick can use that
box to literally plug himself in to a computer that can record the electronic
traffic - the language of neurons, and the language of the brain - at his wrist.
The junction box also contains a small transmitter that can send data out
wirelessly to any computer with a receiver.

    "This is like a freeway to the brain," he said. "It is the same material. It
is jacking into the brain - at a slight remove, but it's hard-wired, for sure."

    If you met Prof. Warwick, a tall, pleasant fellow with a toothy smile, most
of this would be invisible. There are no wires sticking out of his sweater or
shirt. The only evidence of his new cyborg status is a small white bandage of
gauze wrapped around his elbow, to shield the box.

    Prof. Warwick, who is 48, is no techno-utopian. He worries, as many do,
about smart machines taking too much control over human affairs. He worries
about computerized robots that might get too intelligent for their human masters
to control. But his response to this fear has not been to reject technology.
Instead, he has literally incorporated the machine into his own body, merging
with it in a way meant to leave the human brain as the undisputed master of the
new machine-man organism.

    If cyborgs are in our future - and many argue they are already here - Prof.
Warwick is determined that it will be the human, not the machine, who will call
the shots.

    "This really is significant," said David Silver of the University of
Washington in Seattle, where he is an assistant professor and director of the
Resource Center for Cyberculture Studies. "The whole notion of cyborgs is going
from a science-fiction realm into a reality realm. With people like [Prof.
Warwick], it's becoming less about Robocop and Terminator II and more about
everyday life. I think he is a little extreme, but he's also experimentingwith
things that perhaps might be everyday occurrences within a couple ofyears."

    Prof. Warwick embarked on this research initiative - he calls it the Cyborg
Project - to explore ways of treating spinal-cord-injury victims and others who
have lost the use of a limb, by creating artificial replacements for missing
parts of the nervous system.

    But really, Prof. Warwick wants nothing less than to create a new way for
humans to experience their environment, to create additional senses. He expects,
for example, that within 15 or so years, machines will make possible a very
crude form of telepathy.

    Others say Prof. Warwick's cyborg work, the first of its kind, raises a host
of broader cultural issues about our relationship to technology and computers.
That's because the computer, in this case, is plugged directly into the stuff
our brains are made of. It's true that Prof. Warwick's chip is connected only to
the median nerve in his wrist but, whether it's a nerve in the wrist, arm, or
neck, it amounts to a direct interface with neurons, and thus with the brain.

    For Prof. Warwick, this is what it means to be a cyborg - to be an organism
where machine intelligence and human intelligence are joined via circuits and
silicon. In scientific circles, he tones down the science-fiction rhetoric and
sticks to duller medical and engineering terminology. He wants, after all, to be
taken seriously by the conservative scientific establishment.

    But he also knows that the word cyborg conjures up powerful (or cheesy)
fantasies in the popular imagination, from the benign and helpful cyborg that
was Steve Austin in The Six Million Dollar Man to the all-destroying Borg of
Star Trek. But cybercultural scholar Prof. Silver said that the cyborgs of real
life will be most remarkable for being unremarkable.

    "These cyborgs are coming out of rapid developments in nanotechnology and
biotechnology," said Prof. Silver. "It can be claimed that we're already living
in a cyborg culture. It's very interesting that we're having practical and
ethical conversations about cyborgs rather than discussing them in the context
of the newest Star Wars film. That's a distinct historical shift."

      Reading's Cybernetics department, in existence since 1963, sits on the
edge of the university's verdant campus. It is a two-storey brown-brick building
that houses a treasure trove of wondrous machines. On one lab bench there is a
bank of artificial-vision systems - electric eyes for a machine, to be attached
at a future date. In another laboratory, red, blue and green robots, each the
size of a small loaf of bread, move with their own purposes and pace about a
specially constructed chrome playpen.

    Next door, there are working prototypes for artificial arms, wrists and
hands. And in another lab, there is a room-sized virtual-reality chamber, where
one can use special goggles and gloves to feel one's way around in various
simulated worlds.

    The labs are filled with students, mostly male, bent over workbenches with
screwdrivers and pliers. The smell of warm soldering irons hangs heavy in every
room. Most of these students are building tiny electronic devices that, they
hope, will one day improve the lives of humans who have lost the use of a body
part or have damaged senses.

    Others are working in an area of research called telepresence, which allows
people to experience all the sensations of an environment without actually being
there. Telepresence might give humans the ability to control a robot working
down a mine shaft or on the moon, for example, while sitting safely in a room
far away.

    In this wonderland, the only department of its kind in the United Kingdom,
Prof. Warwick is the star. Yet even if the other faculty aren't getting
themselves on the cover of Wired magazine, as Prof. Warwick did in 1998, they
are busy inventing a future found most often in science-fiction magazines.
"We're doing stuff people are interested in," said Prof. Warwick. "We're doing
stuff a bit outside the box."

    Prof. Warwick himself, however, lives a modest life, with a wife and two
children in Reading, a very modest English city. He started his career working
for British Telecom, before going on to earn a doctorate at Imperial College and
joining the Reading Cybernetics department 14 years ago. He teaches, and
supervises about nine students and a dozen paid researchers working mostly on
corporate-sponsored projects.

    Prof. Warwick himself has attracted more than $4.5-million (Can.) in
research money to the department, and authored more than 300 scientific papers.
The Cyborg Project has been reviewed and approved by a battery of scientific,
medical and ethical committees, and is being partially financed by a British
trust set up for spinal-cord research as well as some high-tech companies,
including Canada's Nortel Networks.

    "The things that I enjoy most are actually doing things," he said. "Building
actual robots. When it comes to cyborgs, I'm interested in the philosophy and
discussion and theory behind it, but actually being a cyborg and doing it - the
practical side of it - is what excites me."

    That excitement was first stirred when he read Crichton's The Terminal Man,
in which a brilliant computer scientist named Harry Benson suffers a brain
injury that causes blackouts - during which Benson becomes a violent murderer. A
team of psychiatrists implant 40 electrodes in Benson's brain and wire them to a
small computer implanted in his shoulder. The computer detects the onset of
violent episodes and regulates the flow of chemicals in Benson's brain.

    "This procedure represents the first direct link between a human brain and a
computer," one of the doctors says in the book. "One might think of the computer
in this case as a prosthetic device . . . yet the implications go much farther
than that."

    Crichton wrote this in 1971, when the computing power that now fits in a
cell phone would take up several rooms. But he was right. The implications do go
much farther.

    Since the chip was inserted in March, Prof. Warwick and his team have used
the device a few times to record neuron traffic in his body. Like most
scientists in the midst of an experiment, he is reluctant to speculate on the
basis of the first bits of data. So far, he said, he is pleased.

    "We're getting good information. In truth, it's going to take us some time
to fully understand the nature and extent of the signals that we can see. We're
not going to be able to say, in the space of a few weeks or a few months, what
is actually going on in here," he said, pointing to his wrist. "It's like
opening an enormous box that nobody's ever looked in before. There's all sorts
of stuff. Some of it ties in with [neurological] theory. Some of it doesn't at
all."

    There are about 10,000 neural connections in the human wrist, and Prof.
Warwick's device is plugged only into perhaps 100. Neither he, nor any of the
neuroscientists working with him, can predict which neuron does what. (In the
human brain, there are billions of neurons.) "What we're finding out is even
more complicated as to how the nerves are structured and how they operate."

    At this point, the plan is to keep the chip in Prof. Warwick's arm until
later in the summer or even early fall. If all goes smoothly, Prof. Warwick's
wife, Irena, will undergo the same procedure. Then, the two computer chips will
be linked by a wireless Internet connection, with the hope that Prof. Warwick
will be able to actually feel what Irena is feeling in her arm.

    "The way she puts it," Prof. Warwick has written, "if anyone is going to
jack into my limbic system - to know definitively when I'm feeling happy,
depressed, angry, or even sexually aroused - she wants it to be her."

    "I feel the same way," he added in a recent conversation in his office.
"Linking my nervous system to another guy? I mean, for me, it would be the same
as having sex."

      Scientists are divided, to put it mildly, as to the practical value of the
Cyborg Project. Critics say it is unlikely Prof. Warwick will be able to help
paralyzed people walk again, and that gene therapy, or some other biological
approach such as cloning stem cells, is more likely to help the blind see and
the deaf to hear.

    But Prof. Warwick's deeper interest seems to be in augmenting healthy
people's senses. He is fascinated by notions such as infrared eye implants that
could let soldiers see through walls. "If the brain had direct infrared
information, rather than coming the usual visual route, what the hell would it
mean? Would your brain be able to adjust and adapt to that? That's giving humans
a different world model."

    It may be Prof. Warwick's son or daughter - he is nearly 18, she is 20 - who
will see the day when mind and machine merge in a meaningful way. "All I can do
is set my own time," Prof. Warwick said. "This is controversial to say, but I
see actually bringing about thought communication between humans, in a very,
very, basic way - the sort of thing where if you think about moving your hand, I
get some signal.

    "It's not thinking about abstract thought, but bringing about that sort of
human-to-human communication. I see it as a realistic goal in my career. Whether
I'm involved myself or not, I don't know."

    His goals sound modest compared to some. In the United States, many
scientists are working on ways to download a human personality and intelligence
into a machine. They say it is a simple matter of making computers powerful
enough to scan the human brain with enough detail and precision to reproduce
each neural connection in silicon. Some call it a kind of immortality.

    Such talk makes Prof. Warwick uncomfortable. "I think we've got a long way
to go before we understand exactly how the human brain operates. Mapping the
human brain into silicon [is] quite difficult, and I can't really see that
happening in the next few years."

    His approach is the opposite: The brain remains in the body, but it gets a
computerized booster. And that, he said, is just around the technological
corner. "Connecting the nervous system up to silicon is a practical [problem],
using the technology that's there. Maybe downstream, we'll get to scanning the
brain. But to me that's science fiction, whereas what we're doing is science."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              295 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 14, 2002 Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH; MED WATCH; Pg. R6

LENGTH: 139 words

HEADLINE: Diabetics may be able to produce own insulin

DATELINE: Calgary

BODY:

    It's only a matter of time before diabetics can throw away their insulin
needles for good, says a University of Calgary scientist who has uncovered a new
source of cells to combat the disease.

    Dr. Norman Wong, director of Calgary's Libin Gene Therapy Unit, announced
Thursday the results of a study that show intestinal cells can be stimulated
into producing insulin - the hormone millions of diabetics are lacking.

    Dr. Wong cautioned the discovery is not a cure, but could lead to treatments
in five to 10 years that will give people with Type 1 diabetes mellitus, also
known as juvenile diabetes, the ability to produce their own insulin.

    "My colleagues and I decided," he said, "to investigate whether we could
make islet cells by altering intestinal cells so they would transform into
pancreatic cells and produce insulin." CP

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              297 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                               May 6, 2002 Monday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 682 words

HEADLINE: Attack of killer mice suggests violence is genetic

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM, MEDICAL REPORTER

BODY:

    Two dead mice and a cage of chewed tails have led to the accidental
discovery that a single genetic trait can trigger extremely violent behaviour.

    A University of British Columbia scientist and independent groups in Germany
and Japan have found an inherited gene mutation in mice that affects the brain
and results in very vicious creatures: Rodents that carry it are prone to
attacking their mates, their siblings, their surroundings, even their lab
handlers.

    While animal research does not always apply to humans, the finding is bound
to fuel the growing debate about the power biology wields over behaviour and
whether some people are genetically predisposed to commit violent acts.

    The finding also suggests that medicine might one day concoct a gene-therapy
treatment - or even a cure - for extreme aggression.
   "There is a growing field recognizing the potential of mice to study human
brain disorders," said geneticist Elizabeth Simpson, an associate professor at
UBC's Centre for Molecular Medicine, whose research on the mean mice is to be
published this month in the journal Behavioural Brain Research.

    In animal studies, at least a dozen other genes have been linked to
aggression. But pathological violence has never before been traced to a
particular trait in just one gene, which scientists have aptly nicknamed the
"fierce mutation."

    Personality is accepted as being a complex product of environment,
experience and many genes, and so, Dr. Simpson said, it's unexpected that a
variation in one gene can have such a profound effect.

    "Even in a mouse, it's quite a surprise that a single gene would do this and
be able to change the brain that much," she said.

    If the gene turns out to work similarly in humans, society would face tricky
moral questions about whether people should be tested for it, and when they
should be tested, said Margaret Somerville, founding director of McGill
University's Centre for Medicine, Ethics and Law in Montreal.

    But using the gene as an excuse for violent behaviour would run contrary to
the notion of free will, Dr. Somerville said. "We have to be terribly careful
about these things, because humans are different than animals. It's fascinating
research, but scary if it turns out to be true for us."

    Dr. Simpson never set out to find genes linked to aggression. At Maine's
Jackson Laboratory five years ago, she was studying a mouse gene linked to
reproduction.

    She had bred mice with a deliberate mutation in that gene and left four
mating pairs of them in cages overnight to see whether they would be fertile.
The next morning, she found instead that two of the females were dead.

    "I thought I had a disease in my mouse colony and called the vet," Dr.
Simpson said. But when these same male mice attacked their brothers, leaving
teeth marks in their siblings' tails, she realized it was not disease, but bad
behaviour that had killed the females.

    Researchers wrongly assumed the reproduction gene they had mutated was
responsible. But when they discovered that a mouse without that reproductive
gene mutation displayed the same violent behaviour, they started hunting through
mice DNA for an explanation.

    They bred four generations of fierce mice in the process, noting how the
females, as well as males, bit, squeaked and became bad mothers.

    "You could hardly hold them," Dr. Simpson said. "They even bit the forceps."

    Then a group in Germany reported extremely violent behaviour from mice
missing a gene that had first been identified in the fruit fly.

    Dr. Simpson's group mapped it and discovered the fierce mutation. They
learned that if a mouse inherits a copy of the mutated gene from each parent, it
becomes pathologically aggressive.

    The gene, called Nr2e1, exists in humans but little is known about the role
it plays except that it seems to kick in very early in human development,
regulating a range of brain functions.

    In mice, the gene's fierce mutation has nothing to do with testosterone
levels, but does affect size, sight, smell and brain structure, Dr. Simpson
said. Mean mice are skinnier and smaller.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              298 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                               May 6, 2002 Monday

SECTION: NEWS INDEX; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 1003 words

HEADLINE: Three-minute Summary

BODY:

   POLITICS

      The Globe and Mail has obtained 3,000 pages of internal documents that
show Ottawa's $40-million-a-year visibility program was awash with problems such
as political interference, double-billing and scant administrative controls.

     Page A1

      In Windsor, Ont., the otherwise beleaguered New Democratic Party has found
itself nipping at the heels of the incumbent Liberals. Getting ready for a May
13 by-election to replace retired Grit MP Herb Gray, some long-time Liberals say
this time they will vote for the NDP.

     Page A6

   INTERNATIONAL

      French President Jacques Chirac was swept back into office last night with
a landslide victory over Jean-Marie Le Pen, leader of the extreme-right National
Front party. Good turnout helped produce a massive rejection of Mr. Le Pen and
gave Mr. Chirac the largest majority ever achieved by a French president in the
Fifth Republic.

     Page A1

      A deal to end the 35-day standoff at Bethlehem's Church of the Nativity
seemed within grasp last night. The tentative agreement, which would mark the
end of Israel's largest-ever military operation in the Palestinian Territories,
could clear the way for wider-ranging talks aimed at a ceasefire.

     Page A1

   CRIME

      A jury found Quebec's most feared gang leader, Maurice (Mom) Boucher,
guilty of two counts of first-degree murder and one of attempted murder. The
48-year-old Hells Angels leader faces an automatic life sentence without
eligibility for parole for 25 years. Police say the conviction against a once
untouchable man should boost the confidence of prosecutors, jurors and witnesses
in future trials against the gang.

     Page A1

      Amateur boxing champion Jeremy Molitor will make his initial court
appearance today on a first-degree murder charge, after the stabbing death of
his girlfriend, a 21-year-old waitress. Jessica Nethery's body was found
Saturday in an underground parking lot in Sarnia, Ont., after police received a
call from a distraught man.

     Page A5

      Details about clandestine meetings and frantic late-night document
shredding are expected to figure at the obstruction-of-justice trial of the
venerable accounting giant Arthur Andersen LLP. It is set to open in Houston
today. Most experts seem to agree that Chicago-based Andersen - the auditor for
16 years for the collapsed Enron Corp. - doesn't stand a chance of beating the
charge.

     Page B1

   JUSTICE

      William Sampson's cousin, a medical doctor, believes the Canadian may be
suffering clinical depression from being held incommunicado in a Saudi Arabian
jail for 18 months. Mr. Sampson, charged in a fatal 2000 bombing, has been in
solitary confinement and unable to meet privately with anyone, even Canadian
diplomats or doctors.

     Page A5

   SOCIETY

      Angry battlelines have been drawn in the United Nations's biggest effort
yet to improve the lives of children. Some religious and conservative groups in
the United States and some Roman Catholic and Muslim countries do not believe
that children should have rights at all, since this would give governments
precedence over parents.

     Page A8

   ECONOMY

      As they graduate from the classroom to the work force, students are being
more selective about jobs, recruiters say. Recent highly publicized layoffs,
particularly in the high-tech field, have made the new college and university
graduates wary and they are turning down offers they do not consider suitable,
even though the national unemployment rate remains above 7 per cent.

     Page B1

   BUSINESS

      The Canadian Auto Workers union will unveil a prescription for the auto
industry this week calling for heavy government intervention to attract new
automotive investment. In a new policy paper, the union paints a gloomy portrait
of a struggling industry and catalogues plant closings and layoffs that have
eliminated several thousand jobs.

     Page B1

      Quebec's giant public pension fund manager is taking advantage of the
economic slump in the United States that has been accentuated by last year's
terrorist attacks. Since Sept. 11, CDP Immobilier, the real-estate arm of Caisse
de dépôt et placement du Québec,has struck three deals for choice property in
New York and one in Washington. And the firm says it's looking for more such
opportunities.

     Page B1

   ARTS

      Touring the Whitney Biennial Exhibition in New York, Sarah Milroy is a
more than a little freaked out about the state of contemporary art. She finds a
few pleasant surprises in the curatorial groaning board that includes 113
artists. But her overall sense is that this exhibit is the same show she's seen
about eight times already.

     Page R1

      Tina Keeper, who plays Dene RCMP Corporal Michelle Kenidi in the North of
60 TV franchise, is full of friendly wisecracks on the set of Another Country,
the fourth film spawned from the defunct TV series. You can't help but like her.
She's funny, she has vices and she ages just like the rest of us. Raised in
Norway House Cree Nation in northern Manitoba, Ms. Keeper is passionate about
giving aboriginal people a stronger voice.

     Page R3

   SPORTS

      Curtis Joseph is back to being a saviour, David Shoalts writes. The
Toronto Maple Leafs goaltender added another amazing playoff performance to his
portfolio Saturday night, by stopping 54 shots from the relentless Ottawa
Senators. So the Leafs will arrive for the faceoff tonight in Ottawa with this
second-round National Hockey League series tied 1-1.

     Page S3

   FAREWELL

      Former Bolivian president Hugo Banzer, a dictator turned democratically
elected leader, died yesterday at the age of 75. He was known for eradicating
drug crops in this poor Andean nation. Critics, however, contend that Mr. Banzer
never lost his autocratic streak and continued to abuse human rights.

     Page R7

   QUIRKS

      A pair of really mean mice in a researcher's lab have led to the
accidental discovery that a single genetic trait can trigger extremely violent
behaviour. The finding suggests that medicine might one day concoct a
gene-therapy treatment - or possibly even a cure - for extreme aggression.

     Page A1

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              299 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Sun Media Corporation
                         Calgary Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                       May 3, 2002 Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 160 words

HEADLINE: DIABETES BREAKTHROUGH

BYLINE: NOVA PIERSON, CALGARY SUN

BODY:

   A Calgary scientist and his colleagues have turned intestinal cells into
insulin producers -- a potentially vital finding for millions of people with
diabetes.

   Dr. Norman Wong, a physician, professor and director of the Libin Gene
Therapy Unit at the University of Calgary, along with Dr. Takaaki Nakamura and
Dr. Atsunori Kashiwagi at Shiga University in Japan, was able to coax
transplanted intestinal cells in rats into producing insulin.

   In their study, published this month in international journal Diabetes, the
researchers found it takes two steps to make cells from the intestines -- which
come from the same stem cells as insulin-producing pancreas cells -- produce
insulin.

   "It is a potential for treating people with the disease -- 400 million (of
the world's) people in the next decade will have diabetes," said Wong.

   "It consumes one out of every seven dollars spent on health care."

   Tests on humans are still years away, he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2002


                              300 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 2, 2002 Thursday

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; Briefing; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 101 words

HEADLINE: Genes offer hope of lung-cancer cure

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

    Scientists said yesterday that they had discovered three genes involved in
lung cancer, and when they replaced the genes in mice, the cancer stopped
spreading and in some cases was cured. A report in the journal Cancer Research
says that based on these findings, researchers said they hoped to begin
gene-therapy experiments in lung-cancer patients within a year. The three genes
not only slowed the growth and spread of lung-cancer tumors but seemed to cause
them to die off, report the researchers at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center and the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.
 Reuters

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              302 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             May 1, 2002 Wednesday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 638 words

HEADLINE: UN sees genetics as boon for Third World;
Public-health gap between rich countries;
and poor could close, WHO says in report

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM, MEDICAL REPORTER

BODY:

    The World Health Organization has released a major report that finds the
revolution in genetics could bridge the gigantic public-health gap between rich
and poor countries.

    Be it the development of designer malaria-free mosquitoes, vaccine-laced
vegetables or genetic diagnostic tests and gene-therapy drugs, this exploding
area of science could offer astounding health benefits to poor countries if they
can afford it, the report says.

    The UN agency, which released the 250-page document yesterday, recommends
that wealthy countries create a $1.5-billion (U.S.) fund to back
genetic-research projects aimed at countering health problems in developing
nations.

    It proposes that another $1.5-billion fund specifically targets AIDS,
tuberculosis and malaria, which together kill six million people a year, most in
poor countries.

    Yet examples of AIDS drugs priced out of reach of African countries most in
need of them and the difficulties of providing even the most basic medical
services in the Third World suggest that making the high-tech, high-priced world
of genetics more accessible is a massive challenge.

    Sir David Weatherall, the report's lead author and a professor at Oxford
University's Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, acknowledged that the
recommendations "start now with things that are not expensive. We thought long
and hard about this. We tried to set out a blueprint."

    The report calls for educating doctors in wealthy and poor countries about
genetics, setting up basic genetic clinical services and regulatory bodies to
oversee them and handling ethical concerns such as selecting the sex of babies.

    It notes that hopes for quick cures from the field have been overblown since
the drafts of the human genome were published last year.

    But research in the meantime could become the exclusive domain of rich
countries and the big drug companies based there, it says.

    A most troubling trend, Sir David said, is the patents that developed
nations have granted on genetic material, which he called "chaotic" and
"random."

    The results have left even countries such as Canada, for example, struggling
to test women for their susceptibility to hereditary breast cancer because the
Utah company that patented the genes charges steep royalty fees.

    "This deeply unsatisfying situation is compounded by escalating concerns
that large transnational corporations are becoming more powerful than many
governments and have greater lobbying power," the report says. "The current
situation has gone too far in terms of promulgating a culture of ownership."

    Peter Singer, director of the University of Toronto Joint Centre for
Bioethics, which collaborates with the Geneva-based WHO, noted that 90 per cent
of the $70-billion the public and private sectors spend yearly on health
research benefits only the 10 per cent of people who live in the developing
world.

    Meanwhile, he said, life expectancies in developed countries are reaching
beyond 80, while in some African countries, the age is 40 and dropping. For this
reason, Dr. Singer said, the report from the WHO - which represents 191
countries - can focus attention on a field that could do something to equalize
those statistics.

    "People don't think about how genetics could help developing countries," Dr.
Singer said.

    "They think of a lab at the University of Toronto or a share on the Nasdaq
exchange.

    "Developing nations are in danger of being left out of the benefits of
genomic research, like they were left behind in the computer revolution of the
1980s and '90s, resulting in the so-called digital divide."

    But the report may act as a catalyst to force governments and biotech
companies to come up with creative ways to solve problems that separate the rich
from the poor while the genomics revolution is still in its early days, he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              303 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            April 27, 2002 Saturday

SECTION: FOCUS; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 3536 words

HEADLINE: Five years ago, Gary White had a 14-pound tumour in his gut,

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM

BODY:

    Gary White considered himself a buff 44-year-old and chalked up his bloating
belly to beer with the boys. He even bought himself an ab exerciser. Then, in
1997, he stopped short on the basketball court one day - and the bulge didn't
stop with him.

    He felt fluid lurch and roll, wash over his innards and slosh like a tsunami
against his gut. White quit the game and hauled himself to the hospital. The
ultrasound nurse gasped at the screen: "What is that?" A blob bigger than any
baby had spread through his abdominal cavity. It was cancer - mesothelioma, a
rare, multisyllabic monster so far gone that the doctors gave him eight months
at best.

    Go home, they said. Get your affairs in order. Kiss your wife goodbye.

    Yet five years later, White is still here, broad and strong, with his wife,
his two kids and his buddies. He has even fulfilled a lifelong dream, sailing a
43-foot Spindrift to second place in the Caribbean 1500. And his 14-pound
tumour? It's posted like a trophy on the Internet.

    Chemotherapy - and a surgeon who dared to extract the massive growth -
bought him a few extra months. But the Connecticut man credits something else
for keeping his cancer at bay: a flu virus, pumped into his bloodstream six
times a month for the past three years.

    Dozens of dying men and women are now being deliberately infected with
viruses as doctors determine if these microscopic bugs can kill the cancers
without killing the patients. People desperate to beat their disease have
volunteered to catch the flu, a cold, even a modified version of herpes.

    Results from animal studies have been astounding. Injected with viruses,
human tumours in mice have shrunk and vanished completely without harming the
animal. And viruses have worked against not just one cancer, but nearly every
malignancy medicine knows, whether breast, lung, liver, colon, ovarian or even
brain.

    White's is the first human face to emerge from the early experiments, but it
won't be the last. Nine cancer patients in Ottawa received infusions at
Christmas with the same virus. Canadians are among the leaders in the field.
University of Calgary researchers have completed the first trial designed to
test the safety of a reovirus, a bug common to the human gut and nasal passages,
in people.

    Eighteen patients with sarcomas (cancers of the bone and soft tissue),
breast, skin, head and neck cancers suffered no serious side effects over a
recent 14-week trial. Some of their tumours even showed signs of shrinking and
one tumour disappeared completely. The Alberta group is now conducting a Phase 2
trial, testing 45 prostate-cancer patients and in another experiment, will treat
people with brain cancer.

    "The results are encouraging, but this is a whole new area that we're
exploring," said Dr. John Bell, a senior scientist with Cancer Care Ontario
involved in the Ottawa trials. Still, he says, in the lab "there hasn't been a
cancer that isn't vulnerable to a virus."

    Bell's group at the Ottawa Regional Cancer Centre has started human safety
tests with the Newcastle virus, a flu bug that strikes chickens. They are
collaborating with Provirus Inc. in Maryland, which has already tested Newcastle
in more than 70 American patients, including Gary White, whose case will be
included next month in the Journal of Clinical Oncology.

    California's Onyx Pharmaceuticals Inc. and Stanford University are testing a
genetically altered adenovirus - better known as a common cold bug - in patients
with head, neck or liver cancers.

    Harvard is running trials with a modified herpes virus, and lab research is
underway on a weakened polio virus at Duke University and on measels at the Mayo
Clinic.

    Scientists are struggling to contain their excitement: Imagine beating the
big C with a little-c weapon as wild and mild as the common cold.

    Of course, curing cancer in mice has made front-page headlines before. And
scientists, too familiar with the failures, are cautious as they await answers:
Is Gary White a statistical blip?

    Using one disease to fight another sounds like a handy, if risky, strategy.
But it works with antibiotics. And making friends of our viral foes to battle
cancer offers a special irony: The defects that make cancerous cells vulnerable
to viruses are the very same ones that make them malignant.

    "Tumour cells have already undergone genetic changes to become cancerous,"
said Bell, also a professor of medicine at the University of Ottawa. "They have
thrown out genes that inhibit their growth, but at the same time, they've thrown
out their anti-viral programming."

    Unfortunately, some scientists suggest patients may have to decide whether
they are willing to live the rest of their lives with the symptoms of a flu or
worse.

    But, as Bell said, "Cancer is such an awful disease that patients are
willing to be infected."

    And according to Provirus consultant Dr. Andrew Pecora, the director of the
Cancer Center at Havensack Medical School in New Jersey, who supervised White's
experimental treatment, "It may be that you add this treatment to standard
therapy and all of a sudden you're curing people."
   The concept of fighting cancer with viruses actually stretches back through a
100-year history, rife with bizarre anecdotes of tumours regressing when a
cancer patient battles a cold, a flu or some other infection. Advances in
genetics and molecular biology have only recently explained these weird
observations, pushing them from the fringes of medicine into mainstream
research.

    One of the first reports, Bell said, dates back to an Italian physician who
roamed the countryside in the early 1900s vaccinating people against rabies. The
doctor noted curiously that prostitutes, whose sex work plagued them with high
rates of cervical cancer, had their tumours regress after they received the
rabies vaccine.

    Later, reports from the 1940s and 1950s suggested that measles could quell
lymphoma.

    "A lot of these exposures to viruses were unintended, and only a few trials
were on record," said Duke University virologist Matthias Gromeier. In part,
said Gromeier, who is studying a modified polio virus to treat brain cancer, the
records are slim because some experiments conducted were highly unethical:
"People just fed the polio virus to cancer patients in the Soviet Union in the
1950s."

    Doctors were also limited to the viruses they could harvest. That meant
distilling mumps and measles viruses from people's saliva or pus, and injecting
this unpurified form directly into a patient. If results were promising, the
point was moot: The patients were probably too sick with infections to care.

    The next report, from the 1960s, is so often cited that doctors confess to
wondering how much of it is urban legend.

    But the details, Bell said, go something like this: A Hungarian chicken
farmer with a deadly case of stomach cancer was sent home to die. But while
tending his chickens, which happened to be suffering an outbreak of the
Newcastle disease virus, the farmer contracted the chicken flu and his cancer
completely regressed.

    Skeptics dismiss the accounts as preposterous, while more than one desperate
cancer patient has since trekked to Hungary for shots of this avian flu. But
even in established scientific circles, anecdotes have always circulated to
suggest an intriguing link between infections and halting cancer.

    "It's been floating around for years," said medical oncologist Don Morris,
who runs reovirus trials at Calgary's Tom Baker Cancer Centre. "It's common to
hear that cancer patients who pick up a virus get a regression of their
disease."

    Despite all the tempting tidbits, research idled until the past decade. It
went nowhere, Bell said, because scientists could not explain the phenomenon.
Did viruses simply supercharge a patient's immune system to fight cancer? How
could you find out?

    Dr. Patrick Lee is a virus man. Raised in Hong Kong and educated in
Edmonton, he decided early to devote himself to the arcane world of these
microscopic pathogens. He trained in the seventies at the University of Alberta
and under the fathers of modern virology at Duke, where he learned the enemy's
tricks and grew to admire them.

    Unlike bacteria that can multiply on a doorknob, a subway seat or a bowl of
soup, viruses are parasites that depend on a host cell for their survival. But
once a single virus particle busts through a cell wall, it can replicate from
1,000 to 10,000 times within two days.

    "It's amazing," said Lee, his enthusiasm unmasked. "It makes identical
copies of itself over and over again until the cell finally ruptures and the
virus progeny drift out to infect other cells."

    In 1981 at the University of Calgary, where the virologist and biochemist is
now a professor of medicine, Lee turned his attention to the mechanics of the
reovirus (short for respiratory enteric orphan). The common bug has triggered
colds and stomach upsets in nearly 90 per cent of us before we reach the age of
3. If a scientist wanted to learn how viruses manage to latch on and break into
a cell in the first place, the reovirus was a good candidate to study.

    Lee soon discovered that the bug attaches itself to a single sugar molecule
on the surface of a host cell. Then a graduate student proposed an experiment to
see if the reovirus would hitch itself to a second receptor if he blocked out
the first.

    "It was a weird idea and I told him that it was a stupid experiment," Lee
said. "But he went ahead and did it anyway, and it didn't work." Yet what flowed
from the faulty investigation wasn't stupid at all.

    Analyzing the student's information, Lee noticed something strange that
accidentally led him to discover how the reovirus could penetrate cells in a lab
dish at an uncanny rate. At first, he thought the reovirus was fooling the cell
into thinking it was some other normal molecule. "My heart was pounding so fast
I couldn't believe it. I thought I figured out how a virus tricks the cell."

    But by the early 1990s, Lee became troubled by the notion that a single
virus particle could coax a healthy cell to throw its door wide open. And that
is when it dawned on him that the door was already wide open - because this was
no healthy cell. The virus experiments had been conducted in cancer cells, which
are used routinely in research because they're easy to grow.

    Lee's experiments later proved that a biochemical signalling system called
the RAS pathway, important for growth and survival, is flicked into overdrive in
a cancer cell. "In the normal cell," he explained, "this is like a light that's
only turned on sometimes," leaving a virus groping in the dark on the stoop of a
healthy cell.

    But in the cancer cell, the RAS pathway is more like a porch light on the
prairie, never shutting off, allowing the virus to find its way to the front
door and march right in.

    Lee's remarkable finding, along with staggering studies that demonstrated
the reovirus wiping out a wide range of tumours in mice, was published in
Science in 1998. It turned up in headlines around the world, and researchers
were immediately attracted to the notion that something as ubiquitous as a virus
might selectively kill cancer cells without killing healthy ones.

    "It's the stuff of which we all dream, to have that flash of insight," said
Michael Wosnick, director of research at the National Cancer Institute of
Canada. "And all logic says it should work."

    "I think we're going to find out that some viruses are going to be good at
targeting some cancers, and that other viruses will get other cancers," Bell
said.

    While the Calgary group prepared to move the lab findings into clinical
trials, Lee's work helped to explain why other research teams were already
collecting evidence of the stunning anti-cancer properties of viruses.

    Among them was the Harvard team led by Robert Martuza, who had described in
1991 how a genetically weakened herpes virus could kill tumours in animals, and
Andrew Pecora's Hackensack group in New Jersey, which was then preparing to
launch the first trial of the Newcastle virus in human patients.

    Pecora's group ran ads on the radio in the spring of 1998, looking for
people with solid tumours who had exhausted every other treatment available.
White heard about the plea for "guinea pigs," and he called in.

    Pecora told White that he was running a Phase 1 trial for an experimental
therapy. Such trials, he explained, are not conducted to gauge whether a new
treatment is effective, but to determine the maximum dose a human can safely
tolerate.

    In other words, the trial wasn't designed to save White's life. Was he still
interested?

    White explained that he had spent 12 years as an administrator at the
Connecticut Department of Mental Retardation, a facility that closed in the late
1980s with high levels of asbestos. He figured the exposure probably caused his
cancer (a legal settlement would later confirm his suspicions). White described
his surgery, the drugs that were literally hosed into his abdomen, how his
"disease ate the chemo for lunch," and the miserable prognosis he had heard at
hospitals from New Haven to New York.

    Then Pecora told White about the Newcastle virus. "He was pretty revved up
and excited," White remembered. "I decided to try it."

    The regimen, he learned, would involve three infusions of the Newcastle
virus a week for two consecutive weeks, and then two weeks off. After the first
round, he and other patients in the trial developed soaring temperatures of 104
degrees. White ended up in the hospital for a few days, but he decided to stick
with it.

    Bell, who is now involved in Ottawa's Newcastle flu trials, said that in
those first days down in Hackensack, even the researchers held their breath.
"This was the first time it had been infused into patients, there were some
sleepless nights."

    "Some of the older patients, who had fragile immune systems, couldn't take
it," White said. Already battered by powerful drugs and radiation, some dropped
out. "You are really very ill in the beginning. But then you start to build up
antibodies and then you get tolerance."

    The initial dose in the Ottawa trial has been lowered to counter this
dramatic reaction to a foreign substance. "We're allowing for a desensitization
period, and thus [causing] less side effects," Bell explained. But otherwise,
they are following the highest safe dosage established by the first Hackensack
trial.

    There are all sorts of things researchers are just coming to understand
about using viruses as medicines, Bell said. Some patients in the first trial
were pulled out early because doctors were under the mistaken impression that
their tumours were getting larger. But California's Onyx group recently reported
that tumours initially swell as part of the natural inflammatory reaction to
infection.

    "When the swelling went down, they found the tumours actually shrank," Bell
said.

    A year into White's treatment, he finally heard an encouraging medical
report: "There was no sign of progressing disease." The only worrisome feature
remained a tumour near his pelvis, which his surgeon removed and pathologists
anxiously studied. When they tried to grow White's biopsied tumour cells in the
lab, they stumbled on a happy fact - infected with the replicating virus, the
cells would not grow.

    "The cancer cells were all necrotic and dying," Pecora said. Healthy
immune-system cells were also penetrating the tumour.

    The Hackensack trial ended within the year, but with White's remarkable
progress, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration allowed him to continue the
experimental treatment on compassionate grounds.

    He has since packed a lot of life into the three years he never knew he
would have. He has seen his daughter graduate from college and his son graduate
from high school. He bulked up his 6-foot-3 frame, started shooting hoops again,
and "cashed in some chips" with his legal-settlement money to go down to New
Orleans and buy his prized sailboat, called the Anam Cara, after the Celtic for
"trusted friend."

    He raced the Anam Cara from Virginia to the British Virgin Islands, and he
and his wife, Katherine, a schoolteacher, started talking about taking a year
off, maybe sailing around the world.

    Any notion that cold viruses are harmless as therapy evaporated with the
death of Jesse Gelsinger in 1999, during a gene-therapy experiment. The
18-year-old patient, who suffered from a rare metabolic disorder, was injected
with a weakened adenovirus that was to deliver a corrective gene for his ailing
liver.

    Daniel Sze, an assistant radiology professor at Stanford and Onyx
consultant, said Gelsinger received a dose 20 to 30 times higher than the one
Sze has been injecting into patients' arteries to target liver cancer. But
Gelsinger's death still has made some patients reluctant to join anti-cancer
virus trials, according to Harvard neurosurgery professor Antonio Chiocca.

    "The history of science has not been geared to think of viruses as a
positive thing," said Chiocca, who has been running trials using the modified
herpes virus to treat brain cancer at Massachusetts General Hospital. "Patients
have to understand this is still highly experimental, we're not cowboys just
injecting this into tumours."

    Newcastle is the first replicating virus to be called into battle against
cancer by being pumped into human patients intravenously. Most other trials are
relying on injecting viruses directly into tumours. But safely channelling the
pathogen into the bloodstream is the ultimate goal.

    As Don Morris in Calgary put it, "People don't die from a tumour. They die
from spread disease." The obstacle, as the Gelsinger case showed, is figuring
out how to safely fill a patient's system with an infectious agent - one you
can't control. After all, a dose of a single virus can Xerox itself into as many
as 10,000 viruses within 48 hours. What other drug gets stronger with time?

    "It's a balance scale," Morris said. "Too much virus and too little immune
system can kill the patient. Too much immune system and too little virus, and
the treatment doesn't work."

    Calgary's reovirus likely performed so well in safety trials, Morris said,
because most people already have antibodies to it.

    Similarly, Onyx is using a cold virus altered to target a gene commonly
missing from cancer cells, not because it's the most powerful tool in the
medical shed, but because it may be one of the safest. "If it mutates back into
its original form," Sze said, "it's going to give you a cold - it's not going to
give you AIDS or something."

    But for now, Chiocca said, scientists are still trying to understand what is
safe: "We haven't seen anything dramatic to make us say, 'Stop the trial and
let's just start treating patients.' But anything that is safe and effective in
cancer treatment is a bonus."

    Whatever dosage doctors determine, cancers seem to grow back without the
steady presence of a viral attack. It's quite possible, Chiocca agreed, that
patients might have to consider whether they would live with a permanent cold.

    The question might be whether patients are "willing to turn a fatal disease
into a chronic one," Pecora said. "People live with arthritis all the time. They
take drugs that have side effects, but they live with it."
   After all, he added: "There will always be some reaction to the virus. But if
it works in other people as it did Gary, what does it matter?"

    Gary White is on the water this week, sailing the Anam Cara for what will
likely be the last time. Doctors found another tumour on his rib cage earlier
this year. Surgeons removed it, but he missed more than a month of his viral
treatments recovering.

    "I've never gone that long without them," said White, now 49.

    Thoughts of sailing away with his wife on the high seas have been reined in.
He asked his doctors if should he take the chance and leave. "I asked them,
'Should I stay, dock the boat in Florida and sell it?' They told me to dock the
boat."

    Reactions to the treatments have slipped into a predictable routine for
White. And only one of the six 30-minute infusions a month triggers side
effects. After the first, desensitizing dose on Mondays comes the dreaded
Wednesday, when within 10 minutes of the virus seeping into his bloodstream, it
starts: "I get beet red, flushed, I feel chest pressure, pounding and cramping
my lower back. The nurse says it sounds like labour pains.

    "There's a lull, and then I get nasty tremors for 15 or 20 minutes and they
wrap me with heated towels - it sucks."

    But after 20 minutes, White said, it's over. "Then I'm ready to go. I can
play golf half an hour after getting most of my treatments."

    As he prepared to sell his beloved boat, White was already thinking of his
next adventure, "maybe an RV."

    As he summed it up, "It's been a long, strange trip. I've been living on the
edge of a knife all this time, and I'm not afraid of death. But it's hard to
make plans."

    He's also not thrilled with being anchored to the 2½-hour drives through New
Jersey's industrial corridor from his home in Storrs, Conn., to Hackensack six
times a month. "That's a lot of time in New Jersey.

    "But what the heck?" White said. "I'm alive."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              308 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             March 25, 2002 Monday

SECTION: FACTS & ARGUMENTS; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 662 words

HEADLINE: SOCIAL STUDIES;
A DAILY MISCELLANY OF INFORMATION BY MICHAEL KESTERTON

BODY:

   Budget space travel

      Space tourism just got cheaper. A Russian and U.S. commercial partnership
has slashed the price of a space vacation from $20-million (U.S.) for a week at
the international space station to $98,000 for a few minutes of high-altitude
weightlessness, reports the Houston Chronicle. Flights of the Cosmopolis XXI, a
three-person Russian space shuttle, are scheduled to begin in 2005. On a trip,
lasting 60 to 90 minutes, a professional pilot will fly two paying passengers to
an altitude of 62 miles, yielding five minutes of weightlessness, a look at the
blackness of space and a view of Earth's curvature. More than 100 thrillseekers
have already committed $6,000 each to reserve their seats.
Personal flying

      "The SoloTrek XFV is "a brand-new kind of flying machine that lets you
step on, strap on and fly," says its Website, www.solotrek.com. "This
ultracompact aircraft lets you take off vertically, dash to your destination,
then land literally anywhere." A few months ago, a model was airborne for 19
seconds and video of this breakthrough flight is provided.
Straws in the wind

      Recent U.S. news:

    * Jeanmaking firm Levi's is adding Kevlar, Du Pont's super-strong material
found in bulletproof vests, to some of its Silvertab jeans. Kevlar is 300 per
cent stronger than standard 10-ounce denim.

    * Funeral homes across the country have begun to offer clients a chance to
store the DNA of deceased loved ones, a service that providers say could help
prevent disease in their descendants. The genetic material could be used to
determine a predisposition to conditions such as breast or colon cancer, and
might also be used in gene therapy, reports The Associated Press.

    * In January, the male labour-force partipation rate - the percentage of men
16 or older who are working or looking for a job - fell to the lowest level on
record at 73.6 per cent.

    * In the past seven years, there has been a resurgence of men going into
monasteries, reports the Los Angeles Times.
   Monastic institutions across the country are renovating or expanding to
accommodate hundreds of newcomers.
World o' television

    * "While the Internet has captured the attention of the medical world as a
new, powerful purveyor of health information," reports The Boston Globe, "it is
still the old-fashioned TV that Americans cite as their primary source when it
comes to learning more about health, nearly 10 to 1 over the Internet. It's not
just the news programs and documentaries that saturate the airwaves with medical
advice, either. Drama shows such as ER or Dawson's Creek, daytime soap operas
such as One Life to Live, and public-service announcements are influencing their
view of their health."
Significant digits

    * Ten: Last year, spam constituted 10 per cent of all e-mail, estimates
Brightmail, the San Francisco company that filters e-mail for corporate
customers including AT & T WorldNet, Verizon, Earthlink and MSN. The company now
says that figure has doubled.

    * 160: A spaceflight to the stars would take generations and require an
initial group of 160 adults to successfully complete the mission, estimates John
Moore, an anthropologist at the University of Florida.

    * 1,400: Since 1995, more than 1,400 sports-gambling Websites have sprouted,
attracting an estimated five million users, according to Christiansen Capital
Advisers, a New York market-research firm.
   Only a handful of sites have been accused of swindling bettors or not paying
winnings in a timely fashion.

    * 150 million: Of the 600 million children in the world, 150 million suffer
from malnutrition, say U.N. officials. Almost 11 million die each year of
preventable causes; in the 1990s, largely thanks to immunization programs,
preventable deaths declined from 14 million annually.
Thought du jour

      "Many a woman staring at the back of her husband's newspaper, or listening
to his breathing in bed is lonelier than any spinster in a rented room."
   - Germaine Greer.
MKesterton@globeandmail.ca

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              309 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             March 25, 2002 Monday

SECTION: NEWS INDEX; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 1064 words

HEADLINE: Three-minute Summary

BODY:

   ARTS

      Lewis Lapham is the quintessential public intellectual in the Émile Zola
mould, the superbly well-educated and informed generalist beholden to no one,
serving freedom, civility, dignity, the enshrinement of ideals and the
protection of moral character. Michael Valpy pays tribute to a contrarian and a
gentleman.

    Page R1

      About 25 corpses, along with 175 body parts, are on display at the
Atlantis Gallery in London's Brick Lane in an anatomical exhibition of real
human bodies. It's called Body Worlds, or Korperwelten. Ghoulish spectacle or
public-health exercise? Stuart Jeffries examines the body of evidence.

    Page R3

   QUIRKS

      Funeral homes across the country have begun to offer clients a chance to
store the DNA of deceased loved ones, a service that providers say could help
prevent disease in their descendants. The genetic material could be used to
determine a predisposition to conditions such as breast or colon cancer, and
might also be used in gene therapy.

    Page A18

      Grizzly bears will be tracked by radio and satellite as part of the
extensive security arrangements for the G8 summit in Kananaskis, Alta., in June.
A bear-response team, co-ordinated by the RCMP, wants to prevent any encounters
between people and grizzlies, some of which can become aggressive after
hibernation.

    Page A10

   FAREWELL

      Rand Holmes, the internationally known underground comic artist who
created Vancouver's first counterculture hero, has died at the age of 60.
Riddled with pot references, long-haired hippies and free love, the
misadventures of Harold Hedd were a classic of their time. They earned Mr.
Holmes a legion of devoted fans, including Jerry Garcia of the Grateful Dead.

    Page R5

      James Blake, the Montgomery bus driver who ordered Rosa Parks to give up
her seat to a white passenger and had her arrested when she refused, has died at
the age of 89. Her arrest set off the Montgomery bus boycott and helped to forge
the civil-rights movement.

    Page R5

   INTERNATIONAL

      The history of the developed world has been one of imitation, London-based
journalist John Lloyd writes. Russian President Vladimir Putin must heed the
lesson before his country becomes a pale shadow of its former self. For the
moment, he appears to have what it takes.

    Page A13

      A Russian historical institute has shed new light on the crimes of Joseph
Stalin, releasing a compact disc that documents the lives of some of the
estimated 30 million victims of his ruthless purges. But as Mark MacKinnon
reports, debate still rages about whether Stalin was a villain or a hero. Many
Russians seem content to remain collectively amnesiac.

    Page A1

      The diplomatic dance in the Middle East threatened to turn into a
diplomatic farce yesterday as Yasser Arafat's appearance at a key Arab League
summit appeared less and less likely. Meanwhile, U.S.-led truce talks broke up
without an agreement and violence persisted. More than 1,500 people have died in
18 months of fighting.

    Page A11

   BUSINESS

      The Canadian government is planning to announce major concessions on trade
barriers for the world's poorest countries in time for the Group of Eight summit
in Alberta in June, federal sources say. An end to tariffs and quotas on some
agricultural products will be at the centre of the package, but it could also
include the elimination of protections for clothing and textiles.

    Page B1

      Speculators in money-losing Ivanhoe Mines Ltd. are betting its gold and
copper exploration program in the south Gobi desert of Mongolia will prove to be
a winner. Mining analysts say early drilling suggests the program has potential,
but it would take a large and rich deposit to justify the development of a major
mining complex costing more than $1-billion (U.S.).

    Page B1

      Jack Welch's fall from grace is symptomatic of a time when high-flying
managers are plunging to earth, and once trendy terms such as "virtual company"
and "new paradigms" are dropping out of managers' vocabulary, replaced by
meat-and-potatoes profit, governance and disclosure.

    Page B1

      Merchants are making mothers a priority in their merchandising and
marketing strategies, retailing reporter Marina Strauss writes, by enticing them
with loyalty programs, play centres and wider aisles for moms pushing strollers.

    Page B1

      Faced with paying a 29-per-cent duty on U.S. softwood shipments, Canadian
lumber producers are stepping up efforts to open new markets in Asia. But many
analysts remain skeptical about whether such efforts will lead to a significant
increase in exports to Asian countries such as China, where wood homes are
considered a fire hazard, Peter Kennedy reports.

    Page B1

      The long-mighty U.S. dollar is starting to look a bit more vulnerable,
slipping against the euro as the European economy recovers. The dollar is
"dancing to an unfamiliar tune," one analyst said. But others say the greenback
is in no danger of imminent collapse.

    Page B8

      The Investment Dealers Association of Canada has begun proceedings against
two misbehaving brokers. As Richard Blackwell discovers, however, it's taking
action based on their refusal to co-operate with the investigation, rather than
focusing on their alleged transgressions.

    Page B3

   POLITICS

      Stephen Harper's "entirely understandable instinct" to remove Ottawa even
more from the daily lives of his voters in the West, if not by building
firewalls then by pushing for even more separation in the existing division of
powers, is a reflection of Canada's overcentralized democracy, William Thorsell
writes. It's time for reform, he argues.

    Page A15

      Saying he will choose consultation over confrontation, Ontario's incoming
premier, Ernie Eves, will begin the transfer of power today when he meets with
Mike Harris, whom he succeeds as leader of the Progressive Conservative Party.
Mr. Eves and and Mr. Harris will discuss when and where to hold a by-election
that would allow Mr. Eves to take a seat in the legislature.

    Page A1

   SPORTS

      The fix was in for the order of finish of the ice-dancing event at the
Salt Lake City Olympics months before the event started, a source said
yesterday. Italian and Russian federations entered an agreement to have Italian
dancers Barbara Fusar-Poli and Maurizio Margaglio win the Olympic gold medal.
The arrangement lasted until the middle of December, when plans changed
drastically, according to a skating insider.

    Page S1

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              313 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           February 26, 2002 Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 610 words

HEADLINE: Antibiotics touted for heart;
Gene therapy, drug used against infection;
improve blood flow, landmark studies find

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM, MEDICAL REPORTER

BODY:

    Something old and something new are opening up unprecedented options for
saving the hearts of people with clogged arteries, according to two separate
research groups.

    Scientists in England have shown for the first time that antibiotics can
help repair the damaged blood vessels of patients with angina.

    The study, in which patients also tested positive for the common bacteria
chlamydia pneumoniae, bolsters the theory that infections can trigger heart
disease.

    U.S. researchers, meanwhile, say they appear to have treated angina by
inserting a gene into patients' hearts that prompts new blood vessels to grow.

    Both papers are published today in Circulation, the Journal of the American
Heart Association.

    "These are landmark studies," said Peter Liu, director of cardiovascular
research at the University of Toronto. "They represent new directions and
strategies for treating coronary disease."

    More than eight million people in North America suffer from angina, a
condition marked by chest pains as narrowing arteries struggle to ferry
oxygen-rich blood to the heart during periods of exertion.

    Yet only a few patients can be helped by current methods to clear or
circumvent clogged arteries, including drugs, bypassing blocked vessels with
surgery and widening arteries with angioplasty balloons.

    Bad diets, genes and lifestyle contribute to the condition. But in recent
years, common bacterial and viral infections have also been tagged as potential
artery-clogging culprits. Chlamydia pneumoniae, which causes respiratory
infections in 80 per cent of people by the time they are 65, is one of the
leading bacterial candidates.

    Now, researchers at St. George's Hospital Medical School in London have
found that a five-week course of azithromycin, an antibiotic used to treat
chlamydia pneumoniae, improved blood flow in angina patients infected with the
bug.

    The study included 40 men with an average age of 55 whose blood flow was
measured and evaluated in the arm's brachial artery at both the beginning and
end of the trial.

    Those who received the antibiotic showed a widening artery and lower levels
of biochemical markers known to interfere with the function of the endothelial,
inner, layer of the artery.

    "The antibiotic . . . appears to allow the artery to increase its calibre
[the width of the vessel]," said study co-author Carlos Kaski, a professor of
cardiovascular science.

    Dr. Kaski said it is too early for doctors to consider prescribing
antibiotics to treat heart disease since it is unclear whether the antibiotics
unclog arteries by killing bacteria or because this particular drug counters
inflammation.

    Bill Fong, director of infectious diseases at Toronto's St. Michael's
Hospital, said the study supports previous research showing antibiotics can
prevent second heart attacks in people who already have coronary disease.

    Researchers at the William Beaumont Hospital in Michigan relied on patients'
performance on the treadmill to determine whether an experimental gene therapy
to treat angina had improved blood flow to the heart.

    The gene, which produces FGF4, one of many growth-factor proteins that can
stimulate new blood-vessel growth, was inserted into a common cold virus. Known
as an adenovirus, and used as a vector, this gene-transporting microbe was
stripped of its pathogenic qualities.

    The researchers then infused the vector, which delivered the gene into the
DNA of the patients' heart cells, into the coronary arteries of 79 men and women
with mild to moderate angina.

    Patients who received the gene therapy showed greater improvements in
endurance on the treadmill than those in a placebo group.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              315 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            February 18, 2002 Monday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 967 words

HEADLINE: Mighty mice fuel fears of gene doping

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM, MEDICAL REPORTER

BODY:

     With simple injections, scientists have turned ordinary lab mice into the
Arnold Schwarzeneggers of rodents, fuelling fears about the next wave of Olympic
cheating.

    The doctored animals can scale towering ladders with weights strapped to
their furry backs. They can scamper tirelessly on the treadmill and leave normal
mice in their dust.

    Thanks to a growth-hormone gene that inserted into the DNA of their muscles,
these University of Pennsylvania mice have bulked up 20 per cent without even
lifting a paw.

    Not even old age weakens their strength.

    If they frighten their rodent roommates, these Herculean mice scare the
whistles off sporting officials.

    They represent the ominous prospect of biologically engineered athletes,
built stronger, faster and bigger by the very same genetic techniques that could
transform modern medicine.

    So-called gene doping is different from other forms of doping because it
does not involve injecting a detectable substance - such as steroids or
human-growth hormone itself - into the body.

   Instead, a gene is inserted to make the body itself produce the substances to
gain such things as strength, speed and endurance. Unlike traditional
performance-enhancing substances, genetic engineering may leave no detectable
traces in the urine or blood.

    Worried they could be left laps behind, the International Olympic
Committee's World Anti-Doping Association is meeting next month with scientists,
ethicists and policy makers in Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y., to come up with a game
plan to handle the problem.

    "It's not as farfetched as people think," said Dr. Andrew Pipe, head of the
Canadian Centre for Ethics in Sport. "These therapies are still in the
experimental stage but that doesn't mean there aren't idiots out there prepared
to dabble in these kinds of areas.

    "If past experience is any indication, people will do inordinately stupid
things to achieve their goals."

    Some predict that by the next Olympics any number of competitors will have
subjected themselves to gene-altering experiments. Others suspect crude forms of
so-called "gene doping" are already under way.

    Dr. Johann Olav Koss, former Norwegian speed-skating champion and an
official with the antidoping association, said in December: "I think genetic
engineering may have already started . . . we can't be naive, we must be
realistic."

    It is thought, for example, that many a rogue athlete would consider doping
themselves with the gene that produces erythropoietin, or EPO, a hormone that
increases the number of oxygen-carrying red blood cells in the body, and as a
result, increases human endurance.

    A genetic quirk endowed Finnish cross-country skier Eero Mantyranta with
elevated levels in the 1960s and he was a multi-gold-medal winner at the
Olympics.

    EPO's synthetic form is one of the more widely abused drugs in sport.
Scientists have had to design a sophisticated test to detect it in the
bloodstream. But a genetic therapy could make that test obsolete.

    The possibility also exists that gene therapy could be considered a
legitimate form of treatment to heal an injured athlete, but drawing the line
between repairing and enhancing is bound to be tricky.

    Meanwhile, administering DNA tests, which can easily run $1,000 a shot,
could become prohibitively expensive if every athlete involved in an
international competition is to be tested. And even DNA screens from blood
samples could return false negatives.

    "Detection is a potential problem. It's difficult even in the realm of gene
therapy [used in experiments for medicinal purposes]," said Theodore Friedmann,
a member of WADA's health, medical and research committee who also reviews
gene-therapy research for the U.S. National Institutes of Health. "You would
have to look for a specific gene or the virus that brought that gene in. It
would be invasive."

    The only way researchers can detect the synthetic gene in the supermice, for
example, is to shave off bits of their muscle and extract DNA, said Lee Sweeney,
chairman of the physiology department at the University of Pennsylvania.

    "The gene [and the elevated growth-hormone level it produces] is trapped
within the muscle tissue. It's prevented from leaving and the blood levels are
normal," said Dr. Sweeney, who is to present his research at the New York
meeting.

    Dr. Sweeney created the synthetic gene that produces IGF-1, the body's main
growth hormone, in hopes of treating such diseases as muscular dystrophy or of
repairing weak muscles in the elderly.

    But if excessive amounts of IGF-1, which is produced predominantly by the
liver, circulate in the bloodstream, the patient risks cancers, cardiovascular
disease and other health hazards. To ensure safety, he explained, the effects of
the added gene must be injected directly into and confined to the muscle, as
they are in his mice.

    Dr. Sweeney realized this potential bonanza for the sick could also be an
illicit boon for the sporting world: "It's expensive . . . but it's a relatively
simple procedure.

    "It dawned on me watching the young mice - you inject them and they can sit
around the cage and do nothing and get 20 per cent stronger . . . if they work
out, they can get 35 per cent stronger," he explained. "This would stop that
loss of speed that takes a 30-year-old off the circuit. This could take athletes
to a certain level of performance with less training."

    Dr. Sweeney hopes to soon test the therapy in humans and as news of his
beefcake mice spreads, he has no shortage of volunteers. Body builders are
lining up.

    "They are saying they are ready and they want to try it and give me my data,
they want to be guinea pigs, they want to do anything to improve their
performance," Dr. Sweeney said. "They think it could make the difference between
also-rans and champions."

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              317 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            February 5, 2002 Tuesday

SECTION: COMMENT; GLOBE ANALYSIS: PART ONE; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 1307 words

HEADLINE: For science or money?;
If scientists really want to advance genetic research rather;
than hinder it, says DAVID AKIN, they should shun patents

BYLINE: DAVID AKIN

BODY:

    In 1999, at a dinner party at an elegant townhouse in Boston's Back Bay
neighbourhood, I sat next to Tim Berners-Lee, the British scientist who invented
the World Wide Web.

    Plates of chicken perched on our knees, we chatted about the popularity of
his invention, developed during the 1980s while he was a researcher at CERN, the
European Organization for Nuclear Research, in Geneva. The Web, he was
pleasantly surprised to see, had become the system that gave hundreds of
millions of people around the world easy access to the Internet. Surely, I
thought, Mr. Berners-Lee's invention must have made him filthy rich. He's not.

    He drives an old car and lives a modestly successful life in Boston, where
he holds a research chair at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. At every
juncture when he could have placed patents on his invention and demanded
handsome royalty payments, he chose not to. In fact, in speeches - nowadays
mostly to academic audiences - he laments the proliferation of patents and
worries that patents are given out too easily, often for inventions that are
mundane and obvious.

    I thought of Mr. Berners-Lee and his attitude about patents in January at a
breakfast meeting The Globe and Mail hosted for some of the jury members for the
Gairdner Award, the annual $30,000 prize that recognizes outstanding advances in
biomedical science.

    Plates of smoked salmon and bagels before us, the conversation turned to
Myriad Genetics Inc., the Utah-based company that patented both a gene related
to breast cancer and a test to determine if a woman has that gene. Myriad then
proceeded to charge what many thought was an exorbitant fee - nearly $4,000 - to
those who wanted to administer the test.

    The B.C. government, unable to afford the tests, cancelled them. The Ontario
government, last fall, took a different approach, ignoring the patent and paying
another provider $800 to test for the gene. Myriad has grumbled but has yet to
take any action.

    Needless to say, the situation provoked strong responses from those on both
sides of the issue. Those who have any investment in intellectual property must
worry when governments ignore or override property rights. And yet, many cheered
Ontario Premier Mike Harris for refusing to pay such a ransom to study something
- a gene - that occurs naturally.

    "Where I see the difficulty with the Myriad situation and with many other
companies is, I think they're wrong in trying to control the situation, in
trying to do the testing in-house and charge very high fees when we know that it
can be done for one-fifth or one-tenth of the cost," Dr. Ronald Worton, Gairdner
Award jury member, and CEO and scientific director of the Ottawa Hospital
Research Institute, said at our breakfast. "So it's a question of amount rather
than whether or not they should be allowed to protect their investment."

    Sir Keith Peters, regius professor of physic (medicine) at Cambridge
University and another Gairdner Award jurist, agreed: "I don't think there are
any new principles involved. It's the way they've been applied. What does strike
me is the sense of an unfair payment.

    "I think most people say it is reasonable for a company to recoup their R &
D and provide an aspect for investment in the future, because we know that in
the absence of essentially a capitalist system in drug development, drugs don't
get developed. The drugs that really altered our life in the Western world have
been developed by capitalistic drug companies."

    But the capitalist system that has served us relatively well when it comes
to the development of treatments for new diseases may be in need of some fine
tuning.

    Mr. Berners-Lee's invention - an invention that changed the world - cost
relatively little to create and, as a result, there were few pressures to
recover costs or repay money lent to him by investors.

    Still, for Mr. Berners-Lee, then and now, the more important goals of
freedom of scientific inquiry outweighed patent-protection issues. The Web, he
concluded, should be a tremendous teaching, research and publishing tool for
scientists in all fields and, sure enough, it has been.

    For Myriad, it is the reverse: Researchers and caregivers are restricted in
their use of a vital gene; as a result, scientific inquiry into a deadly and
all-too common disease may be hobbled.

    Mr. Berners-Lee and Myriad, it is fair to say, are examples at opposite ends
of the patent debate. Most companies who patent scientific research seem to be
able to balance the common good with the appropriate financial rewards due to
those who own intellectual property.

    "The breadth of the patents has been problematic. . . . I think there are
many people who would feel that the claims that have been allowed have been,
perhaps, too broad. That's changing, though," Dr. Worton said.

    Canadians are justifiably concerned that, as gene therapies become
increasingly common, there will be greater restrictions and less scientific
freedom.

    The House of Commons standing committee on health specifically addressed
this issue in a report, released in December, on proposed new legislation
governing assisted human reproductive technologies: "We are deeply disturbed
that the Patent Act does not specifically disallow patenting with respect to
human genes, DNA sequences, and cell lines. Treating human biological components
as patentable property is repugnant to many of us. It entails their
commodification and paves the way for their commercialization. We urge that
patents be denied in relation to human material."

    Writing in these pages last fall, E. Richard Gold, a law professor at McGill
University, argued that we must rethink the nature of patent protection over
human biological materials, including genes. One sensible idea he proposed is to
improve the education and resources of patent examiners when it comes to
biomedical patents, to avoid patents that are overly broad.

    Patent issuers here and elsewhere in the world are going to have much more
work in this area because most of the world's advances in biomedical science are
likely to come through privately funded research.

    Dr. Joseph Martin, dean of Harvard Medical School, said at the Gairdner
breakfast that in the United States last year, $60-billion (U.S.) was spent on
U.S. biomedical research by privately funded organizations, most of which expect
a decent return on their investment. By comparison, $40-billion (U.S.) was spent
on U.S. biomedical research by publicly funded organizations.

    "What's changed in the last 10 years in the U.S., is the amount of money
actually spent on biomedical R & D has been increasingly in the private sector,"
Dr. Martin said.

    Changes in patent laws or their application, then, have to be delicately
handled, lest the flow of research money from the private sector slow.

    "The patentability of a genomic discovery in any species has been allowed in
the courts in the U.S. since 1983-84," said Dr. Martin. "So if there's a
retrenchment on that whole principle, it will be surprising I think - even
though there's legitimate argument that this is constraining access."

    The relationship, then, between privately funded research organizations and
public institutions is one that calls for some imaginative and creative
management. Legislation may be too heavy-handed and difficult to change or
enforce. But the Canadian public will clearly have little tolerance for more
companies that act like Myriad.

    And so it falls to individual scientists who, we hope, will remember the
altruism of Mr. Berners-Lee when they must choose between the pursuit of patents
and riches and the broader societal benefits that come from protecting the
freedom of scientific inquiry.
David Akin is a contributing writer for The Globe and Mail and national business
and technology correspondent for CTV National News.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              318 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 22, 2002 Tuesday

SECTION: FACTS & ARGUMENTS; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 789 words

HEADLINE: SOCIAL STUDIES;
A daily miscellany of information by Michael Kesterton

BODY:

   Seniors and appetite

   "Many seniors report a loss of appetite and it's becoming clear that at least
part of this is biochemical, says The Boston Globe. John Morley of St. Louis
University Health Sciences Center and his colleagues at the University of
Adelaide, Australia, have found that high levels of cholecystokinin, or CCK, a
hormone that affects appetite, are common in elderly people. A controlled study
in which CCK was administered to both young and old people demonstrated
significant appetite suppression, and the hope now is that agents that reduce or
inhibit CCK may help restore appetite to old people."


   Reference: Journal of Clinical Endocrinology (December).
Genes and memory

   "Working in his rodent laboratory at Long Island University, John C. Neill
has succeeded in speeding up brain power in animals by injecting genes into the
brain," writes Jamie Talan in Newsday. "The genes delivered by Neill produced a
protein that helps animals - and humans - remember new relationships. Other
scientists had discovered the enzyme protein kinase C's role in memory and
learning. Neill hopes his technique might one day be used to treat people. The
animals without gene therapy learned a task in 11 sessions and those with gene
therapy mastered it in five sessions."
Phones at concerts

   "Ears aren't the only things ringing at pop music shows these days," writes
Craig Seymour in The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. "Cellphones have become the
new must-tote-along concert accessory, replacing the once-ubiquitous lighters.
Folks use them to meet up with their friends, brag about their seats and even
play songs for pals who couldn't make the show."
Beanie Babies

   "My girls got out their Beanie Babies over the weekend," writes Michael Booth
in The Denver Post. "Not to check their value on eBay. But to actually play with
them. . . . The much-touted Beanies the girls were given as presents during the
1998 craze, such as Glory the All-Star Bear or Princess, the Lady Diana memorial
bear, have fallen like a lead bean bag. Bears that might have gone for $150
(U.S.) three years ago now sell for $5 to $10. Beanie deflation is even worse
among the Beanie models that led the frenzy: An original Peanut the Royal Blue
Elephant may still sell for up to $1,000, but that won't be much comfort to
anyone who paid up to $5,000 for it at the peak of the market. . . . 'There's no
money to be made,' said Jason Burch, one of the few Beanie traders still left at
a Dallas-based site called Getcollecting.com. 'They're popular still, but now
it's just a cute toy worth $6.' "
Dot gone

   "Timothy Lee prompted some head-scratching two years ago when he said he
turned down $8-million (U.S.) cash and $30-million in stock for the 'cool.com'
Web address that he had registered years earlier for free," writes Reid Kanaley
in The Philadelphia Inquirer. "Today, for lack of funding, the Cool.com site
that Lee, of Seattle, tried to build into a Web community for teenagers is a
virtual ghost town." Speculators say top prices for names have fallen about 90
per cent since the dot-com go-go era. Gone is the craziness of the late 1990s,
when business.com sold for a record $7.5-million.
Nuking the mail

   "After months of delay, batches of irradiated mail are trickling back to
[U.S.] government employees," reports The Baltimore Sun. "But some are finding
platinum credit cards stained the colour of coffee, snapshots singed, magazines
fused shut and floppy discs wiped clean by the powerful electron beams that were
intended only to kill anthrax and other biological poisons." The most common
damage is yellowed, brittle mail.
Shock du jour

   "Open your car door, shake hands with a co-worker, or buss your mate on the
lips after walking across a carpet," writes Kathy Boccella of Knight-Ridder
News. "Feel that jolt? Many people do, the result of the rampant static
electricity that goes hand-in-hand with our recent ultra-dry weather." Making
the seasonal static worse, automobiles are made with more plastic these days,
and plastic creates static electricity, according to Herb Kaufman, director of
technical standards and research for the Society of Automotive Engineers.
Real life was cleaner

   This month, commenting on the blockbuster movie Apollo 13 (1995), former
astronaut Fred Haise - who flew on the near-disastrous moon mission - told The
Daily Oklahoman that Hollywood's "actornauts" did follow the actual sequence of
events very closely. However, they used some language that simply wasn't spoken
during the flight. "None of us ever said an off-colour or curse word," he said.
Thought du jour

   "You can tell the ideals of a nation by its advertisements."
   - British novelist Norman Douglas (1868-1952).
MKesterton@globeandmail.ca

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              319 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2002 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 15, 2002 Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH; DOCTOR'S ORDERS; Pg. R7

LENGTH: 783 words

HEADLINE: Are you ready to put yourself on trial?

BYLINE: MIRIAM SHUCHMAN

BODY:

    Medical experiments necessarily involve risks. For cancer patients, deciding
whether or not to take those risks is often one of the earliest steps in
treatment. Joe van Rooyen faced that decision two years ago, when he discovered
he had an unusually aggressive form of prostate cancer.

    Most men with prostate cancer can be cured. Some choose not to be treated
for it, since it grows slowly and may never become life-threatening. But that
wasn't Joe's situation. With conventional treatment, including an operation to
remove his prostate, Joe's doctors said there was a 50-per-cent chance his
cancer would recur. Or, he could enroll in a clinical trial at Toronto's
Princess Margaret Hospital to test an experimental therapy.

    The doctors running the trial hoped they could prevent his cancer from
recurring. But they didn't know if the experiment would work. Joe would have to
be injected with a form of gene therapy. Then he would have his operation. There
were serious risks involved.

    Joe and his wife Pat set out to learn more. They told their family about the
decision Joe had to make. Their son-in-law used the Internet to find a wealth of
information about gene therapy. The couple read through it. Then they started
asking questions of the doctor in charge of the trial, Princess Margaret's Keith
Stewart.

    Says Pat, "I think there are a lot of patients who don't ask enough, but we
found that the tiniest question we had was answered." They asked about the
dangers of gene therapy. Pat took notes. And Joe learned that the experiment he
would be participating in was in its earliest stages

    The doctors were still at the point of figuring out whether the experimental
treatment was safe.

    Joe says he accepted the fact that the trial wasn't designed to benefit him.
But he thought that anything the doctors learned might help his two sons or four
grandsons somewhere down the line.

    They also spoke to the urologist who would operate on Joe. He assured them
he would be Joe's surgeon, whether or not Joe entered the trial.

    "It was our decision," Pat says. "There was no pressure on us, none
whatsoever."

    It wasn't a decision they made lightly. And the questions the van Rooyens
asked their doctors are good ones for anyone considering a clinical trial for
treatment of a serious illness. Here are some of their questions, and a few
others suggested by clinical-trial co-ordinators:

    1. Is the trial you are considering the best for your situation? Doctors who
specialize in a given field are typically up to date on all the trials going on
in their field. Patients wanting to know about other trials can check out
several U.S.-based Web sites, such as www.acurian.com, emergingmed.com,
veritasmedicine.com, and www.americasdoctor.com. These sites match trial
volunteers with those running the research. It's a free service; the caveat is
that the Web sites are profit-making ventures, paid for by pharmaceutical
companies in need of research subjects. And almost all of the trials listed are
in the United States.

    2. What's the purpose of the trial? In most cases, a clinical trial doesn't
result in a cure. It's designed to gather information about the risks and
benefits of an experimental treatment. The doctors don't know if the
experimental treatment works better than standard treatments, and sometimes they
don't know if it works at all.

    3. What are the risks involved, compared to the risks of standard treatment?
You don't want to underestimate the risks, but you don't want to overestimate
them either.

    4. Would you do better outside of a clinical trial? Clinical trials aren't
for everyone. Some people fear that they will be looked on as a guinea pig and
not as a patient. Others want to receive a particular form of therapy and don't
want to take the chance of not getting it if they sign on to a trial. Also,
joining a trial can mean extra visits to the hospital, extra forms to fill out,
extra lab tests or extra treatments.

    5. What's involved if you enroll in the trial and then get worried that you
made the wrong decision? You should be able to drop out of a clinical trial and
still continue to receive high-quality medical care from your doctors. But it's
a question worth asking.

    In the end, Joe van Rooyen volunteered for the trial at Princess Margaret
Hospital. Today, he's living at home in Bradford, Ont. He's in good health, with
no signs of cancer. And though no one can be sure, and the studies are still in
progress, Pat thinks the experimental treatment helped.
Miriam Shuchman, MD, teaches medical ethics at the State University of New York
at Buffalo and the University of Toronto. She is also board certified in
psychiatry.
mshuchman@globeandmail.ca

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              320 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            December 31, 2001 Monday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: CANADIAN; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 849 words

HEADLINE: Biotech sector heating up;
Canadian firms may be targets in 2002

BYLINE: LEONARD ZEHR, BIOTECHNOLOGY REPORTER

BODY:

    A recent flurry of mergers and acquisitions in the U.S. biotech sector led
by Amgen Inc.'s $16-billion (U.S.) gamble on Immunex Inc. may heat up the hunt
for takeover candidates in the Canadian sector in 2002.

    "Almost anybody with cash flow could be a candidate," said Doug Janzen, an
analyst with Sprott Securities Inc.

    High on his list of those to watch are two Vancouver-based companies, QLT
Inc., which has a profitable treatment on the market to prevent blindness, and
Angiotech Pharmaceuticals Inc., which is expected to begin generating revenue in
2002 from a drug-coated medical device for coronary disease.

    Mr. Janzen also suggests that high-flier Biovail Corp. either could be a
buyer or be acquired.

    "Biovail is the one company in Canada with critical mass to buy franchise
drugs because of its big sales force," he said. "But its sales force and cash
flow also make it attractive as a takeover candidate."

    Shares of the Mississauga-based specialty drug company rose 65 per cent
during 2001 and its market capitalization climbed to $13-billion (Canadian) from
$8-billion.

    "We're going to see a lot more M&A activity in 2002," predicts Dana Ono, a
director of Boston-based Venture Investment Management Co. "Amgen-Immunex is
just the tip of the iceberg."

    Faced with growing pressure to maintain their double-digit growth rate and
get new medicines on the market as hot-selling drugs lose their patent
protection, pharmaceutical companies are widely anticipated to begin another
round of consolidation in 2002.

    For Canadian biotech companies, pharmaceutical consolidation is a Catch-22.

    Some companies will be in line to buy drug lines and products spun off by
merged firms, but it will be a challenge to strike research alliances with fewer
cash-rich drug companies, said Claude Camiré, an analyst with Dundee Securities
Inc.

     On the other hand, he predicts that more specialty drug companies such as
Biovail, Axcan Pharma Inc. of Montreal, King Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Bristol,
Tenn., and Forest Laboratories Inc. of New York will increasingly step into the
traditional role of the multinationals and form alliances with Canadian biotech
companies.

    Mr. Janzen agrees. "We'll see more biotech teaming up with biotech and
specialty pharma. The good [biotech] companies will move forward. The bad ones
will churn and fall by the wayside."

    In a "What's Hot, What's Not" outlook for 2002, Mr. Camiré likes drug
delivery companies with products, specialty pharmaceutical companies with
earnings and vaccine companies.

    He is tuning out of e-health, generic, laser vision correction, contract
research, gene therapy and large pharmaceutical companies.

    Michael Denny, director of health care investment banking at Yorkton
Securities Inc., suggests that three bought deals totalling $100-million in the
fourth quarter by Inex Pharmaceuticals Corp. of Vancouver, Theratechnologies
Inc. of Montreal and Stressgen Biotechnologies Corp. of Victoria could set the
tone for additional biotech financings in 2002.

    "If those three go up in price, it's a good bet institutions will be back
for more," he predicted.

    All three stocks are trading above their offering prices. Inex closed Friday
at $8.15, up from a $7-a-share issue price; Stressgen at $4.65, up from an
offering price of $4.25; and Theratechnologies at $11.95, up from $10.25.

    If the financing window opens for the biotech sector, analysts figure that
nearly a dozen private companies have a chance to go public in 2002. MDS
Proteomics Inc. of Toronto and MethylGene Inc. of Montreal are the closest to
pulling off an initial public offering, analysts say.

    "But science does not drive the stock market," Mr. Camiré said. "In many
cases, the problem is not raising money at IPO day but keeping the boat above
the issue price because of a lack of liquidity and interesting news."

    Analysts generally agree that Angiotech could be the story for 2002.
Investors will be waiting for new clinical data set to be released in the next
few months from testing its paclitaxel formulation to treat multiple sclerosis.

    "[Positive data] could have a spill-down impact on others in the sector,"
Mr. Janzen said.

    Besides Angiotech, several other Canadian companies are expected to file
products for marketing approval with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in
2002, including AnorMed Inc., Axcan, Biovail, Cangene Corp. and AltaRex Corp.,
which has moved to Massachusetts but still trades on the Toronto Stock Exchange.

    Analysts suggest AltaRex is nearing the finish line in talks to strike a
corporate partnership for its ovarian cancer drug along with new clinical data
also scheduled for release early in the new year.

    AltaRex shares, which closed Friday at $2.16, could be one of the high
fliers if the talks and results are positive.

    But perhaps the biggest boost to the sector will occur in June when Toronto
hosts BIO 2002, the world's biggest biotech convention, which is expected to
attract about 12,000 delegates from dozens of countries for a week-long
get-together organized by the Biotechnology Industry Organization.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              322 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            December 14, 2001 Friday

SECTION: HEALTH; Briefing; Pg. A22

LENGTH: 51 words

HEADLINE: New therapy cures sickle cell in mice

BYLINE: Carolyn Abraham

BODY:

    Scientists have cured lab mice of a serious inherited blood disease by using
a gutted version of the virus that causes AIDS to deliver healthy genes to
faulty cells.

    The feat follows a 12-year effort that marks a milestone in gene-therapy
research and offers hope for a genetic remedy for sickle-cell anemia.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              323 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            December 10, 2001 Monday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 672 words

HEADLINE: Schizophrenia gene differs by race

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM, MEDICAL REPORTER

BODY:

    U.S. researchers conducting the largest North American study into the
heredity of schizophrenia have found that the disease appears to be triggered by
different genes in people of different ethnic origins.

    Looking at 166 families with two or more members affected by schizophrenia,
scientists discovered that a chromosome linked to the disease in people of
European descent was not at all associated with the disease in people of African
descent.

    The findings help explain why scientists around the world have struggled for
more than a decade to confirm which genes are behind the incurable mental
illness.

    They also raise the possibility that any future genetic therapies for
schizophrenia, which strikes one in every 100 people, will have to be designed
to fit a patient's ethnic profile.
   "We're not studying all of this for reasons of genetic determinism, to screen
the population to see who's at risk," said co-author Debby Tsuang, a University
of Washington assistant professor of psychiatry and epidemiology. "We want to be
able to find [faulty] genes to see if we can develop a therapy to correct them .
. . right now all we can do is treat symptoms, give people something for the
hallucinations."

    Several family studies suggest that schizophrenia is, in part, an inherited
disorder - one that likely involves many genes.

    Yet a parade of researchers who have mapped gene areas along chromosomes
that seem to be associated with a susceptibility to the disease have had their
work debunked or contradicted.

    According to the new study, whose findings were presented yesterday at the
American College of Neuropsychopharmacology meeting in Hawaii, some of this
confusion may reflect the fact that previous work had not taken ethnicity into
account.

    "All analysis should be broken down by ethnic group," Dr. Tsuang said.

    She and colleagues from six other institutions spent a decade gathering
enough families of African and European descent for comparison.

    They found that in Americans of European descent, chromosome 15 and 13
seemed to be associated with the disease. But while chromosome 13 was linked to
schizophrenia in the Americans of African descent, chromosome 15 was not.

    "This was one of the strongest results of our analysis," Dr. Tsuang said.
"It means that different combinations of genes may contribute to schizophrenia
in different ethnic groups."

    Recent studies of families in Taiwan and Portugal have also suggested a link
to chromosome 15.

    Linda Brzustowicz, a Rutgers University geneticist in New Jersey, said the
results are not surprising. She and Anne Bassett of the University of Toronto
have been looking for susceptibility genes for schizophrenia in 22 Canadian
families of Celtic and German descent.

    They reported in May of 2000 that they had found areas linked to the disease
in chromosomes 1 and 13. "I think part of the reason we were successful is that
we did have an ethnically homogeneous population from Eastern Canada," Dr.
Brzustowicz said.

    Finnish and Swedish researchers, studying homogeneous populations, have also
produced interesting work, she noted.

    But Dr. Brzustowicz stressed that it is tricky to define "ethnicity."
Siblings will give two different answers about the ethnic origins of their
families, she said. People from different parts of Africa and Europe can also
have significant genetic differences.

    "You have to ask people, 'Where did your grandparents come from?' and then
you at least have a country," she said.

    Many hurdles still exist in understanding the genetics of schizophrenia, Dr.
Brzustowicz explained. And no one yet understands all the environmental factors
in causing the disease, she said.

    Some research, for example, suggests that women who suffer viral infections
while pregnant are more likely to have children who will develop schizophrenia.

    Dr. Brzustowicz suspects that it will be easier to target environmental
triggers of the disease than it will be to design genetic treatments - "which
would never be a one-size-fits-all-therapy."

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              326 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 20, 2001 Saturday

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; BUSINESS; Pg. D11

LENGTH: 813 words

HEADLINE: Inventive, eh?

BYLINE: HEIDI OVERHILL

BODY:

   Prototype:How Canadian Innovation
is Shaping the Future
   By William Illsey Atkinson
   Thomas Allen, 322 pages, $34.95

    W
   illiam Atkinson's Prototype is a rollicking cross-country tour of Canadian
entrepreneurial enterprise, packed with action, adventure and snappy prose.
Atkinson, a Vancouver-based science writer, has zealously tracked to ground a
multitude of colourful characters, busily turning private intellectual fantasy
into profitable corporate reality.

    Innovations in deep-sea diving, fuel cells, nano-engineering, gene therapy
and computer programming are profiled in 60 vivid vignettes depicting the
technology involved, the origins of insights in universities and private
offices, the business acumen required to bring them to fruition, and even the
choicest bad jokes of the entrepreneurs. Chatty asides draw the reader into
wide-ranging glens of historic trivia, for leisurely musing on the wider
meanings of it all.

    It's a great read, covering a vast amount of territory at breathless speed,
and substantiating the suspicions of every thinking person (even pre-Trade
Center bombing) that a paradigm shift is come upon us, that the world trembles
on the brink of some radical change of approach - information-driven, of course.
Periodic business-guru conclusions drive home general lessons to be learned from
the case studies: "The Prototype: First Attribute . . . that its scientific,
technical and strategic knowledge should be as simple as possible."

    At his best, the author is deliciously frank, as when slagging the "suited
apes" of the B.C. forest industry for their persistence in believing against all
reason that slash 'n' sell, no value added, is a reasonable business strategy.
"The core skill of much of Canada's lumber industry is converting a
non-renewable resource, or at least a resource it is not renewing adequately,
into vast quantities of goods so cheap that they are nearly worthless. . . .
Canada's lumber industry is a classic case of working dumb."

    Other opinions are less appealing, such as the tidy chart comparing the
attributes of a good CEO to those of a good husband, an analysis that rather
rubs the reader's nose in the almost complete absence of women from these happy
tales of success. By my count, there are only four females interviewed amid a
cast of hundreds. Atkinson is aware some people might see a problem here, and
mentions at one point that "studies" have documented the low percentage of women
in high-tech industry for years, but stalwartly asserts that the role of CEO at
least is "gender independent," because, get this, "female CEOs are usually
treated like honourary males."

    The reader is thus left uncertain about whether there really are no women
innovators in Canada, or if Atkinson simply didn't visit them, or if perhaps
they are innovating in areas not of interest to him. (Makeup?) He does find
room, however, for a lengthy passage on the need for a "new metaphor for the
human/nature dyad," which he finds by characterizing "Lady Earth" as the "bride"
married to "man," in a passage astonishingly, completely free of irony.

    At least one unnamed woman is of pivotal interest, though, for she was let
go from her post at the University of Waterloo after the crime of publishing her
research, thus making it unpatentable for the university. Pull on that thread of
thought for longer than the single paragraph it is given, and the grand
climactic conclusion of the book - that profitable New Industry is also more
moral, more open to sharing and more fulfilling in lifestyle - starts to unravel
badly. A cynical female reader might even react badly to the passage lyricizing
the shoestring start-up financing of these thriving companies with mere personal
savings and mortgages - for such wealth is beyond reach of the statistical
majority of women, which fact alone, perhaps, forms an adequate explanation for
their puzzling absence here.

    The genetic foods section also reads more like polemic than real argument,
with opponents dismissed as backward-thinking scaredy-cats, and growing
international concern observed without anticipating any impact on export trade.
In fact, almost everything outside of Canada is thinly painted, leaving us with
a detailed vision of what's happening here, but little sense of how it relates
to the big picture out there in the global village. At a corporate press
conference in Vancouver, Atkinson asks, "Why do you stay in Canada?" The CEO
replies, "I don't know," and Atkinson seems content to leave the question at
that.

    In short, to stretch one of the author's own analogies, while this book
would make a good boyfriend, it's just not up to the calibre of husband
material. It is funny, fast-talking, attractive and smart - but it's not wise,
and it's not lovable.
Heidi Overhill is a professor at the Ontario College of Art and Design, and a
consulting designer.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              327 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 4, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 726 words

HEADLINE: Scientists pinpoint gene that dictates how we speak

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM, MEDICAL REPORTER

BODY:

    For the first time, scientists have found a gene involved in speech
production, offering further proof that biology has a profound impact on
behaviour - right down to the human ability to talk.

    Researchers from Oxford and London's Institute of Child Health discovered
the gene after hunting through the DNA of three generations of a British family
that suffers language difficulties.

    The gene, called FOXP2 and located on chromosome 7, appears to play a role
in building the fetal brain, specifically structures and circuits needed for
speech and language.

    Everyone from stutterers to Canada's Prime Minister have borne the stigma
that speech impairments reflect a psychological deficit. But pinpointing a
defective gene as the root of a language disorder goes some distance in upending
that notion.

    The new research shows that when one of the two inherited copies of the
FOXP2 gene malfunctions - as it does in Britain's so-called KE family - it
leaves the person stumbling over words, unable to use proper grammar.

    "The genetic damage can prevent the brain from being built as it should,"
said Oxford geneticist Simon Fisher, co-author of the report today in the
journal Nature.

    Brain scans of the family members who carry the faulty gene show an
undersized caudate nucleus, a structure deep in the brain that fires off
information between the motor cortex and frontal lobe areas involved in
speaking.

    Myrna Gopnik, professor emeritus of linguistics at McGill and who spent five
years studying the KE family in the late 1980s and 15 years studying families
with similar impairments, said people tend to think that someone with a speech
problem is just not trying hard enough - unless they suffer hearing or physical
troubles.

    "A lot of people don't want to think that language has a genetic basis," she
said. In part, she explained, this is because democracy's ideals say everyone is
born equal and speaking abilities depend on training and education.

    Yet speech impediments bear little impact on intelligence, said Prof.
Gopnik.

    Jean Chrétien, for example, who is known to have language difficulties in
English and French, and has some facial paralysis, may also suffer from an
inherited genetic flaw. According to Chrétien biographer and journalist Lawrence
Martin, other members of the Prime Minister's family experience language
difficulties.

    "Yet he is an adequate prime minister," Prof. Gopnik said.

    Dr. Fisher said speech therapy for the KE family members has had little
success in helping them overcome their problems. But finding the gene
responsible does raise the distant hope that one day science may find a way to
correct a speech impairment with gene therapy or at the very least develop a
teaching method that would help those that carry the mutation.

    Steven Pinker, a Canadian cognitive neuroscientist now at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, noted in an accompanying review of the Nature paper
that this "discovery motivates the search for genetic causes of cognitive and
learning disorders more generally, relieving the presumption of guilt from
mothers, who are often still blamed for everything that goes wrong with their
children."

    Roughly 3 per cent of the population suffers language impairment. Dr. Fisher
expects researchers will find the FOXP2 gene is only one of many involved.

    Steve Scherer, a senior scientist at the Hospital for Sick Children in
Toronto and who also studies speech problems associated with defects on
chromosome 7, said FOXP2 "may only account for a very small percentage of cases
of severe speech and language disorders."

    The KE family is unlike most other families with histories of language
disorders, because the condition is so prevalent within the family: The
grandmother passed the gene mutation on to three of her four children, who
passed it down to four of nine grandchildren and six of 13 great-grandchildren.

    Various groups of scientists have studied the KE family over the years, but
not until another patient - known only as CS - turned up with the same disorder
was the Oxford group able to narrow the search.

    Dr. Fisher said they plan to further investigate the other functions of the
FOXP2 gene, since it appears to be one of the large family of genes that turn
other genes on and off. Other genes in this group play a role in glaucoma,
cataracts and ovarian failure.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              330 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                          September 13, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: APPOINTMENT NOTICES-ADV'T; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 534 words

HEADLINE: CSA GROUP

BODY:

    CSA Group is a not-for-profit membership association serving business,
industry, government and consumers.  CSA Group consists of three divisions: the
Canadian Standards Association which develops standards and helps people
understand and apply them through information products and seminars.  CSA
International which provides testing and certification services for electrical,
mechanical, plumbing, gas and a variety of other products, and QMI which
delivers client-focused management systems registration, and is North America's
leading registrar.

    The Board of Directors of CSA group is pleased to announce the appointment
of the following individuals, as members of the Executive Committee of the
Board:

   V. Lynne Pearson, B.A., B.J., M.A., as Chair of the Board of Directors.  Ms.
Pearson is Dean, College of Commerce, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,
Saskatchewan.

   Philippe Biron, B.A., B.Sc., M.B.A., as Vice Chair of the Board of Directors
and Chair, Standards Policy Board.  Mr. Biron is General Manager, Information
Technologies, Hydro-Québec, Montréal, Québec.

   David C. Colville, B.Sc., B.Ind.Eng., P.Eng., as Past Chair of the Board and
Chair of the Awards Committee.  Mr. Colville is Chairman and Vice Chairman,
Telecommunications and Regional Commissioner (Atlantic), Canadian
Radio-Television Telecommunications Commission (CRTC), Halifax, Nova Scotia.

   David S. Grubbe, M.B.A., as Chair of the Certification Board.  Mr. Grubbe is
a consultant with DMG Consulting and works with several clients, most notably
TruServ Canada Members.  Mr. Grubbe lives in Medicine Hat, Alberta.

   William E. Watchorn, FCA, as Chair of the Compensation Committee.  Mr.
Watchorn is President and CEO, ENSIS Management Inc., in Winnipeg, Manitoba.

   Roger N. Wolff, B.Sc., M.B.A., DBA as Chair of the QMI Board.  Mr. Wolff is
Dean, Faculty of Business, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia.

    CSA Group is also pleased to announce the appointment of the following
individuals, as new members to the Board:

    Yves Brissette, Ph.D.  Mr. Brissette is responsible for Federal, Provincial
and International Relations with the Québec Occupation Health and Safety Board
in Montréal, Québec.

   Sondra Bruni, B.A., M.A.  Ms. Bruni has been involved with CSA as a Winnipeg
Consumer Advisory panel member and as a consumer representative on CSA's
strategic Steering Committee on Public Safety for the past eight years.  She
resides in Winnipeg, Manitoba.

   John Cowen, B.Sc., C.G.A.  Mr. Cowen is Vice President and General Manager of
NOMA Cable Tech in Stouffville, Ontario.

   Julia Hill, M.A.  Ms. Hill is Associate Director General, Biological and
Genetic Therapies Directorate, Health Products and Food Branch, Health Canada in
Ottawa, Ontario.

   Linda Anne Lusby, M.Sc., LL.B.  Ms. Lusby is Associate Professor of
Environmental Science at Acadia University in Wolfville, Nova Scotia.

   Brian J. McQueen.  Mr. McQueen is President and CEO of the CWB Group -
Industry Services in Mississauga, Ontario.

   Paul Straus. Mr. Straus is Vice President and CEO of Home Hardware Stores
Limited in St. Jacobs, Ontario.

   Mel Ydreos, P.Eng.  Mr. Ydreos is Vice President, Asset Operations for Union
Gas Limited in Chatham, Ontario.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              331 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                         Calgary Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                  September 12, 2001 Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 414 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS SAY FURTHER STEM-CELL TESTS NEEDED;
NEW DEBATE EXPECTED ON BUSH POLICY

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Public funding of embryonic stem-cell research is the best way to speed new
medical breakthroughs, but it will take work on more than just the 64 colonies
of cells President Bush is allowing, says a report by an influential scientific
group.

   Also, researchers should aggressively pursue a related technique known as
therapeutic cloning, in which a person's genes might one day be used to grow his
or her own stem cells for customized therapy, says the report by the National
Academy of Sciences.

   But because embryonic stem-cell research raises ethical questions, the
National Institutes of Health should create a special advisory group to oversee
it, much like the NIH committee that oversees research into gene therapy, says
the report issued yesterday.
    INDEPENDENT ADVISORY GROUP
 The National Academy of Sciences is an independent organization chartered by
Congress to advise the government on scientific matters. Thus the report is
expected to generate new debate about Bush's policy on stem cells.

   "Given the promise of stem-cell research for treating and perhaps curing a
variety of debilitating diseases, our committee felt strongly that research not
be limited," said report co-author Dr. Bert Vogelstein, an oncologist at Johns
Hopkins University.

   Stem cells are the basic building blocks of the body's parts. The most
flexible stem cells are derived from days-old embryos, but some stem cells also
can be found in adult tissue.

   Scientists are trying to learn how to coax the cells to grow into healthy
tissue that might, one day, allow them to repair ailing hearts, livers, brains
and other organs.
   ETHICAL QUESTIONS GENERATED
 Most existing colonies, or lines, of embryonic stem cells were culled from
embryos left over at infertility clinics, embryos that otherwise would have been
thrown away. Because culling the stem cells destroys the embryo, however, the
science has generated ethical questions.

   Last month, Bush ordered that federal money be used only for research on cell
lines that already exist, not on any new ones.

   Administration officials claim 64 lines around the world meet that
definition, although many scientists contend not all 64 are developed fully
enough to be sure even that they are the kind of stem cells necessary for
research.

   That criticism is unfair, Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy Thompson
has said, contending that many of the lines in earlier stages will develop over
the next several months.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2001


                              332 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 6, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: ROBDEX; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 611 words

HEADLINE: THE R.O.B. INDEX 9.6.2001

BODY:

   Companies

   3Com Corp.
B8

   AGF Managemt.
B2

   AIC Ltd.
B2

   AIM Funds
B2

   ATI Technologies
B15

   Acktion Corp.
B7

   Air Canada
B7

   Alberta Energy
B13

   Alcatel
B1,13,14,16

   Algonquin Power
B7

   Alliance Atlantis
B15

   Altamira Invest.
B2

   Amisk Inc.
B20

   Anderson
B13

   Andrés Wines
B15

   Angiotech
B16

   Anglo American
B2

   AngloGold
B2

   Apple Computer
B8

   At Home Corp.
B1

   Atco Ltd.


   B9

   BCE Inc.
B8

   BMO Mutual
B2

   BMO Nesbitt
B15

   Ballard Power
B16

   Barclays Global
B14

   Bell ExpressVu
B8

   BellSouth Corp.
B1

   CHC Helicopter
B16

   CHUM Ltd.
B16

   CI Fund Mangmt.
B2

   CIBC Securit.
B2

   Celestica
B14,16

   Cisco Systems
B9,16

   ClaringtonFunds
B2

   ClubLink Corp.
B7

   Cogeco Cable
B9

   Comcast Corp.
B9

   Compaq Comptr.
B8

   Confederation Life
B4

   Cox Comm.
B9

   Devon
B13

   Dofasco Inc.
B15

   Dynamic Mutual
B2

   Echo Bay Mines
B3

   Elliott & Page
B2

   Enron Corp.
B5

   Ericsson
B1,13,16

   Ernst & Young
B4

   Fidelity Invest.
B2

   Flextronics
B14

   Franco-Nevada
B2,3

   Geac Computer
B15

   Golfnorth Proper.
B20

   gearunlimited.co
B20

   HSBC Holdings
B13

   Hemosol
B16

   Hewlett-Packard
B8

   High River Gold
B2

   Infocorp Computer
B7

   IBM Corp.
B15

   Investors Group
B2

   KPMG Inc.
B4

   Kinross Gold
B3

   La Senza
B15,20

   Landover Energy
B20

   Liberty Oil
B15

   Liquidation Wld.
B15

   Mackenzie Fin.
B2

   Manitoba Telec.
B15

   Marconi
B1,13,16

   Mercer Int'l
B5

   Meridian Gold
B15

   Merrill Lynch
B2

   Microcell Telec.
B16

   Motorola Inc.
B16

   NewGrowth
B21

   Nokia Corp.
B16

   Normandy Mining
B2

   Nortel
B8,13,16

   Oxford Properties
B15

   Pacific & Western
B7

   PacWest Ventures
B7

   PanCanadian
B13

   Parkland Ind.
B16,20

   Penn West
B15

   Petro-Canada
B13

   Placer Dome
B2

   Promethean Inv.
B9

   Proprietary Inds.
B20

   Rampart Merc.
B15

   RIM Ltd.
B16

   Rogers Cable
B9

   Royal Mutual
B2

   SBC Comm.
B1

   SLMsoft.com
B7

   SNC-Lavalin
B16

   Sanmina Corp.
B14

   Scotia Secur.
B2

   Shaw Comm.
B1,8

   Shell Canada
B6

   Sierra Wireless
B15

   Skeena Cellulose
B5

   Solectron
B14

   Southward Ener.
B16

   Star Choice
B8

   Suncor Energy
B6

   Synergy Asset
B2

   TVX Gold
B2

   Talisman
B13

   Talvest Fund
B2

   TD Asset Mngmt.
B2

   TD Bank
B15

   UltraVision
B20

   Utility Corp.
B21

   Viceroy Res.
B20

   VisuaLabs Inc.
B7

   Wenzel Downhl.
B20

   WestJet Airl.
B3,15

   George Weston
B21

   Xerox Corp.
B8

   Xplore Tech.
B16
Contents

   Amex
B23

   Bonds
B20

   CDNX
B21

   Carrick
B15

   Classified
B11

   Comment
B13

   Commodities
B24

   Dividends
B21

   Earnings
B20

   Equity options
B22

   Foreign exch.
B20

   Gold & silver
B24

   Grain
B24

   Indexes
B16,24

   Index options
B21

   Insider trading
B15

   Int'l Business
B11

   Internet dir.
B25

   London metals
B21

   Money rates
B21

   Montreal
B21

   Mutual funds
B17

   Nasdaq
B22

   New York
B23

   Overseas
B22

   Toronto
B19

   Wall St. Journal
B12

   Willis
B15
ROBTv

DYNAMIC
POWER BREAKFAST:

   Corby Distilleries sells some of the most popular brands of liquor in Canada,
including Canadian Club and Kahlua. The company is now focusing on a few of its
products, including Polar Ice vodka. After declining in 2000, revenues are
climbing again this year. President and CEO Krystyna Hoeg will talk about the
future of the company. Live at 7:50 a.m. EDT; rebroadcast at 9:50 a.m.

MARKET CALL
WITH JIM O'CONNELL:

   Eric Bushell, portfolio manager at C.I. Mutual Funds, will answer viewers'
calls and e-mails on high-quality dividend-paying Canadian companies. Live at 12
p.m. EDT.

THE BOTTOM LINE
WITH MICHAEL VAUGHAN:

   A Biotech Special Edition. Coverage of the BioFuture 2001 conference in
Toronto. We'll look at the business of gene therapy, novel therapeutics,
genomics as well as intellectual property and regulatory concerns. Dr. Cal
Stiller, chairman and CEO of Canadian Medical Discoveries Fund, will guide us
through the biotech investment maze. Live at 6 p.m. EDT.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              338 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            August 18, 2001 Saturday

SECTION: FOCUS; Pg. F4

LENGTH: 3247 words

HEADLINE: Medicine's Holy Grail;
Stem cells could one day cure everything from Alzheimer's;
to heart disease. Aching joints? Damaged liver? Just grow a brand;
new replacement. These cellular magicians are the most seductive;
area of scientific research today. CAROLYN ABRAHAM tells you;
everything you wanted to know but were too confused to ask

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM

BODY:

    Few other areas of science have generated as much excitement, scrutiny and
controversy as stem cells. They were uncovered in a Toronto lab half a century
ago, and now scientists around the globe are pursuing them for their potential
to regenerate body parts and revolutionize medicine.

    These cellular magicians have captivated the public imagination. But because
human embryos are destroyed to extract the most powerful stem cells, they have
also been swept into the abortion debate.

    Legislation is just beginning to catch up with science. Canada has a law
pending that would govern research into embryonic stem cells. Just last week,
U.S. President George W. Bush set strict limits on the work publicly funded
scientists can conduct in the area.

    But stem cells go way back and this is their story - from the decades of
science behind them and the roots of the current controversy, to the
mind-boggling medical feats the future might hold.
What they are

    When a sperm fertilizes an egg, the resulting single cell begins to divide
and multiply at a staggering rate.

    Among these are what scientists call "totipotent" stem cells. These
primordial, embryonic cells have the potential to grow into a complete human
being and all its parts.

    Within days of fertilization, these new and dividing cells form a hollow
sphere. Those on the outer layer give rise to things such as the placenta and
other membranes to surround the embryo. Stem cells arise in the inner mass of
the young embryo, which scientists call a blastocyst.

    The blastocyst is a barely visible dot, having no features of an embryo or
fetus. The stem cells within are considered "pluripotent" - they can divide
indefinitely and blossom into all the various tissue types of the human body,
but they have the lost the totipotent ability to grow into a separate being.

    After roughly 14 days, the first stirrings of a nervous system develops as a
primitive streak appears down the length of the new being that will eventually
grow into the spine. At this stage, the stem cells within the embryo are
considered "multipotent." They can grow into some tissues, but not all. Those
poised to become bone or blood, for example, cannot form stomach or skin.

    There are thought to be three ways to extract stem cells from human embryos:
embryos can be created for medical research, as Britain will allow; used after a
fertility clinic deems them surplus, which Canada is expected to sanction with
new legislation; or they might be cloned, the way scientists created Dolly the
sheep. No one is known to have tried this last method.

    Scientists suspected that stem cells also existed in adult tissues, since
muscles, skin, hair and blood regenerate and work as the body's natural repair
mechanism.

    But conventional wisdom suggested that these stem cells in a mature body
were not multipotent, lacking the versatility of embryonic stem cells. If stem
cells were found in muscle, for example, they had already received chemical cues
and were destined to become only muscle cells.

    But in April of 1999, researchers at a Baltimore biotechnology company
called Osiris Therapeutics reported that they had collected stem cells from
adult human bone marrow, the spongy tissue inside bones that produces the body's
blood cells. They said they had chemically coaxed the stem cells to become not
only blood cells, but also fat, cartilage and bone cells.

    The discovery meant that it might be possible to reprogram adult stem cells,
an appealing option given the ethical controversy of experimenting on human
embryos. Over the next two years, scientists learned that adult stem cells are
more multipotent - having more plasticity - than anyone had ever imagined.

    "The more data we get that says stem cells from bone, brain and skin can do
the job, the less you will need embryonic stem cells and then the controversy
goes away," said Ronald Worton, head of the Stem Cell Network in Canada and
scientific director of the Ottawa Research Institute.

    What's more, adult stem cells have been found in unusual places: in the fat
people have liposuctioned from their bellies and the layer of skin that lies
beneath the scalp.

    Adult stem cells in bone marrow have been manipulated to grow into kidney,
liver and nerve cells. Blood has morphed into brain cells and brain into blood
cells. This week, researchers at McGill University in Montreal revealed that
they had harvested stem cells from the skin of mice and humans that are capable
of growing into complex brain cells, smooth muscle and fat.

    As the possibility of regenerating tissue moves out of the realm of science
fiction and into the lab, scientists have barely been able to contain their
excitement.
The breakthrough

    Ever since the study of embryo development early in the 20th century,
scientists suspected a powerful precursor cell must be present to give rise to
all the varieties of tissues that constitute a human.

    But not until the late 1950s did a pair of Canadian researchers prove that
these elusive stem cells actually exist. Earlier that decade, researchers had
begun to investigate whether stem cells - also called seed cells at the time -
could be found in the adult body, particularly in bone marrow.

    Since blood is frequently regenerated, scientists thought that it was an
obvious place to look for precursor cells. They assumed that there were at least
three types of seed cells, since marrow produces three different kinds of cells
to create the blood supply: red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets.

    Toronto researchers Ernest McCulloch and Jim Till, working at the Ontario
Cancer Institute on Sherbourne Street, transplanted bone marrow from one group
of mice to another. Less than two weeks later, they spotted lumps in the marrow
and spleen of the recipient rodents. Guessing that these lumps were blood-cell
colonies that had grown from a single cell, the scientists expected to find only
one type of blood cell within the colony. Instead, they discovered that all
three types had sprung from a single precursor cell, a stem cell.

    "This showed that a single cell gave rise to all three different types. It
proved for the first time that there was such a thing as a stem cell," said
McCulloch, a University of Toronto professor and senior scientist emeritus at
the cancer institute.

    The discovery, reported in 1961, opened the field of stem-cell research and
led to a revolutionary treatment for people with diseases such as leukemia and
anemia and immunodeficiencies. In 1968, doctors at the University of Minnesota
performed the first bone-marrow transplant, using stem cells to replenish a
patient's blood supply.

    The idea that an adult body might still possess multipotent stem cells came
with the study of a bizarre form of cancer called teratocarcinoma, for the
mythological monster "terrato." These tumours grow spontaneously out of the eggs
in a woman's ovaries or the sperm in a man's testes.

    The tumours can balloon to the size of big grapefruits, with stem cells
forming random tissues throughout. The frightening masses might be covered in
hair, be complete with blood vessels, have bone or teeth sprouting within, and
be rich in nerve cells. Scientists who poked them discovered that the tumours
could recoil in a nervous reaction.

    Researchers in the 1970s learned to grow these teratocarcinoma tumours in
mice and then extract from them the stem cells that clearly had the potential to
become various cell types. Growing these cells in the lab, researchers found
that they could indeed grow into cells of the heart, kidney, liver and even the
brain.

    Janet Rossant, who worked on mouse teratocarcinomas 30 years ago, said of
the stem cells found in them: "They behaved very well in terms of their growth,
but they also grew tumours."

    In 1980, researchers in California and Cambridge reported that they had for
the first time extracted stem cells from a mouse embryo. "This was a really
important breakthrough," said Rossant, a senior scientist at Toronto's Mount
Sinai Hospital. With mouse embryonic stem cells, scientists could manipulate
genes and grow mutant mice for medical research.

    The notion that stem cells could also be extracted from a human embryo
always hovered as a possibility, but the idea was so fraught with ethical
dilemmas that few scientists rushed to explore the area.

    But the value of such experiments proved too exciting to resist after 1996.
That year, researchers at Indiana University demonstrated that they could
extract mouse embryonic stem cells and then chemically induce them to become
heart cells, which could then be implanted into a mouse heart and integrate
smoothly into the organ.

    The accomplishment raised the prospect of scientists being able to
manipulate stem cells into growing whatever tissue they desired. But first, they
would need a supply ofhuman stem cells if they hoped to grow tissues for human
use.

    In 1998, James Thompson at the University of Wisconsin reported that he done
just that.

    In a landmark experiment, the biologist worked with human embryos that were
considered surplus and due to be discarded after being created in a fertility
clinic.

    Interrupting the molecular choreography of early life, Thompson managed to
squeak in and extract the embryonic stem cells while they were still dividing -
at their prolific, blank-slate stage before they could differentiate to form the
various cell types in the human body. He then grew these precious human
embryonic stem cells in a lab dish.

    Days later, John Gearhart at Johns Hopkins University reported that his
research team had discovered and isolated embryonic stem cells that had migrated
into the reproductive organs of an aborted fetus - calling them embryonic germ
cells.

    Together, the two reports offered scientists the opportunity to become
mechanics of the human body - repairing and replacing tissues and organs not
with scalpels, drugs or artificial substitutes, but with brand new human parts.
The potential

    Besides their chameleon capabilities, stem cells entice scientists with
their ability to regenerate. Most other cells divide roughly 50 times before
they die, but a stem cell can proliferate indefinitely. Although they are not
immortal, they are plentiful.

    If scientists can manipulate stem cells to grow into whatever anatomical
part a patient requires, they would no longer need donated organs and tissues -
which are scarce.

    Harnessing the power of stem cells would also mean that doctors could move
far beyond patching up old or damaged body parts with used ones.

    University of Pittsburgh urologist Michael Chancellor, who reported in June
that his research team had grown a urethral sphincter muscle from stem cells
extracted from the muscles of adult mice, said scientists will some day be able
to produce new body parts "like a starfish regenerates a limb."

    Scientists have also found that stem cells, once transplanted, merge easily
with the biology of their new home.

    In the case of the urethral sphincter, skeletal muscle began to form over
the regenerated valve within weeks of the stem-cell concoction being injected.

    The applications to treat and perhaps cure currently incurable diseases have
some scientists discussing the regenerative powers of stem cells as though they
could be the source of the fountain of youth.

    As Michael West, founder of the California-based Geron Corp. that financed
Thompson's research, once said: "When I hear critics saying that they don't want
to see life span extended, they are thinking about the old myth of Tithonus,
where people live longer in a decrepit state.

    "That's not what we are talking about doing."
The problems

    Having the wisdom of time and experience behind him, Ernest McCulloch is
cautious in his predictions of the benefits stem cells might bring. "All of this
is very hypothetical, that one can actually make brain cells that work, heart
muscle and so on," he said. "There is a long, hard row to be followed before we
can have therapeutic applications."

    In the early 1990s, for example, scientists pinned their hopes on
regenerating damaged tissue using regular cells from aborted fetuses. Scientists
persuaded governments to fund their efforts with Parkinson's patients, who had
dopamine-producing cells from aborted fetuses transplanted into their brains.
The results have been underwhelming.

    Samuel Weiss, a cell biologist and stem-cell researcher at the University of
Calgary, said it remains to be seen whether stem cells will be accepted as
replacement tissue any better than fetal cells. "This still has to be proven an
effective therapy in patients," he said.

    As well, scientists are still exploring the fine balance of growing stem
cells without having them begin to differentiate into various cell types, and
yet keep them growing without having them reproduce endlessly - which would
amount to the cellular hallmark of cancer.

    Beyond the ethical concerns, few Canadian scientists are working with human
embryonic stem cells. In part, this is because some say they are simply not
practical raw material if a doctor hopes to grow replacement tissue or organs
for a patient.

    For example, an organ created from embryonic stem cells could be rejected by
the recipient patient if his or her immune system was incompatible with that of
the embryo. Robert Casper, head of reproductive medicine at Mount Sinai
Hospital, feels that a patient's own adult stem cells hold greater potential to
grow replacement tissues.

    But one disadvantage of working with adult stem cells is that there may not
be enough of them. The older people get, the fewer they seem to have. Stem cells
are part of the body's natural maintenance system, which tends to wither with
age.

    While cloning adult stem cells might mitigate the problem, it would not
guarantee their longevity.

    The internal clock of an embryonic stem cell is set at zero. The adult stem
cell has already been ticking away for many years.

    "We certainly don't know if adult stem cells will have the same long-term
potential," Rossant said.

    While there is less risk of rejection in growing tissues from a patient's
own stem cells for transplant, there is also a good chance the newly grown
tissue will suffer the same problems as the part being replaced.

    With muscular dystrophy, for example, any new muscle grown from a patient's
own stem cells would also lack the dystrophin protein that is missing in the
inherited muscular disorder.

    "I'd like to be able to take stem cells from a child's skin, grow up stem
cells and put in a gene to produce dystrophin and then grow them into muscle
cells to transplant," said Ronald Worton, who is to head up the new Centre for
Stem Cell and Gene Therapy Research in Ottawa.
What's next

    In public and private labs from all over the globe, researchers are busy
testing the magic of stem cells in trials with mice and humans.

    In France and the United States, experiments are under way in patients to
see whether stem cells can repair the heart muscle damaged after cardiac arrest.

    Scientists in Baltimore have already reported that human stem cells injected
into the spinal fluid of paralyzed mice have restored movement to the rodents'
lifeless feet. They have also been shown to help mice recover from strokes.

    Michael Chancellor hopes to grow a urethral sphincter that he can implant
next year in an elderly patient suffering urinary incontinence.

    In Nova Scotia, researchers are investigating the potential of growing
dopamine-producing brain cells for Parkinson's patients.

    Scientists at the University of Alberta are hoping that stem cells will
allow them to make history with a breakthrough that last year made international
headlines.

    In May of 2000, they reported that they had effectively cured 13 patients
with Type 1 diabetes by transplanting into their pancreases the islet cells that
produce insulin.

    Over a two-year period, the transplanted cells allowed patients to live free
of insulin injections.

    But as with any transplant scenario, donors are scarce and each patient
required islet cells from the pancreases of two cadavers - an obstacle easily
overcome if islet cells can be grown from stem cells.

    A report from the U.S. National Institutes of Health suggests that it is
feasible: Its researchers have grown insulin-producing organs similar to islets
of the pancreas from mouse embryonic stem cells.

    Ernest McCulloch said researchers are also investigating whether they can
implant a drug-resistant gene into a stem cell that could be coaxed into
becoming a blood cell. The blood cell could then be introduced into the system
of a cancer patient who has built up a resistance to an otherwise effective
medication.

    As well, Mount Sinai's Casper hopes to create a public bank of stem cells
harvested from umbilical cord blood and placenta to grow a wide range of
youthful, multipotent tissues of various donor types.

    The possibilities are endless, and, in the view of some scientists, not that
far off.

    As the NIH's Ronald McKay predicted in The New York Times in November of
2000: "In two years, people will routinely be reconstituting liver, regenerating
heart, routinely building pancreatic islets, routinely putting cells into brain
that get incorporated into the normal circuitry.

    "They will routinely be rebuilding all tissues."
The three types of stem cells
Totipotent cells
   These form as the fertilized egg starts to divide and can develop into a
complete individual.
Pluripotent cells
   The totipotent cells group together into a blastocyst. The pluripotent cells
inside can develop into any tissue in the body.
Multipotent cels
   These are found in mature tissue, and have a limited ability to grow into
different types of cells.
Brain
   Researchers are growing dopamine-producing brain cells to see if they can
treat or cure Parkinson's patients. They also hope to grow replacement brain
tissue for other neurodegenerative diseases such as multiple sclerosis and
Alzheimer's.
Eyes
   Cataract patients can benefit from corneal transplants grown from stem cells.

Heart
   Stem cells may be able to regenerate heart muscle to repair the organ after
cardiac arrest.
Pancreas
   Patients with Type 1 diabetes have been treated by transplanting
insulin-producing islet cells. Now researchers hope to grow islet cells for
implantation from stem cells.
Liver
   Liver cells are being grown with the prospect of replacing liver tissue
damaged by toxins or alcohol.
Kidney
   Embryonic stem cells have already grown into kidney cells in the lab, and
doctors hope that one day the process will allow them to replace the organ
damaged by kidney disease or failure.
Skin
   Doctors already use stem cells to grow skin grafts for patients with burns or
wide gashes. Montreal researches have also found that the skin is a rich source
of multipotent stem cells.
Urethral sphincter
   Scientists have grown this bladder-control muscle from stem cells in a rat
and next year hope to test it in an elderly patient with urinary incontinence.
Knees
   Stem cells from both embryos and adults have grown into connective tissue,
raising the prospect that aching joints may some day be replaced with brand new
ones.
Bone
   Patients with leukemia, anemia and immunodeficiencies have been treated by
replacing their bone marrow.


   For more on the issue and the chance to voice your own opinion, visit our Web
site this weekend to check out an extended chronology and read a glossary of
terms associated with stem-cell research.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              339 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                         Calgary Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                    August 15, 2001 Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: Editorial/Opinion; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 671 words

HEADLINE: FEEDING BIG DELUSION;
ALTERNATIVE SOURCE OF STEM CELLS ESSENTIAL

BYLINE: MARIANNE MEED-WARD, SUN MEDIA

BODY:

   Finally, some good news on the stem cell research front -- and I'm not
talking about U.S. President George Bush's strict limits on said research.

   The good news comes from McGill University, where researchers have developed
a way to harvest stem cells from skin, instead of the much more controversial
source: Human embryos.

   If stem cell development is possible without using embryos, we will have
arrived at the "have it all" stage. We'll get all the benefits of stem cells
(and there are many) without the wrenching ethical difficulties (there are many
of those, too).

   First, the benefits. Stem cells are the equivalent of a fresh lump of clay:
If you get them early enough -- before they start to develop into legs and arms
and organs -- you can shape them into any body part you like. So, for example,
you can coax them to become skin cells for burn victims. Or insulin-producing
cells for diabetics. Or brain cells for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's patients. Or
nerve cells for para- and quadriplegics. And so on. Stem cells provide the hope
of a cure for many ailments that, at the moment, we can only treat.

   Now, the ethical difficulties. Until recently, stem cells were believed
available only in newly fertilized embryos -- you know, those things that, given
love, nourishment and an unmolested nine months in the womb, grow up to be Suzy
and Johnny.

   That's why people who believe life begins at conception are opposed to stem
cell research. You're essentially killing one life to save another.

   Most of us, though, have a hard time treating a lump of cells we can't see
that reside in a Petri dish or a cold storage unit as the equivalent of our
beloved Tom, Dick or Mary. But they are.

   Consider for a moment where most stem cells come from: Unused embryos from
fertility treatments and aborted fetuses.

   Let's look at unused embryos. They were created specifically to become a
child for an otherwise infertile couple. Like, for example, the embryo or
embryos belonging to Celine Dion and her husband that sit in a freezer somewhere
in the U.S. But for the luck of the draw, these embryos could have become the
couple's new baby.

   Celine has reportedly promised her mother, a devout Catholic, she'll retrieve
these embryos when she decides to have another baby. But what if Celine gets hit
by a bus on the way to the clinic? The embryos would likely be destroyed. And
people will pretend they weren't human to begin with.

   Now, let's look at aborted fetuses. The reason they're being aborted is they
will, if left alone, develop into a baby, something the pregnant mom obviously
doesn't want.

   Once again, to assuage guilt, we'll pretend these cells aren't human. What a
difference nine months makes. The embryo is a baby if I want it to be (as in:
"I'm childless, implant me"), but it's not if I don't (as in: "I'm with child,
unplant me"). Hmmm.

   Which brings us to the Big Compromise. Bush will allow stem cell research on
cells that already exist, but forbids the creation of new ones. Same idea in
draft legislation introduced by Health Minister Allan Rock in May. The bill
would prohibit creating embryos solely for research, but would allow using
leftover embryos from fertility treatments.

   Which makes me ask: Why do we have leftovers? No matter why or when they were
created, these embryos are just as human as the next set of fertilized eggs. On
the other hand, if you're comfortable destroying fertilized eggs at all, what
difference does it make that the eggs are purposely created or left over?

   Which is why the Big Compromise is a Big Delusion.

   Bush has pledged $250 million for research into stem cells derived from other
sources, such as the bone marrow, blood and brain cells of adults, and the
umbilical cord and placenta normally discarded after birth. That's the right
approach.

   Here at home, $7 million in research is earmarked for the Centre for Stem
Cell and Gene Therapy Research being built in Ottawa. Let's hope it, too, uses
the money looking for alternatives.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2001


                              341 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            August 11, 2001 Saturday

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 727 words

HEADLINE: Bush's stem-cell policy could mean brain gain for Canada

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM, MEDICAL REPORTER, With a report from Reuters

BODY:

    Canada stands to become an attractive destination for American researchers
looking for scientific freedom after U.S. President George W. Bush imposed tough
restrictions on one of the hottest fields in medicine.

    Mr. Bush's decision to limit research into embryonic stem cells is expected
to drive many U.S. government-funded scientists into the private sector or out
of the country.

    "At the moment there are no rules in Canada," said Ron Worton, CEO and
scientific director of the Ottawa Health Research Institute and head of Canada's
newly created Stem Cell Network.

    And the rules that are pending are far more liberal than the limits set by
Mr. Bush, which prohibit federally funded scientists from harvesting stem cells
- primitive master cells that can transform into other cell types - from human
embryos, which are destroyed in the extraction process.

    Instead, Mr. Bush announced Thursday that scientists who receive federal
money must confine their work to the embryonic stem cells already harvested.

    In Canada, draft legislation to be debated this fall would allow scientists
to harvest - and consequently destroy - human embryos to retrieve stem cells
provided that the embryos are left over from fertility treatments.
   Canadian researchers are also building a $12-million institute in Ottawa to
conduct all types of stem-cell research. The Centre for Stem Cell and Gene
Therapy Research, said Dr. Worton, will earmark $7-million for 55 researchers
across the country. They will explore the potential of stem cells to transform
into the various cell types in the human body so they can repair damaged
tissues.

    Meanwhile, many American scientists yesterday were lamenting the impact of
Mr. Bush's announcement and how it may curtail research work.

    "The President's decision . . . will severely inhibit our ability to unlock
the huge potential of embryonic stem cells," said Michael Soules, president of
the American Society for Reproductive Medicine.

    One top scientist, Roger Pedersen of the University of California at San
Francisco, recently announced plans to pursue his research at Britain's
University of Cambridge. Under a new British law, it is legal for researchers to
create human embryos solely for the purpose of extracting stem cells. The Bush
administration has planted the United States at the opposite end of the
spectrum, while Canada now occupies a middle ground. It is ground that has
already drawn the interest of U.S. researchers. California-based Geron Corp.,
which backed pioneering research into embryonic stem cells, was in touch with
Canadian researchers long before Mr. Bush booked his prime-time TV spot,
anticipating limitations in U.S. rules.

    "They have already talked to us about partnering," Dr. Worton said. "They
want to do something in Canada if federally funded scientists are going to be
limited [in the United States]."

    In his statement, Mr. Bush referred to the fact that, eight years ago,
former president Bill Clinton reversed the ban on federal funding on
fetal-tissue research because it was so promising, but progress has yet to live
up to expectations.

    As a result, Mr. Bush said federally funded researchers will only be
permitted to work with the 60 embryonic stem-cell lines already created. Each
"line" represents stem cells harvested from a single embryo that have been
cultured to divide indefinitely. But his estimate of the number of lines
available surprised many in the scientific community, where the number of lines
has been estimated as being in the range of a dozen or so.

    "If there are that many, no one knows about it," said Samuel Weiss, a cell
biologist at the University of Calgary.

    "Indeed, the President seems to have information far different from that of
the bulk of the medical community," said Dr. Soules.

    Diane Krause, of Yale University School of Medicine, noted that many
stem-cell lines "were made in privately funded laboratories, so whether they're
even going to be freely available . . . to federally funded researchers isn't
clear at all." Many observers suspect that Mr. Bush's strictures will drive
federally funded researchers anxious to work on embryonic stem cells into the
private sector.

    Dr. Weiss said it means developments in the field have the potential to stay
under wraps for longer periods, because the private sector has its own
proprietary interests.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              342 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             August 10, 2001 Friday

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 217 words

HEADLINE: Highlights of stem-cell decision

BODY:

     Key points about President George W. Bush's decision to allow federal
funding for limited stem-cell research, as provided by the White House:

    * Federal funding will apply only to research using existing embryonic
stem-cell lines, that is, stem cells already harvested from destroyed embryos.
It will not apply to work that destroys additional human embryos.

    * Federal funds will only be used for research on existing stem-cell lines
that were derived: (1) with the informed consent of the donors; (2) from excess
embryos created solely for reproductive purposes; and (3) without any financial
inducements to the donors.

    * No federal funds will be used for: (1) the derivation or use of stem cell
lines derived from newly destroyed embryos; (2) the creation of any human
embryos for research purposes; or (3) the cloning of human embryos for any
purpose.

    * Mr. Bush will create a new President's Council on Bioethics, chaired by
Dr. Leon Kass, an expert in biomedical ethics and a professor at the University
of Chicago, to study the human and moral ramifications of developments in
biomedical and behavioural science and technology. The council will study such
issues as embryo and stem-cell research, assisted reproduction, cloning, genetic
screening, gene therapy, euthanasia, and psychoactive drugs.
AP

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              343 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 21, 2001 Saturday

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; SCIENCE; Pg. D8

LENGTH: 899 words

HEADLINE: A matter of inheritance

BYLINE: NICOLE JOHNSTON

BODY:

   Chance in the House of Fate:A Natural History of Heredity
   By Jennifer G. Ackerman
   Houghton Mifflin,
   272 pages, $37.95
   Somewhere between learning to make fire and scribbling symbols in the dirt,
humankind started to question how we fit into the grander scheme of things. The
ancients grappled with it through philosophical dialectic, while theologians
relied on what they chalked up to divine inspiration.

    In Chance in the House of Fate: ANatural History of Heredity, award-winning
U.S. science writer Jennifer Ackerman tackles this timeless subject by
explaining how genetic discoveries of the past decade put us in our evolutionary
place, so to speak. She reveals how genetics inextricably relates us to all
living things in the natural world, however great or small, and how heredity is
the commonality that links our past with our future.

    "There are mysteries in all families," she begins. "Those that arrest me,
that set me back on my heels, are the mysteries of heredity - the past whispered
in bone and blood; the dozens of ancestors rolled up in one skin, to be read in
'curve and voice and eye,' as Thomas Hardy wrote, 'the seeds of being that heed
no call to die,' but turn up again and again on the doorstep like a
ne'er-do-well uncle."

    The birth of Ackerman's younger sister, who was born severely retarded
through some undetermined genetic event in the womb, is what seemingly compels
her to undertake the onerous task of elucidating the role heredity plays in our
lives. Pregnant with her first child, Ackerman even reveals how she anxiously
calculated the odds of her unborn child inheriting her sister's devastating
affliction.

    On the molecular level, she explores various developmental discoveries that
shed light on how we've come thus far in the evolutionary scheme of things. That
common thread - our DNA - she explains, underlies the ebb and flow of our
molecular essence. For within its coils, its timeless instructions make us, at
once, both common and unique.

    To date, more than 100 genes have been discovered that carry out the same
business among fruit flies, sea urchins, worms, birds, cows and humans. The Hox
genes, for instance, dictate the development of body shape. Mess with these and
you can cause one body part to transform into another. Mutate the antennae gene
in fruit flies, and they end up sporting legs from their heads.

    Similarly, teaching old genes new tricks may help to explain how evolution
has driven speciation. The genetic system that underlies such traits as limb
development can be found in various walks of life. The gene distal-less directs
the growth of simple, hairy limbs in fruit flies, the complex appendages of
lobsters, and diaphanous wings in butterflies.

    Mucking about with the existing wiring may explain the burst of new species
that erupted during the Cambrian period. Humans are no exception. Consider the
eye-making gene, pax-6. When the mouse version was used in fruit flies, it
behaved like the fly's own version. When it was set about its business in other
tissues, eyes popped up in very un-eyelike places. In humans, mutations in this
gene cause individuals to be born with eyes missing irises, resulting in poor
vision and eye problems. With 92 per cent similarity to the mouse counterpart,
odds are good that we might be sporting extra eyes in uncomely places if
subjected to the same experiment.

    Our relatedness doesn't stop at shared bits of DNA, Ackerman tells us, but
rises up the evolutionary scale to shared processes. When a 19th-century
entomologist left a female peacock moth by her lonesome in his lab, 150 males
moths came calling over the course of a week. The behaviour-influencing
chemicals she was giving off, termed pheromones, were the reason. In humans,
pheromones given off by women at different stages of the menstrual cycle can
influence the cycles of other women, explaining why the menstrual cycles of
women in close quarters fall into sync over time.

    Ultimately, however, Ackerman shows how alike we humans truly are. Our
differences, she tells us, are literally skin deep, and yet underlie much of our
suffering. The same can be said for gender, sexual preference and other defining
characteristics which, rather than being embraced, are often the target of
derision and intolerance - the origins of which, ironically, are rooted in the
great religions.

    Ackerman's compelling approach to explaining modern science is an unorthodox
blend of science, literature, history and autobiography, rolled into a
colourful, engaging account. And surprisingly, it works. This unique blend is
the driving force that propels the fascinating stories she retails, making it
nearly impossible to put the book down as one eagerly anticipates what lies
ahead.

    In the same vein, however, her approach is sometimes distracting as she
leaps from tales of her family or historical figures to discussions of
scientific discovery and prevailing theories. Purists will likely feel that
there isn't enough science to sink their teeth into, but as popular science,
this book affords a highly entertaining foray into human genetics that the lay
reader will surely enjoy.
Nicole Johnston is a writer and PhD student inbiochemistry at McMaster
University. She is recipientof the 2000 Herb Lampert Student Writing Award from
the Canadian Science Writers' Association for herGlobe feature, Gene Therapy:
Hope or Hype.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              345 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 10, 2001 Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. R5

LENGTH: 1661 words

HEADLINE: Trials and tribulations;
Guidelines exist, but Canadian medical experts warn;
that human research is not as tightly monitored as it should be

BYLINE: CELIA MILNE

BODY:

    Ena Ilse is one of the lucky ones. She is in a clinical trial that she feels
is well-run, and she is benefiting from the medication being tested.

    Mrs. Ilse, 65, from Toronto, has osteoporosis. Until recently, it was severe
enough that her ribs would fracture if she turned over in bed or if someone
hugged her. Now, she is enrolled in a study testing the new drug zoladronate.

    The risk paid off. Mrs. Ilse's bones began to get stronger. She hasn't had a
fracture in three years, and is proud to say that she now plays soccer with her
grandsons and sometimes even hangs with them on the monkey bars.

    Jesse Gelsinger was not so lucky. The 18-year-old from Tucson, Ariz., who
had had a mild metabolic disorder since the age of two, agreed to participate in
a gene-therapy trial. He believed there was little risk for him and the trial
would benefit infants born with the same disorder. On Sept. 13, 1999, Mr.
Gelsinger received the therapy through two catheters into his groin. Exactly
four days later, he was pronounced dead, having suffered a massive breakdown of
body systems. His family sued the University of Pennsylvania, where the trial
took place, saying that the risks of the therapy had been hidden from Mr.
Gelsinger. It was a case of human experimentation gone horribly wrong.

    Mrs. Ilse, Mr. Gelsinger and others who agree to be human guinea pigs take a
big risk. "You're going into it blind and don't have any idea what's going to
happen. We are all very vulnerable going in," says Mrs. Ilse. It is utterly
important, she says, that the trial is based on good science, that it is done by
conscientious people, that communication between investigators and subjects is
open, and that the study is well-monitored.

    Although this is most often the case and people are generally not harmed in
clinical trials, human research is not as tightly monitored as Canadians might
think.

    "In Canada, you are better protected as a lab rat than you are as a human
research subject," complained one person interviewed for an academic paper on
human research published by the Law Commission of Canada.

    The commission, an Ottawa-based agency that advises Parliament on how to
improve Canada's laws, set out to study the various ways human research is
governed. It found that the fate of the people who volunteer is not always the
top priority.

    "Most Canadian research institutions and sponsors have a far better idea of
what happens to research funds than what happens to research subjects," said the
report.

    Dr. Wendy Bohaychuk, an expert in clinical-trials monitoring, says: "We
can't assume everything's fine. Patients do suffer in clinical trials and drugs
do get on the market that shouldn't."

    "The problem is," says her partner Dr. Graham Ball, "the whole process is
very secret. The pharmaceutical companies are obviously not going to declare
their misdemeanours, nor are the physicians, and the government is not checking,
so nobody knows what's going on, least of all, the patients."

    Drs. Ball and Bohaychuk run a company called Good Clinical Research Practice
Consultants and have conducted audits of clinical trials at more than 250 sites
in 25 countries, checking to make sure they adhere to the international code of
practice guidelines, covering everything from scientific methodology to patient
protection.

    Canada's record, they say, is disgraceful. "We have collected a lot of hard
data and found in Canada there is no regulation and no effort to ensure
compliance," says Dr. Bohaychuk, who lives in Lakehurst, Ont.

    But Lee Marks, director of marketing practices at Canada's Research-Based
Pharmaceutical Companies in Ottawa, vehemently disagrees. "[That] is an
incredible statement," she says. "Canadian clinical trials done by
research-based pharmaceutical companies comply with all the Canadian
regulations, guidelines and policies that apply to clinical research."

    Ms. Marks is referring to the Good Clinical Practice Consolidated Guidelines
developed at the International Conference on Harmonization, part of the
Declaration of Helsinki.

    There is no doubt that excellent guidelines exist and that clinical
researchers are required to adhere to them, but what is lacking, say Drs. Ball
and Bohaychuk, is anyone making sure they are complying.

    Every clinical trial plan in Canada needs to be approved by two groups: the
federal government and a research ethics board (REB). Neither group is
particularly aggressive at the moment in monitoring how people in trials are
faring, says Dr. Bohaychuk.

    The Canadian government, for its part, is soon to address this shortcoming.
On June 20, Health Minister Allan Rock announced approval of amendments to the
Food and Drug Regulations in Canada, which will include the introduction of
on-site inspections of clinical trials. These could begin in September.

    The other level of conscience in clinical trials is the REB. These ethics
boards usually consist of a mix of volunteers pulled together at the study site,
representing various interests such as medicine, law, nursing and the public.
Dr. Bohaychuk says members of REBs are overworked and undertrained.

    Every once in a while, a Canadian does die in a clinical trial and an REB is
blamed. In 1989, a heart patient at a Montreal hospital was asked by a doctor to
enter a trial of eye drops. The study had been approved by an REB. Right after
the drops were put in the patient's eyes, he collapsed and died. When his family
sued the doctor and the hospital, they won. "The hospital, through its research
committee, failed to emphasize the risks of [the procedure] on the consent
form," stated Quebec Superior Court judge in the case.

    Much more recently, the Law Commission of Canada paper described why REBs
can't handle the load of trial proposals coming at them. "The REB system is
comprised of conscientious people of good will voluntarily doing their best but
with inadequate resources, training and expertise."

    There is also a concern that an individual REB may not have sharp teeth when
it comes to a disagreement with a huge pharmaceutical company over an ethical
issue in a trial. "What is your clout as an REB when it's a multisite trial and
the pharmaceutical company can say we'll take it to another site? Money will not
flow to the site if the REB is overly stringent," says Susan Zimmerman, director
of research at the Law Commission of Canada.

    On paper, Canadian research subjects are protected by a policy called the
Tri-Council Policy Statement on Ethical Conduct for Research Involving Humans.
It was designed by the Medical Research Council and two other science councils.
"Our people must comply with that policy," says Ms. Marks of Canada's
Research-Based Pharmaceutical Companies. But who is making sure that they do?
"This is somewhat of a self-regulatory area," says Ms. Zimmerman. "There's no
real oversight body." There is also no central body that forces clinical trial
investigators to report all drug side effects, so many negative reactions go
unpublicized.

    Though Canadian figures illustrating the extent of this problem are
difficult to get, a U.S. group did study this issue - and the results were
dramatic. In 192 recent drug trials involving more than 130,000 human subjects,
toxic reactions to drugs were only described accurately in drug trial reports 29
per cent of the time.

    Or, sometimes doctors try hard to communicate results that could signal harm
to patients, and run into interference from the company paying for the research.
"Visualize this as the big guy looming up in the night, saying, 'Back off or
you'll be sorry,' " says Dr. Bob Evans, a health economist at the University of
British Columbia. He is interested in bringing to light various cases in which
negative results of studies have been suppressed by the pharmaceutical industry.

    Meanwhile, Health Canada spokesperson Roslyn Tremblay said that the
government's recent announcement of new inspection system "will enhance
safeguards for Canadians participating in clinical trials." Observers agree that
is a step in the right direction, but only time will tell whether the improved
system of checks and balances goes far enough in closing the monitoring gaps.
The dope on drug testing
Where to get information?
   Finding information about Canadian clinical trials and their criteria justgot
easier with the development of a new, first-of-its-kind Web site
linkinginvestigators, physicians and patients (www.medistudy.com). Medistudy,
whichbrings together trial information in all illness areas, was launched
thisyear by a group of health-care professionals in Guelph, Ont.
What are the benefits?
   Enrolling in a clinical trial allows access to new therapies before they are
widely available. This could be life-saving for those who are very sick with,
for instance, cancer or HIV. Being in a trial means your progress will be
monitored regularly by members of the research team. Clinical trials also offer
an opportunity to make a contribution to medical research.
What are the risks?
   New therapies, especially in early phase trials, may cause side effects
orrisks that are not known. The medication being tested may not work for
you.Or,you may end up in a "placebo" group, where you are not receiving the
therapy.
Questions to ask before enrolling
   Has this drug been used in people before?
   How many people have taken this drug?
   What were the results?
   What exactly is involved in this trial?
   What are the possible risks and benefits?
   Will I have to go off my present medications?
   What happens if I decide to pull out?
Words of warning
   Patient recruitment in clinical trials is big business, so you need to
protect your own best interests. When you enroll, the recruiter (whether it is a
doctor, research centre or outside company) gets paid. You want to make sure the
motive for your enrolment is to get the best care possible for you; if you are
uncertain, get a second opinion from a doctor not involved in the trial.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              346 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             June 28, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: COMMENT; CONFLICTING RIGHTS: Part One; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 931 words

HEADLINE: Privacy comes first;
When it comes to revealing our genetic makeup,;
the public good comes second, says lawyer MAUREEN McTEER.;
Tomorrow: The people's right to better research

BYLINE: MAUREEN McTEER

BODY:

    President George Bush surprised everyone last week when he signalled his
support for a ban on the use of individuals' genetic tests by employers and
insurance companies. It was a reassuring stand for anyone concerned about
questions of privacy and human rights.

    If Mr. Bush adopts the position of his predecessor, Bill Clinton, Americans
who test for a genetic condition cannot have their test results used to label
them as having a pre-existing medical condition and denied health insurance or
denied jobs. Instead, only those who are actually sick could be denied. What
does this mean for Canadians? In my view, quite a lot.

    Genetic information is special and different from other personal
information. At its core, it is about heredity and therefore can tell not just
one person's story, but that of everyone else to whom they are related by blood.
With the identification of the role of each human gene, the international Human
Genome project will make it possible to predict our health status through
genetic testing. Think of what this will mean to the practice of medicine and to
scientific research. But think also what it can mean to companies that can
profit by such information. How will we manage to protect ourselves from
discrimination?

    Some argue that this is the price to pay for great progress in the diagnosis
and treatment of serious and fatal genetic diseases such as certain breast
cancers, Alzheimer's or diabetes. Genetic testing's promise is real. It will
revolutionize the diagnosis of certain diseases and allow for new ways to treat
them, including gene therapy, which will literally alter genes to make them
better, curing potential problems before they even begin.

    But these cures are in the future, and the genetic information is of limited
value. In the meantime, otherwise healthy Canadians may join the class of "the
healthy sick." The same applies to their blood relatives whose only way then to
confirm their own health status is to undergo testing themselves. Now is the
time for governments to protect the health privacy of Canadians and to ensure
that they are free of discrimination on the basis of their genetic heritage. How
might we do this?

    First, remember that there is no constitutional right to privacy in Canada -
on this question, the Charter of Rights and Freedoms is silent.

    Second, no human rights laws ban discrimination on the basis of genetic
predisposition or heritage. This is a simple and urgent place to start.

    Third, we need to cover genetic information as a specific class of
information to protect us in dealings with private companies, including
insurance and other related companies, such as banks, educational institutions
and employers. A recent federal law on the use of personal information by
private companies leaves this question open. It needs to be amended. More and
more of our health insurance is private.

    Fourth, the same principles must apply to our personal health information.
Provincial governments must ensure stricter protection of genetic information as
part of our general health records.

    The goals of ensuring medical care (especially in emergency situations) and
preventing medicare fraud are important. So is the need for access to anonymous
health information for certain kinds of research, which is already provided for
in existing institutional ethical review board guidelines and practices. But,
personal genetic information must be stored separately from our existing health
records and must be accessible only to designated persons (such as a family
doctor). If companies or researchers want our genetic and other health
information, we should know about it and have the right to either allow or deny
them access to it. Technology makes this possible and we should make it the
standard practice.

    Finally, laws are needed to handle the collection of blood and other sources
of our genetic material by private companies. There are two possible ways to do
this: We could ban the practice entirely (reverting to the former practice of
having only our doctor take our blood for specific testing) or we could amend
current laws that cover the doctor-patient relationship to also cover corporate
collection of genetic source materials. Either way, such laws should be uniform
across Canada.

    Why is this so crucial? Because very soon we will be able to know our entire
genetic profile from a single drop of blood, or strand of hair, swab of saliva
or even a skin cell. The person or company with access to our blood and other
individual sources of genetic information will have incredible potential power
over us. They can use that information in both positive and negative ways - to
provide or deny health or life insurances; to provide or deny us access to
mortgages, jobs, or higher education.

    Right now, the insurance industry does not require Canadians seeking health,
life and other insurances to undergo genetic testing as part of an applicant's
medical history. But if you have had genetic testing done already, then you have
to share the results with the company. If you don't and the company finds out,
then it can cancel your policy. Studies show that Americans are either refusing
genetic testing or seeking it anonymously to avoid losing health and other
insurance.

    Genetic testing is part of our future. It's time we acted to create the
safeguards needed to better balance the protection of privacy and individual
rights with the interests of research and private companies.

Maureen McTeer is a lawyer, author and host of the weekly Internet show Science
Bytes at www.epress.ca

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              350 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             June 7, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: SPORTS; SPORTS IN BRIEF; Pg. S9

LENGTH: 132 words

HEADLINE: IOC readies for genetic cheating

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: Lausanne, Switzerland

BODY:

    The International Olympic Committee is bracing itself for the onset of the
genetic modification of athletes. Representatives of the IOC medical commission
have met with leading genetic experts to examine the potential impact of gene
therapy in sport and the ethical implications of genetically modifying athletes.
"There is an important mutation on the horizon," said Prince Alexandre de
Merode, the chairman of the IOC's medical commission. "The application of gene
therapy is not feasible today and we know of no cases of abuse yet, but it could
become as important and widespread a problem as traditional doping in sport."
Among the procedures under consideration to ferret out genetic cheats is the
detection the presence of antibodies generated in the blood as a result of gene
therapy use.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              351 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             June 7, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; WORLD REPORT; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 65 words

HEADLINE: Hemophilia treatment passes human test

BODY:

    A new kind of gene therapy for hemophilia, which uses altered cells from the
patients themselves to correct a genetic flaw, has passed its first preliminary
test in humans, researchers report.

    If the technique works, it may apply to other diseases such as diabetes,
said Richard Selden, president of Transkaryotic Therapies, the company that
developed the biotechnology.
 Healthscout, Reuters

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              355 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Sun Media Corporation
                         Calgary Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                       May 18, 2001 Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: Lifestyle; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 106 words

HEADLINE: MARVELLOUS MOUTHWASH

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   A gene-therapy mouthwash shows promise of warding off oral cancer by
destroying ominous growths before they turn malignant.

   The idea is to attack these pre-malignant patches by unleashing viruses that
have been programmed to kill cells that contain cancer-causing genes.

   The first study of this approach is still under way, but doctors said it
appears to work in at least some patients, making ominous patches in their
mouths disappear completely.

   "The advantage is that it's where we can see it," said Dr. Ezra Cohen of the
University of Chicago.

   "We can get to it, and the therapy does not get absorbed into the body."

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2001


                              360 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             April 27, 2001 Friday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS MAGAZINE; FEATURES; Pg. 62

LENGTH: 10476 words

HEADLINE: The In Crowd;
The seventh annual selection of the best;
and brightest among achievers on the rise

BYLINE: Staff Writer

BODY:

    How do you measure success? Everyone has their own vision of who they would
like to be. The winners of this year's Canada's Top 40 Under 40 have come much
closer than most to realizing that vision, yet even they still have many
unfulfilled ambitions.

    For the seventh year in a row, the winners were selected by a panel of
blue-chip business and community leaders assembled by Caldwell Partners
International, the Toronto-based executive search firm. Caldwell assembled a
preliminary list of more than 700 Top 40 nominees. The panel then rated the
final candidates on the criteria of vision and leadership, innovation and
achievement, community involvement, impact, and strategy for growth. Scores in
those five categories were tallied and ranked using an electronic scoring
system.

    Once again, the winners are a very eclectic group, including Dr. Marco
Marra, a world-class human genome researcher in Vancouver, Edmonton stockyard
owner Jennifer Wood, and Cindy Burton, chairperson of Charlottetown-based
iWave.com Inc., which sells specialized software for fundraising. This year, we
wanted them to express themselves. We sent them seven questions, some serious
and some not-so-serious, and encouraged them to be candid and relaxed in their
responses.

    Those responses demonstrate a high level of commitment. But they also give
us glimpses of a conflicted generation. Ask Brendan Paddick, president of St.
John's-based Regional Cablesystems Inc., his ambitions for age 50, and he says
he wants to be running a corporation "with a market cap that includes the word
'billion.'" Karen Basian, chief financial officer of high-tech darling 724
Solutions Inc., says she just wants "more time with family...time on the ground
versus in the air."

    Ask them for one piece of advice for the Prime Minister, and there are few
strong themes: maybe lower taxes, or more research funding. Ask them to name the
best thing they read last year, and the responses range from Beowulf to Dr.
Seuss. One of the few things most of them share is a taste for foreign cars.

    In many ways, they're a lot like the rest of us. But, as with previous
winners, some of whom we profile on page 78, you'll be hearing a lot more about
this year's elite 40 in the years to come.

   Josef Penninger
   Age 36

    Associate Professor and Scientist, Amgen Institute, University of Toronto,
and Scientist, Princess Margaret Hospital, Toronto

    Born in Austria, Penninger completed his postdoctoral fellowship in Toronto.
He has made major discoveries concerning the role of the osteoporosis gene, the
link between bacterial infections and heart disease, and the signals the body
uses to control the immune system.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    To still be able to play competitive soccer.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    Five. I am not very competitive, but I'm very stubborn, which is different.

    What is the best advice you ever received?

    To become a good soccer player, you have to score with both legs. Second,
don't let yourself be talked into a profession because of money or social
pressures.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Science is on the verge of revolutionizing life, culture and economies.
Every effort should be made to nurture universities and research. All parts of
science must be supported, not just the ones that might become products.

    Is money important to you?

    Only so I can afford a decent house and give my kids a decent living. By
itself, money has no moral or intrinsic value. People have value.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    I don't have a Canadian driver's licence. In Europe, I failed my driver's
test (the only exam I ever failed). I ride old, crummy bicycles and the subway.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    The new translation of Beowulf by Seamus Heaney, Journey to the

    End of the Night by Louis-Ferdinand Celine, and Romancero gitano, gypsy
poems by Federico García Lorca.

   Alain M. Bellemare
   Age 39

    Vice-President, Operations, Pratt & Whitney Canada,Longueuil, Que.

    Every two seconds, an aircraft equipped with a Pratt & Whitney turbine
engine takes off somewhere in the world. An aeronautical engineer by training,
Bellemare led the development of 25 new P&WC products and applications in the
last three years, and has developed a new, streamlined production system.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    To be the CEO of a large company where I can influence wealth creation
through internal growth or acquisitions.

    How competitive are you on a scale of 1 to 10?

    10. I just hate losing!

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Always be in a learning mode. When you commit to do something, do it quick,
do it right.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Keep investing in research and development, the engines of long-term growth.

    Is money important to you?

    I am driven by challenges and I expect to be rewarded and recognized
according to my performance. Money is not the main driver, but I want to
maintain a standard of living for my family.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    An Infiniti QX4. But it's just a matter of time before I get that BMW 330
convertible.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    The terra-cotta warriors in the mausoleum of the First Qin Emperor in China.
I was astounded by the level of detail.

   Christi Strauss
   Age 39

    President, General Mills Canada, Toronto

    New York-born Strauss has been with General Mills since 1986, and president
of the Canadian division for the past five years. She's responsible for the
recent successful launch of Betty Crocker potato products; for the Sydney
Olympic Games, she lined up product sponsorship deals with Canadian athletes
such as Simon Whitfield.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    To have a happy balance in life.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    I'd say 9. Though in things where I'm just competing against myself (like
golf), I'm probably a 10.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    From my parents-the good old golden rule: "Do unto others as you would have
them do unto you."

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    A good leader learns to make tough decisions when appropriate. Do what's
right, rather than what's popular.

    Is money important to you?

    Some "base" level of money is important to provide security and a sense of
freedom in life's choices. It's also nice to be able to enjoy travel, great wine
and some of my other passions. I'm just trying to figure out how much "enough"
is.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    An S-model Jaguar. I had driven cars that seemed more practical and
conservative. I was ready for a change and I just loved the look of this car.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    Seeing an island inhabited by a million penguins in Antarctica. Humans had
not set foot there in over two years.

   David Park
   Age 35

    President and CEO,TrueNorth Energy Corp., Calgary

    A former international business executive at Atomic Energy of Canada, David
Park joined Koch Industries in 1994 and has been president of its subsidiary
TrueNorth since 2000. He has developed office-based project teams and introduced
environmental initiatives, including "open-pit monster" truck-and-shovel mining
technologies, which reduce energy use and environmental hazard.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    I find it hard to think 15 years ahead; the world changes too quickly.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    Probably a 6. I think I've outgrown that overly competitive stage in my
life.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    My father once said, "You have two ears, two eyes, and one mouth. Use them
in that proportion."

    Is money important to you?

    I'd like to say no, but I can't. Money is a means. It's not how I keep
score.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    I traded in my old Honda Accord for a Dodge Caravan. It's a minivan, but at
least it's the sport model.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    The Tipping Point by Malcolm Gladwell, a book about why major trends often
happen suddenly and unexpectedly.

   Tommy Petrogiannis
   Age 35

    Co-founder and President,Silanis Technology Inc., Montreal

    An electrical engineer by training, Petrogiannis co-founded Silanis with
Joseph Sylvester in 1992. The company makes ApproveIt, the market's top-selling
document-signing application-a program that performs electronic approvals

    on-line. The firm's clients include the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Nationwide Insurance, GMAC and Dell.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    To have started another two successful businesses; to be an angel investor
and mentor for startups.

    How competitive are you?

    Second place is first to lose, and I don't like to lose.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Watch cash like it's blood. If it's leaking you're dying.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Be more aggressive on reducing the tax burden.

    Is money important to you?

    I respect it-that's it. I have never considered it important.

    What kind of car do you drive and why?

    Nissan Maxima-great car for the money.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    A quote by General Electric chairman Jack Welch: "Companies

    don't provide job security. Only customers do."

   Jennifer Wood
   Age 38

    President and CEO, Edmonton Stockyard Inc., Weiller & Williams Ltd.; COO,
Viewtrak Technologies Inc.;

    President, Cattle & Co. Investments Inc.;

    Partner, O.A. Brown Ltd., Saskatoon Livestock Sales. Edmonton

    After stints as a restaurant chain manager and commercial float- plane
pilot, Wood started a career in the cattle industry in 1990 at her father's
company, Weiller & Williams. In 1992, she reorganized Weiller & Williams
(Saskatoon) Ltd., and in 1994, bought Edmonton Stockyard, along with 5,760 acres
of pastureland in Central Alberta. She also bought O.A. Brown Ltd. More
recently, she's developed an internet-based system to track animals and their
production.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    To be a leading player in the agri-food industry. To double the number of
cattle that we process.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    Some people would rate me a 10, others a 5. It depends on the situation at
hand.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    No dream is too big.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    A consumption tax as a cornerstone of fiscal policy. The U.S. is proposing
to do just that, and it's a fairer tax system.

    Is money important to you?

    Health and happiness first. Money is secondary.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    An Infiniti Q45 and QX4. Maybe I just like the letter Q. Actually, they are
great vehicles, speaking in terms of value and performance.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    Half-time: Changing Your Life Plan from Success to Significance by Bob
Buford and The Seat of the Soul by Gary Zukav.

   Dr. Todd Anderson
   Age 38

    Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Foothills Hospital,
Calgary, and University of Calgary

    Run in part by the University of Calgary's faculty of medicine, Foothills
employs 6,000 staff and serves 500,000 patients a year. As an academic
cardiologist, Anderson conducts research and teaches cardiovascular medicine.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    To establish a world-class vascular biology research group at the University
of Calgary.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    At least a 10. You should see me on the golf course. I hate to fail.

    What's the most useful advice you ever received?

    My father once told me that in the long run, it costs little extra to do
things first class.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Put money into research until it hurts and then give some more.

    Is money important to you?

    If money were more important to me, I would be in private practice

    or business and not an academic cardiologist.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    1986 Honda Civic. I pride myself on having the ugliest car at the hospital.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    The Great Barrier Reef. Fantastic.

   Karen Basian
   Age 39

    Chief Financial Officer,

    724 Solutions Inc., Toronto

    Basian developed the financing plan for 724's January, 2000, IPO, the most
successful in Canadian history. The company develops wireless and web services
for financial institutions, and it has grown from 36 to 700 employees in 18
months. Basian also heads 724's corporate giving program.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    More time with family and friends; time outdoors; time on the ground versus
in the air.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    I'd say a 6, my team would say a 10, so we'll split the difference and call
it an 8.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Stuff happens. It's what you do with that stuff that defines your life.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Give the Finance guy a turn.

    Is money important to you?

    I've had the privilege of seeing the benefits that money can bring. Also
money can facilitate change when applied to the right things.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    An Infiniti G20. It actually saved my life when I had a head-on collision
and the frame remained intact.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    Read: The Power of One by Bryce Courtenay, a moving book about how

    people can impact a child in a powerful way. Saw: "Terminator," a class-5
rapid. I was whitewater rafting in Chile at the time.

   Dr. Marco Marra
   Age 34

    Co-Director (Scientific), Genome Sequence Centre, B.C. Cancer Agency,
VancouverMarra was part of an international team that announced in December,
2000, the decoding of nearly the entire genetic endowment-known as the genome-of
a worm called a nematode. He is a senior scientist at the B.C. Cancer Research
Centre; adjunct professor of medical genetics at UBC; and an adjunct professor
of molecular biology and biochemistry at Simon Fraser University.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    To have significantly contributed to unravelling the molecular basis

    of cancers.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    10.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    My parents told me to "always perform at your highest level no matter what
the task."

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Implement aggressive funding programs for research and health care.

    Is money important to you?

    It's essential to producing internationally competitive research.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    A station wagon-reasonable utility and relatively inexpensive to operate.

    What's the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    The federal government's announcement of $160 million to fund genomics
research. It was monumental. But it's only an initial investment.

   Tim Hockey
   Age 37

    Senior Vice-President, TD Canada Trust, TD Bank Financial Group, Toronto

    Hockey began his career in 1983 as a part-time teller with Canada Trust and
worked his way up to a vice-presidency with the bank in 1997. Hockey developed
the paperless banking system at Canada Trust. His model will be adopted by TD
Canada Trust.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    Lead great people to do extraordinary things, and be a credit to my family
and community.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    I'd say I'm about a 23.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Be politically astute, but not politically motivated.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Set big, audacious goals for our country. Incrementalism might be
politically safe, but it's incredibly uninspiring.

    Is money important to you?

    Yes, but only insofar as it frees one up to make more choices in life.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    A Chrysler 300M, because it's big, well-built and comfortable.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    The West Wing series (I'm an addict) and Into Thin Air by Jon Krakauer.

   Helena C. Cain
   Age 36

    Vice President, Sales, Aliant Telecom, Saint John

    Cain leads both the New Brunswick and global sales forces at Aliant Telecom.
She has helped attract call centres to the province, and is credited with
convincing Bell to establish call centres in Moncton, bringing 300 jobs to the
area.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    I hope I've retained my drive and energy to be a change agent. I hope to be
more tolerant, empathetic and sensitive.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    9.5.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Take risks. It is better to ask for forgiveness than permission, but you
need to know when to do either.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Privatize and/or leverage the strengths of industry a lot more.

    Is money important to you?

    Once I got to the point that I felt I could cover the bills and afford the
lifestyle I like, I paid very little attention to money.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    A Jeep Cherokee for winter driving and to haul our boat in the summer. I
also have a cherry-red VW Golf because it's small and agile and good on gas.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    I reread Stephen Covey's The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People

    and Principle-Centred Leadership.

   Jon D. Manship
   Age 38

    Co-founder and CEO,

    Spielo Gaming International, Dieppe, N.B.

    At age 15, Manship took a part-time job in a Moncton video game arcade. In
1990, he co- founded Spielo, which designs and manufactures video lottery
terminals (VLT) and other arcade and on-line gaming products. Spielo holds

    the largest single VLT contract-awarded by the province of Quebec-given to a
North American supplier.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    Retirement. Being a board member of companies that I have invested in.
Health. Travel.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    I'd say 8.5.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Make your customer successful and you'll be successful.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Minimize the size of government.

    Is money important to you?

    No, but having it does give you freedom.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    BMW X5. It's the best.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    The collaboration at a quarterly company-wide meeting; we broke into groups
that randomly came together. The results were impressive.

   Brendan Paddick
   Age 37

    President and Chief Operating Officer, Regional Cablesystems Inc., St.
John's

    A graduate of Harvard's Advanced Management Program, Paddick joined the
company as vice-president and general manager in 1992 and was promoted to COO in
1995. He was appointed president the following year and returned the company to
profitability. Regional Cablesystems now has 250,000 subscribers in seven
provinces.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    Freedom 55 is not in my plans, so Freedom 50 is even less appealing. I have
a hard time sitting still through a movie. At 50, I'd like to be the CEO of a
thriving public company with a market cap that includes the word "billion."

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    I hate to lose, but I can accept defeat if I feel we have given it our best
shot. Incompetence and complacency drive me insane. I'm not a real team player
at work, but I do enjoy creating an environment in which teams can excel.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    In 1982, my 88-year-old grandmother told me two things. "Always tell the
truth; you won't have to remember as much." And "life is all about sales, so
sell yourself."

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Cut taxes and then cut them again.

    Is money important to you?

    You know all those business-school lectures that taught us money is

    not a motivator? I slept in for those classes. Money is my main motivator,
but not simply my own money. I care about our shareholders, I worry about
investing strategically in our corporate initiatives.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    The book The Innovator's Dilemma by Harvard Business School's Clayton M.
Christensen. It confirmed that being the first to market is not nearly as
important as timing your entry.

   Byron Neiles
   Age 35

    Director, Public Affairs and Government,

    Enbridge Inc., Calgary

    Neiles is a former senior policy and communications adviser to two federal
cabinet ministers. At natural gas giant Enbridge, he has built on the company's
community investment program. He is chairman of the Calgary Philharmonic
Orchestra, and has co-founded Leadership Calgary-a nine-month program that
offers young business executives mentorship by prominent Calgarians such as
Jenny Belzberg.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    To have an enduring marriage, raise enlightened children and help build my
community.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    8.5

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    It sounds cliched, but the sage advice of "remember where you are from" has
always kept me grounded.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    How much space do you have for this? I have lots to say.

    Is money important to you?

    To the extent it affords my family comfort and freedom.

    What kind of car do you drive and why?

    Honda Odyssey-as a working dad, function won out over form.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    A visit to Ireland to trace family history. It was fascinating to juxtapose

    the past with its new prosperity.

   Shannon Byrne
   Age 33

    Co-founder, President and CEO, Paradata Systems Inc., Whistler, B.C.

    Byrne's company designs secure global internet payment systems for financial
institutions. Using $10 million (U.S.) in financing this past July, she created
Paradata's Internet Payment Service Model. She is a member of various boards,
including the B.C. Technology Industry Association and AceTech Early Stage
Advisory Board, and is an active volunteer and foster parent.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    To be just like my parents-fit, active and healthy.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    If I said anything less than 10, no one would believe my answer.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    While negotiating, if your first offer or bid does not make you unbelievably
uncomfortable, then you definitely did not go high or low enough.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    No comment.

    Is money important to you?

    Important for life's necessities but not for life's balance.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    Subaru Outback, to get to the airport on time when it snows.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    A thank-you card from a Paradata team member on their one-year anniversary
with the company. It makes it all worth it.

   Dr. Keith Stewart
   Age 39

    Director, Toronto General Hospital Research Institute, University Health
Network, Toronto

    The University Health Network operates three sites: Toronto General
Hospital, Toronto Western Hospital and Princess Margaret Hospital. Stewart
founded the Cancer Gene Therapy Program at Princess Margaret, and has begun more
than 10 clinical trials in gene therapy, with a focus on treating cancer of the
bone marrow. He is also a member of CANVAC, a national network of scientists
working to develop vaccines against hepatitis, cancer and HIV.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    Staying healthy to enjoy time with my family.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    7. I'm not in this to compete; I'm more of an enthusiast.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    "Just focus." But I'm not very good at following that advice.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Don't turn back the clock to yesterday's social policies. Health care can be
high-quality and accessible to all.

    Is money important to you?

    Not really-if it were, I would have chosen private practice.

    What kind of car do you drive and why?

    A Saab 900-since there weren't many of them, it seemed like I was being
different at the time.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    The discovery that the human genome contains only 30,000 genes, fewer than
everyone thought.

   Jordan Gnat
   Age 28

    President and CEO, Midnorthern Group Inc., Toronto

    Jordan Gnat runs the home appliance sales company founded in 1958 by his
father, Willy Gnat. In 1994, the company was nearly bankrupt. It restructured
the following year. Jordan and his brothers, Michael and Kevin, then bought out
five of the minority partners, giving the family 85% ownership. By 1999 annual
sales had grown to $43 million in North America. In May, 2000, the company
bought its main competitor, Home & Rural Appliances.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    50! I'm not even 30! Seriously, to have a healthy and happy family.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    9 or 10.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    It doesn't matter if you win or lose, just go out and have fun; just
remember one thing-there's no fun in losing. And second, figures don't lie,
liars have to figure.

    If you were to give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it
be?

    Run the country like the chairman of a public company. Look out for the
highest return for your shareholders, and rely on your best people to take care
of the operations.

    Is money important to you?

    Business is like a professional sport. In sports, you win trophies; in
business, you make money.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    Audi A4. I like small cars.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    The best business book ever: Oh, the Places You'll Go! by Dr. Seuss. It is
soon to be required reading for our management.

   Joanne Dunbar
   Age 38

    Partner, Mergers and Acquisitions Due Diligence Practice (MADD), Ernst &
Young, Toronto

    Dunbar joined Ernst & Young as an audit staff member in 1984, quickly moving
up the ranks before making partner in 1997 in financial services. In 2000, she
moved to the MADD practice. Dunbar has designed a year-long national training
course for the Uniform Final Examination, the qualifying exam for chartered
accountants. Among her volunteer positions, she is chair of the national board
of directors for the Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    It appears that I will not be a professional athlete or a rock star so I
guess I'll settle for watching my professional hockey or basketball team (which
I will own).

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    Close to a 10, but in a healthy wanting-to-win sort of way.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Early in my career, I worked for a manager who, during our busiest times,
would walk around the office and ask if we were having fun.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Next!

    Is money important to you?

    Insomuch as it provides the freedom to do things, to share new experiences
with family and friends. And it makes a shopping trip to New York so much fun.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    A 1994 SAAB convertible-the last year of the old models. Nicer lines than
the new ones.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    The Harry Potter series-and I don't have children. Just finished the fourth
book recently.

   Adam Lorant
   Age 37, Vice-President, Marketing and Product Management;and Paul Terry
(right)

    Age 38, Chief Technology Officer and Vice-President, Research and
Development, Abatis/Redback Network Systems Canada Ltd., Burnaby, B.C.

    Co-founded by Lorant and Terry (who met as colleagues at Newbridge
Networks), Abatis was in business for a little over two years, offering IP
intelligent network devices. In October, 2000, the company was sold to
California-based Redback Networks for $1.3 billion.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    Lorant: I'd like to leave a legacy, something to make my son proud.

    Terry: To be aerobatic unlimited champion, bridge national champion,
snowboard those double-blacks at Whistler, and invent something really neat.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10.

    Lorant: 7.

    Terry: About 100.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Both: [Abatis chair] Terry Matthews has been a constant role model and
mentor. He says be bold, be aggressive, be world class in everything you do.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Lorant: Build the best education system in the world in four years. Map out
annual, aggressive, quantitative goals.

    Terry: Brand and market Canada as the intellectual property capital of the
world by lowering capital gains tax to zero.

    Is money important to you?

    Lorant: At our first board meeting, Terry Matthews challenged us to show him
how our key staff would become millionaires. When Redback's acquisition was
announced, we had more than 50 new millionaires.

    Terry: Money is not necessarily the end goal, except it oils the wheels and
provides a measure of performance.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    Lorant: Audi Quattro, a beautifully engineered car.

    Terry: Lexus 470-large, protects the family. Also a Nissan 300Z-excellent
engineering.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    Lorant: Outside of the huge volumes of e-mails, trade publications and
market research reports, The Harvard Business Review and The Economist.

    Terry: Just finished Peter de la Billiere's Looking for Trouble. He was the
general of the special forces in the U.K. He presents a fascinating picture of
leadership exaggerated by war.

   Dr. May Griffith
   Age 39

    Associate Professor, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine and
Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine at University of Ottawa

    Griffith was educated at the University of Toronto and Harvard Medical
School, and has an Executive MBA from the University of Ottawa. She created a
method to grow cells into the structural equivalent of a human cornea-paving the
way for a prototype artificial cornea for transplantation. She also developed a
form of in-vitro toxicology testing as an alternative to animal testing that
caught the attention of Procter & Gamble, which has promised to eventually
eliminate product testing on animals.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    With my family, friends, students and colleagues, I would say 1. With other
people I don't know, especially at work, around 7.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    If you don't try, you will never succeed.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    It's useless to invest in heath care while cutting environmental programs.

    Is money important to you?

    It is important for keeping my research program going. Also, if I had a lot
of it, I would use it to purchase wetlands for conservation.

    What kind of car do you drive and why?

    A Subaru with four- wheel drive-I live in Ottawa and don't like winter
driving.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    Natural Capitalism by L. Hunter Lovins, Amory Lovins and Paul Hawken. It's
about how companies can be good to the environment while improving their bottom
line. It's a bit preachy, but it presents an interesting paradigm.

   Samuel Duboc
   Age 39

    President and Managing Partner, NB Capital Partners Inc. (NBCP), Toronto

    Duboc received a BSc in chemical engineering from Tufts and an MBA from
Harvard. He moved to Canada in 1991 to co-found the Loyalty Group Canada, where
he launched the Air Miles rewards program. He founded First Marathon Capital
Partners which was bought by National Bank in 1999. He established an employee
incentive program, with more than 200 staff co-invested in deals completed by
the NBCP Capital Equity Fund.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    Kids who've grown into active young adults. A golf handicap of 5.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    Pretty high. Definitely not a 10 but you can see that level from where I am.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Ask; those who don't ask, don't get.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    To dramatically alter or accelerate his policies. Instead of growth-oriented
policies, we have high tax rates, relatively low real income growth, and a
dollar below 64 cents (U.S.).

    Is money important to you?

    My family, health, happiness are the most important things to me.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    Not important.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    Who Moved My Cheese: An Amazing Way to Deal with Change in Your Work and in
Your Life by Spencer Johnson and Kenneth H. Blanchard.

   Brock Furlong
   Age 34

    President, Maple Leaf Poultry, Toronto

    Furlong is president of Canada's leading processor of fresh and frozen
chicken and turkey products. He has launched several new products and expanded
the succesful "Prime" line. Branding is a focus for Furlong. While at Maple
Leaf's Consumer Foods arm in 1998, he initiated a redesign of the Maple Leaf
Foods logo.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    To lead a major business turnaround in an industry that does not even really
exist today.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    10.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    The only key driver of career growth and change is learning.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Focus on education to produce people who can compete globally.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    A GM Yukon Denali because a big truck suits my organization and

    my three kids.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    First Break All the Rules: What the World's Greatest Managers Do Differently
by Marcus Buckingham and Curt Coffman.

   Rene Bourdages
   Age 37

    Executive Vice-President, Programming, Sales and Marketing,

    Astral Television Networks Inc., Montreal

    Bourdages oversees Canal Indigo (the first French-language pay channel,
which he launched in 1996) and the pay-TV station Super Ecran. He also plays a
supervisory role at TMN (The Movie Network), Moviepix and Viewers' Choice.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    To stay physically and mentally fit. To start a new career: writing. To
build a nice log home. To learn piano, painting and Tuscan cuisine.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Success is never permanent and failure is never final.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice,

    what would it be?

    Encourage and reinforce Canadian culture through Canadian-owned vehicles
such as broadcasting, film and television production.

    Is money important to you?

    I come from a very humble family. We had no running water at the house when
I was born in 1963, yet we were surrounded by simple values: integrity, respect.
That's better than money to build your character.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    A Mercedes 430CLK Coupe. I got emotional when I saw the lines. On snowy
weekends we use my partner's car: a Chevrolet Blazer 4X4.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    Five Frogs on a Log: A CEO's Field Guide to Accelerating the Transition in
Mergers, Acquisitions & Gut- Wrenching Change.

   Greta Podleski Age 34;
   and Janet Podleski Age 35

    Co-authors and Vice- Presidents, Granet Publishing Inc.,

    Waterloo, Ont.

    The Podleski sisters are co-authors of the low-fat cookbooks Looneyspoons
and Crazy Plates. Both titles have hit No. 1 on the Canadian paperback,
non-fiction bestseller list, with Looneyspoons selling 800,000 copies across
North America since publication in 1996. The Podleskis founded Granet Publishing
with David Chilton, author of The Wealthy Barber.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    Greta: Since my sister and I are launching a new line of frozen entrees,

    my ambition is to become the next [food marketer] Dave Nichol.

    Only slimmer.

    Janet: Right now, I'm thinking of starting a family. So when I'm 50, I very
well may have a teenager.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    Greta: I'm a 10, but in metric. That makes me about a 22 in imperial.

    Janet: 10 squared. I began competitive sports (soccer, tennis, basketball)
when I was five years old.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Greta: Don't eat anything bigger than your head.

    Janet: "Go big or stay home." I learned this from Corel Corp. CEO Michael
Cowpland. I worked at Corel from 1990 to 1995.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Greta: Dear Jean, in order to improve the health of all Canadians, purchase

    30 million copies of our cookbooks and distribute them with everyone's

    tax returns.

    Janet: To work on his golf game. He once played in a foursome behind me at

    a course in Ottawa, and I think he could use a good swing doctor.

    Is money important to you?

    Greta: I was born with expensive taste, so I blame my need for money on my
genes.

    Janet: How I use my money is important-and I choose to help out my mother
and my four older sisters and their families.

    What kind of car do you drive and why?

    Greta: A 2000 BMW 328 Ci. Greta is, after all, a German name.

    Janet: A 2000 Toyota Solara-sporty, fast yet sensibly priced.

    What's the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    Greta: A rerun of the "Serenity Now!" episode of Seinfeld. Every time

    I get stressed, I say "serenity now!"

    Janet: A book called The Worldwide Laws of Life by John Marks Templeton. It
draws from a vast array of sources-the major scriptures of the world, various
schools of philosophical thought, storytellers, scientists and historians.

   Mark Foote
   Age 39

    President, Canadian Tire Retail, Toronto

    Foote began working at Canadian Tire at age 16 as a fast-lube attendant. He
was appointed president of Canadian Tire Retail, Canadian Tire Corp.'s main
operating entity, in October, 2000. He oversees more than 400 stores, 200 gas
stations and Canadian Tire's on-line business. Previously, as chief information
officer, Foote helped expand the role of technology throughout the company.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    I want to be at the helm of a $10-billion Canadian Tire Corporation.
[Revenues last year were $5.3 billion.]

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    11.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Everything in life and business is about attitude.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Create an environment where the best talent apply their trade here.

    Is money important to you?

    Of course. Money provides you with flexibility. Plus, I have my eye on a
very nice boat.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    A Volvo S80-T6. I bought it because it's distinctive-looking, fast and
apparently the safest car in the world. I think it's the safest car in the world
because it spends a lot of time in the shop.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    Winning Everyday, a book by ex-Notre Dame football coach Lou Holtz. Lou is
about the wisest guy in the world.

   Darren Entwistle
   Age 38

    President and CEO,

    Telus, Burnaby, B.C.

    Entwistle's career in telecommunications spans 21 years, beginning with
summer jobs at Bell Canada and continuing with senior positions at telcos in
Europe. Since taking the helm at Telus last July, the company bought Clearnet
Communications Inc. for $4.6 billion in cash and stock, the largest acquisition
ever in Canadian telecommunications. He revamped the corporate culture,
initiating one-on-one meetings with staff as well as incentive programs.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    To play a round of golf with my father at Royal County Down and watch him
shoot his age: 85.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    I think in relative rather than absolute terms; so one point higher than the
person or company I am up against.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    "Get your sorry ass on that airplane and make a success of your secondment
to the U.K. and if you embarrass me, I will come over and wring your neck"-Dan
Somers, CFO of Bell Canada International in 1993.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Make everyone spend a year abroad; you are never so patriotic as when you
are looking at your country from outside its borders. And when Canadians come
back, keep them. Talent is our most important resource, but one that is
presently seeping away.

    Is money important to you?

    No, not at all. Well, maybe a little bit. Okay, it's bloody important.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    It's a rocket called Telus.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    My twin boy and girl taking their first steps.

   Dr. Steffany A.L. Bennett
   Age 34

    Assistant Professor, Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Ottawa

    Bennett completed her PhD at the University of Ottawa in 1995. She was named
a Lefler Scholar at Harvard Medical School in 1999, and she visits Harvard
frequently to conduct research in neurobiology. She has received numerous awards
and fellowships, and she is an adjunct research professor at Carleton
University. Bennett is a leading researcher into the causes and treatment of
Alzheimer's.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    To live up to the faith that charities and individuals have placed in my
research. If we can delay and ultimately prevent cognitive failure, basic
Alzheimer's research will have made a difference.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    Paradoxically 1 and 10. Science requires a willingness to collaborate-a very
uncompetitive trait. That said, my underlying assumption with this work is:
There has got to be a better way, which demands very competitive
characteristics.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    "If you don't love what you do, get out of the business"-my parents.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Foster strong and innovative basic medical research programs, specifically
in neural degeneration.

    Is money important to you?

    Money to keep the lab running and to recognize the achievements of my
research team.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    Whatever...something with four-wheel drive. I hate getting stuck.

   Marc P. Tellier
   Age 32

    President and CEO, Sympatico-Lycos Inc., Toronto

    Tellier was hired at Bell Canada in 1990 as a summer student and has been
with BCE ever since. He is responsible for negotiating and implementing the new
web partnership between BCE and Lycos. Tellier wrote BCE's B2C internet strategy
and launched more than 35 new web products and services in 2000.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    My biggest hope is for my wife and I to have guided our kids on the road to
happiness and success.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    I would like to think that I am a gracious loser, but I absolutely hate to
lose. About a 9.99.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Sleep on it-since I tend to want to move things along quickly. Having said
that, a bad decision is better than indecision.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    No matter how hard Canada tries, we'll be forever in the shadow of the U.S.
I recommend a common currency platform for North America.

    Is money important to you?

    You don't get up excited in the morning by counting your pennies. You do get
excited by stimulating work.

    What kind of car do you drive and why?

    Chevrolet Suburban 4-by-4-with two kids and a third one on the way, space is
at a premium for those road trips.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    If December 20, 1999, counts as being close enough, I would have to say the
birth of our second child.

   Sonia Baxendale
   Age 38

    Executive Vice-President, Global Private Banking and Investment Management
Services, Wealth Management, CIBC, Toronto

    CIBC's Wealth Management unit has a sales force of 2,900. Each of
Baxendale's departments has exceeded its targets since she became executive VP
in 1999. She has also developed a dual employment strategy, requiring financial
advisers to be employed by the bank and by the investment dealer.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    Spending more time with my family; using the skills I've acquired for a
small entrepreneurial venture.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    9 or 9.5, says my husband, Dean.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Where there is a will, there is a way.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Having obtained the ultimate position of influence, use that privilege
wisely and pass on the flame while you are at your peak.

    Is money important to you?

    Money can certainly contribute to your life experiences and afford
opportunities that enhance your own life and, of course, that of your community.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    A Mercedes SUV because it provides safety and space for a family of five.
And it's reasonably fun to drive.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    The most interesting experience was the birth of my son.

   Alexander Reford
   Age 38

    Director and President,Les Jardins de Metis,

    Grand Metis, Que.

    In 1995, Reford founded a non-profit corporation that took over the
directorship of Les Jardins from the provincial government. The 40-acre
botanical garden was founded by his great-grandmother, Elsie Reford, and has
plant collection of 3,000 varieties. In 2000, Redford launched an International
Garden Festival, which brought in 127,000 visitors over seven weeks.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    About 7. I'm a collaborator rather than a take-it-or-leave-it kind of
person.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    If you don't play, you can't win.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Create a national trust: a non-governmental body modelled on similar
organizations in England and Scotland dedicated to the protection and
preservation of historic buildings and landscapes.

    Is money important to you?

    I make a modest salary and have not given myself a raise since 1995. For

    the moment, it is more important for me to see the business progress than to
profit from it.

    What kind of car do you drive and why?

    A 1983 Volvo, which I bought from my grandmother's estate and drove across
Canada from Victoria, adding more mileage to it in a day than she did in a year.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    Seeing our International Garden Festival take form. We hosted eight teams

    of garden designers from around the world, and watched and collaborated as
they brought their drawings to life.

   Richard O'Connor
   Age 38

    Chief Technology Officer,Tundra Semiconductor Corporation, Kanata, Ont.

    An electronics engineering technologist and Executive MBA from the
University of Ottawa, Rick O'Connor joined Newbridge Networks in 1991. Tundra
was created when Newbridge spun off Newbridge Microsystems in 1995. O'Connor was
a senior manager. Since then, he has led Tundra through its successful IPO in
1999, and led development of products that account for 90% of the firm's
revenue.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    To be healthy and surrounded by the ones I love.

    How competitive are you?

    An 8 or 9. I play to win.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    My parents always said "Do your best, let your conscience guide you through
right and wrong, and don't worry about what others think."

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Focus on increasing national productivity and implement a taxation system
that rewards aggressive success instead of penalizing it.

    Is money important to you?

    To a degree, to establish a standard of living for

    my family.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    A Mercedes ML320. As a hockey coach, I need lots of room for equipment. Also
for passenger safety (the car has six air bags).

    What was the most interesting thing you read

    or saw last year?

    The explosive growth in Ottawa's high-tech sector.

   Joel Leonoff
   Age 37

    Executive Vice- President and Chief Operating Officer, SureFire Commerce
Inc., Montreal

    SureFire is a business-to-business e-commerce company co-founded by Leonoff
in 1999. Within two months of its launch, the firm bought Boston-based
Stumpworld Systems Inc. for $70 million in stock. Within a year, SureFire had
clients such as AOL Canada and CIBC, and a market capitalization of $400
million. Recently the market cap dipped below $250 million.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    To be very active in business, increase my involvement with charitable
organizations, travel with my family, improve my golf game.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    Off the scale-20, which is probably because of my extensive background in
competitive sports.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    A balance between family, business and community is vital.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Introduce significant incentives for young entrepreneurs to launch
businesses in Canada.

    Is money important to you?

    Money is important to everyone to attain a certain quality of life.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    A sports car that is very unique and has a certain sense of style.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    Read: my daughter's report card. Saw: my kids' school plays.

   Cindy Burton
   Age 37

    President and Chairperson, iWave.com Inc., Charlottetown

    In 1990, Burton founded Rainforest, a publisher of guides and directories
for fundraisers. She also helped develop Prospect Research Online (PRO)
fundraising software, used by many major charities and institutions, including
Harvard University. Rainforest was acquired by iWave in 1999.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    I'd like to work at a UN agency or on a project to help redistribute wealth
and resources. I want to participate in the Iditarod Dog Sled Race in Alaska, as
a contestant or volunteer.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    11.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Only hire people who can do the job as well or better than you.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Do the right thing even if people don't agree.

    Is money important to you?

    It's important in what it can do. I'm notorious for giving away more than

    I have, but a little bit can have an incredible impact.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    A 1996 Jeep Cherokee because it gets through the PEI snowdrifts and holds my
daughter and our five big dogs.

    What is the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    The X-Men movie. I love it when comics come to life. Stats on global infant
mortality made me think.

   Blake Hutcheson
   Age 39

    President, CB Richard Ellis Limited (Canada), Toronto

    With more than 10,000 employees, 250 offices in 44 countries, CB Richard
Ellis Inc. is the world's largest commercial real estate services company. Since
becoming COO and later president in 1999, the Canadian company-with 11 offices
and 500 employees nationwide- has increased revenues by over 60%, of which 25%
was in the last two years. As part of Hutcheson's IT and research initiatives,
the company continues to push global, web-enabled applications. It recently
purchased 50% of RealNet, a web-based real estate information service.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    No regrets, no jealousies, no health problems.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    Pushing 10 on most fronts, but hoping to mature in the years to come to pick
the spots where I can lower the number.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    From one of my professors at Columbia University: "There are two kinds of
people in this world-elevator people and basement people. Elevator people bring
you up, basement people bring you down. Surround yourself with the former."

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Do not underestimate, underfund or undervalue the youth of today. Make them
the priority and your legacy will shift from staying in power to brainpower.

    Is money important to you?

    It has never been my primary motivator or even my scorecard.

    What kind of car do you drive and why?

    A 10-year-old Mercedes. It's safe, well-engineered and it still works-so

    why replace it?

    What is the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    Long Walk to Freedom: The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela because

    I love history but would rather read it through the eyes of others-I am

    a big fan of biographies and autobiographies.

   Dean Hopkins
   Age 32

    Co-founder, President and CEO, Cyberplex Inc., Toronto

    Cyberplex, a publicly traded company, provides internet professional
services to blue chip clients such as Royal Bank, 3M and Handspring. It is
headquartered in Toronto with offices in several other cities.

    Before launching the firm in 1994, Hopkins was a management consultant at
McKinsey & Company. Under his leadership, Cyberplex has doubled its revenues
annually.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    Professionally, I hope to have helped build a number of successful new
businesses.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    In business I am reluctantly a very competitive 8, although I'm mostly
competitive with myself.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Be much more aggressive at making Canada the place to operate and grow a
business.

    Is money important to you?

    It is low on my priority list. I am much more interested in spending time
with my wife and raising great kids.

    What kind of car do you drive and why?

    In the winter, a 1996 Nissan Pathfinder.

    In the summer, an orange 1978 Porsche 911 because I needed a second car

    and it was either that or a new Jetta.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    Built to Last by James C. Collins. It is one of the only business books I
could make it past the first chapter. It looks at businesses that have been
successful over 50 years.

   Jo Mark Zurel
   Age 37

    Senior Vice-President and Chief Financial Officer,

    CHC Helicopter Corporation, St. John's

    After taking over in 1998 as CFO and, eventually, senior VP, Zurel has
helped triple CHC's share price. CHC is the second-largest helicopter services
company in the world, providing helicopters for exploration and production in
the oil and gas industry. In 1999, CHC acquired Helicopter Services Group in
Norway.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    I'd say 1. At least, that's what I tell my competitors before driving them
into the ground.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    "Son, always wear one of these."

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    It's great to see the tax rate dropping. Keep up the good work.

    Is money important to you?

    Yes, it gives me the confidence to make the right decisions.

    What kind of car do you drive and why?

    A car small and nimble enough to manoeuvre around the potholes.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    Seeing our share price move from $3 to $14.

   Dr. Deborah Fels
   Age 38

    Director, Centre for Learning Technologies, and Associate Professor, School

    of Information Technology Management, Ryerson Polytechnic University,
Toronto

    A PhD in engineering and instructor at Ryerson since 1995, Fels has designed
and developed several education-based programs, including PEBBLES (Providing
Education By Bringing Learning Environments to Students), a video-communications
system that links hospitalized children to their classrooms at school.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    To get there safely and soundly.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    About a 4. I'd rather collaborate than compete.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Never burn bridges.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Know when it is time to quit. Increase funding for research and development,

    and for education.

    Is money important to you?

    No, not as long as I have enough to feed, house and clothe my children.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    A 1988 Volvo. My first car was a 1966 Volvo that my dad purchased for $25. I
learned how to fix cars then and I still like Volvos.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    I read Memories of a Geisha while en route to Japan.

   Francois Rainville
   Age 38

    CEO, Elix Inc.,

    Nun's Island, Que.

    Rainville negotiated the merger last year of Prima Telematic and MediaSoft
to form Elix-a telecom services company that provides hardware and software, and
builds call centres for clients such as Air Canada, Telus and Fido.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    Invest in tech startups; help my children succeed in their professional and
personal lives; play the 45 most beautiful golf courses in the world.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    11. The most important thing is not to participate, it's to win.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Actually two things: Don't sweat the small stuff. Hire people who are more
qualified and more intelligent than yourself.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Do not get in the way! Let business develop without putting too many laws

    and taxes as obstacles.

    Is money important to you?

    Yes, but making money is a means to do something and not the ultimate goal.

    What kind of car do you drive and why?

    A Ford Expedition-lot of space, very safe.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    Seeing Tiger Woods and Jack Nicklaus in person at the U.S. Open.

   Wade R. Cachagee
   Age 27

    Co-founder and President, Cree-Tech Inc.,

    Chapleau, Ont.

    A status Cree Indian, Cachagee founded Cree-Tech at age 21 after obtaining
his Geographic Information Systems (GIS) diploma from Algonquin College.

    The company focuses on GIS and forestry sectors, offering specialized
applications, native resource management and other products and services.
Cachagee helped create one of the largest cultural inventories of aboriginal
lands in Canada. He also launched a database search engine with information on
every First Nation in the country.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    I have a 23-year journey ahead of me before I reach 50, but I'm up for the
challenge.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    There are no limits. My family keeps repeating this!

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Provide more opportunities for IT-based companies and professionals of all
categories.

    Is money important to you?

    I don't measure success by how much money I make.

    What kind of car do you drive and why?

    I have two white sports cars and two SUVs.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    The most exciting time for me was representing Canada at my second World
Summit of Young Entrepreneurs held in New York City.

   Stephane Boisvert
   Age 37

    Net Generation Business Unit Executive, IBM Canada, Markham, Ont.

    Boisvert joined IBM in 1985. He identified the opportunities that prompted
the company to create the Net Generation Business Unit in 1999. The unit builds
business strategies for web-based companies.

    Its revenues increased by 1,000% in 2000.

    What are your ambitions for age 50?

    More time to spend with my family; being more involved in the community.

    How competitive are you, on a scale of 1 to 10?

    8. I am competitive, but not at all costs.

    What is the most useful advice you ever received?

    Love to read and learn.

    If you could give the Prime Minister one piece of advice, what would it be?

    Invest more of our hard-earned dollars in health care and education.

    Is money important to you?

    What my family and I can do with money is important. We love to travel, we
enjoy good food and entertainment, so, yes, I love money. But I also appreciate
what money can do to help people in need.

    What kind of car do you drive?

    BMW 540. Drives like a Porsche.

    What was the most interesting thing you read or saw last year?

    Being at the Sydney Olympics when Cathy Freeman ran the 400-metre. You felt
the crowd actually carried her at the end-an intense feeling of human energy.

CANADA'S TOP 40 UNDER 40(TM)

    National Board of Directors

    2000/2001

    Ms. Barbara Bruce

    President, Winds of Change

    Winnipeg, Man.

    Dr. Angus Bruneau

    Chairman, Fortis Inc.

    St. John's, Nfld.

    Dr. J.-Pierre Brunet

    Chairman, PEAK Investments Inc.

    Beaconsfield, Que.

    Mr. Pierre Brunet

    Vice Chairman, National Bank of Canada

    Montreal, Que.

    Mr. Brendan Calder

    Corporate Director

    Toronto, Ont.

    Dr. Elizabeth Cannon

    Professor & NSERC Chair, Geomatics, University of Calgary

    Calgary, Alta.

    Mr. Pierre Choquette

    President and Chief Executive Officer,

    Methanex Corporation

    Vancouver, B.C.

    Mr. Rob Dexter

    Chief Executive Officer, Maritime Marlin Travel

    Halifax, N.S.

    Mr. Jean-René Halde

    President and Chief Executive Officer,

    Livingston Group Inc.

    Toronto, Ont.

    Mr. Stanley Hartt

    Chairman, Salomon Smith Barney Canada

    Toronto, Ont.

    Mr. Dale Lastman

    Co-Chair, Goodmans LLP

    Toronto, Ont.

    Mr. Jeffrey Lozon

    President & Chief Executive Officer,

    St. Michael's Hospital

    Toronto, Ont.

    Ms. Marg McGregor

    Chief Executive Officer, Canadian Interuniversity Athletic Union (C.I.A.U.)

    Ottawa, Ont.

    Ms. Wendy Paquette

    President and Chief Operating Officer, MTT

    Halifax, N.S.

    The Honourable Marie-P. Poulin

    Senator, Senate of Canada

    Ottawa, Ont.

    Ms. Barbara Rae

    Corporate Director

    Vancouver, B.C.

    Mr. Kenneth A. Shields

    President and Chief Executive Officer,

    Raymond James Ltd.

    Vancouver, B.C.

    Mr. Doug Stewart

    Corporate Director

    Oakville, Ont.

    Ms. Stella Thompson

    President, Governance West Inc.

    Calgary, Alta.

    Mr. Arni Thorsteinson

    President, Shelter Canadian Properties Limited

    Winnipeg, Man.

    Mr. Mike Tims

    President and Chief Executive Officer,

    Peters & Company Limited

    Calgary, Alta.

    Mr. Kip Woodward

    President, Woodcorp Investment Ltd.

    Vancouver, B.C.

    Mr. Victor Young

    Chairman and Chief Executive Officer,

    Fishery Products International Ltd.

    St. John's, Nfld.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              365 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             April 5, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: APPOINTMENT NOTICES-ADV'T; Pg. B10

LENGTH: 395 words

HEADLINE: The Ottawa Health Research Institute

BODY:

    Dr. Ronald G. Worton
   Howard Alper, Chair of the Transition Board of The Ottawa Health Research
Institute, and David Levine, President and CEO of The Ottawa Hospital, are
pleased to announce the appointment of Dr. Ronald G. Worton as Chief Executive
Officer and Scientific Director of Research for The Ottawa Health Research
Institute and Vice-President, Research at The Ottawa Hospital. Dr. Worton
assumed his new responsibilities on April 1, 2001 when the new institute was
created through the merger of The Ottawa Hospital Research Institute and the
Loeb Health Research Institute.


      Dr. Worton has been Director of Research for The Ottawa Hospital Research
Institute (formerly the Ottawa General Hospital Research Institute) since 1996.
   Following degrees in Physics at the University of Manitoba, and a PhD in
Medical Biophysics at the University of Toronto, Dr. Worton spent two years as a
research fellow at Yale University. In 1971, he moved to the Department of
Genetics at the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto where he spent 25 years as
a researcher, diagnostic laboratory director and administrator - the last 11
years as Geneticist-in-Chief at the Hospital and Professor of Molecular and
Medical Genetics at the University of Toronto.
   In 1996 Dr. Worton moved to Ottawa as Director of Research at the Ottawa
General Hospital with a mandate to build a new research institute. He is
Professor in the Department of Medicine and the Department of Biochemistry,
Microbiology and Immunology at the University of Ottawa.
   Dr. Worton's research has been on the genetics of human disease, including
the identification of the dystrophin gene responsible for Duchenne muscular
dystrophy. Since that discovery his work has involved the mechanism of mutation
in patients, the regulation of the dystrophin gene, and gene transfer into
myogenic cells as a forerunner to gene therapy.
   Dr. Worton is the recipient of several national and international awards
including the Gairdner Foundation International award, the Award of Distinction
from the Muscular Dystrophy Association of Canada, the Centenary Medal from the
Royal Society of Canada, the E. Mead Johnson Award for Research in Pediatrics
and The Canadian Society for Clinical Investigation Distinguished Scientist
Award. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada and a recipient of the
Order of Canada.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              375 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                          February 14, 2001 Wednesday

SECTION: COMMENT; THE HUMAN GENOME; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 1036 words

HEADLINE: Balancing act: science and society;
Medicine's basic mode will change, shifting from treatment;
to the prevention of illness, says ALAN BERNSTEIN

BYLINE: ALAN BERNSTEIN

BODY:

    We are in the midst of a profound revolution in health research - a
revolution driven by our emerging understanding of the molecular basis of human
biology and disease. Within our genome exist many of the secrets of our shared
humanity, as well as the differences that make each of us distinct human beings.

    Understanding the human genome will have a transformative effect on health
and on our health-care system. This revolution will fundamentally alter the way
we prevent, diagnose, and treat diseases even as it poses ethical problems about
privacy and confidentiality that we are only just beginning to grasp.

    At the moment, our health-care system is primarily reactive - we treat
people when they become ill. With the new knowledge that we are gaining of the
human genome, we will be able to predict who is susceptible to disease and help
to prevent the disease or catch it at an earlier, treatable stage.

    For example: We can now identify people who carry an altered gene that
predisposes them to colon cancer. Armed with this knowledge, we can look for and
remove the pre-malignant growths before they become cancerous, preventing deaths
from this disease.

    Diagnosis of disease will also change radically. Instead of symptom-based
diagnosis - we know the car won't start, but we don't know why - we will be able
to make a diagnosis based on the molecular pathways that are altered. We will
know whether the car won't start because the battery is dead, or the gas tank is
empty. Just as battery or gas-tank problems require different solutions, the
genetic variations of a disease require different approaches. Patients will be
stratified according to the genetic pathway their disease has taken, and treated
appropriately.

    We can already see the potential benefits of such individualized medicine.
STI-571 is a drug being tested as a treatment for chronic myelogenous leukemia.
It is designed to interact with the ABL protein, the protein coded for by the
ABL gene that is responsible for the abnormal growth of leukemic cells. Early
results are highly promising; the drug is very effective and has few side
effects. In short, we are rapidly moving from reactive to proactive approaches
to health and to diagnoses based on what our genes are doing, not our symptoms.

    The genomic revolution, and its implications for health research, is also
fuelling the growth of Canada's New Economy. For Canada, the economic potential
is enormous. We have one of the world's most vibrant biotechnology sectors -
companies that are leaders in developing new therapies for HIV/AIDS, cancer,
infectious diseases, blindness, heart disease, etc. These companies have grown
out of the innovative research carried out at our universities and research
hospitals. They now employ hundreds of young Canadians, and are supported by
more than $500-million annually.

    But . . .

    We are still far from having all the answers. If the human genome map is the
Book of Life, then we still don't completely understand the language in which it
is written. Deciphering that language - figuring out what our genes actually do
- is going to be an exciting challenge involving more than just geneticists.

    Proteomics will be an important piece of the puzzle, since genes are simply
blueprints for proteins. Bioinformatics will be another part of the puzzle.
Integrative physiologists and clinicians will bring their understanding of the
whole person to the table, while organ specialists will help us understand how
genes affect the development and functioning of our heart, lungs, liver, brain
and other organs. Social scientists are essential if we are to understand the
complex interplay between genetics and external factors, such as socio-economic
status, lifestyle, and the environment. Some diseases such as Tay-Sachs and
cystic fibrosis arise only as a result of mutations in a single gene. Others,
such as diabetes and various mental illnesses, appear to reflect the complex
interplay between our genetic hard-wiring and what we eat, who we know, how we
live.

    And more than ever, we're going to need ethicists. The genetics revolution
is raising countless new ethical issues. The ability to predict disease, decades
in advance, has profound implications for how we view our lives and make life
decisions. How will new genetic information affect our decisions about whether
to have children? What should we tell them? What should they tell us?

    Issues of privacy and confidentiality are critical, as is the need to deal
with the issue of discrimination in the workplace or by insurers. Will employers
have the right to genetic information about potential workers? Who has the right
to this information? Our bosses? Our future spouses? Our insurance agents?

    The development of new therapies raises issues of health disparities. New
drugs are expensive, and the pace of development is rapid. Access to these drugs
is going to vary, not only between the developed and developing worlds, but
within regions of Canada and between Canada and the United States.

    Our governments need scientific, objective evidence in order to make
informed policy decisions about the avalanche of new treatments. Will this
ultimately mean that the health-care system becomes more cost effective? Or will
costs rise as the public's expectations continue to increase?

    In last month's Speech from the Throne, Ottawa recognized the driving force
that health research will play in ensuring the health of Canadians and of the
health-care system. It implicitly recognized that today's challenges - a vibrant
and efficient health-care system, the health of our aboriginal population,
healthy children, a strong and diversified economy and the branding of Canada as
a country characterized by excellence, creativity, free enquiry and opportunity
- requires a strong culture of research. I have no doubt that Canada can lead
the world in this new science and develop a uniquely Canadian approach that
balances the exciting scientific opportunities with the ethical and social
challenges for the benefit of all.
Dr. Alan Bernstein, an internationally known researcher in cancer and gene
therapy, is president of the newlycreated Canadian Institutes of Health
Research.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              380 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           January 27, 2001 Saturday

SECTION: FOCUS; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 3208 words

HEADLINE: Perfection but at what price?;
Science has entered the realm of science fiction.;
This week Britain became the first Western nation to;
approve human cloning. It's to be done within;
limits, but who sets such limits? Who decides vital;
questions of morality? Ethics reporter MICHAEL VALPY;
examines biotechnology's rapid progress and discusses;
its amazing potential and profound danger with;
an international panel of leading medical researchers

BYLINE: MICHAEL VALPY

BODY:

    Scientists in Britain received parliamentary approval this week to create
human embryos for research into treating disease. In two words: therapeutic
cloning.

    It is the first legal green light given to the Western world's biomedical
community to actually create human life. The terms are stringent: The embryos
must be destroyed after 14 days; they must never be allowed to grow into human
beings; a select parliamentary committee is to come up with detailed regulatory
controls before the first research licences are granted.

    Now, from the moral principles of Westminster's lawmakers, let's travel to
this month's issue of Wired magazine, the widely read periodical of the North
American software industry, a sort of New England Journal of Medicine for
computer nerds. The cover story is about the Creator and the Client. It is not
fiction.

    The Creator is described by writer Brian Alexander as "an intense
dark-haired man in his thirties [who] looks a little like Peter Lorre in The
Beast With Five Fingers."

    He has a PhD in molecular biology, a list of peer-reviewed publications, a
research job at a major U.S. university, an entrepreneurial spirit and a
shortage of ethical scruples. He has "just enough skill to make human cloning
work," Mr. Alexander writes.

    And he has attracted a customer - the Client - a businessman living in
Western Europe whose son died from disease a year ago. The Client found him by
cruising the underworld of the Internet.

    The Client wants the Creator to clone his dead son. He has consulted experts
and keeps tissue samples from the body stored in liquid nitrogen and paraffin
blocks. The Creator has found an in vitro fertilization laboratory that can do
the work, with a compliant director skilled in the handling of human eggs and
the IVF embryo manipulations that closely resemble the techniques used in
cloning.

    At last report, Mr. Alexander writes, the Creator and the Client had fallen
to bickering over whether the Creator could guarantee success.

    Then there is the story of the Quebec-based New Age cult, the
UFO-worshipping Raelians, and their project, Clonaid. They announced last year,
through much salacious press coverage around the world, that they had found a
U.S. couple ready to pay $500,000 to have their dead baby cloned from saved
tissue.

    The cult said it has the medical know-how to do the job. It, too, may have
found the Creator and his lab.

    "The Creator's spirit," Mr. Alexander writes, "has been awakened by the
historical moment we're in right now, a convergence of under-the-radar
pro-cloning agitation, falling taboos, and the inexorable march of science."

    Or, as Dr. Joseph Martin, the Alberta-born dean of Harvard University's
school of medicine, explains: "The technology isn't that difficult and it will
happen probably before we'd like it to.

    "Cloning of the monkey has already been done. So the possibility of
reproducing ourselves, humankind, within the next few years is really not a
question of 'whether' or 'if you can,' but a question of 'who does it.' "

    And so here we have the chills travelling up the world's spine.

    Hidden from view in corporate-financed research laboratories, human-cloning
experiments already may be well under way, Dr. Martin told a recent breakfast
gathering attended by some of the world's outstanding clinical and basic-science
researchers in genetics, immunology and molecular biology.

    The Globe and Mail had invited the scientists to talk about the morals and
ethics required to frame the relentless advance of biomedical research.

    Britain has now taken the step to the leading edge. The U.S. National
Institutes of Health has just begun to finance research using surplus human
embryos from in vitro fertilization clinics (manufacturing embryos remains
prohibited), which the new Bush administration is being strongly lobbied to
halt.

    The Canadian government, wishy-washy to a fault, twice has backed away from
regulatory legislation of any kind, relying on a voluntary moratorium by the
biomedical community that may well have served to drive research underground. In
any event, Canadian scientists have described human embryo-cell research in the
country as having gone nowhere.

    The publicly funded Canadian Institutes of Health Research (the reincarnated
Medical Research Council) has a committee working on research guidelines. A
Health Canada discussion paper given media attention this week says the
government may permit therapeutic cloning similar to the British model when it
finally gets around to making laws to govern human reproductive technology.

    Religious groups, with the Roman Catholic Church in the forefront,
immediately announced their opposition.

    A brief look at the science before we get to The Globe's breakfast:

    Dolly the sheep was cloned in Scotland four years ago. This month,
scientists announced the cloning of ANDi the rhesus monkey (named for "inserted
DNA") in Oregon. Mice and other forms of life have been cloned in university and
private labs around the world.

    This is how it works: The nucleus is removed from a fertilized egg to be
replaced by a new cell nucleus from the tissue of the "parent" animal (or
"brother" or "sister" - the language hasn't yet found the right, comfortable
word) in a process called somatic cell nuclear transfer. The new, cloned egg is
then grown into an embryo.

    Within the embryo are stem cells, the body's master cells that go on to
diversify into organs, bones, nerves, muscles, skin and blood. Researchers want
to understand, using the knowledge of genetic codes, how stem cells can be grown
into new organs and body parts that can replace those that are diseased or
genetically disordered.

    In Britain, before the House of Lords passed amendments this week to the
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act, scientists were restricted to research
on fertilization, contraception and congenital disorders using existing, surplus
embryos.

    British researchers are still expected to rely on surplus embryos rather
than to create new ones. But the legal authority now exists, and the limits on
research have been lifted.

    Against this backdrop is an engulfing debate over both the ethical issues of
creating life as "disposable organic material" - as one British church leader
has termed it - and the scientific issues of whether devoting so many resources
to genetic research is going down the wrong path and raising invalid public
expectations.

    And, of course, there is the worry about the Creator and for-profit
corporate interest in what can be done with our bodies.

    To date, private companies, universities and charitable organizations
working to eradicate various diseases and disorders have filed patents on
127,000 genetic bits of the human body - the gene sequences and chemical codes
that are the software of life. The race to buy life, it has been called.

    The scientists who met Globe journalists for breakfast were in Toronto to
serve as jurors for medical science's prestigious Gairdner Award, known as the
Baby 'Bel because many winners subsequently receive the Nobel Prize.

    The group included Harvard medical dean Joseph Martin; Australian
immunologist Peter Doherty; Sir Keith Peters, regius professor of physic
(medicine) at Cambridge University; Harvard surgeon Judah Folkman; Judith Hall,
clinical geneticist at the University of British Columbia; and Alan Bernstein,
president of the Canadian Institutes for Health Research, the pre-eminent agency
for funding medical research in Canada.

    John Dirks, president of the Gairdner Foundation and former dean of medicine
at University of Toronto, was also at the breakfast.

    The job of the Gairdner Award jurors, Dr. Dirks said, "will be to decide
what ideas are important and what will last." It will be interesting to
speculate on what values are embodied in the selection of this year's winner,
whose name will be announced this spring.

    What they had to say, in sum, was this:

    * The biggest obstacle to growing cloned embryos into human beings is that
there is not a mass market for it. Yet. Which is not the same as saying there
isn't a market.

    * It is not the role of scientists to determine the ethical limits to
research or the application of genetic knowledge to the delivery of public
health. That is the role of legislatures and the public. The job of scientists,
Dr. Bernstein said, is to be canaries in the coal mine, saying: "Hey, there's an
issue coming up here, and we should have a full discussion."

    * The public and the news media generally have an inaccurate and exaggerated
- the best word might be naive - idea of where genetics research is leading and
what can be accomplished in treating and eradicating disease and other human
imperfections.

    * The debate over stem-cell research will probably end, or at least become
more muted, once researchers learn how to work usefully with adult stem cells
and no longer need embryos.

    * The primary ethical issue for medical scientists is not about genetics and
cloning but the rapidly widening gulf between the developed and developing
worlds in the availability of medical knowledge and treatment.

    The market for genetics research will be created by the demand for
genetically engineered human tissue (preferably a person's own) or genetic
pharmacology to replace or compensate for diseased and disordered parts of the
body. To that end, private corporations have invested billions of dollars in
biotechnology and applied for tens of thousands of patents (one French company
alone holds more than 38,000).

    But the reality, Sir Keith Peters said, is that the market for cloning
embryos for human life is not absent.

    "In most Western societies, there's a tremendous amount of hand-waving about
how human cloning is not going to happen, it's absolutely unacceptable, the
society will reject it.

    "And then I ask the question of my friends: 'Okay, your only child, age 21,
is killed in a motor accident and you had a chance to take a little tissue from
him or her and you're beyond reproductive age yourself almost certainly - would
you like to have another child, [because we] have this technology? And I've yet
to come across an answer no.

    "I think there are all kinds of reasons why we should not do that. But when
people are faced with it as a real possibility, the answer is yes."

    Why should science not do that? Because genetic determinism, however much it
comes eventually to be understood, will never replicate a human being.

    The parents who want their dead 21-year-old cloned will get a 21-year-old,
Sir Keith said. But they won't get back the 21-year-old child who died.

    Patricia Baird, the University of British Columbia geneticist whose report
from the 1993 Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies has been left by
Ottawa to gather dust, pointed out in a public Vancouver lecture this month that
genetic constitutions - even if they could be exactly replicated - can never
overcome human nurture, human experience and the million and one other
environmental factors that from conception on give shape to a human being.

    What of genetic manipulation, or the application of transgenic technology?
What do scientists say about therapies to deal with, for example, the genetic
mutation for cystic fibrosis identified in a human embryo?

    The CF gene has been known for 11 years, since it was discovered by
University of Toronto geneticist Lap-Chee Tsui.

    To date, there is no proven gene-based therapy to correct it, to replace the
mutated gene with one that is not.

    Dr. Bernstein asked whether a couple wanting a child free of the mutations
would be willing to undergo all the required genetic manipulations, most of
which would fail. (Maybe one in 50 would succeed, Dr. Doherty said. It took 300
tries to get Dolly.)

    Dr. Bernstein posed further questions. Should genetic screening for the
mutation become required? Do we move to some sort of societal consensus that all
fetuses identified with the mutation should be routinely aborted?

    And what would that say to people living with cystic fibrosis - the people
with a mutation that wasn't identified?

    To date, 950 mutations of the cystic-fibrosis gene have been identified,
only 30 of which are routinely screened for in laboratories. In 10 to 15 per
cent of affected patients, the mutation is not identified either during a
natural pregnancy or before an in vitro embryo is implanted.

    Dr. Bernstein said: "It's not up to the research community to decide whether
fetuses with the cystic fibrosis gene should be aborted. It's for the public
through their lawmakers to either regulate or legislate."

    Those questions, Dr. Doherty said, rest with the community values and
ethical considerations in a particular society.

    The scientists at The Globe breakfast spoke enthusiastically about
revolutionary advances in genetics-based medical knowledge. They talked about
developments in genetic pharmacology leading to drugs that will compensate for
genetic disorders.

    They predicted major therapeutic advances in the next few years for cancer,
diabetes, muscular dystrophy, coronary disease and neurological disorders such
as Alzheimer's.

    They also repeatedly tempered their enthusiasm with warnings against unreal
public expectations.

    "One of the things we've learned from the genetic revolution . . . is the
uniqueness of every individual and how much environment plays a role," Dr. Hall
said. "So although we can talk broadly about Alzheimer's, there are major
environmental factors and there will be individual susceptibilities because of
the interaction of various biochemicals."

    Dr. Baird, in her public lecture, put the issue succinctly with two
examples: There are 256 different identified risk factors for heart disease, and
a B.C. study of one million individuals followed from birth to age 25 found that
single-gene disorders occur in only 3.6 per 1,000 live births.

    "The vast majority of illnesses in humans are the result of complex
interactions, over time, between their genetic constitutions and [their
environment]," she said. "The evidence is overwhelming that the determinants of
the common chronic diseases of modern life are complex, interrelated, act over
time and are embedded in a social context."

    Which suggests that the breakthroughs in the treatment of humanity's
horrible disorders are not going to come from genetic discoveries alone but from
a partnership of medical scientists doing both basic and clinical research.

    Harvard's Judah Folkman said: "I continue to be fascinated by the absolute,
unexpected and surprising discoveries that come when clinicians work with basic
scientists which would not come at all if their work was separate."

    He cited as an example the isolation by basic researchers of an enzyme in
hemangiomas - benign facial tumours that appear at birth and usually disappear
by age 7 or 8. Clinical researchers then discovered that these tumours destroyed
thyroid hormones and are a leading factor in causing mental retardation in
children.

    Then Dr. Folkman spoke of the moral issue that is most on his mind: "All our
arguments about cloning and ethics will pale before the fact that we will be
judged by not worrying about places . . . that can't afford the treatments we
discover."

    He recalled one of his medical residents who returned from working in a
children's hospital in New Delhi. The resident described how every morning there
were 20 children on the hospital's doorstep who had died overnight from simple
diarrhea.

    "They don't do the fancy surgery we do," Dr. Folkman said. The assaults on
the frontiers of medical science have not been matched by assaults on miserly
foreign aid.

    Sir Keith said the endemic presence of diseases such as AIDS in Africa -
where, in some countries, 40 per cent of women arriving in clinics and hospitals
for childbirth are HIV-positive - puts all other medical ethical issues on the
back burner.

    (In an article in The Globe and Mail yesterday, Stephen Lewis, former
Canadian ambassador to the United Nations, called AIDS in southern Africa one of
the greatest human tragedies of our age on which the West is willfully turning
its back.)

    Dr. Doherty spoke of recently visiting the University of California's
veterinary school and seeing dogs on dialysis at a cost of $7,000 a year. "Think
about it. It's these people's money. They could just as well spend the money on
a new Cadillac every year, but they choose to spend it on their dog.

    "Ethically, it's appalling. Look at AIDS. In this country and in Australia
and in the U.S., everyone gets triple drug therapy. In Africa, . . . they can't
afford these drugs."

    At a guess, there will be more public fuss in the West about the Creator.

The panel

   Dr. Alan Bernstein has been a molecular and medical genetics professor at the
University of Toronto since 1984. He has made key contributions to the study of
embryonic development, hematopoiesis, cancer, the cardiovascular system, gene
therapy, and mammalian development. He is the president of the Canadian
Institutes for Health Research.

Dr. Peter Doherty, who originally studied veterinary medicine in Australia, is
now chairman of the department of immunology at St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital in Memphis and a pathology professor at the University of Tennessee,
Memphis. He won a Gairdner award in 1986 and the Nobel Prize for physiology in
1996.

Dr. Judah Folkman developed the first implantable pacemaker and discovered
anti-angiogenesis, the eradication of tumours by cutting off their blood supply.
Before devoting himself to research, the Cleveland native became a professor of
surgery at Harvard Medical School in 1967 and served as surgeon-in-chief at
Children's Hospital Medical Center in Boston for 14 years. He received the
Gairdner in 1991.

Dr. Judith Hall is a clinical geneticist and the head of the pediatrics
departments at the University of British Columbia and B.C.'s Children's
Hospital. Born in Boston, her main areas of research are human congenital
anomalies, including the genetics of short stature and monozygotic (identical)
twins. She is an officer of the Order of Canada.

Dr. Joseph Martin, born in Bassano, Alta., is the dean of Harvard Medical
School. His specialties include the molecular genetics of neurodegenerative
disease. His early work led to the discovery of the genetic marker for
Huntington's disease. He won the Abraham Flexner Award for distinguished service
to medical education in 1999.

Sir Keith Peters is the Regius Professor of Physic (medicine) at the University
of Cambridge. His research interests include diseases of the kidneys and blood
vessels and immunological mechanisms in disease. He is a fellow of Christ's
College, Cambridge, and served on the Advisory Council on Science and Technology
from 1987 to 1990.

The Gairdner Foundation

   Dr. John Dirks is president of the Toronto-based Gairdner Foundation, which
presents an annual international award for excellence in medical science. A
native of Winnipeg, he became the dean of medicine at U of T in 1987 and is
currently a professor emeritus of medicine there. His work is concentrated in
renal pathophysiology. He has served on the Medical Research Council of Canada
and received the medical award of the Kidney Foundation of Canada in 1985.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              387 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 23, 2001 Tuesday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: MONEY & MARKETS; YESTERDAY'S MARKETS; Pg. B21

LENGTH: 527 words

HEADLINE: Biotechs ease pain in Toronto, N.Y. as high techs slide;
Retreat by Nortel, JDS, Microsoft, Oracle;
nudge benchmark stock indexes into red

BYLINE: RICHARD BLOOM

BODY:

    Biotechnology stocks were propelled into the spotlight as traders reacted to
a U.S. court ruling in favour of Amgen Inc. But technology stocks failed to
build on last week's rally as investors digested a profit warning from Dell
Computer Corp., and took profits after gains last week.

    On Friday, a U.S. federal judge ruled that Amgen rival Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc. had infringed three of Amgen's patents on its anti-anemia drug,
Epogen.

    The judge ruled that Amgen's broadest patent, which covered the composition
of Epogen's active ingredient, erythropoietin, "is valid, enforceable, and
literally infringed." Erythropoietin boosts the production of red blood cells.

    The ruling impressed analysts covering Amgen and the biotechnology sector.
Amgen's investment rating was upgraded by Merrill Lynch & Co. Inc., Banc of
America and Morgan Stanley Dean Witter. The stock jumped 12.7 per cent to $67.63
(U.S.).

    Investor enthusiasm after Amgen's court victory boosted the Nasdaq Stock
Market's biotechnology index yesterday, helping offset some high-tech losses on
Nasdaq's composite index. The composite finished the day down 12.47 points to
2,757.91, hurt by drops in market heavyweights Dell, Oracle Corp., Microsoft
Corp., JDS Uniphase Corp. and WorldCom Inc. For a short period during the
morning session, the index was in the black, reaching an intraday high of
2,789.63.

    The Amgen announcement was also good news for biotechs in Canada, helping
the Toronto Stock Exchange's consumer products subindex, home to Bay Street's
biotechs, climb 1.64 per cent. Gainers included QLT Inc., Biovail Corp. and
Biomira Inc. The upturn brought a ray of light to the recently battered sector,
which is down nearly 15 per cent from the 52-week high it touched last February.

    Like its U.S. cousin, the sector helped offset high-tech declines on Bay
Street, and helped alleviate a slide on the TSE 300-stock composite index. The
benchmark closed down 40.12 points to 9,120.95 as investors took profits
following last week's upward-movement of Nortel Networks Corp., Ballard Power
Systems Inc., Celestica Inc. and Sierra Wireless Inc.

    "Now people are sort of sobering up after a couple of days of rally,
especially in techs," Richard Long, senior vice-president at Black Investment
Management in Toronto, told Reuters News Agency. "Now you are getting the
weakness in the techs and rotation back into the banks and maybe the oil
stocks."

    On Wall Street, the Dow Jones industrial average lost 9.35 points to
10,578.24, while the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index rose 0.36 points to
1,342.90.

    Corporate earnings and the economy remained key focal points of interest
yesterday. A slew of companies in both Canada and the United States are slated
to release corporate results this week. Market watchers in both countries are
also awaiting some key economics data.

    On the Canadian Venture Exchange, home to Canada's small-capitalization
stocks, the CDNX index rose 4.53 points to 3,154.81.

New York odd lots

    Odd-lot trades made Friday through the New York Stock Exchange:

   Customer purchases5,864,881
    Short sales444,120
   Other sales7,045,192
    Total sales7,489,312

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              390 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 12, 2001 Friday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 710 words

HEADLINE: Science builds a better guinea pig;
Genetically altered monkey raises hope;
for medical-research breakthroughs

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM, MEDICAL REPORTER

BODY:

    Scientists say they have for the first time genetically modified a monkey
with high hopes of its being a missing link between people and primates for
medical research.

    The three-month-old male rhesus monkey carries the green fluorescent gene
from a jellyfish in its DNA. Its creators in Portland, Ore., say the monkey
shows that researchers should be able to insert genes that cause human disease
into our primate cousins for use as the ultimate guinea pigs.

    The Oregon team first experimented by inserting a green fluorescent
jellyfish gene into monkey DNA because the glowing results would be hard to miss
if the procedure worked. And while the young monkey ANDi - "inserted DNA"
spelled backward - is not yet green himself, the researchers think that may just
be a matter of time.

    As investigation into genetic and stem-cell therapies explodes, scientists
increasingly need human-animal hybrids for testing.

    "These primate animals accelerate the day when these innovative cures are
available to everyone," reproductive biologist Gerald Schatten said.

    Dr. Schatten, of the Oregon Regional Primate Research Center, is senior
author of the report, published today in the journal Science.

    While adding human genes to common lab animals such as rodents has
revolutionized understanding of ways diseases are caused, those are not the best
models to evaluate the safety or value of a potential cure for patients.

    But primates given human genetic traits linked to Alzheimer's could receive
the Alzheimer's vaccine that Canadian researchers recently found effective in
mice, Dr. Schatten suggested.

    "Wouldn't you rather see if these things work on a closer cousin of humans
first rather than trying it on a loved one?" he asked.

    A primate research model would certainly raise hopes for gene therapies,
which have not lived up to expectations so far. But Janet Rossant, a senior
scientist at the Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute at Mount Sinai Hospital in
Toronto, pointed out that adding human disease genes to another species is only
half the story of what's needed to create any animal research model.

    "You also have to be able to find a way to remove genes," said Dr. Rossant,
who has for two decades worked with genetically altered mice. To add a gene from
another species without removing a primate's own corresponding gene could cause
complications of its own, she explained.

    Dr. Schatten also acknowledged that at the moment, scientists have no way of
controlling or predicting where in the DNA an added gene might land, meaning the
genetic extra could interfere with the way the animal functions generally.

    Researchers who reviewed the report for Science also questioned how easy it
would be to produce genetically altered primates.

    The procedure is cumbersome, they concluded, and it is not yet clear if it
is in fact "a glowing success."

    First, Dr. Schatten and his colleagues had to genetically engineer a mouse
virus as an agent to carry the marker jellyfish gene into the eggs of potential
mother monkeys. In all, they altered 224 eggs, which they then fertilized with
monkey sperm, creating 40 embryos. They chose 20 of the altered embryos to
implant in surrogate mother monkeys. Five pregnancies produced three births.

    Two males, twins, were stillborn, leaving only ANDi as proof the procedure
is possible.

    Dr. Schatten said it is not clear why the twins - which tend to be high-risk
pregnancies for rhesus monkeys - did not survive.

    The hair and toenails of the stillborn twins, unlike ANDi's, did glow green
under fluorescent light.

    Dr. Schatten said he has good reason to suspect ANDi may yet turn green with
age: Calves that received the jellyfish gene took a year to show their colour,
he said.

    And it will be another five years to know whether ANDi can pass on the
jellyfish gene to future offspring through his sperm.

    The new role in cutting-edge research for primates - cute, cuddly and
closely resembling the human species - is bound to be controversial.

    But Dr. Schatten said he suspects "the public will accept a few of these
animals being specially bred" if they help bring new treatments to patients
sooner.

    "We would not insert a gene to make a sick monkey unless there was a
treatment to try and cure it," he said.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              393 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 4, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: THE GLOBE REVIEW; Pg. R5

LENGTH: 960 words

HEADLINE: A dramatic gamble;
With Zadie's Shoes, brothers Adam;
and Jordan Pettle deliver a play;
inspired by their family's affinity;
for risk, MICHAEL POSNER writes

BYLINE: MICHAEL POSNER

BODY:

    Those who are convinced that everything in the end is genetic might consider
the curious antecedents of Adam Pettle's new play, Zadie's Shoes - opening on
Tuesday and playing until Feb. 4 at Toronto's Factory Theatre.

    The shoes in the title derive from a Pettle family legend. According to the
story, Jack, a paternal great-grandfather in France, apparently developed
something of a gambling addiction: He actually lost his shoes in a card game.
The young woman he was courting at the time refused to accept him in marriage
until he signed a pledge renouncing his vile and debilitating habit. Witnessed
by a rabbi, he signed.

    Grandfather Roy, it is reliably reported, was likewise not averse to a
little betting action. And father Alvin, a Toronto obstetrician and
gynecologist, is fluent in the foreign language of the Racing Forum, the Bible
of horse players everywhere. Son Adam, for his part, acknowledges that he, too,
has wrestled with the demons of gambling, also at the track. (In fact, he heard
his great-grandfather's footwear-as-collateral story from his dad on the way to
the races one day.)

    Meanwhile, Adam's older brother, Jordan, an actor who plays the lead role of
Benjamin in Zadie's Shoes, allows that he has a well-developed taste for poker.
"It's definitely in my blood," he says. "Playing this character is like playing
a combination of my dad, my brother and myself. He comes from a very personal
place."

    "Gambling has been a problem," Adam concedes. "The play's an exploration of
that."

    As an addiction, Adam notes, gambling is particularly insidious because it
takes little visible physical toll. "With alcohol or drugs, you know there's a
point where you're going to kill youself," says Adam. "With gambling, as long as
you have money, it's a slow burn. And you can rationalize that it's just money:
'Other people spend $50,000 on a boat. I choose to spend it at the racetrack.
This is my money. This is what I work for.' Of course, that's not what it's
about at all."

    So there's the gaming gene, a tantalizing lead for researchers of the human
genome project.

    The family's theatrical strand of DNA is a little harder to isolate,
although one uncle apparently acted in radio commercials during the Second World
War.

    But whatever the genetic predilection for drama, the brothers Pettle have
been drawn to the stage since their high-school days in the Toronto
neighbourhood of Leaside.

    Jordan, now 29, went on to graduate from Montreal's National Theatre School
and spent four seasons at the Stratford Festival. Adam, 27, nursed similar
ambitions, but was forced to take another avenue.

    Six years ago, while was studying acting at Dalhousie University in Halifax,
what he thought was a swollen gland turned out to be an aggressive strain of
thyroid cancer. To remove the tumour, which was wrapped around a nerve in Adam's
throat, surgeons had to cut his vocal chords. The thespian baritone voice is
gone now, replaced by a gentle, higher-pitched rasp. It was during the long
recuperative period, when at times he could not speak at all, that Adam started
writing seriously.

    "I was very angry, angry about everything," Pettle recalls. "I never felt
sick with the disease. I felt sick because of the radiation treatment." Writing,
as it turned out, became another, no less beneficial, form of therapy.

    Now, out of that anger has emerged a promising theatrical voice. His therapy
program, in fact, provided the inspiration for Therac 25, a one-hour play in
which he acted with Kristen Thompson. Directed by Jordan, it played to sold-out
audiences during SummerWorks, an annual Toronto program of short plays three
years ago. The title is both the name of a ward at Toronto's Princess Margaret
Hospital and a computerized radiation-therapy machine.

    Redirecting his dramatic energies after treatment, the younger Pettle was
one of three students admitted to the playwright's program at the National
Theatre School. An earlier, shorter version of Zadie's Shoes was written there
as his graduation project, with his older brother in mind.

    When Adam returned from Montreal, he won a Canada Council grant to be a
playwright in residence at the Canadian Stage Company. There, dramaturge Iris
Turcotte urged him to reconstruct and expand Zaide. Two drafts and one reading
later, Factory Theatre artistic director Ken Gass decided to add it to the
2000-2001 season.

    In it, Benjamin's relationship with Ruth, also a cancer patient, is put at
risk because of his gambling addiction. A chance meeting in synagogue with Eli
(Paul Soles), a Holocaust survivor, gives Benjamin a chance at both financial
and moral redemption. The play, directed by Jackie Maxwell, also stars Kelli
Fox, Randy Hughson, Torri Higginson and June Mills-Cockell.

    Now Adam has begun work on a new play, Sunday Father, co-commissioned by
Canadian Stage and a theatre in the English city of Manchester.

    Funding permitting, it will premiere at the 2002 Commonwealth Games in
Manchester. And it, too, he allows, contains autobiographical elements. "I'm not
a huge research guy," Pettle says (although, commissioned to write another play
by Theatre Direct, he is investigating the 1999 murder of Toronto teenager
Dimitri Baranovsky).

    Meanwhile, Adam and Jordon, both unmarried, are planning a Florida vacation
when Zadie closes. Then Jordan is off to Edmonton to play Mercutio in a Citadel
Theatre production of Romeo and Juliet. And down the road, they'd like to launch
their own theatre company - a fraternal venue where they both could produce,
write, direct and act.

    Can they make it happen? On the strength of the track records to date, it's
probably a safe bet.
Zadie's Shoes opens Jan. 9 at Factory Theatre in Toronto. For ticket information
call 416-504-9971.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              394 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2001 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             January 1, 2001 Monday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; UNDER THE INFLUENCE; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1913 words

HEADLINE: Drug research walks thin line;
Defining ethical boundaries critical;
when academic, corporate goals coincide

BYLINE: ANNE McILROY

DATELINE: OTTAWA

BODY:

   First in a series of four articles about the growing ties between drug
companies and the medical community.

    Dr. X didn't plan to tell the patients in his experimental cancer trial that
he stood to make a fortune if they proved him right.

    In his proposed experiment, patients would have taken a new test that would
tell them how deadly their cancer would become under the supervision of the
scientist who not only founded the firm that funded the testing but was one of
its principal shareholders. They found out about his financial interest only
because of the careful work of a committee at McGill University charged with
protecting the rights of the human guinea pigs who agree to try experimental
therapies.

    The McGill trial is no longer unusual. The wall between the academic and
corporate world is crumbling under the weight of rich pharmaceutical and biotech
companies and the money they can bring to underfunded universities, and to
researchers who see the chance to earn as much as their counterparts in the
private sector.

    Pharmaceutical and biotech companies now fund 16 to 30 per cent of all
research at big medical schools such as McGill, Queen's, and the universities of
Toronto and British Columbia.
   Critics charge that researchers are more likely to approve drugs of the
companies that pay for the studies, but others say the collaboration between
academic researchers and pharmaceutical companies has led to powerful new drugs
to fight disease.

    The proposal Dr. X prepared for the research ethics board at McGill
University contained a draft consent form for the volunteers but said nothing
about his financial stake in the company.

    Dr. Denis Cournoyer, director of McGill University Health Centre's research
ethics office, said he told Dr. X it was his duty to inform his test subjects in
writing that he is the founding scientist of the firm and one of its principal
shareholders. (He won't identify the researcher or his company because of
confidentiality rules.) Doctors who run clinical trials are responsible for
their patients' care, and a large financial stake in the outcome of an
experiment could cloud their judgment.

    "If they know the person running the study is likely to benefit, then they
can judge if it still makes sense for them. It gives them all the elements they
need to make a decision," Dr. Cournoyer says.

    Dr. X revised his consent form, and the subjects went ahead with his trial.

    Managing potential conflicts of interest has become a daily reality in
research labs across the country as professors rush to bring new, possibly
life-saving products to market before the competition or help find a market
niche for a product similar to many already available for sale.

    Ties between researchers and the pharmaceutical companies have led to
controversy. University of Toronto researcher Nancy Olivieri faced an ugly
internal battle and a lawsuit when she published data unfavourable to the drug
company that funded her work. The dispute over her statements continues.

    There is increasing evidence, including a study done by a University of
Toronto researcher, that links with drug companies change the way scientists
work, making them more likely to approve drugs they have been asked to evaluate.
There is also documented evidence of how drug companies set up experiments to
get the kind of results they are looking for.

    In the United States, the worst-case scenario happened in September of 1999,
when a young patient died in a clinical trial run by a scientist who stood to
make millions if his gene therapy worked.

    The young man's father won an out-of-court settlement, claiming he had been
duped by scientists who cared more about profits than safety. There were calls
for stringent new rules to prevent researchers who stand to profit from an
experiment from having anything to do with patients who agree to take part. The
debate over the issue now dominates the pages of medical journals and university
board meetings.

    In Canada, the research ethics boards in place at every university are
wrestling privately with those same questions. Should a scientist who owns a
company have direct contact with patients testing the discovery that could make
him wealthy? Should universities ask their best professors to disclose holdings
in a pharmaceutical company that pays for their research? Should they have to
disclose their corporate ties when they write articles for scientific journals
about their work?

    There is a national consensus within universities that they have to be open
and transparent about commercial relationships, that academic freedom cannot be
compromised and that drug companies who push for the right to veto the
publication of research must be told no.

    But on specifics, each university is feeling its way through the quagmire.
They all say their policies are evolving and are trying to balance the drive to
get industry money with protecting the rights of patients and researchers.

    What Dr. X didn't know is that if he had been a researcher at the University
of British Columbia, rather then McGill, he wouldn't have been required to
inform the patients of his financial interest.

    "We don't include that. We look very carefully at the experiment, but I am
not sure the corporate stuff makes a huge difference," Richard Spratley, the
associate vice-president of research at UBC, said.

    Queen's University doesn't ask whether researchers own shares in the company
that is paying for a clinical trial. McGill expects researchers to disclose
potential conflicts every year, but a senior university official concedes that
often they forget. The dean of the U of T's faculty of medicine says the
university is planning to consult faculty members next year about new rules
dealing with scientists who own equity in large pharmaceutical firms and spinoff
companies. Dr. David Naylor says many of these questions are potentially
explosive.

    "This is a huge area of attention for all of the world's health institutions
in the next few years."

    Other countries are well ahead of Canada in dealing with these issues, Mark
Bisby, director of programs of the Canadian Institutes for Health Information,
says. The CIHR, which replaced the Medical Research Council last year, oversees
federal government grants to researchers.

    "We don't have the tight, well-regulated systems of some countries.
Generally we feel that the ethics environment needs some additional work."

    Health Canada and the CIHR are planning to establish a new arm's-length
agency that would look at accrediting ethics review boards across the country.
The idea is to have national standards.

    Canadians may not be aware of how close academia and industry have grown
over the past 10 years.

    A few years ago, John Hoey, editor of the Canadian Medical Association
Journal, tried to enact a new policy. Only experts without ties to a drug
company would be able to write editorials about a product produced by the firm.
He found it too difficult to find qualified researchers who met the requirement.

    "There are very few researchers in Canada that aren't doing research in one
form or another for pharmaceutical companies."

    Medical schools are part of a larger trend of what some describe as our
"kept" universities. When the federal government cut back funding for basic
research in the eighties, universities began turning to the private sector to
keep their laboratories running. At the same time, the pharmaceutical industry
began pumping money into research, both on and off campuses. The industry now
funds 42 per cent of medical research in Canada. There has been new federal
money in the past few budgets, but most of it is tied to joint ventures with
industry.

    The culture of universities is changing. Some academics have embraced the
new relationship with private companies and are happy to start making the same
kind of money as their colleagues in the private sector. Others are wary.

    Researchers such as Ken Renton at Dalhousie University in Halifax say they
feel pressure from their superiors to land industry contracts, because the
academic institution takes upward of a 40-per-cent cut to cover overhead.

    "We are told all the time by everyone from the department heads to the deans
that we as individuals should be going after more contract-type research, no
matter what it is. This is because universities are desperate for money," Dr.
Renton, a professor of pharmacology, said.

    He says pharmaceutical companies try to get researchers to sign contracts
saying work can't be published without their approval. He's not interested.

    "Many of us will not sign."

    Richard Britten, a researcher at the Cross Cancer Institute at the
University of Alberta, is one of many academics and university officials who
blame the federal government for the growing dependence on drug-company money.

    "A lot of these problems would be circumvented by more federal funding for
research. At that point, it becomes an issue of personal choice rather than
necessity for the researcher. If you have choice, then you have a lot more
ability to exercise your own personal ethics. If you are forced into getting
money from pharmaceutical companies because you have to publish, then things
start inevitably to be eroded.

    "I'm not saying anyone is corrupt, but it is a subtle pressure."

    That pressure can change the way scientists work. Several studies have
indicated that researchers with close ties to the pharmaceutical industry are
more likely in general to approve drugs they have been asked to evaluate.

    One study, led by a University of Toronto professor and published in the New
England Journal of Medicine, found that 96 per cent of the researchers who
concluded it was safe had ties to the pharmaceutical industry. Only 37 per cent
of those who were critical of the medication had those same ties. Other studies
have found that researchers funded by the manufacturer were more likely to
conclude that a new drug therapy was better then one already on the market.

    Last month, another article in the New England Journal reported that
academic researchers doing clinical trials for drug companies may feel pressured
to follow the protocol designed by the corporation. It said there are documented
tricks for getting better results, including testing drugs in a population that
is younger and healthier then average, even if the medication is targeted at
older patients. Comparing a new drug with an insufficient dose of the competing
product can also lead to more impressive results.

    Drug companies may want to use different measuring sticks than researchers.
When James Kahn, a researcher at the University of California, studied a new
AIDS drug called Remune, he found that patients in the trial didn't get any
better. When he published those results, the company, Immune Response, sued him.
They argued that the research showed patients had less of the AIDS virus in
their blood after taking the medication. The lawsuit has not been settled.

    Dr. Britten, who is leaving Canada in June to go to the United States, says
if researchers are honest they will admit that working for a drug company subtly
changes their behaviour.

    "You realize you can't be dogmatic and say it is bad. You become a little
bit more cautious in your wording. Maybe yes, you do become a little bit
tainted, for lack of a better word."

The series

    Today: Research at any price?
   Tomorrow: Doctors' dilemma
   Wednesday: The CEO scientist
   Thursday: Charitable allies

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              396 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           December 28, 2000 Thursday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 531 words

HEADLINE: Discovery on blood could aid therapies;
Researchers find two types of stem cells

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM, MEDICAL REPORTER

BODY:

    Canadian scientists have made an intriguing discovery about the mechanics of
human blood that is bound to have an impact on everything from cancer treatments
to genetic therapies.

    Based on a complex experiment 15 years in the making, researchers at the
Hospital for Sick Children have learned that stem cells - mother cells within
bone marrow that give rise to the human blood system - are not created equally.

    After transplanting human stem cells into laboratory mice, researchers found
that one type of stem cell blossoms quickly, but produces new blood only for
about a month before disappearing. A second type of stem cell appears to lie
dormant for months before springing into action for a much longer period.

    Without knowing that both short- and long-term types of stem cells existed,
doctors have never made a distinction between the ones they target when
transplanting bone marrow in cancer or anemia patients.
   Also, they've never made a distinction between which cells they try to insert
corrective genes, or which stem cells they manipulate in experiments to grow new
human tissue and organs.

    The Sick Kids finding may, as a result, help explain why many of these
treatments have been less than successful.

    It also offers some hope there will be fewer failures in the future.

    "Because we always thought a stem cell is a stem cell is a stem cell, we did
not have the knowledge that some of these things would be better suited for
long-term re-populating cells than the short-term re-populating cells and vice
versa," Toronto geneticist John Dick, who led the Sick Kids research team, said.

    "Because the stem cells have different functions, the clinical use of these
cells will also be different."

    For cancer patients who withstand high chemotherapy doses and then undergo a
bone marrow transplant to save their battered blood systems, short-term,
fast-acting stem cells could help quickly generate the white blood cells that
bolster their vulnerable immune systems.

    Meanwhile, researchers interested in chemically coaxing stem cells to grow
into various organs and tissues for transplant, would probably be more
interested in the potential of long-term stem cells; as would scientists who
increasingly view stem cells as an effective agent to administer gene therapies.

    This month, for example, Los Angeles researchers began inserting artificial
genes that block the AIDS virus into stem cells that will be transplanted into
children with AIDS. The idea is that as the stem cells proliferate in the blood
system, they will transfer the HIV-resistance to all their offspring cells.

    Molecular biologists Ihor Lemischka of Princeton University and Craig Jordan
of the University of Kentucky, who reviewed the Canadian research to be
published in the January issue of Nature Immunology, wrote that the work was
"the most compelling characterization of human stem cells to date."

    Dr. Dick said the investigation is continuing to find out exactly how long
the two types of cells function. As well, the research team, including Guillermo
Guenechea, Olga Gan and Craig Dorrell, also hopes to determine the ratio of
short- to long-term stem cells in children versus adults.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              400 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           December 19, 2000 Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH; LETTERS FROM ACADEMIA; Pg. R6

LENGTH: 1125 words

HEADLINE: Need info on rare diseases? Check the Web

BODY:

    After several years of tests and consultations with specialists, you finally
learn the diagnosis: You or someone you know has a rare, hereditary condition
that strikes just one in 20,000 people.

    You've never heard of this disorder before and have no idea where to find
out about it. Your family doctor - and perhaps even a specialist - won't have
the in-depth knowledge you seek. The only written information you uncover is a
brief paragraph in a medical textbook. Finally, how can you join a support group
for this condition, when those affected are so few and far between?

    People with so-called rare disorders are often in desperate need of
information about treatment, research advances and, in many cases, simple, basic
knowledge about their condition, says Maureen Gaetz-Faubert, who founded the
Canadian Organization for Rare Disorders in 1995.

    After all, would you expect your doctor to know about Goodpasture Syndrome
or Maple Syrup Urine Disease? Would you expect your doctor or pharmacist to
provide much information about bullous pemphigoid, a rare, autoimmune, chronic
skin disorder that involves blistering?

    We tend to underestimate the overall impact of these illnesses and
conditions, Ms. Gaetz-Faubert adds. "There are about 6,000 rare disorders
[defined as affecting fewer than one in 20,000 people]. Each individual disorder
may only have an impact on a small number of people but, taken together, they
affect about three million Canadians."

    She herself has Ehlers Danlos Syndrome, a connective-tissue disease that
causes fatigue, pain and poor immune functioning. She sought help for her
symptoms for 29 years before receiving a proper diagnosis from a geneticist at
the University of Alberta.

    Ms. Gaetz-Faubert's situation illustrates the first major obstacle faced by
a person with a rare disorder: getting a proper diagnosis. According to one U.S.
survey, it can take up to five years for patients with rare diseases to be
correctly diagnosed. Even then, appropriate care and treatment are often delayed
until specialized clinical programs and professionals are tracked down.

    Accurate information is key to getting appropriate referrals, avoiding
unnecessary tests and receiving proper, timely treatment. That's why
rare-disease patients often become experts - by necessity - on their own
situation.

    Fortunately for today's health consumer, the Internet offers a vast amount
of health information, including these helpful Web sites on rare disorders:

   Canadian Organization for Rare Disorders (www.cord.ca/) - With a database of
about 150 patient-support groups and disease-specific agencies across Canada,
CORD can link you with others who share your health concerns. These groups
typically supply pamphlets and brochures about the disorder, as well as regular
newsletters that provide information about local support groups, fundraising and
educational events, research advances and interviews with specialists.

   National Organization for Rare Disorders, Inc. (www.rarediseases.org/) - This
U.S. federation of more than 140 voluntary health organizations offers extensive
information, including three searchable databases - for 1,100 rare diseases, for
more than 1,200 organizations, and for 900 so-called orphan drugs. Links to
Canadian resources are included.

   Office of Rare Diseases (http://raredisease.info.nih.gov/ord/) - The U.S.
National Institutes of Health provide this Web site, which features information
on 6,000 rare diseases, current research, genetics information and support
groups.

   Rare Genetic Diseases in Children
(http://mcrcr2.med.nyu.edu/murphp01/homenew.htm) - A directory of Web sites from
organizations and individuals on genetic diseases or disease families.

    IODE Genetics Resource Centre, based at the London Health Science Centre in
London, Ont., provides free information for consumers and doctors on genetically
based diseases (which account for the majority of rare disorders). The centre
also maintains a directory of genetic-related support groups in Canada.Call
1-800-243-8416 Monday to Thursday, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.


Reprinted from Health News, the medical letter of the University of Toronto
Faculty of Medicine. For information, call (416) 324-9191

Why some people are medically disenfranchised

      Unlike diseases that strike large numbers of people, those that affect
just a tiny minority are poorly funded when it comes to research, new drug
development and genetic testing.
Research: Funding is hard to obtain because money generally flows to study
diseases with a greater impact on public health. Also, it's complicated to
organize a randomized, controlled trial for a rare condition because the people
being studied are often scattered over a wide geographical area.

    "An estimated 20 million Americans with more than 5,000 rare disorders find
themselves medically disenfranchised, and falling through the cracks of the
health-care system, because their afflictions are not identified as major
public-health threats warranting targeted research efforts," writes Abbey
Meyers, executive director of the U.S. National Organization for Rare Disorders.

    However, new computer technology is making it easier to recruit patients for
studies of rare diseases. Recently, doctors and computer experts at the Mayo
Medical School Clinic and Foundation in Rochester, Minn., developed a
computer-based disease-tracking system that can identify all patients with a
particular disease and enter their information into a secure, central database.

    Although the system was specifically developed to study Mayo Clinic patients
with cholangiocarcinoma, a rare cancer of the bile ducts, the researchers say
the software could be applied more broadly to facilitate clinical trials of rare
disorders.
Drugs: Pharmaceutical companies are unlikely to focus on rare diseases when
developing new drugs because of the small number of patients and limited
potential for profit.

    To address this problem, the U.S. government passed the Orphan Drug Act in
1983. It provides federal subsidies to encourage pharmaceutical companies to
develop drugs that otherwise wouldn't be commercially viable. Similar programs
exist in Japan and Europe, but not Canada, although the policy is under review,
according to Health Canada.
Genetic therapies: As the genes for rare disorders are discovered, more affected
families will seek testing. However, as with drugs, genetic tests and therapies
for rare diseases are often scientifically possible but not commercially viable.

    "The pharmaceutical industry is unlikely to see profit potential in
supplying a small patient population, especially when only a single injection
may be needed over a lifetime to correct the genetic defect," says a 1999
editorial in Nature Genetics.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              401 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            December 11, 2000 Monday

SECTION: ADVERTISING SPECIAL REPORT; British Columbia's Technology Industries;
Pg. T1

LENGTH: 1846 words

HEADLINE: B.C. on cusp of high-tech boom;
High-tech opportunity is soaring above the mountains, lakes;
and forests of British Columbia. Life is beautiful, indeed.

BODY:

     British Columbia is on the verge of an era of high-tech growth as never
before seen in this province. So says a number of this industry's executives who
once participated in the phenomenal successes of Kanata, Ontario and who have
relocated to B.C. to realize the potential they see here.

    Once a province whose contributions to the national economy were primarily
derived from its abundant natural resources, British Columbia has in recent
years emerged as a fertile ground for high technology. A total of 52,000 people
are now employed in high tech jobs, a figure that last year increased a full 10
per cent. Based on projections, by the end of 2010 this industry is now expected
to emerge as one of, if not the leading economic sector in British Columbia. Now
after a decade and a half of industry growth that has outstripped all other
aspects of the provincial economy, B.C.'s multi-faceted technology industry is
ripe with success stories and offers a bounty of new economy opportunities.

    A recent study compiled by Deloitte & Touche notes that 10 of Canada's top
50 fastest growing technology companies including the number one fastest
growing, Pivitol Corporation, are based in British Columbia. Pivotal earned its
number one position by achieving phenomenal revenue growth of nearly 35,000 per
cent in the four years 1995 to 1999. Based on the Canadian study, British
Columbia is second only to Ontario for producing rapid-growth companies. A
related study shows that five of the top 10 fastest growing new companies, those
under the age of five years, also come from B.C.

    George Hunter, Executive Director of the B.C. Technology Industries
Association says his organization has seen its membership more than double in
the past two years. "B.C. now has a multitude of firms leading in their industry
sectors," says Hunter. "We see a lot of innovators. They're competing at a world
class level in power technologies, new media, biomedical, wireless and software
as well as in the creation of products that facilitate e business and the growth
of the Internet."

    Leaders in power technologies such as Westport Innovations, Ballard Power
Systems Inc, Xantrex, Questair and others are very much on the forefront of
their fields, creating systems that increase efficiency and drastically reduce
emissions. In new media there's Electronic Arts Canada, creators of the world's
best selling interactive video games and Credo Interactive whose 3D animation
software is used worldwide by companies such as Disney Interactive, Phillips and
other corporate clients. Systems integrators including Information Services
Management BC, SFG Technologies and Sierra Systems among others are helping
governments and corporations around the world make the most of today's
technologies. And still others IT factories create the nuts and bolts of new-age
wireless and Internet communications - technologies that are forever changing
our lives. And all of this is going on around the province, including on
Vancouver Island and in the Okanagan, an area once known only for its famous
lakes, orchards and wineries, but which now has earned a new nickname: Silicon
Vineyards.

    Al Hildebrandt, CEO of QHR Technologies Inc., a provider of human resource
management solutions for the health care industry, is also President of the
Okanagan High Tech Council. "We've seen a number of local companies in a variety
of sectors making inroads into big US markets," he says, and points to Kelowna's
Bridges.com (#9 of 50 Fastest Growing Technology companies).

    It provides online career planning tools to North American middle and
secondary schools. Earlier this year Bridges.com acquired Careerware from ISM, a
100 per cent-owned IBM subsidiary, and as a result now has 175 employees. The
Okanagan made the news again when US-based Packateer paid $80-million (US) for
Workfire.com, a Kelowna-based company that is making technology to enhance the
speed of the Internet. Meanwhile, Kelowna's privately held Total Care
Technologies, makers of specialized staff scheduling systems for more than 300
healthcare organizations in five countries around the world, earned spot number
37 of Canada's top 50.

    Back in the bustling Lower Mainland, business is big and getting bigger
across all sectors. Vancouver's Seagate Software employs 750 employees (1300
worldwide) who work in the company's downtown headquarters. With revenues of
$126-million and seven million units of licences shipped, Seagate Software says
its on the leading edge of the rapidly growing enterprise-reporting industry.
Its software enables organizations to access, analyze, report and share
corporate data and information. Like many of the area's success stories, Seagate
traces its roots to homegrown ingenuity, drive and support.

    Hunter says that these days readily available support encourages
entrepreneurs to develop technology-based businesses here. Canada's biggest
biotech firm, QLT Inc., is a number-one example of one that has grown from
startup to worldwide fame.

    QLT chief Dr. Julia Levy, recently recognized as Ernst and Young's Pacific
Canada Entrepreneur of the Year, can be proud to say that QLT is one of only 20
profitable publicly-traded biotech companies in the world. Not only that, it has
a market cap in the neighbourhood of $5 billion. The company has recently
launched its new photodynamic therapy (medicine that uses light-activated drugs
to treat disease) called Visudyne. Ranked among the top-five biotech products to
date, Visudyne was recently selected by Popular Science as one of the 100 most
remarkable new products, technological developments and scientific achievements
of the year. Visudyne has been approved for the treatment of age related macular
degeneration (AMD) in 25 countries including Canada and the U.S., making it the
only treatment in a highly visible and potentially lucrative market.

    The success of QLT and others has heightened venture capitalist interest and
incubator support of promising startups.

    Hunter says that newcomers such as biotech firm Chromos Molecular, which
originated in 1995, get the help they need.

    Chromos Molecular president and CEO Alistair Duncan says that since going
public, Chromos has generated a market cap of about $150-million. His company's
artificial chromosome expression system ("ACes") has multiple applications in
such fields as gene therapy and the production of protein-based drugs.

    Well backed, the company has developed corporate and academic relationships
in Europe, across Canada and in the U.S.

    "We started Chromos Molecular in B.C. because, of the five founders, three
are residents and have families here," says Duncan. "There is a great
entrepreneurial environment here that is supported by a strong academic
community. Access to start-up capital and qualified entry level technical
personnel also add to B.C.'s appeal." But like many of this area's top chiefs,
Duncan says what he he'd like to see is a greater pool of experienced managers.
Deneene Ross is part of the human resources team of Creo Products Inc., one of
BC's largest technology companies.

    "It's easy to attract prospective employees from across Canada and around
the world," she says. "Vancouver fits the bill for people who desire a balanced
lifestyle that includes doing the work they love and being able to ski, sail and
mountain bike in the same community." Creo's employees develop digital printing
technologies for the graphic arts industry, a bustling enterprise that this year
helped the company generate revenue of $453-million (US). Ross adds that Creo
has recruited employees from all across Canada, throughout the United States and
as far away as Britain and South Africa.

    "Vancouver's mild climate and its abundance of outdoor recreational
opportunities, many available within an hour from the heart of downtown, make up
for the lower income taxes and higher salaries that might be found in the United
States," she says. "But if they're focused only on climbing the corporate ladder
and making the biggest salary, they may find it elsewhere."

    Like many local companies Creo values its human resources above all. Last
year the Quality Council of British Columbia honoured Creo with its "People
Focus" award for the company's human resource planning, participatory
environment, continuous education and employee satisfaction.

    At nearby Electronic Arts Canada, company president and general manager
Glenn Wong acknowledges that his company goes above and beyond to attract and
retain the best and brightest. Its brand new $75-million-studio is home to 550
employees who have at their disposal amenities that include a gym, research
centre and library, basketball court, soccer pitch, cafes and more.

    Seagate Software's Michael Kavanagh, director of its worldwide recruiting,
has taken a similar approach and says: "Seagate Software believes that financial
incentives aren't the only factor that attracts great employees. Added touches
such as daily fruit baskets, subsidized beverages and lunches create a positive
environment."

    The software company even provides its staff with an employee cabin at
Whistler.

    But the bottom line appears that it's not just company perks or B.C.'s
inviting lifestyle and culture that attracts talent here.

    Moreover, it's something more intrinsic to human nature that appeals most -
talented people like to work on exciting projects alongside other high calibre
individuals.

    Creo's Deneene Ross says: "A vibrant high tech community not only acts as an
incubator for new companies as it did for Creo - it's also a magnet for new
engineering talent from outside the area."

    Despite its natural splendor, most are aware the province does have its
issues, the primary one being its political landscape.

    But George Hunter says that BC is fortunate to have an industry that is not
only an economic powerhouse with a promising future, but one that is very much
united.

    He says his association's lobbying efforts speak for more than 400 BC TIA
member companies and is seeing to it that the province's political
decision-making considers the needs of the high-tech community.

    Hunter recently rallied his membership to join in the provincial
government's pre-budget consultation process.

    "Our membership has proved it has the strength to deliver a strong message.
We intend to make a significant impact with the Committee," Hunter says.

    Meanwhile Paul Terry of Redback Network Systems Canada says that while B.C.
has been good to him (his less-than three-year old company Abatis Systems was
recently acquired by Redback for $1.3-billion) he feels the same as the majority
of BC TIA members.

    "I think the government might not realize what they've got," he says.

    When it comes to appreciating the value of the local offering, MacDonald
Dettwiler (MDA) president and CEO Dan Friedmann says that leading a company from
B.C. has its benefits.

    "The skiing is great," says Friedmann lightheartedly.

    "Briish Columbia is a great place to live and it does offer easy access to
the United States, Europe and Asian markets."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              409 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                         Calgary Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                    November 26, 2000, Sunday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 13

LENGTH: 278 words

HEADLINE: DIABETES DOCS MAKE BREAKTHROUGH

BYLINE: SHARON LEM, SUN MEDIA

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   A promising gene therapy which cured diabetes in lab rodents could end the
need for insulin injections in humans.
   Researchers at the University of Calgary and Yonsei University Medical School
in Seoul, have created a synthetic gene which helps produce an insulin
substitute.
   The breakthrough is the first gene therapy experiment in the world to bring
about the remission of Type 1, insulin dependent diabetes.
   Dr. Ji-Won Yoon, of the Julia McFarlane Chair in Diabetes Research at the
University of Calgary, and his colleague, Dr. Hyun Chul Lee, of South Korea,
found that by injecting a specialized gene into diabetic rats and mice, the
scientists were able to control blood glucose levels.
   "We're very encouraged by the results. With any new research we understand at
this point in time it's not a cure, but we're hopeful for the future this could
be applied to humans," said Dr. Joi Abbott, executive director of the Alberta
and Northwest Territories branch of the Canadian Diabetes Association.
   Type 1 diabetes destroys the pancreas' ability to create insulin -- a hormone
needed to convert sugars into physical energy.
   The researchers have created a genetically engineered virus to transport the
gene into the liver of diabetic rodents.
   This gene contains a glucose regulator control -- when the glucose level in
the blood rises, the gene is activated and releases a synthetic version of
insulin that controls blood glucose.
   When treated with this compound, the mice were free of diabetes for five
months and the rats went into remission for eight months, which is equal to 20
to 30 years of human life.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2000


                              411 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                         Calgary Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                   November 23, 2000, Thursday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 329 words

HEADLINE: FIND MAY BRING CURE

BYLINE: MICHELLE MARK, CALGARY SUN

BODY:

   The beginning of the end for juvenile diabetes could be just a shot away
following the discovery of a new gene therapy.
   Researchers at the University of Calgary's Faculty of Medicine released their
study yesterday on a new treatment that keeps blood-glucose levels in check.
   "After 25 years of trying to find causes and cures for diabetes, this
discovery is one of the high points of my scientific career," said study
co-author Dr. Ji-Won Yoon.
   "We expect this breakthrough to pave the way for us to develop a future
therapy which, we hope, will cure diabetes in people," he said.
   The study will be published for the first time today in Nature, one of the
world's top research journals.
   Tested only on rodents, the new therapy involves a one-time injection of an
insulin-containing virus into the liver.
   "To cure the disease, we have to restore insulin in the body," he said.
   Although similar therapies have been tried by other U of C researchers, this
one is unique because it includes a glucose-sensory gene to regulate insulin
production.
   And maintaining glucose levels could put Type 1 diabetes into remission, said
Yoon.
   Last June, Yoon was awarded the Ho-Am, the Korean equivalent of the Nobel
Prize, for his work in diabetes research.
   With still another seven or eight years of testing ahead, Yoon said only time
will tell how well the gene therapy will work on humans.
   "There certainly are some barriers we have to overcome," said Dr. David Lau,
director of the U of C's Julia McFarlane Diabetes Centre.
   "We're certainly on our way to a cure, but we're not there yet."
   Four-year-old Benton Dalgleish has had juvenile diabetes since he was 20
months old, and undergoes 15 tests per day.
   "We're really excited about this," said his mom Stacey. "But we'll be even
more excited when we can get beyond rodent research to a place where we can see
it happening for humans."

GRAPHIC: photo of DR. JI-WON YOON

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2000


                              413 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 23, 2000 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS INDEX; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 75 words

HEADLINE: NEWS INDEX: Thursday, November 23, 2000

BODY:

   Tale of two cities
   Today's Technology section examines the high-tech clusters co-existing with
Ottawa officialdom and the Calgary oil patch.
   Page T1
First step
   Researchers hail a new gene therapy that cures diabetes in mice.
   Page A3
Jitec jitters
   CEO Benoît Laliberté has left scandal-plagued Jitec Inc.
   Page B1
Grey Cup countdown
   By rights, the B.C. Lions shouldn't be in the Grey Cup game. Stephen Brunt
looks at why they made it.
   Page S1

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              414 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 23, 2000 Thursday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 825 words

HEADLINE: Diabetes cured in lab rats;
Canadian, Korean researchers' findings;
could end need for insulin injections

BYLINE: KRISTA FOSS, HEALTH REPORTER

BODY:

    A unique gene therapy created by Canadian and Korean researchers has cured
rats and mice of diabetes by tricking their bodies into making an insulinlike
substance.

    It's the world's first gene therapy experiment to treat Type 1 diabetes
successfully in animals and it could be ready for clinical trials on humans as
early as 2006, said its lead Canadian researcher, University of Calgary
immunologist Dr. Ji-Won Yoon.

    If it proves effective in people, the new treatment would allow those
suffering with the disease to forgo constant insulin needles, pumps and sprays
in favour of a single, long-lasting and tolerable treatment.

    The therapy may also ultimately help the burgeoning numbers of those with
Type 2 diabetes - a form of the disease that develops in later life and is
associated with diet and lifestyle.

    "It has the potential to impact a lot of people," said Dr. John Elliott, a
professor of immunology and microbiology at the University of Alberta, which
garnered international attention in May for another diabetes breakthrough.

    Today's research, published in the journal Nature, is a collaboration
between scientists at Korea's Yonsei University, led by endocrinologist Dr.
Hyu-Chui Lee, and Dr. Yoon.

    Type 1 diabetes destroys the ability of the pancreas to create insulin - a
hormone necessary to convert sugars from food into physical energy. Without
insulin, a body's blood sugar levels are perilously high and over time that can
lead to kidney failure, heart disease and blindness. Most diabetes sufferers
inject insulin into their bodies - as often as 15 times a day - to control their
blood sugar.

    Scientists on the trail of a diabetes cure have struggled with how to make
the body produce insulin. A team at the University of Alberta made headlines
this year when it showed it had successfully transplanted insulin-producing
cells from healthy donors into the livers of those with Type 1 diabetes. Those
patients can now make their own insulin but they have to take antirejection
drugs.

    Dr. Yoon and his colleagues may have stumbled onto a simpler approach with
fewer potential pitfalls. His team has engineered a human gene to produce an
insulinlike substance once it is in the body. They also developed a mild, safe
virus - an adeno-associated virus - which acts like a courier, taking that gene
and embedding it permanently into the chromosomes of liver cells.

    Liver cells normally produce an enzyme in response to blood sugar levels.
With the new gene therapy, the liver cells now respond to blood sugar by also
producing the engineered insulin - which has up to 40 per cent of the potency of
natural insulin.

    "Twenty to 40 per cent potency is sufficient to control glucose levels," Dr.
Yoon said.

    The researchers tested their gene therapy on rats and mice with diabetes.
Within one to two weeks after a single injection, the rodents' blood sugar
levels became normal - an effect that lasted between five and eight months and
is considered permanent.

    The challenge is to see if the researchers can transfer the effects on
rodents into humans.

    "If all we had to do is cure diabetes in rats and mice we'd have a hundred
cures," Dr. Elliott said. According to him, the gene therapy needs to prove its
worth on larger animals that regulate blood sugar more like humans. He also said
it needs to be shown that over time humans won't reject the engineered form of
insulin.

    "We have a lot of work to do before we can test this on humans," Dr. Yoon
said.

Research dollars pay off

      A $116-million annual research budget has paid off handsomely this year
for the international Juvenile Diabetes Foundation - but nowhere more so than in
Canada where powerhouse Alberta diabetes researchers have parlayed just over
$2-million of that global investment into world-beating breakthroughs.

    "We are very excited, naturally, with the results out of Alberta
particularly. . . . These are fairly major breakthroughs," said Ron Forbes,
president and chief executive officer of the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation
Canada. "We have to raise more money because this is the stage when they need
funding."

    Here is some of the diabetes research published by Alberta scientists in
2000:

    * May, 2000: University of Alberta researchers announce they have reversed
diabetes in eight people for more than a year through islet cell transplants
followed with drug therapy. Research is led by Dr. Ray Rajotte and surgeon Dr.
James Shapiro. Their work is subsequently published in the New England Journal
of Medicine.

    * August, 2000: Pere Santamaria, a microbiology and infectious diseases
researcher at the University of Calgary, discovers how white blood cells cause
inflammation that leads to destruction of insulin-producing cells in the
pancreas. The research is published in Nature.

    * November, 2000: University of Calgary's Dr. Ji-Won Yoon and Korean
scientists report in Nature on using a novel gene therapy to cure diabetes in
mice and rats.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              418 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            November 13, 2000 Monday

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; WORLD REPORT; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 72 words

HEADLINE: Scientists to resume gene-therapy trials

DATELINE: New Orleans

BODY:

     Gene-therapy trials suspended by the U.S. government after a teenage
patient died have been allowed to start again and will be up and running next
week, the researcher in charge said yesterday.

    Dr. Jeffrey Isner of Tufts University and St. Elizabeth's Hospital in Boston
had been conducting three separate gene-therapy trials aimed at helping patients
grow new blood vessels to alleviate diseases of the heart and arteries. Reuters

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              422 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 28, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: CANADIAN; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 505 words

HEADLINE: Kinetek plans $25-million IPO to fund medical research;
Biotech will focus on developing cancer,;
inflammation, metabolic disease drugs

BYLINE: PETER KENNEDY

DATELINE: VANCOUVER

BODY:

   Kinetek Pharmaceuticals Inc. is planning an initial public offering of stock
that sources say will raise about $25-million for drug research, making it the
latest company in the province's hot biotechnology sector to go to the markets.

    Founded in 1992 by University of British Columbia biochemistry professor
Steven Pelech, Kinetek is focusing on the development of new drugs designed to
treat cancer, inflammation and metabolic diseases.

    The company plans to develop the new suite of drugs using data obtained from
the mapping and sequencing of human cell communication systems.

    In an interview yesterday, Kinetek chief executive officer André Archimbaud
said he is restricted from discussing the planned public offering because the
company has just filed a preliminary prospectus in connection with the offering.

    "We are just one of many biotech companies which are planning for growth,"
he said.

    The prospectus shows that Kinetek has hired Vancouver investment firm Goepel
McDermid Inc. to act as lead underwriter of an offering that is expected to be
completed by mid-December.

    Sources close to the company say Goepel expects to raise $25-million from an
offering priced in the $6.50-a-share range.

    If everything goes according to plan, the shares will soon trade on the
Toronto Stock Exchange.

    Proceeds of the offering, according to Kinetek, will be used to fund the
development of compounds to treat cancer and inflammation as well as phase one
clinical trials of the company's KP-102 antidiabetic compounds.

    When the offering is completed, Kinetek will join a growing list of publicly
traded British Columbia-based biotech firms that include QLT Inc., AnorMed Inc.,
Angiotech Pharmaceuticals Inc. and Chromos Molecular Systems Inc.

    Before it raised $34-million from an initial public offering in July,
Chromos attracted public attention when a mouse injected by one of its
artificial chromosomes was able to transmit the artificial chromosome to its
offspring.

    At the time, the British journal New Scientist described the feat as a
breakthrough that could make gene therapy a practical reality.

    In its preliminary prospectus, Kinetek describes itself as world leader in
identifying and characterizing cellular communication pathways that regulate
various biological functions of cells.

    It claims to be a leader in discovering bioactive compounds that target and
correct these defective pathways.

    Since its inception eight years ago, Kinetek says it has raised about
$36-million from the sale of equity by private placements.

    The company's board of directors includes Julia Levy, chief executive
officer of QLT, which posted its first-ever profit in the third quarter of 2000
because of burgeoning sales of Visudyne, a new treatment for blindness in
seniors.

    Kinetek's biggest shareholders include the Vancouver-based Working
Opportunity Fund, Royal Bank of Canada's Royal Bank Ventures Inc., and
Vancouver-based Ventures West Capital Ltd., which hold a combined 35 per cent of
the company's outstanding shares.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              427 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 21, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; REVIEW; Pg. D8

LENGTH: 1209 words

HEADLINE: Stop. Look. Think.

BYLINE: JENEFER CURTIS

BODY:

   The Ingenuity Gap:How Can We Solve the Problems
of the Future?
   By Thomas Homer-Dixon
   Knopf Canada, 480 pages, $37.95

    Do you think that we are better off than we were 25 years ago and that we
can - through free markets, science and liberal democracy - solve our problems?
Do you think that technology has generally improved the way we do things? If so,
you are likely an "economic optimist," says University of Toronto
political-science professor Thomas Homer-Dixon. And you are wrong.

    According to Homer-Dixon, human ingenuity ain't what it used to be. We are
charging pell-mell into the future, creating complexities in every field, but
not equipping ourselves properly to deal with them. "To one degree or another
all societies are locked in a race between a soaring requirement for ingenuity
and an uncertain supply."

    This is the ingenuity gap and it's a catchy phrase, one that sounds a little
like the next Big Idea. But such trendspeak may surprise those familiar with
Homer-Dixon's work, which includes another book, Environment, Scarcity and
Violence (1999), and has him at the forefront of highly respected new
scholarship that is linking political instability and violence to environmental
scarcities, especially in the developing world. The Globe and Mail's John
Stackhouse calls Homer-Dixon "an emerging celebrity in development circles."

    Homer-Dixon also has a chorus of critics - mostly economists and
pro-establishment types who call him a prophet of doom, citing his pessimistic
claims as unsubstantiated and comparing him to writers such as American author
Robert Kaplan (The Coming Anarchy). It would not surprise these critics that,
unlike the first book, The Ingenuity Gap is not focused on one academic topic
but offers the wide-ranging suppositions of a Big Idea.

    The effectiveness of a Big Idea (think Generation X, The End of History and
The Horizontal Society, among others) is directly proportional to the number of
societal spheres to which it applies and to its emotional and intellectual
resonance. On the first front, Homer-Dixon succeeds: While environmental
problems, on which he is expert, figure prominently in The Ingenuity Gap,he also
explores - with impressive research - the ups and downs of financial markets,
education, politics, technology and medicine.

    When it comes to resonance, though, he's not as successful. The problem
isn't the accuracy of his central claim - most of us would agree that there is a
"chasm" between our new problems and our "lagging ability" to solve them.
Rather, the flaw is the slipperiness of both the word "ingenuity" and the idea
of an "ingenuity gap."

    Consider Homer-Dixon's definition of ingenuity: "ideas that can be applied
to solve practical, technological and social problems." Ingenuity consists of a
"set of instructions" to help us arrange the world in the way we want.

    First, the demand side of the equation (it is ironic that Homer-Dixon
constantly criticizes economists, but conveys his argument in the language of
supply and demand): Our need for ingenuity has skyrocketed because we are living
at a terrific pace, overloaded with information, ignoring increased
socio-economic disparity and consuming vastly more natural resources per capita
than ever.

    He begins the book with the crash of 1989 United Airlines Flight 232 (the
tail engine blew apart), during which pilots faced a huge flow of incoming
information which overloaded their cognitive capacity. He returns to that scene
often, claiming that it serves as a "metaphor for a world of converging
complexities and connections, of decision making at high speeds in conditions of
uncertainty, and of the difficulty of managing in such circumstances."

    In subsequent chapters, he offers other so-called examples of urgency and
unpredictability, of capitalist indulgence and scarcity - the 1987 Asian
financial crisis, the grandiose Canary Wharf structure, world hunger, population
growth, global haze, climate change and scarcities of water, species and
cropland.

    Homer-Dixon hates two things, complexity and uncertainty, yet sees them as
rampant. A whole chapter is devoted to complexity theory and the thinking of
U.S. economist Brian Arthur.

    Second, the supply side of the equation: Given this rising complexity, can
we supply the needed ingenuity? No. With our vast technological capabilities, we
think we can do anything. But technology is weakening the Almighty State
(Homer-Dixon's last vestige of hope), empowering individuals, including
lobbyists, terrorists and what he calls "insurgent groups" (there is a
fascinating chapter on the Sri Lankan group, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam). It has us sleep-deprived and frantically doing more (because we can),
and less contemplative, a state of being necessary for real ingenuity.

    Sometimes we are not implementing ingenuity properly. Scientific research -
what economic optimists call "that ingenuity-producing powerhouse" - is slower
to get translated into practical technology than it used to be. A chapter on the
brain explains how the brain's frontal lobes are key to our integrative and
imaginative thinking. Cognitive overload and stress impair them and weaken the
"experiential knowledge" (as opposed to raw cognitive ability) that provides the
adaptability to meet novel challenges.

    If this sounds like pretty sophisticated stuff, it is. (Do you know, for
instance, what "thermohaline circulation" is?) But Homer-Dixon doesn't lose the
reader, nor does he assume we are academics. His prose is spirited and
accessible. It helps that he offers verbatim quotations from lively articles, as
well as his conversations with a multitude of experts: Canadian ecologist Buzz
Holling, U.S. sociologist Charles Perrow, U.S. paleoanthropologist Rick Potts
and British marine biologist Michael Witfield among them.

    The flaw in Homer-Dixon's notion of an ingenuity gap is that ingenuity is
both the problem and the solution. He admits that the very things that raise our
need for ingenuity can also stimulate its supply - a rising population may mean
more stress on the environment, but it boosts the availability of useful ideas
and generates economic growth. The Internet may mean more unregulated activity,
but it also means a wealth of creativity and new ideas.

    The word "ingenuity," like the word "freedom," can mean whatever the user
wants it to. An economic optimist may see the market, wealth and economic growth
as ingenuity, the very antithesis of ingenuity for an environmentalist. Indeed,
in the age of Palm Pilots, virtual shopping and gene therapy, one cannot argue
that we lack ingenuity. Homer-Dixon is simply partial to a certain kind of
ingenuity, one that respects our natural resources and the needs of poorer
countries.

    British philosopher Alfred North Whitehead once wrote, "Civilization
advances by extending the number of important operations which we can perform
without thinking about them." Homer-Dixon would take this one step further: "We
cannot think about them. We have fallen behind. There is still time to muster
that ingenuity and will, but the hour is late." A Big Idea? Maybe not. An
Important Idea? Definitely.
Jenefer Curtisis an Ottawa journalist and speechwriter, and a student of the
history of ideas.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              435 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 5, 2000 Tuesday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 1056 words

HEADLINE: If you were given a gene map,;
Humans are a long way from knowing precisely;
how the genes in the Human Genome Project interact

BODY:

    Given a choice, we would rather predict the past than the future. The
complications of being a futurologist are evident from the poll that appears in
these pages today on the Human Genome Project.

    The Angus Reid Group sampled 1,500 Canadians about what they thought the
project meant, and about its health and social implications. The problem is that
we are very much in midstream. The project is unfolding in three component
parts.

    The first, which is quite near completion, is physical gene-mapping. It
seeks to determine where genes are located on the body's chromosomes.

    Physical mapping offers few medical benefits, but there will probably be
some very interesting comparative biological spinoffs. For example, we will be
able to compare the human genome with other creatures' genomes and determine
those areas where our genes are very much the same and those where they very
much differ. Comparative genomics may provide some biochemical rationales for
the enduring physical divisions between creatures - say, between mammals and
reptiles.

    Ultimately, what is of much greater interest to both doctors and patients is
the second component part, something called a functional genetic map. A
functional map says: This gene does this in conjunction with this gene there,
and that one there.

    However, that kind of map will likely not be in place for 100 or 200 years,
and even then may be incomplete. The problem is that it must understand how
everyone's individual mutations interact in DNA's genetic orchestra, where
40,000 to 50,000 player genes produce an even greater number of proteins. These,
in turn, regulate the body's growth and daily functioning.

    Think of it as a reverse engineering exercise involving tens and tens of
thousands of components. While functional mapping would eventually enable
doctors to tell patients about the genetic components of their lives and inform
parents of the makeup of their children, it isn't in itself curative. A genetic
screen may let doctors tell worried patients that it is likely they will get
Alzheimer's, but the doctors will also have to say there is nothing the patient
or physician can do about it.

    That is essentially the position we are in with much of today's genetic
testing, which regularly alerts people to the existence of a genetic mutation -
e.g. Huntington's or cystic fibrosis - for which there is no cure.

    What one really wants is the third step in understanding the genome: the
genetic fixer-upper stage. Unfortunately, attempts at what is called gene
therapy have so far failed, even when dealing with a single gene defect such as
cystic fibrosis. In some cases, the attempts to insert a functioning gene into
the body have killed patients.

    Undoubtedly we will get better at the technology of bio-manipulation, but it
is possible that some aspects of genetic engineering are just intrinsically
difficult. For example, animal studies suggest there may be a strong mechanism
in the body primed to reject eggs that have been in any way tampered with. As a
historical comparison, consider that while people have become much better at all
kinds of metallurgy since the Middle Ages, the alchemists' dream - the
transmutation of lead into gold - remains a fundamentally tough thing to do.

    It would be equally problematic if fixing up one gene defect caused an
imbalance somewhere else. A classic example is the mutation that causes sickle
cell anemia. If only one of the body's twinned genes is affected, it protects
against malaria.

    With this as background, it is possible to look at what people said in the
Angus Reid survey and reinterpret it. When nearly 90 per cent said they think
the mapping of the genome will lead to discoveries that will greatly increase
the quality of our life and health, they were probably thinking less of physical
mapping and more of the gene therapy that flows from it.

    As a proposition, their bio-optimism is hard to argue with. If we can easily
fix up genes, it should dramatically change our view of genetically rooted
illnesses. And if we can fix ourselves up, it is reasonable to think - as do
about two-thirds of the people in the survey sample - that there will also be
thorough genetic testing on fetuses.

    However, what would people have answered if they were told that most things
can't be fixed up, and that we don't have even halfway perfect gene therapy? The
helpless knowing of bad things about their children's future is generally not a
state most humans wish for.

    Again, while nearly two-thirds of those polled think people shouldn't be
required to be genetically tested, future developments in genetics may change
their minds. What would they have responded to a question asking: If gene
defects are easily fixed, should people be allowed not to test for them if
unrepaired mutations would cause a great financial strain on a communal medical
system?

    The same issue arises when trying to interpret the respondents' apparent
willingness to test for hereditary diseases. Cure matters. Living your life in
the shadow of fears about what will cause your death is hardly anyone's
definition of happiness.

    As further evidence that people are confused by the implications of heading
down the road to genetic wellsville, half the respondents think screening will
lower health costs and half think it will increase those costs.

    People's attitudes toward the use of genetic information are also
intriguing. Most think it will be used for medical purposes, and think this is
good. Many think parents have the right to genetically test children under 16 as
well as unborn fetuses.

    What isn't clear is what people should be allowed to do with such
information. Do parents have the right to abort for medical defects, for sex,
for something like shortness or big-nosedness? The stickiest ethical issues of
our geneticized future will centre not on what parents can know, but on what
they can do with what they know.

    Finally, people don't want non-medical institutions - governments, insurance
companies, employers - to have access to their genetic histories. This makes all
kinds of sense from today's civil-liberties assumptions, but when genetic
histories are as common as television, might people be less protective of them?

    But that is something for the "pastologists" to know and the futurologists
to pretend to know.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              436 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           August 30, 2000 Wednesday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 654 words

HEADLINE: Vaccine to fight all cancers may be feasible, study finds;
Key is immunizing sufferers;
against a protein, U.S. researchers say

BYLINE: ANDRÉ PICARD, Public Health Reporter

BODY:

     U.
   S. scientists say they have the first concrete evidence that it may be
possible to manufacture a "universal" cancer vaccine.

    The vaccine would not prevent the disease from developing initially but
would help the body fight off cancers once they are detected, regardless of
whether they originated in the breast, prostate, lung or elsewhere.

    Writing in today's edition of Nature Medicine, researchers at Duke
University Medical Center report that cancer sufferers could be immunized
against telomerase, a protein that plays an important role in the replication of
cancer cells.

    In the laboratory, this approach stimulated development of immune cells in
such large numbers that they were able to kill human cancer cells in test tubes
and to slow tumour growth in mice.

    Dr. Eli Gilboa, director of the Center for Genetic and Cellular Therapies at
Duke, said most vaccines work by stimulating the body's natural immune response,
prompting it to build an army of cells that recognize and attack and kill the
target cells. The challenge has been to find what will trigger immune responses
strong enough to fight off wily cancer cells.

    The protein telomerase has become a focus of much research because it is
produced during the replication of all cancer cells. Telomerase allows the cells
to divide unchecked and also provokes the immune system to work.

    As cancer progresses, the immune system becomes progressively weaker but
seems to retain the ability to recognize telomerase. The idea then is to bolster
the telomerase level to stimulate the immune system to keep fighting.

    "The question posed in the study was whether the telomerase-based vaccine
can stimulate an immune response from cancer patients, and whether [immune
response] cells can attack and kill the patient's tumour cells," Dr. Gilboa
said.

    The answer, at least in the laboratory, is yes, according to the researcher,
and that is the "first indication that a more broadly applicable cancer vaccine
might be possible."

    While telomerase is present everywhere cancer cells are replicating, it is
not a strong antigen, meaning it does not provoke a strong immune response. For
a universal vaccine to be effective, it would have to contain other antigens
that would better stimulate the immune system.

    Using new genetic therapy techniques, Dr. Gilboa and his team used RNA -
ribonucleic acid, part of the cell's machinery for building proteins - to teach
dendritic cells to display telomerase protein on their surface. Dendritic cells
are often described as the most-wanted posters of the immune system, because
they circulate through the body eating foreign proteins and displaying their
antigens on the cell surface. These displays, in turn, stimulate the production
of cytotoxic T lymphocytes, known as killer T cells.

    Cancer cells produce a number of unusual proteins and have developed ways of
hiding these proteins from the dendritic cells, making cancer virtually
invisible to the immune system.

    Several cancer vaccines are in development and one for the skin cancer known
as melanoma is being tested on humans.

    Most cancer vaccines, however, target specific antigens. For example,
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is found in 90 per cent of colon cancers. To
date, most vaccines have been made by extracting protein antigens from the
tumours of specific patients, an onerous and expensive process.

    The Duke researchers said their vaccine approach not only would allow
treatment of a broad range of patients, but would allow the product to made in
assembly-line fashion.

    "The thinking has been that because every cancer is different - melanoma,
breast, etc. - that each cancer has its own specific set of antigens that must
be used for a vaccine," Dr. Gilboa said. "We're looking for a universal antigen:
one antigen to treat every cancer patient."

    He stressed, however, that the approach remains theoretical and much work
needs to be done.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              438 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                         Calgary Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                     August 27, 2000, Sunday, Final EDITION

SECTION: SUNDAY MAGAZINE, Pg. M9, BOOKS

LENGTH: 158 words

HEADLINE: THE DEVIL'S CURE

BYLINE: YVONNE CRITTENDEN

BODY:


   Canadian writer Kenneth Opel has written a first-class thriller in this story
about cults, murder, gene therapy and the search for a cancer cure.

   Dr. Laura Donaldson is a researcher on the brink of an important gene-
therapy breakthrough. She has a sister who is desperately ill with cancer which
adds to the pressure she feels in her work.

   Then, a serial killer on Death Row, David Haines, is found to have an immune
system which is miraculously curing his cancer. Donaldson wants his blood, but
he refuses because he hates doctors.

   FBI agent Kevin Sheldrake is called in when Haines makes a daring escape and
he and the doctor undertake a desperate race against time to catch Haines before
he kills again, and before he is hunted down by other law enforcement and killed
before his potentially life-giving blood can be tested.

   It's a book that's hard to put down.

   - - -

   THE DEVIL'S CURE

   By Kenneth Opel

   (HarperCollins)

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2000


                              439 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            August 26, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; FALL PREVIEW: INTERNATIONAL; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 1076 words

HEADLINE: Good news from abroad;
From the posthumous to the postmodern,;
the season's foreign books include fiction,;
biography, science, and the undescribable.

BYLINE: MARTIN LEVIN, The Globe and Mail

BODY:

    Internationally, it seems, being dead is no more a bar to continued
publication than it has been to such North American authors as Robertson Davies
and Ernest Hemingway, both of whom continue to flourish from beyond.

    Last year, we lost one grand dame of the English novel, Iris Murdoch, whose
passing occasioned a (second) wonderful memoir from her husband, John Bayley,
and then a 40-page story with a book to itself, Something Special.

    She was followed this past spring by Penelope Fitzgerald,who began
publishing fiction at 60 and thus left us a small but indelible corpus. The
Means of Escape (Houghton Mifflin), a posthumous story collection, her first
and, alas, her last, promises a too-small set of generous, witty and subtle
tales of the intricacies and absurdities of human behaviour. Fitzgerald fans
will also be interested in the reissue of her 1977 work, The Knox Brothers
(Counterpoint), an account of four members of her own remarkable clan, including
the editor of Punch, a cryptographer, and a religious writer/Bible
translator/detective-story writer.

    Also back once again from the grave is Isaac Bashevis Singer,whose More
Stories From My Father's Court (Farrar, Straus & Giroux) is a sequel to his
evocative account of his rabbinic family, and at least his fifth posthumous
work.

    There will, rest assured, be work from living writers of fiction as well.
Still on the grand-dame front, Muriel Spark's Aiding and Abetting (Penguin) is a
comic who's-who novel in which two men each claim to be the vanished
aristocratic murderer, Lord Lucan.

    Somewhat younger, but certainly no less grand, is Beryl Bainbridge. Her two
previous novels, Every Man for Himself and Master Georgie,were superb
investigations centred respectively on the Titanic and the Crimean War. But for
how long can this masterful writer be a Booker Prize bridesmaid? Perhaps
According to Queeney (Carroll & Graf), in which she probes even farther back in
time's abysm to give us the last days of Samuel Johnson, will do the trick. I
can't wait.

    In Too Far Afield (Harcourt Brace),the redoubtable Günter Grass offers his
no doubt inimitable take on German unification, and the prodigious John Updike
weighs in with a story collection, Licks of Love (Knopf). British bad boy Will
Self tells of a terminal cancer patient struggling with intimations of mortality
in How the Dead Live (Grove Press), while Gore Vidal finally ends his
multi-volume saga of American history in The Golden Age (Doubleday), which sees
the country he loves to hate through from the First World War to the Korean
conflict.

    We'll also be watching for new fiction from Barbara Kingsolver (Prodigal
Summer, HarperCollins), Julian Barnes (Love, Etc., Random House Canada), Jim
Harrison (The Beast God Forgot to Invent, Atlantic Monthly) and Jeanette
Winterson (The Power Book, Knopf Canada).

   Caleb Carr's hit novel, the tour de force historical thriller, The Alienist
,took us back to turn-of-the-20th-century New York. Killing Time (Knopf) is set
in 2023, as a criminologist investigates the assassination five years earlier of
a female president.

    In non-fiction, an eagerly awaited title is The Island of Lost Maps: A True
Story of Cartographic Crime,by Miles Harvey (Random House), the story of a
cartographic cat-burglar with the Wodehousian name of Gilbert Bland, who stole a
great many old maps from libraries in Canada and the United States.

   James Atlas's much-delayed and much anticipated biography of Saul Bellow (
Saul Bellow: A Biography, Random House) should excite even greater interest in
light of the octogenarian author's recent paternity of both a new novel and a
new child.

    We may well be jaded by the endless spate of books about the outgoing
American president and his peccadilloes (if that's the word for it), but
anything written by the brilliant cultural critic Griel Marcus is worth reading,
so Double Trouble: Bill Clinton & Elvis Presley in the Land of No Alternatives
(Henry Holt) should be unmissable. No one who remembers the sixties (no old
jokes, please!) will want to miss The Beatles Anthology (Raincoast), a huge and
colourful compilation, in the Fab Four's own words, many of them unpublished,
about the lovers and friends they still can recall. Others will want The Oxford
Companion to Jazz (Oxford University Press) a mammoth and comprehensive
multi-author guide edited by the distinguished jazz writer Gary Giddins.

    Biography and, especially, memoir, have been enormously popular, and
continue so. Viking Press burnishes its successful Penguin Lives series with
popular medical writer Sherwin B. Nuland's take on Leonardo da Vinci and Nigel
Nicolson's Virginia Woolf. Second and final volumes of two monumental
biographies are at hand. Ian Kershaw's Hitler, 1936-1945: Nemesis (Penguin) and
Ray Monk's Bertrand Russell 1921-1970: The Ghost of Madness (Jonathan Cape) are
already being regarded as definitive. In Dream Catcher (Washington Square),
Margaret A. Salinger, daughter of the famous recluse, comes clean.

   Can a Darwinian be a Christian? (Cambridge),by Michael Ruse, late of the
University of Guelph, is just one of a number of intriguing science titles,
including David Bodanis's E=mc2 (Walker), which is, as it sounds, the story of
that most famous and resounding equation. Among the many books on cloning and
genetic therapy, The Century of the Gene (Harvard University Press), an overview
of current research and thought by philosopher of science Evelyn Fox Keller,
seems especially promising.

    In history and current affairs, I look forward to: Civilizations (Key
Porter),in which the macrocosmically inclined Oxford historian Felipe
Fernandez-Armesto (of Millennium: A History of the Last Thousand Years)attempts
to redefine the idea of civilization through an overview of world cultures;
History of the Present: Dispatches from Europe, in which journalist/academic
Timothy Garton Ash looks at whether the idea of a unified Europe is working; and
Eastward to Tartary: Travels in the Balkans, the Middle East and the Caucasus
(Random House), in which doommeister Robert D. Kaplan surveys what he expects
will be the next international fault line.

    No doubt there will be surprises aplenty in the coming months, dazzling
first novels and magisterial revisions of history, perceptive biographies and
soul-wrenching accounts of both derring-do and misery. And when they arrive, you
can read about them (or as many of them as we can cram in) in Books.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              449 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 11, 2000 Tuesday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS; INVESTMENT NEWS; Pg. B21

LENGTH: 61 words

HEADLINE: Genetronics

BODY:

   Genetronics Biomedical Ltd. has filed a preliminary short-form prospectus for
a public offering with Canadian securities regulators. The San Diego-based
biotechnology firm, whose shares are listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange, said
it will use the funds raised through an offering to start a gene-therapy project
and to develop the company's oncology business in Canada.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              450 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              July 10, 2000 Monday

SECTION: THE GLOBE REVIEW; Pg. R6

LENGTH: 1719 words

HEADLINE: Do we still need God?;
Breakthroughs in mapping the human;
genome raise big questions about;
life. But despite what Nietzsche;
said, God isn't dead yet

BYLINE: MICHAEL VALPY, Religion and Ethics Reporter

BODY:

     The favourite cautionary tale the opponents of marketplace genetic
engineering like to tell is about the dwarf drug.

    The drug was developed in the United States as a treatment for dwarfism, a
rare condition that afflicts about 7,000 children. The pharmaceutical companies,
however, quickly hyped the market by promoting the product as a muscle-builder
and, more important, as a way of adding inches to children whose growth is
within normal range.

    It has been prescribed, to date, to more than 20,000 children - in a country
where height is statistically related to success.

    Thus the unveiling of the Human Genome Project has religious ethicists more
worried about the language of commerce than about Bill Clinton's musings on "the
language of God." It is not turning out to be fallow ground for Friedrich
Nietzsche.

    Forty years into the study of DNA, the so-called secret of life, the notion
of man as co-creator with God has acquired considerable theological acceptance.
So has the idea of genetic engineering as a kind of repair kit for restoring
Eden to Creation's unflawed state before the Fall.

    The Pope himself has given what has been called a yellow light to genetic
research and even left the door open to genetic enhancements so long as they do
not "offer harm to the origin of human life" or "modify the genetic store to
create groups of different people at the risk of provoking fresh marginalization
in society."

    And theologians show they can come rather close to Nietzsche - although not,
of course, by agreeing with the 19th-century German philosopher that God is
dead.

    Nietzsche also said cause and effect in Creation probably did not exist, and
theological ethicists say pretty much the same thing: that simple causality and
a notion of genetic determinism - you've got the gene for height? you're going
to be tall - strips God of divine freedom and doesn't give Him any space to be
creative.

    In any event, there aren't many scientists, theologians or spiritualists of
any stripe who believe that what was unveiled in Washington the other day with
President Clinton and (by telephone hookup) British Prime Minister Tony Blair in
attendance was "the language of God." About which more in a moment.

    U.S. Catholic theologian Thomas A. Shannon, a teacher at Worcester
Polytechnic Institute in Worcester, Mass., has spoken out about the huge amounts
of corporate money riding on genetic research, much more than has been invested
in traditional biomedical research. It is private money, he said, that is
driving research, unfettered by public controls.

    Lisa Sowle Cahill, a theologian at Boston College, has noted that news about
biotechnology often breaks in the business pages.

    Canon Eric Beresford, a geneticist as well as a priest and a consultant on
ethics to both the Canadian Anglican Church and the world Anglican Union, said
from London: "The fact is that the project is tied to the patenting of various
sequences of the human genome [all the DNA contained in a human cell] on the
grounds that a certain percentage of them are likely to code for proteins which
can be manufactured and marketed at tremendous profit.

    "This has been a particular concern where the project has focused on the
specific characteristics of the genome of isolated populations, whether they be
indigenous populations in Canada or the rest of the world, or communities like
those in Newfoundland, which are relatively isolated and have some fairly unique
characteristics."

    Gene-hunters have already approached Newfoundland communities, looking for
"defective" or mutated genes. Once a gene defect is found, wrote Globe and Mail
medical reporter Carolyn Abraham, scientists could craft a way to override the
mutation and produce the next generation of blockbuster drugs. "Every human gene
has the potential to be raw, commercial material."

    The U.S. science and technology critic Jeremy Rifkin, who has called
genetics the "ultimate consumer playground," is part of a coalition of 180
religious leaders from 80 faith groups who have called, so far unsuccessfully,
for a ban on patenting human or animal genes, saying the process devalues the
sanctity of life. (The drug companies say the patents are necessary for research
leading to genetic therapies for disease.)

    Said Rifkin: "The question of whether life itself is to be regarded as a
human invention or God's creation is one of the seminal issues of the coming
age." And it is here where many theologians and laypersons distance themselves
from Rifkin, saying he is being too simplistic.

    When Toronto University Health Network neurologist Paul Ranalli, a Catholic,
looks at the genetic mapping that has been done, he describes it as another part
of the curtain of God's creation being pulled back.

    Dr. Jim McNamara, head of Toronto's Psychocultural Institute, which offers
spiritual counselling, said: "Genes are not the bottom line, not the end of the
explanation of life. The way I understand it, life commences when a spirit spark
comes together with genetic material. If that doesn't work, it doesn't count.
Spirit interacts with matter just as matter interacts with energy.

    "For example, puberty is said to happen at 13. But it doesn't happen to
everyone at the same time and it happens at different times in different
cultures."

    Canon Beresford suggested that much of the public and media have a
misconception of what actually has been scientifically accomplished. What has
not been uncovered, he said, is some sort of genetic code that will allow
science to predict and alter a human being's characteristics.

    This is because genetics for the most part is not a science of simple
determinism.

    "There is not one gene for height; there are multiple genes for height,"
Canon Beresford said. "Genes for behavioural traits are almost always multiple,
and are profoundly affected by environmental conditions, by your upbringing, by
what sort of parents you have, by your nutrition, by all sorts of conditions.

    "Some genes need to be switched on or off, and there are switching genes
that control them. So the question then becomes not whether you carry a certain
gene, but whether you carry a certain switching gene - which makes inheritance
itself very, very complex.

    "There are certain genes which are pretty strictly deterministic. But even
with the possession of an X or a Y chromosome [the determinant of sex], it's
possible to have one genetic makeup but develop the primary sexual
characteristics of the other sex. It doesn't happen very often, but it does
happen."

    Moreover, said Canon Beresford, a human being's basic genetic material
constantly makes random mistakes - mutates - as it reproduces itself, leading to
altered genetic information and the basis for the theory of evolution.

    Darwin concluded that random beneficial genetic changes are preserved and
random harmful changes are eliminated. In fact, said Canon Beresford, it's more
subtle: Because of genetic drift, even beneficial mutations can pass out of a
population.

    So this is why theologians don't think the scientists of the Human Genome
Project are speaking the language of God. It is because God's language is still
very much out of reach.

    But there are also theological arguments that God wants man to join Him in
the Creator's office.

    These arguments arise from imago dei - the theological notion that man is
born in the image of God and therefore is like God - and from what is called
theodicy, the attempt to justify belief in the goodness of God in the face of
all the world's evil and suffering. Why does a good God allow good people to
have horrible diseases while bad people snort around life's paddock in the full
bloom of health?

    Taken together, imago dei and theodicy give man a green light,
theologically, to explore genetic manipulation and enhancement.

    There are three major theodicies.

    The first, called the Augustinian theodicy, says the Fall of Adam and Eve
from complete goodness and perfect images of God's Creation has affected all
their offspring. "We were born in the image of God but the image is impaired or
'defective,' not the way God intends," said Ronald Cole-Turner, professor of
theology and ethics at Pittsburgh Theological Seminary.

    Thus, he said, God is not responsible for suffering because all suffering
results from humankind's Fall from original perfection created by God, and
redemption becomes the restoration of Creation's original state.

    The Augustinian theodicy "led to the whole notion that we could use
technology to fix nature," Prof. Cole-Turner said.

    Francis Bacon, the 17th-century philosopher, urged the massive use of
science and technology to repair the effects of the Fall. He talked about the
responsibility of scientists to think God's thoughts after Him.

    The Iranean theodicy, named after a theologian called Iraneus, posited that
Creation is incomplete, that Adam and Eve are tossed out of Eden for disobeying
God when they're still adolescent; thus, their development is arrested.

    In this theodicy, true human identity is not found by going back to the
beginning, by imagining what Adam and Eve were like, but by moving toward
Christ, the full image of God, said Prof. Cole-Turner. This theodicy opens up
the idea of enhancement, of improving on what Nature has given humanity. There
is no normative state, no normative humanity. "Forget restoring Eden, go for the
stars," Prof. Cole-Turner said.

    The third theodicy doesn't try to let God off the hook for suffering; it has
God suffering along with man, Christ on the Cross, a God who suffers with his
own Creation.

    This is the theodicy Prof. Cole-Turner prefers as the underpinning for an
ethical, theological framework around genetic engineering.

    "Diseases may be treated, problems might be solved, pain might be
eliminated, but suffering arises not just primarily from disease but from love
and its vulnerability, from life and its irreplaceability. Suffering can be
addressed technologically but never removed finally, and it's a dangerous
illusion to try."

    The professor says if there is any hope humans will use genetic technology
wisely, "it will come from a retheologizing of the entire framework so that we
understand anew the relationship between God and the natural world . . . [not
from] attempts to remake Eden or exceed Eden."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              454 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 1, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: NET WORTH; AHEAD OF THE CURVE; Pg. N2

LENGTH: 705 words

HEADLINE: Take the shotgun approach if you buy

BYLINE: JEFFREY RUBIN

BODY:

    The similarities are compelling. Born in academia, nurtured by government
funding, and now seemingly hijacked by entrepreneurs. In so many respects, the
mapping of the human genome, and its potential medical applications, resemble
the state of the Internet only five or six years ago.

    And just as the Internet made its jump from academia to a slate of initial
public offerings, so too is the genome taking a leap from the laboratory to the
stock market.

    Within this rubric, there are really three types of firms. Most notable are
the gene mappers, like Celera Genomics Inc., who are racing to complete the map
and then sell it to pharmaceutical companies. The latter, like Millennium
Pharmaceuticals Inc., in turn hope to use this mapping information to develop
products than can re-engineer genes, and hence provide cures or at least
treatments for genetically-determined diseases.

    Lastly, there are equipment manufacturers such as PE Biosystems Group that
provide the sequencing decoders to gene mappers, and are the only group with
earnings.

    Over the past decade, the frontiers of genetic engineering have exploded on
the back of advances in computing capacity and molecular biology. Not only has
computer technology advanced to the point where a cataloging of the more than
one billion words of our genetic language has become possible, but also the
development of retrovirus technology has for the first time provided an actual
mechanism for effecting gene therapy.

    Essentially, gene therapy entails loading a good gene on to a virus. Once
the retrovirus penetrates the patient's cell, it replicates its genetic
information, effectively inserting the desired gene into the patient's
chromosomes. Less ambitious, but more immediate, is the prospect of designer
pharmaceuticals that are tailor-made to a patient's genetic makeup so as to
enhance therapeutic effectiveness.

    A mature technology would allow health practitioners to scan your genetic
makeup and identify your genetic disposition to disease. If, for example, you
are identified with a gene linked to the incidence of breast cancer, genetic
engineering could potentially take that gene out and replace it with a gene that
triggers tumour suppression.

    Although gene therapy is still in its infancy, its economic potential
exceeds that of the so-called Internet economy. Even broadly defined, the
information economy is at about 8 per cent of U.S. GDP.

    E-commerce represented less than 1 per cent of U.S. retail sales last
Christmas. By comparison, the health economy, at 14 per cent of GDP, is almost
twice the size of the information economy.

    And given the demographic profile of North America over the next 20 years,
that share is likely to grow. Yet information economy stocks listed on the
Nasdaq Stock Market have 14 times the capitalization of Nasdaq biotech stocks.

    If genomics becomes the market's new technological paradigm, are there
lessons to be gleaned from the Internet experience?

    If there is one lesson, it's that picking individual winners in a period of
explosive technological change is needlessly risky.

    Sure picking Yahoo Inc. or Amazon.com Inc. would have yielded phenomenal
returns, but it wasn't so apparent back when they were launched that those
stocks were qualitatively better than a whole host of other Internet IPOs.

    If instead, one would have bought an equally-weighted basket of the 28
largest Internet IPOs between late 1994 and mid-1997, one wouldn't have to make
an all or nothing bet. An equally weighted basket of these stocks would yield a
1,400-per-cent return to date. That would have beaten the individual performance
of 23 of the 28 individual companies, over 80 per cent of the stocks held in the
basket.

    Moreover, the index's return would be more than five times the median return
from the 28 IPOs. While the index's return would still pale beside the
14,000-per-cent return from Yahoo or the 12,400-per-cent return from America
Online Inc., it's all a whole lot better than the negative returns from Peapod
Inc., or other Internet duds in your basket.

    If there was a case for a shotgun approach to investing, genome stocks are
it.
Jeffrey Rubin is chief economist and managing director of CIBCWorld Markets.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2006


                              456 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             June 27, 2000 Tuesday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 590 words

HEADLINE: Geneticists could have tests for 25 major illnesses

BYLINE: LAWRENCE ALTMAN, New York Times Service

BODY:

    Within 10 years, tests for genetic predisposition to 25 major causes of
illness and death in North America will be widely available, if the predictions
of Francis Collins, head of the Human Genome Project of the National Institutes
of Health, prove correct.

    But most people will shun genetic testing unless effective therapies exist
to prevent potential hazards from the particular disorders, Dr. Collins said in
an interview.

    The project will map each of the estimated 50,000 human genes and spell out
each letter in the book of the DNA, the thread of life, in the genes. But as
scientists race to write the final chapter, they have little comprehension of
the book's instructions and the changes they might bring to society.

    In a recent lecture, Dr. Collins made predictions about the project's impact
on medical practice over the next 40 years, answering the question he said he
was asked most: Where will all the research lead?

    Using genetics to tailor and improve health care will be the project's main
legacy if laws are passed to protect privacy, prevent use of genetic information
to deprive an individual of health insurance or a job, and prohibit other forms
of genetic discrimination, Dr. Collins said.

    Also, he urged closer scrutiny to determine when genetic tests are ready for
wide use, given that commercial pressures may persuade patients and doctors to
use the tests before their medical value is established.

    Even if only a few predictions prove true, major political and economic
problems would follow. For example, the new genetic information's power to
change medical practice could aggravate international tensions by widening
inequalities in access to health care within countries and between those in
developed nations and the Third World.

    Among Dr. Collins's predictions:

    * By 2010, the genome will help identify people at highest risk of
particular diseases. In cancer, for example, genetic tests will identify those
at highest risk for lung cancer from smoking. Genetic tests for colon cancer
will narrow colonoscopy screening to people who need it most. Additional genetic
tests would guide treatment of breast and ovarian cancer.

    Three or four genetic tests will help predict an individual's risk for
developing coronary artery disease, thus helping to determine when to start drug
treatment and other measures to reduce the need for bypass operations.

    Tests predicting a high risk for diabetes should help encourage susceptible
individuals to exercise and control their weight. Those at higher risk might
start taking drugs before they develop symptoms.

    * By 2020, doctors will rely on individual genetic variations in prescribing
new and old drugs and choosing the dose. Pharmaceutical companies will take
another look at some drugs that were never marketed, or were taken off the
market, because some people who took them suffered adverse reactions. It will
take many years to develop such drugs and tests.

    * By 2030, death will still be inevitable, but clinical trials relying on
information from the genome will be under way to extend life spans. Human genes
will be identified and fully catalogued.

    Scientists working with the genome will develop full computer models of
human cells and analyze all genes, proteins and their interactions. As a result,
many experiments now done with laboratory animals or even human subjects will be
completed entirely on computers.

    * By 2040, gene therapy and gene-based drugs will be available for most
diseases, and the average human life span will reach 90.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2006


                              460 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              June 26, 2000 Monday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 644 words

HEADLINE: Houston, we have hype

BODY:

     We have an unusually politicized science question for you. What do P.T.
Barnum, the new NASA evidence for waterways on Mars and the completion of the
first rough map of the human genome have in common?

    Hint: It isn't brainpower. Rather, it seems that some of the scientific
community has bought into Mr. Barnum's maxim that people will buy whatever you
sell so long as you promote it hard enough.

    Last week, the world was told that an analysis of Martian satellite
photographs found an increased likelihood of liquid water existing on the
planet. This finding in turn "greatly increases the likelihood of life on Mars,"
said news reports.

    "On Earth," added Bruce Jakosky, an atmospheric physics professor at the
National Aeronautics and Space Adminis- tration's news conference, "wherever you
find liquid water below the boiling temperature, then you find life."

    The new interpretation of Martian gullies has to overcome the stubborn
physics of a planet whose -70 to -100 C temperatures should mean that water
exists only as ice. But even if there isn't water-borne life on Mars,
enthusiasts say, this could-be, would-be discovery is still miraculous. Space
colonists might break down water into its constituent hydrogen and oxygen and
make either rocket fuel or a breatheable atmosphere for domed habitats.

    Even if we overlook the uncomfortable fact that we haven't actually seen any
water on Mars, only signs of erosion, something is obvious here. How the Mars
data have been framed looks a lot more interesting than the data themselves.

    Scientists don't know how life came into being. Even with water they haven't
been able to recreate something as simple as one species of bacteria from raw
materials. Nor is it clear what people who went to live on Mars would do there
except slowly go mad in what non-space enthusiasts might view as the ultimate
prison camp.

    What space scientists do know is that their findings will have a greater
resonance with the general public if they are connected to something
extraordinary. Headlines that say "Likelihood of life on Red Planet" or
"Potential rocket fuel found on Mars" sell space exploration. "Water on Mars a
little less unlikely" isn't even news. So if you are a P.T. Barnum of a space
scientist, you sell what sells.

    The first rough mapping of the human genome is a true accomplishment, but
what the accomplishment really means isn't obvious. "It will," said news reports
anticipating an announcement being made today, "enable doctors to treat the
underlying genetic causes of hundreds of diseases . . . and to perhaps [correct]
gene flaws from birth."

    Maybe. But before that happens we have to know what human genes do, and all
today's news tells us is that we know, more or less, where genes are. That's
akin to finding a way to play a record of songs from an extinct culture. Knowing
what a language sounds like is hardly the same as knowing what the words in the
language mean.

    Heretofore, there has been no rapid-fire way to decipher what the human
genes do. Even without a map, it has been estimated that 40 per cent of newly
discovered genes bear no resemblance to anything seen before.

    And up to now, fixing broken genes (so-called gene therapy) has proved
remarkably difficult. There are no successful examples of researchers doing it
in single gene diseases, much less in conditions such as heart disease where a
hundred genes might interact.

    So why emphasize the revolutionary medical aspect of completing our species'
genetic jigsaw puzzle? Because doctoring is what ordinary people can relate to.
Miracle medicine transforms brute biochemistry into the promise of a pain-free
life. True genetic repair may be a long, long way off, but, as Mr. Barnum might
have put it, "there is someone ready to believe the most extravagant scientific
promise born every minute. Give 'em what they want."

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2006


                              462 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             June 15, 2000 Thursday

SECTION: APPOINTMENT NOTICES-ADV'T; Pg. B12

LENGTH: 164 words

HEADLINE: Canadian Institutes of Health Research

BODY:

    Alan Bernstein

   Dr. Alan Bernstein, former Director of the Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute of Mount Sinai Hospital has been appointed the first President of the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research by Governor in Council.


      An internationally-recognized researcher, teacher and scientific leader,
Dr. Bernstein's expertise ranges from developmental biology to cancer and gene
therapy. He has served on numerous select boards and committees in Canada and
the United States. Among his numerous awards and honours are the first Anne
Tanenbaum Chair at the Lunenfeld and the University of Toronto, the Royal
Society of Canada's McLaughlin Medal and the National Cancer Institute of
Canada's Robert L. Noble prize.
   CIHR is Canada's major federal funding agency for health research. Its goal
is international scientific excellence achieved by creating new knowledge and
transforming it into improved health, more effective health services and a
stronger Canadian health care system.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2006


                              465 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              June 6, 2000 Tuesday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 877 words

HEADLINE: Cash infusion will attract top minds;
Contenders for future Nobel Prizes could be drawn;
to U of T after $150-million research gift

BYLINE: LISA PRIEST, Health Care Reporter

BODY:

    The University of Toronto will spend $150-million to lure more of the
world's top scientists on the leading edge of biomedical research and perhaps
even a contender for the Nobel Prize.

    The university is to receive $100-million starting in August, 2001, with
what is believed to be the biggest combined private and government donation in
Canadian history.

    On top of that, the university and four Toronto hospitals will kick in
another $50-million.

    "Researchers often used to move to the States saying Canada can't compete,"
cancer biologist James Woodgett, head of experimental therapeutics at Princess
Margaret Hospital, said in an interview. "That excuse has gone out the window
with this initiative."

    The gift includes $50-million from the R. Samuel McLaughlin Foundation,
named after the pioneer Canadian carmaker, and another $50-million from the
provincial government through the Ontario Innovation Trust, which was created by
the province last year to fund non-profit research institutions.

    Dr. Calvin Stiller, a trustee of the Ontario Innovation Trust, said the
donation will mean the university will be able to lure the "brightest young
scientists, the predictable Nobel Prize winners."

    While the university said it expects to recruit about 100 scientists,
trainees and associates, Dr. Stiller said as many as 400 new researchers will
work with the R. Samuel McLaughlin Centre over a five-year period.

    "We want to go out and recruit scientists in molecular biology and genetic
medicine and [those who work in] regeneration of tissue," he said, adding that
it's important to get scientists when they're young as most Nobel laureates are
awarded the prize before age 35. "An opportunity is being created that is
unprecedented in this country."

    The U of T is well known for Nobel laureate John Polanyi, who won the prize
for chemistry in 1986. Frederick Banting and John Macleod also won a Nobel Prize
in 1923 for their work with Charles Best on the role of insulin. Four U of T
alumni have won the award as well.

    University of Toronto president Robert Prichard said the money will allow
the institution to "retain scientists who will rank with the very best in the
world" by having the equipment, laboratories and hospital clinical settings
available.

    Specifically, the money will fund research that focuses on gene therapy,
molecular pharmacology and tissue engineering with an eye to finding new ways to
treat, diagnose and prevent diseases.

    The centre will be a virtual one, with training, teaching and research
taking place at the following four hospitals: Sunnybrook and Women's College
Health Sciences Centre; the Hospital for Sick Children; Mount Sinai; and
Princess Margaret, which is part of the University Health Network.

    At a news conference yesterday, Ontario Premier Mike Harris called it the
"beginning of a new era of medicine in Canada" while the U of T's dean of
medicine, Dr. David Naylor, called it an "unprecedented opportunity."

    The $50-million donation from the McLaughlin Foundation comes as it winds
down operations at the instruction of its founder, the late Mr. McLaughlin. By
the time the foundation ceases operation, it will have contributed almost
$200-million to institutions, organizations and individuals across Canada since
its inception in 1951.

    The combined foundation-government donation to the U of T fits with recent
federal government initiatives to stimulate lagging research in Canada and keep
its brightest scientists in the country.

    Federal Finance Minister Paul Martin, in his most recent budget, announced
the allocation of $900-million over five years to fund 2,000 new research chairs
across the country.

    Also, the U of T recently received an $8-million donation from Leslie Dan,
chairwoman and founder of Novopharm Ltd. The money will go toward the
construction of a $44-million building that will help the pharmacy faculty
double its enrolment to 240 students, triple the space for research laboratories
and increase the number of full-time teaching staff.

ACADEMIC DONATIONS

    10 years of donations and where the money was spent

Benefactor/donationRecipient


 April 1991   Peter Wall,            University of British Columbia


$15-million            to found Canada's first Institute


                                     for Advanced Studies


 Sept. 1995   Murray Koffler,        University of Toronto for


$16-million           environmental research and


               (860 acre estate)     field work


 Dec. 1995    Seymour Schulich,      York University's School


$15-million           of Business


 Jan. 1997    Joseph Rotman,         University of Toronto's


$15-million           Faculty of Management


 Oct. 1998    Stewart Blusson,       University of British Columbia


$50-million           to promote basic research


 May 1999     Jim Pattison,          Vancouver General Hospital


$20-million           for research in prostrate cancer


 May 2000     Richard Tomlinson,     McGill University to support


$64-million           medical and technology research


 June 2000    R. Samuel McLaughlin   University for biomedical and


Foundation            genetic research


$50-million



CORRECTION

    Leslie Dan is chairman of Novopharm Ltd. Incorrect information was published
yesterday.
   (Wednesday, June 7, 2000, Page A2)

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2006


                              472 of 545 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Sun Media Corporation
                         Calgary Sun (Alberta, Canada)

                     May 18, 2000, Thursday, Final EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 19

LENGTH: 195 words

HEADLINE: KEY FOUND TO THERAPY

BODY:


   University of Calgary researchers have hit a breakthrough that will make a
controversial new treatment, gene therapy, safer.

   They've identified the process that causes the body's cells to inflame when a
virus is used to deliver genes to troubled parts of the body.

   So far, the gene therapy has caused the death of U.S. teen Jesse Gelsinger.

   Dr. Daniel Muruve, who made the discovery along with Dr. Norman Wong, said
the case was highly publicized -- but rare.

   "We're studying the toxicity of some of the drugs used in gene therapy," said
Muruve. "Hopefully that will help in preventing future deaths."

   Viruses, or other vehicles, are used to deliver genes to cells in the body.
The genes then change the way those cells behave.

   But large doses of the virus can act as "fly paper," said Muruve, inflaming
and trapping cells.

   Their research has zeroed in on chemokines which cause that process -- a
first step towards making the therapy safer.

   While it may be years -- or even a generation away -- Muruve said gene
therapy could eventually help countless people with dozens of diseases, such as
cancer, heart, kidney or liver disease and diabetes.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2000


                              483 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             April 28, 2000 Friday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 476 words

HEADLINE: Gene fix turns on immunity of 2 boys;
French MDs free them from germless bubbles

BYLINE: Reuters News Agency

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

     In what some experts are calling the first true gene-therapy success,
French researchers said yesterday that they have treated two infant boys for a
rare, inherited immune-system disorder.

    The boys have human severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) X1, which leaves
them without any working immune system. Patients usually live out their short
lives in sterile "bubbles" because any infection would overwhelm them.

    Alain Fischer of the Necker Hospital in Paris and colleagues said they had
managed to establish their immune systems using gene therapy.

    "Both enjoy normal growth and psychomotor development. No side effects have
been noted," they wrote in their report, published in the journal Science.

    Although they do not know how long the new genes will last and continue to
provide an immune system for the boys, the researchers said their results "pave
the way" for the same approach to be used in other genetic diseases.

    "I think this is the first evidence ever that gene therapy does anything,"
said David Nelson, an expert in inherited immune diseases at the U.S. National
Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md. "This is really good stuff."

    SCID X1 patients are missing a master control for the immune system, a cell
receptor that turns on the different immune system cells, including T cells that
flag and destroy invaders and natural killer cells.

    The defect is inherited on the X chromosome, which only males have, so it is
easier than some other genetic defects to track down and try to correct.

    Attempts to introduce an improved version of the gene into patients' bodies
have not worked, so Dr. Fischer's team tried a new approach, using stem cells.

    Stem cells are nursery cells, found in this case in the bone marrow. They
give rise to all the different kinds of blood cells, including the immune system
cells.

    Bone marrow is now routinely mined for stem cells to treat a range of
diseases, including leukemia.

    Dr. Fischer's team took bone marrow cells from the two boys, aged 8 months
and 11 months at the time, and purified out the stem cells. They do this by
looking for a marker known as CD34, which is believed to be a pointer to stem
cells.

    They nursed these cells along in a special cocktail of compounds meant to
help the stem cells thrive and multiply, and also to make them more amenable to
genetic engineering.

    Added into the mix was a virus carrying a healthy version of the gene the
boys needed, called the gamma-c cytokine receptor sub-unit. The virus, a
retrovirus, injected the new gene into the stem cells.

    After three days, the mixture was purified and the infected cells put back
into the boys.

    Within 15 days, the researchers saw results. The boys started producing
immune cells and chemicals. One boy who had suffered from diarrhea and skin
lesions had his symptoms clear up and both went home after three months.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2006


                              488 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             April 18, 2000 Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. R8

LENGTH: 1901 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy: hope or hype;
No one has yet been cured of any disease by gene therapy,;
but cancer treatment results are showing promise

BYLINE: NICOLE JOHNSTON, Special to The Globe and Mail

BODY:

    For several years, Jack Schnoor chalked up a discoloured toenail to a sports
injury. But in the fall of 1995, when a regimen of antifungal therapy cleared up
all but that one toe, his doctor was concerned.

    The lab result came back indicating melanoma - a type of skin cancer
notoriously difficult to treat if not caught early.

    "I assumed everything was okay," says Mr. Schnoor. "They discovered it,
amputated it, and after a biopsy, found nothing else."

    But by 1997, everything wasn't okay. He developed pain in his hip that grew
so intense he could no longer walk.

    Tests revealed that the cancer had spread throughout his pelvic area.
Doctors in both Toronto and New York gave him 12 to 18 months to live. It then
spread to his neck, collapsing two of the vertebrae and thrusting his head
permanently forward. Chemotherapy offered little promise.

    So, when he heard of a melanoma gene-therapy trial through the Hamilton
Regional Cancer Centre, he enrolled. The aim of the Phase I trial was to
establish the dosage safety limits - it made no promise of effectively treating
his cancer.

    After receiving two injections since last August, a subsequent bone scan
showed some improvement in his chest area. A lump on his calf has since gone
away. And it's been two years since the grim prognosis.

    But both Mr. Schnoor and his doctors are cautious about overinterpreting the
therapeutic effect he seems to have experienced. "Something is happening, but
they don't know what it is," he says. "It could be a placebo effect."

    Gene-therapy research continues to garner headlines claiming various
breakthroughs for treating this or that disease. And recently, a report in the
journal Nature Genetics described some success in treating hemophilia B in two
people.

    Other reports have claimed successes with research in animals where
gene-therapy strategies have wiped out cancers and reversed heart disease, among
other things.

    But after more than a decade of clinical study, nobody has been cured of any
disease by gene therapy. Effective treatments are still a few years down the
pipeline. And early clinical trials are restricted to a very small number of
very sick people

    Even so, to the desperately ill or dying, each new gene-therapy
pronouncement amounts to a beacon of hope - if only a false one.

    "I have people coming to my office on a regular basis with clippings from
newspapers and magazines, asking, 'Can I have this drug treatment?' " says Dr.
Keith Stewart, a hematologist and the director of Cancer Gene Therapy at
Princess Margaret Hospital in Toronto. "They have somewhat unrealistic
expectations."

    Dr. Jack Gauldie, chairman of the Department of Pathology at McMaster
University in Hamilton, and an internationally recognized expert in gene
transfer research, cautions: "We're a mile away from replacing the broken gene."

    But he believes that, in time, cancer will be probably be the first disease
in which gene-based medicine will show benefit, with infectious diseases not far
behind. In Canada, of 29 approved gene-therapy trials, 25 of them are aimed at
cancer.

    The idea of gene therapy still conjures up images of simply fixing or
replacing a "broken" or defective gene to cure a disease. The reality is far
more complex. Medicine will likely continue to rely on a wide range of
treatments with gene therapy added to the mix.

    Dr. Ronan Foley, a hematologist at the Henderson Hospital in Hamilton,
headed up Mr. Schnoor's clinical trial along with Dr. Gauldie and colleagues.

    "We have come to realize that cancer treatment is very effective at
eradicating [the] tumour . . . but that is only part of the strategy," says Dr.
Foley. "The second part of the equation is you also have to keep the cancer
away."

    Sometimes, the cancer will return in two or three years because some of the
original cancer cells found ways to evade the immune system and avoided
detection. To make matters worse, they sometimes don't respond to chemotherapy
the second time around.

    Getting around this problem is where gene therapy could prove useful.
Researchers like Dr. Foley are using gene therapy as a form of immune booster,
or a cancer vaccine.

    This approach tries to draw attention to the tumour cells that the immune
system, for some reason, fails to notice. Then, the body's own defenses can beef
up patrols and kill any renegade cancer cells on the loose.

    Melanoma tumours, like other cancers, sport characteristic molecules -
called tumour antigens - on their surfaces. Mr. Schnoor's vaccine consisted of
specialized but rare immune cells, called dendritic cells. The role of these
cells is to flash the tumour antigen before the immune system - like a red cape
before a bull.

    The dendritic cells are collected from the patient's blood and multiplied in
the lab to obtain a large number of them. Then they are genetically modified so
they are even better at alerting the immune system to the tumour once they are
injected back in the patient's body.

    In particular, the dendritic cells are modified by inserting the gene that
makes the protein that plays the role of the red cape. And with more red capes
flashing before the immune system, it's hoped the body will rev up its attack
against the cancer that had skillfully evaded detection.

    Dr. Stewart at Princess Margaret Hospital is using a similar approach in
clinical trials for bone-marrow cancers (leukemias), melanoma, prostate cancer,
and breast cancer.

    His team is removing some cancer cells from the patients and inserting genes
into them that instruct the cells to make the most powerful immune stimulating
molecules - interleukin proteins IL-2 and IL-12. Once the cancer cells are put
back into the patient, they alert the immune defenses, drawing attention to
themselves and the other cancer cells left behind.

    Other gene studies are using different approaches, but the aim is the same:
providing an extra punch to conventional cancer therapies.

    Meanwhile, four clinical trials approved in Canada are investigating gene
therapy for heart disease and blood-vessel disease of the extremities, called
peripheral vascular disease.

    Dr. Duncan Stewart, head of cardiology at St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto,
is aiming to improve blood flow to the heart muscle of patients with heart
disease. In this study, he is injecting into the heart muscle a gene that make a
protein - known as Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) - that stimulates
the growth of tiny new blood vessels in the heart. The goal is to see if
improved blood flow can be achieved in these areas.

    The initial studies are being done on patients undergoing bypass surgery and
that involves opening up the chest to gain access to the heart. But later this
month, using a new approach, "smart" catheters will feed the genes into
oxygen-starved heart tissue without having to open the chest.

    Dr. Barry Rubin, medical director of the vascular-surgery division at
Toronto General Hospital, anticipates using VEGF in an industry-sponsored study
aimed at treatment for patients with severe peripheral vascular disease who are
facing amputation and have no other treatment options.

    In this case, "naked" DNA carrying the VEGF gene will be injected into the
skeletal muscle of extremities where blood flow is severely impaired in the
hopes of improving circulation.

    But despite promising results in animals for these applications, hurdles
still have to be overcome. There is a chance that the VEGH genes could end up in
the wrong place and do more harm than good. For instance, there is a theoretical
risk they could accelerate tumour growth by setting up a blood supply to an
undetected cancer. What's more, excessive blood-vessel growth in the eyes could
lead to vision loss - particularly among diabetics.

    "The chances of major breakthroughs in the near future are small," says Dr.
Keith Stewart, "but we have to start somewhere."

    Nevertheless, there is cause for optimism. "There is no reason why it should
not work well in some situations," says Dr. Anthony Ridgway, manager of the
biotherapeutics division of the Health Protection Branch of Health Canada. And
just as no one approach to cancer is going to treat all cancers, he adds, the
same is going to be true for different applications of gene therapy.

    "Success will be achieved more quickly for some, others will be more
difficult."

THE OBSTACLES

    Genes are DNA blueprints that spell out the instructions our cells need for
making the proteins required to function normally. When a gene is defective -
mutated or missing a portion - a particular protein isn't produced or is made
improperly, resulting in the symptoms of a given disease.

    While the replacement of a defective gene is possible in principle, it is
anything but straightforward in practice. Some genetic diseases will be easier
to correct than others. Dr. Gregory Downey, director of Lung Gene Therapy
Research at the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto, and his colleagues are
investigating various ways of overcoming the hurdles facing cystic fibrosis gene
therapy. But as he points out, "each area has its own demons to conquer."

   Delivery methods: A major challenge is how to get the gene into a cell
without having it wiped out by the body's immune system while in transit. The
body has devised ways of destroying foreign genetic material, including enzymes
that will chew up naked DNA.

    One option is to use modified viruses as protective carriers. The viruses
are altered so that they no longer make people sick. Then they are converted
into little taxis that can ferry a gene to a desired location. After millions of
years of evolution, they've mastered the art of invading cells and setting up
shop.

    In some cases, however, the immune system will recognize the viral carrier
and destroy both it and the gene passenger. In other cases, the modified virus
can still trigger an undesired inflammatory reaction in the body.

    So, researchers are also experimenting with a non-viral carrier called a
liposome (or lipoplex) - a synthetic fatty sphere. It can take the form of an
aerosol spray and be inhaled into the body. This approach might be used to treat
a genetic lung disease such as cystic fibrosis.

   Controlling gene activity: For some diseases, the correct amount of protein
has to be made for the right amount of time. Diseases like cystic fibrosis need
a continual supply of a certain protein throughout a person'slifetime to keep
the disease in check. Other diseases will respond well to small amounts of the
protein and don't require such tight control. For different reasons, protein
production sometimes works poorly or shuts off altogether. Scientists are not
yet able to control gene activity after it's been introduced into the body.

   Condition of the host: For some genetic diseases, irreparable damage occurs
early in life. In cystic fibrosis, the lungs are damaged during childhood.
Treating some of these diseases will mean having to intervene while the patient
is still an infant, before permanent damage has already occurred.

   Host immune response: Another concern is how the person's immune system will
react to seeing a foreign protein. The immune system may not react adversely the
first time the carrier or gene product (the protein) is encountered, but can
mount a severe response on subsequent exposures. This would pose a problem for a
gene therapy that requires repeated applications.
- Nicole Johnston

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2006


                              491 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            April 15, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; SHELF LIFE; Pg. D20

LENGTH: 563 words

HEADLINE: Predictable predictions

BYLINE: MARTIN LEVIN

BODY:

    'You can only predict things after they happen," wrote the Romanian
playwright Eugene Ionesco. The advice has seldom been heeded by prognosticators,
from Greek soothsayers through Nostradamus to Edgar Cayce and newspaper
horoscopes. The Book of Revelations' apocalyptic prophesies aside, the Bible
condemns prediction, or augury, as witchcraft. But surely that must refer only
to correct prediction, and as Ionesco wrote . . .

    The last days of the just-past millennium were laden with predictions both
dire and rosy. Never mind that the practice has a rather dicey track record,
many bought into the trend anyway. Including publishers. An early production of
the new era is Predictions: 30 Great Minds on the Future (Oxford University
Press, 328 pages, $25.25

    ), edited by Sian Griffiths of London's Times Higher Education Supplement,
where these interviews first appeared.

    Griffiths has certainly assembled a mighty cast of intellectual icons, even
if there's a usual-suspects quality. More than half come from science, including
Richard Dawkins, Daniel Dennett, Stephen Jay Gould and James Watson. Noam
Chomsky writes on language, not politics, thank goodness. There's Andrea Dworkin
on women, Peter Singer on ethics, Sherry Turkle on technology and so on.
Expatriate Canadians are there in the inevitable personae of J. K. Galbraith and
evolutionary psychology maven Steven Pinker.

    Now I love books about big ideas, even when they go off the rails, perhaps
especially when they go off the rails. But this one's a bit of a cheat. Pick it
up and you'd think: 30 great minds, 320 great pages, that's about 10 pages of
extended rumination each, a lot of Big Bangs for the buck. But you'd be misled:
Each author gets a full-page photo (sort of nice) and the introductions to their
musings - useful little essays by perfectly respectable writers of whom you've
never heard - are in every case longer, and often more interesting, than the
famous contributions. In fact, the actual predictions take up a mere 70 pages or
so. And some are less predictions than lists of desiderata: Dworkin's wishes for
women; Galbraith's and Amartya Sen's pleas for ending world poverty.

    And when you do get to the predictions? Well, most seem familiar. Arthur C.
Clarke says artificial intelligence will reach human level by 2020; science will
solve the mystery of consciousness (Dawkins, Pinker, Susan Greenfield); the
feminization of politics will see less war (Yeah? Tell that to Maggie Thatcher);
advances in gene therapy will enhance human capabilities and challenge
traditional ethics, but won't solve all riddles; and climate change will become
more apparent (it's snowing in Toronto on April 12 as I write this).

    Frankly, among seers, I'll take the American wacko Criswell, a pal of the
incompetent film director Ed Wood. Though he did correctly predict Ronald
Reagan's presidency (on The Tonight Show in 1965, to much derision), his true
out-on-a-limb calls include: mysterious fumes would cause cannibalism in
Pittsburgh in 1980, with blood-crazed men attacking unsuspecting victims (eerily
foreshadowing the film Night of the Living Dead, made in Pittsburgh); other
fumes would render the women of St. Louis bald in 1983; by 1999, space colonies
would contain the only survivors of humanity when all Earth's oxygen is sucked
away by another mysterious force. Now that's predicting!

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2006


                              497 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              April 3, 2000 Monday

SECTION: SPECIAL REPORT; CANADIAN CANCER SOCIETY: PROGRESS AND HOPE; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 861 words

HEADLINE: Breaking down a tumour's defence

BODY:

    Cancer cells are notoriously gifted at proliferation. The other side of that
coin is that they are highly tenacious at self defence.

    One sign is that cancerous growths often develop resistance to drugs that
seem initially effective. A frequent and very frustrating pattern in cancer
treatment has been the tumour that goes into remission with chemotherapy, only
to come back more aggressively than before in a couple of years.

    This problem has preoccupied award-winning Canadian scientist Dr. Victor
Ling for more than two decades.

    More than a dozen years ago, Dr. Ling and his team discovered a protein
called P-glycoprotein, which appeared to act as a kind of pump in cancer cells
to eject therapeutic drugs that entered them. P-glycoprotein, which normally
protects cells from environmental toxic materials, is exploited by tumour cells
to protect them from the agents used to control cancer growth.

    This was resonant. Overcoming drug resistance by cancer cells could reclaim
the promise that first sprang up two and three decades ago when combination
chemotherapy approaches started being used to prolong life. There was then what
Dr. Ling terms "a certain level of euphoria" in the scientific community with
those early results.

    But the eventual relapse in which the tumour returned was discouraging.

    "What we didn't appreciate at the time is that the cancer cell marshals up
other resistances, some of them from the P-glycoprotein family," Dr. Ling says.

    As his concept developed from hypothesis to evidence-based findings, the
work of Dr. Ling caught fire in the international scientific community. His
team's effort, which has been supported primarily by the Canadian Cancer Society
with millions of dollars in grants, soon became the focus of an entire session
at the annual meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research, the
largest conference of its type.

    "I think that by 1990 or so we clearly understood the basic mechanism of
P-glycoprotein," recalls Dr. Ling, currently vice-president of research at the
British Columbia Cancer Agency and a vice-dean at the University of British
Columbia in Vancouver.

    "One question, of course, was how relevant would this be in human cancer,"
continues Dr. Ling, who conducted much of the formative research with the
Ontario Cancer Institute before moving west in 1995. "The question was very easy
to ask but difficult to answer. You had to have some mechanism for turning off
P-glycoprotein and seeing if people did better."

    Certainly, the mouse model showed a dramatic pattern. If even a single
drug-resistant cell was implanted into an otherwise drug-sensitive tumour in a
mouse, traditional therapies could no longer stop the cancer from growing and
killing the animal.

    During this last decade, it turned out, "a number of different drugs and
compounds were found to block P-glycoprotein," Dr. Ling says. "Then the question
was whether the patient could tolerate [the treatment] or not."

    An answer leading to the next question is precisely the formula by which
science usually proceeds (this answer turned out to be "yes"). Even with
groundbreaking findings such of those of Dr. Ling, the whole problem may not be
resolved, yet the treatment results are improved and the base of knowledge is
expanded. Dr. Ling believes the public has come to understand and accept this
ongoing dynamic in cancer research.

    For example, patients with myeloma (bone marrow malignancy) and leukemia who
are given P-glycoprotein-blocking therapy "all seem to do better," Dr. Ling
relates. But they aren't cured, their life is prolonged.

    "What it tells us," he says, "is that the cancer cell will defend itself
even when P-glycoprotein is blocked, perhaps with different mechanisms."

    That seems to fit. A normal liver cell, for example, has certain defences
specific to its function while a cancer cell is much less differentiated and so
likely has a wider range of defences.

    Canadian Cancer Society-supported research has increasingly been penetrating
those defences, however. Dr. Ling praises the work of two colleagues who have
gone on to look at how chemotherapy can be made effective in retinoblastoma, a
tumour of the eye that is generally resistant to that approach.

    The two scientists, Dr. Brenda Gallie of the Princess Margaret
Hospital/Ontario Cancer Institute and Dr. Helen Chan of the Hospital for Sick
Children, "have had some really remarkable success," comments Dr. Ling, noting
that the Toronto team's work is now a basis for clinical trials across North
America.

    More generally, clinical studies to date have proved the phenomenon of
anti-drug resistance, Dr. Ling believes, and the nearly completed work on
mapping the entire human genetic structure will afford new insights into how it
can be overcome. Such possibilities as combining chemotherapy with gene therapy,
for example, could overwhelm cancerous growth.

    As we enter into the new millenium, says Dr. Ling, uncovering the knowledge
needed to stay "one step ahead of cancer cells" is becoming a reality. "There
are exciting times ahead - times that will make a real difference to cancer
patients and to cancer control in general."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2006


                              498 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              April 3, 2000 Monday

SECTION: SPECIAL REPORT; CANADIAN CANCER SOCIETY: PROGRESS AND HOPE; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1309 words

HEADLINE: Research making inroads against cancer

BODY:

    In his effort to lay the groundwork for a cancer vaccine, Dr. Yves Fradet of
Laval University in Quebec City has discovered molecular "fingerprints" left by
bladder cancer cells. His finding of these specific antigens has led to the
creation of an extremely sensitive and reliable test for bladder cancer that is
already in use in North America and Europe.

    At McMaster University in Hamilton, one of the world's foremost scientists
in gene therapy, Dr. Frank Graham, is investigating how the common cold virus
can induce a heightened immune response against cancer. The virus is considered
super-efficient at delivering DNA into cells, potentially with a gene needed for
cancer therapy spliced into it.

    Dr. Grant McFadden at the John P. Robarts Research Institute in London,
Ont., is looking at how common viruses elude the body's immune system and keep
host cells alive, a process believed to hold important lessons about how cancer
works.

    Dr. Victor Ling at the British Columbia Cancer Agency examines how cancer
cells develop resistance to drugs, research that has created important therapy
refinements.

    At Sunnybrook and Women's College Health Sciences Centre in Toronto, Dr. Bob
Kerbel has pioneered new findings in anti-angiogenesis, an approach that shrinks
cancer tumours by depriving them of their blood-vessel network. This area of
investigation is considered one of the most promising in cancer research today.

    What the work of these and hundreds of other top Canadian scientists have in
common is that it is all part of an ongoing Canadian Cancer Society (CCS) effort
that is making remarkable inroads against cancer.

    A national, volunteer organization founded in 1938, the Canadian Cancer
Society has since then funded more than $700-million in research that has proved
instrumental in building a strong foundation of knowledge about cancer.

    "There's one thing I've been telling people when they ask me what's
happening," remarks Dr. Robert Phillips, executive director of the National
Cancer Institute of Canada, the research arm of the CCS. "I say this is the most
exciting time ever in cancer research and everything is working."

    Supported by new understandings of genetic mechanisms, with technology
bringing advanced refinements to the investigations and with hundreds of
medications in development, cancer research is rapidly moving toward hitherto
unimagined protocols for treatment.

    "It is astounding what we know now relative to even five years ago, let
alone 15 or 20 years ago," declares Dr. Philip Branton, chair of biochemistry at
McGill University in Montreal, cofounder of Geminx Biotechnologies.

    At the same time that the research community is openly euphoric about the
advances, Dr. Branton acknowledges that there is also deep public concern with
the continued incidence and mortality of cancer.

    "We have made great progress but we're in the translation phase, converting
what we know to more practical therapies," he says. "Let's just talk about new
drugs to treat cancer. To develop a drug, you need a target, either genes or the
products of genes, the proteins. All of the basic research we've been doing has
given us dozens, probably hundreds of targets today. These are all new. These
were unknown 20 years ago."

    And while the potential being developed with the new therapies should
convert to statistical change quickly - Dr. Phillips believes cancer mortality
rates in 30 years will be 50 per cent of its current levels - research has
already generated important recent advances in diagnosis and treatment.

    There are now substantially decreased deaths in Canada from many leukemias
and some of the childhood cancers, for example. Early detection and treatment
advances have reduced mortality rates from breast, colon and bladder cancer, and
progress in therapy has done the same for Hodgkin's disease and testicular
cancer.

    Meanwhile, lower rates of invasive cervical cancer probably reflect the
impact of early detection through Pap smear screening programs. And as the
Canadian Cancer Society and other groups continue to encourage an improved diet
for Canadians, large declines in incidence and mortality rates for stomach
cancer continue.

    Still, as much as any organization in the country, the CCS understands how
persistent the challenges are. Among women, lung cancer incidence and mortality
rates continue their rapid increase and are now almost five times as high as
rates in 1970. Prostate cancer is today the most frequently diagnosed cancer in
Canadian men, and has only recently gained a stronger emphasis in research.

    "There are still too many people getting cancer who shouldn't be," says Dr.
Barbara Whylie, director of medical affairs for the Canadian Cancer Society.
"Through continued advances uncovered by research, and more information about
risk reduction and prevention, we anticipate that over the next few years we
will see progress towards our mission of eradicating this disease once and for
all."

    More observations from these Canadian Cancer Society/National Cancer
Institute of Canada experts on where research is taking us:
ON THE EXPLOSION OF KNOWLEDGE:
   "There has been a revolution in technology, mainly genetic, biochemical," Dr.
Branton says. "It opens new windows that we didn't even know existed six or
seven years ago."

    "Now you can go in and identify a single protein and change that protein to
see what it does," Dr. Phillips observes. "Any graduate student can learn the
fundamental mechanisms."
ON NEW THERAPIES:
   "Some of the major accomplishments are now going to be seen in the area of
treatments," Dr. Whylie says.
   "The introduction of drugs that target the cancer-producing pathways within
individual cells are bringing along a whole new approach to treatment that
brings fewer dangerous and unpleasant side effects."

    "It used to be said that the majority of drugs were developed by serendipity
rather than through science," Dr. Phillips remarks. "We now go through targeted
pathways. A very high proportion of things that come through clinical trials now
have a chance of working."

    "Virtually all of the major pharmaceutical companies have cancer programs
today because this is a huge problem and a huge market," Dr. Branton notes.
"They are racing to the clinic. And in addition to the big companies, a whole
host of smaller biotechnology companies have sprung up."

    Research has observed that cancer cells avoid a normally programmed
cell-death process called apoptosis and "this has changed our thinking about new
targets," Dr. Branton says. "Many of the new targets are now in the 'death
machine' of the cells. This can allow highly selective killing of cancer cells
and therefore there are less side effects."
ON REDUCED CANCER MORTALITY:
   "If you just look at the cancer statistics, you see that mortality rates are
dropping in almost every cancer site, the big exception being lung cancer in
women," Dr. Phillips says. "This is due to research - improved treatment,
diagnosis and some prevention."

    At a recent symposium on breast cancer, Dr. Branton relates, "I argued that
even within five years there will be a significant change and certainly within
10 years."
ON PREVENTION:
   "We've certainly learned a lot about risk factors," Dr. Whylie observes. "We
know what needs to happen."

    "We were probably naive in the beginning," Dr. Phillips admits. "We thought
we would tell people that smoking is bad and they would stop. Both the National
Cancer Institute of Canada and the Canadian Cancer Society are trying to
identify the best ways to help people to stop smoking."
ON PROGRESS STILL NEEDED:
   "If we're going to have a major impact in cancer, we must have progress on
the four big sites - lung, breast, prostate and colorectoral," Dr. Phillips
says. "These account for about 50 per cent of cancers, and we're making gains in
all four."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2006


                              505 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             March 21, 2000 Tuesday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: MONEY & MARKETS; Pg. B20

LENGTH: 834 words

HEADLINE: Biotech funds take licking but most keep on ticking;
Nasdaq sector index plunges by one-third since March 6

BYLINE: ANDREW BELL, Investment Reporter

BODY:

    Mutual funds that loaded up biotechnology stocks have taken a pounding since
early March as the overheated sector continues to slide. Still, most
biotech-heavy funds are sitting on healthy gains this year.

    The Nasdaq Stock Market's biotech index peaked at 1,596.53 on March 6 for a
sizzling gain of 81 per cent since the start of the year. However, it has since
lost almost one-third of its value.

    Much of the damage was inflicted last week when U.S. President Bill Clinton
and British Prime Minister Tony Blair reiterated their desire to see free
dissemination of research on the human gene code - many investors took that as a
sign it will be difficult for biotech companies to lock up lucrative genetic
patents.

    Yesterday alone, the Nasdaq biotech index fell 129.28 points or 11 per cent
to end at 1,087.49, helping to drive the Nasdaq composite index to its
third-worst point loss ever.

    "The selloff has been pretty indiscriminate," said Wendy Chua, co-manager of
the $83-million Altamira Health Sciences Fund. "It's difficult to say where the
bottom will be."

    Only one mutual fund specializing in biotechnology has been launched in
Canada so far, the C.I. Global Biotechnology Sector Fund. Introduced in August,
its assets had ballooned to $549-million by the end of last month, up from
$52-million at the start of the year.

    As of Friday, the fund had dropped almost 16 per cent since March 6, less
than the slide in many biotech stocks. It was still up 48.7 per cent in 2000 so
far even though the influx of new investors means New York-based manager Stephen
Waite has been carrying a huge cash position: 40 per cent of the fund at the end
of January.

    There has been no respite for biotech investors in the sector as industry
heavyweights crash along with smaller, more speculative names.

    "The stocks have come a long way in a few short months," Mark Augustine, an
analyst with U.S. Bancorp Piper Jaffray, told Bloomberg News. "The slightest
hint of bad news is seen as reason to sell."

    Giant immune-system specialist Immunex Corp. of Seattle, for example, has
slid to $150 (U.S.) on Nasdaq from $248.50 on March 6.

    Investors in global biotech player Amgen Inc. of Thousand Oaks, Calif., have
been spared the worst so far: The stock has dropped only about 10 per cent since
March 6, closing yesterday at $58.

    Still, Amgen took a pounding yesterday, losing 8 per cent on news that the
company may fail in a bid to keep a rival to its best-selling drug, Epogen, off
the U.S. market. Upstart biotech Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. wants to sell an
anemia drug that would compete with Epogen.

    The frothy Canadian biotech market has also suffered. Immune researcher
Vasogen Inc. has dropped to $12.90 (Canadian) on the Toronto Stock Exchange from
$18.85 on March 3 while cancer fighter Lorus Therapeutics Inc. has slumped to
$5.80 from $8.80 March 6.

    The health care mutual fund that has taken the biggest hit seems to be the
$903-million AIM Global Health Sciences Fund, which dropped almost 18 per cent
from March 6 to last Friday. It was still up 14.8 per cent in 2000.

    As of Friday, the Altamira Health Sciences Fund had gained a stellar 41 per
cent in 2000, the best performance by a broadly based health-care fund. "Much of
our performance came from biotech," co-manager Ms. Chua acknowledged, although
she said the fund has done well also on conventional drug makers such as Elan
Corp. PLC of Ireland, whose stock has doubled since November.

    Some funds have sailed almost unscathed through the biotech storm - but
that's mainly because they didn't have much money in the sector to start with.
The $361-million Fidelity Focus Health Care Fund was unchanged from March 6 to
March 17. Manager Ramin Arani has hardly any pure biotechs in his top holdings:
Amgen was the fund's No. 3 holding as of Dec. 31 but otherwise its biggest
investments were old-line drug companies such Merck & Co. and Johnson & Johnson.
As of Friday, the fund was up a lacklustre 5.5 per cent in 2000.

GENE WHIZ

    Biotechnology funds have taken a drubbing lately but most are still well
ahead this year.

                                                   Three-


                                    Return   Return  year


                                     since    this  annual    Assets


                                    March 6*  year*.return*.($million)


Aim Global Health Sciences         -17.8%   +14.8%  +25.6%   $903


Altamira Health Sciences           -13.3    +41.0     new      83


C.I. Global Biotechnology Sector   -15.6    +48.7     new     549


C.I. Global Health Sciences Sector  +0.6    +13.8   +17.3     274


Fidelity Focus Health Care          +0.1     +5.5     new     361


Green Line Health Sciences         -12.3    +23.8   +28.0     434


Talvest Global Health Care          -2.7    +36.3   +32.6      95


Nasdaq biotech index               -23.0%   +40.4%  +66.4%


    -*Returns this year and since March 6 are to March 17. Three-year return is
to Feb. 29.
Source: www.globefund.com and Bloomberg Financial Services

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2006


                              507 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            March 16, 2000 Thursday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 682 words

HEADLINE: Buying genes, selling dreams;
Private industry isn't the brake;
of human genetics, it's the engine

BODY:

    'Genes for sale. Genes for sale. Hurry, hurry, get access to your own genes,
patented by private company, with its and not your interest in mind."

    It is hard not to translate the political scientific news of the past few
days into this kind of cynical peddlers' cry. On Tuesday, U.S. President Bill
Clinton and British Prime Minister Tony Blair issued a joint statement saying
that it was in the interest of humanity that scientists - both public and
private - make their sequences of the three billion chemicals that make up human
DNA publicly available.

    They pointed out that publicly funded scientists do this within 24 hours of
discovery. The announcement followed hard on the news that an effort to ensure
just this kind of democracy of information had broken up over disagreements as
to how and when private companies should release their sequencing data.

    A nervous biotech market interpreted the news to mean that politicians were
against gene patenting, but that's not what was going on at all. Politicians
were really saying that the sequenced human genome - the proper ordering of all
genetic chemicals that human beings collectively share - should be in the public
domain.

    What does raw, sequenced DNA tell you? Nothing about what genes actually do,
or the diseases they may produce. A sequenced human genome is roughly akin to a
book written in an alphabet you can read but in a language you can't understand.
The genes that make you susceptible to heart disease or help you get the "joke"
in jokes remain a mystery.

    It is this raw material - the genome's letters, not its words - that the
politicians, the scientists and, at least to judge by their words, the private
companies say should be released. In the wake of Mr. Clinton and Mr. Blair's
statement, two big U.S. genomics companies have declared themselves 100 per cent
behind the free data idea.

    This is because, as Craig Venter, head of Celera Genomics, has long been
saying, they are not in the patenting business, but the information business.
That is, their long-term strategy is to create software that analyzes myriad
genetic data and suggests what genes may be linked to what other genes. They
don't want to patent genes, but a gene-searching technology.

    But there is another dynamic at work. In 1993, a public consortium of the
world's scientists announced that they would sequence the human genome by 2005.
Mr. Venter believed he could do it much faster using a different approach. The
public program, known as the Human Genome Project, entered into a race with Mr.
Venter and other private companies. This summer - nearly five years ahead of
schedule and driven by competition with private companies - a largely complete
sequencing map will be released by the HGP.

    Mr. Venter says his company will release what it has sequenced, and hasn't
already published, in the fall. Thus, rather than impede the progress of
possible genetic medicine, impatient private initiative has pushed humanity
closer to genetic understanding much faster than public initiative thought
possible.

    Finally, it is true that the genomics companies have sold early peeks at
their data to drug companies looking for genes. It is true that the genomics
companies or their licencees can patent genes when they know what they do. But
heretofore, the only real commercial success of gene patenting has been the
devising of tests to tell people that they do, indeed, carry often incurable
defects. Gene therapy, putting working genes inside defective bodies, hasn't
worked. Moreover, it is not clear scientists are going to find out how it does
work within the 20 years of a patent's coverage.

    Some suggest that pharmaceutical companies pouring billions into gene
research may not get a return on patents before they expire. To forestall
economic ruin, biotechnology firms will be forced into becoming engines of the
fastest medical application possible.

    The genetic hawkers' cry that should be going through our minds at the
latest news is more like: "Genes for sale. Genes for sale. Buy 'em before
somebody else gets 'em for free."

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2006


                              509 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              March 6, 2000 Monday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 528 words

HEADLINE: Toronto death raises questions about risks of gene therapy;
Man with brain cancer is believed to be second patient;
to die after undergoing experimental treatment;
that has made some scientists nervous

BYLINE: NATALIE SOUTHWORTH, The Globe and Mail

DATELINE: Toronto

BODY:

     The first death in Canada linked to gene therapy reveals possible
undisclosed risks associated with the experimental treatment.

    James Dent, a Toronto man who had 10 months to live after being diagnosed
with a terminal form of brain cancer, underwent gene therapy in 1997 as a last
resort. He died in April of 1997 - only the second recorded death linked to gene
therapy.

    Some proponents of gene therapy say it will one day dominate all medicine
since all diseases have a genetic component. Other, more cautious doctors and
scientists argue that until more work is done in the field, gene therapy should
be reserved only for terminal patients.

    According to an investigative report airing tonight on the CBC's The
Magazine,Mr. Dent was injected with a virus carrying genes that targeted his
brain tumour.

    A few weeks later, he began the second stage of the treatment - the
injection of an antivirus drug. Soon after the second stage, Mr. Dent's
condition worsened and he was taken off the antivirus. But it was too late.

    Days before he began the second stage of his treatment, another patient who
was part of the same experiment and suffered from exactly the same condition
died in Indiana. The death was ruled unexpected and possibly related to the gene
therapy.

    Mr. Dent died without knowing about the Indiana patient. Health Canada
concluded that part of Mr. Dent's gene therapy treatment contributed to his
death.

    Mr. Dent's daughter Laura told The Globe and Mail yesterday that her family
is considering asking for an inquest into the 66-year-old man's sudden death.

    "Within 48 hours of the second stage of the treatment, he was a changed
person. I tried to find out what was wrong with him, but I never got an answer,"
she said yesterday.

    Ms. Dent said that she was initially told by doctors at the Toronto
Hospital, where her father was treated, that he had developed steroid-induced
diabetes. She was then told he was suffering from stress and finally, that he
had pneumonia.

    According to the CBC's report, Mr. Dent's death was not reported in the
United States. And Health Canada was never notified about the death in Indiana.

    Under Canadian law, unexpected deaths possibly relating to experiments must
be reported within seven days. After that, the deaths, or other "adverse events"
are reported to ethics boards, which can change consent forms to include new
information to help patients make more informed choices.

    In Mr. Dent's case, the consent form he signed did not mention that patients
suffered adverse events as a result of the experiment.

    Since 1993, 30 gene therapy experiments on humans have been approved in
Canada.

    The first publicly recorded death from gene therapy occurred last September.
Jesse Gelsinger, a 19-year-old man volunteered for a gene therapy experiment at
the University of Pennsylvania, but died after receiving genetically altered
viruses called adenoviruses. Unlike Mr. Dent, whose fate was sealed, Mr.
Gelsinger suffered from a rare but non-fatal liver disorder.

    Mr. Gelsinger's father said he was not told a monkey had died in a similar
experiment, or that another patient had experienced serious side effects.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2006


                              510 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             March 4, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: COLUMN; Pg. D23

LENGTH: 524 words

HEADLINE: THE CHALLENGE

BYLINE: WARREN CLEMENTS

BODY:

    The challenge was to adjust the title of any familiar play, movie, book, TV
show or poem to reflect the world of medical doctors or other health
practitioners, and provide a brief synopsis. The winner is Julius L. Stoller of
Vancouver:

   Thoracic Park: In a failed experiment, a group of cloned chest surgeons go
out of control and run amok in the operating rooms of a secret Alberta private
hospital.

    Other doctored works:

   $10.66 and All That: An advisory brochure to doctors on how to structure
fees. (Ian Guthrie, Ottawa)

   "Dr. Iving, Miss Daisy": The life of a poor Atlanta GP changes dramatically
when he is introduced to an independent-minded widow. Mr. Strangelove: A doctor
loses his licence because of improper use of nuclear medicine. (G. Fisher,
Vancouver)

   Sleeping With the Enema: An aide overcomes her fear of medical devices with
hypnosis. The Incredible Gurney: An orderly and his patient experience harrowing
adventure when a wheel breaks. Bed Ringers: Identical twins cause confusion in
the maternity ward. (Lisa Henderson, Saskatoon)

   Prescription for Allergy Written in a Country Churchyard: Ragweed disables
the local gravedigger. Luckily, a nearby Dr. Gray is versed in these situations.
Phantom of the Operation: Haunting tale of a mysterious surgeon of whom the
patients ask, "Who was that masked man?" (K.C. Angus, Kemptville, Ont.)

   Parasites Lost: A biochemist proclaims the results of Stage III clinical
trials. (George Fells, Toronto)

   Charlatan's Web: Through his Web site, snailoil.doc.com, a disbarred
physician amasses an e-fortune. The Cabinet of Doctors' Calligraphy:
Prescriptions remain unfilled until cryptographer Rose Etterstone finds the key
to a mysterious cabinet. (Barrie Collins, Courtenay, B.C.)

   The Eyes Man Cometh: A lengthy account of the development of ophthalmology.
(Geoffrey Pierpoint, King City, Ont.)

   Back to the Suture: A 24th-century doctor is persecuted for using ancient and
barbaric procedures. (Karl Dilcher, Halifax)

   Honey, I Kidded the Shrink: The story of a young man's fight to do well in
his psychiatric assessment. (Tony Chandler, Sidney, B.C.)

   Animal Pharmacy: Should animals dispense their own drugs? A futuristic tale
of politics in the world of medical supplies. (John Illingworth and Norma
Crawford, Toronto)

   Regeneration X: Young doctors embrace gene therapy. HMO Pinafore: The true
identity of doctors on a cruise ship is revealed. Tissueless Joe: A baseball
player's biopsy sample is lost by the laboratory. (Cherry Watson, Waterloo)

   The Towering Infirmary: Fire sweeps a high-rise hospital. (Maggie Dickson,
Toronto)

   Catch 20/20: Thanks to Doc Daneeka's "perfect vision" clause, Yossarian
thought he'd never return home. (Nick Comeau, Ottawa)

   The Sick's Cents: A young boy with the power to see dead people finds himself
broke after learning his psychotherapy is not covered by health insurance.
(Charles Hall, Toronto)

   Ward of the Flies: An entomologist, concerned about the transfer of human
disease to insects, opens a very small hospital. (Paul Davy, Parry Sound, Ont.)

   This week: No challenge, so that we may run more of these next week, when a
new challenge will be set.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2006


                              519 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            February 18, 2000 Friday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 673 words

HEADLINE: Two new studies raise hope of treatment for livers damaged

BYLINE: KRISTA FOSS, Health Reporter

BODY:

    An enzyme and a gene that make cancer cells "immortal" have been enlisted to
the cause of healing: both may lead to new treatments for livers damaged by
disease, infection or alcohol, according to two research reports published
today.

    For the first time, scientists have used the enzyme telomerase - much hyped
as a potentially powerful anti-aging chemical when it was first discovered - to
prevent a specific condition in mice: cirrhosis of the liver.

    Meanwhile, another team of scientists has harnessed the power of a gene that
lets cancer cells divide endlessly. But they've used it instead to create an
abundant supply of fresh human liver cells. That may lead to a "bridge" therapy
that keeps alive those people waiting for liver transplants until a suitable
donor is located.

    Both teams of scientists are based at Harvard Medical School and both had
their research published today in the journal Science.

    In the first study, Ronald DePinho, a professor of medicine and genetics at
Harvard, showed that damage to the chromosomes in the liver cells of mice made
them more susceptible to cirrhosis - irreversible scarring of the organ.

    The liver, the organ responsible for cleaning the body's blood and
manufacturing important blood-clotting agents, has cells that stubbornly
replenish themselves. But after a barrage of insults - alcohol, drugs, viral
infection - these cells, also known as hepatocytes, get worn out.

    In particular, the cap that protects the end of the cell's chromosome, the
telomere, gets frayed and shortens. Telomerase, an enzyme produced by the cell,
can extend the life of these chromosomes. But when normal cells get tattered, a
genetic message shuts down the telomerase production and the tired cells die.
(Cancerous cells have a genetic mutation that never turns the telomerase
production off, resulting in nearly limitless division.)

    In Dr. DePinho's study, mice were genetically altered to have shortened
telomeres and then were deluged with toxins. They quickly developed cirrhosis -
unlike normal mice whose livers were able to handle the toxins.

    When Dr. DePinho's team treated the altered mice with gene therapy to
restore the telomerase production, the mice were protected from cirrhosis even
when subjected to toxic chemicals.

    "Now they have direct proof that if they interfere with the telomere
shortening using telomerase they can overcome the toxic effects. They can
prevent those effects," said Dr. Silvia Bacchetti, a professor of pathology at
McMaster University who is researching telomerase.

    Still, it will be several years before telomerase therapy will be ready to
be tested on humans, Dr. DePinho warned yesterday. His research used an
adenovirus to carry the gene therapy to the mice. But this procedure, which uses
a virus to deliver corrective genes to cells, has been controversial since the
death last year of a young man undergoing experimental therapy at the University
of Pennsylvania was linked to an adenovirus.

    Meanwhile, the work of Philippe Leboulch's team of researchers is likely to
benefit humans sooner. Dr. Leboulch, a molecular biologist and associate
professor of medicine at Harvard, grew fresh human liver cells in his laboratory
by infusing them with a gene - SV-40T - long known as a factor in the rapid
division of cancer cells.

    But Dr. Leboulch's team removed the cancer risk in the new liver cells in an
ingenious way. They sandwiched SV-40T between a "suicide" gene. When they had
grown enough new liver cells in the laboratory, they activated the suicide gene
with a drug, and it killed off the SV-40T.

    The new human liver cells were injected into the spleens of rats which had
90 per cent of their livers surgically removed. The human liver cells cleaned
the rats' blood, and created blood-clotting agents, while the remaining 10 per
cent of the rats' livers had a chance to grow back into new organs.
   Dr. Leboulch said yesterday that one day he hopes the research may help find
a way to extend the lives of people waiting for liver transplants.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2006


                              520 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            February 18, 2000 Friday

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; WORLD REPORT; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 71 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy cleared in testing, FDA says

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

    The U.S. Food and Drug Administration said yesterday that in-depth testing
concluded that gene therapy given to a group of dying cancer patients was not
contaminated with HIV or with the hepatitis C virus.

    Reports last week said that highly preliminary laboratory testing suggested
an experiment at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital and Houston's Baylor
College of Medicine might have exposed children to the viruses. AP

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2006


                              521 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           February 12, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A27

LENGTH: 389 words

HEADLINE: Gene-therapy drug may contain HIV;
Trials involving child cancer patients put on hold;
while FDA does testing

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD, Associated Press

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

     The U.S. Food and Drug Administration is trying to determine if a number of
children already dying from a nervous-system cancer might have been accidentally
exposed to the AIDS virus while getting experimental gene therapy in a
last-ditch attempt to save them.

    Suggestions that the children were exposed to HIV, human immunodeficiency
virus, are highly preliminary, FDA officials stressed yesterday.

    In fact, the FDA called initial contamination testing of the gene-based
medicine so tenuous that it would not have alarmed the children's families by
telling them until tests now under way settle the issue.

    However, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, Tenn., famous for
defeating leukemia in children, and Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, Tex.,
notified families this week in anticipation of newspaper reports of the FDA
probe.

    The FDA has suspended the gene-therapy study while investigating whether
researchers followed federal safety regulations, including whether they alerted
the government quickly enough to the possible contamination.

    "There is no evidence that any of the children who were treated were harmed
in any way," St. Jude hospital said in a statement yesterday.

    Researchers were trying out the gene therapy on the nervous-system cancer
neuroblastoma. Babies often survive it, but neuroblastoma is highly lethal when
it strikes older children. If patients relapse after initial conventional
treatment, most die quickly.

    St. Jude hospital studied 20 relapsed children. Two received the batch of
gene-based medicine suspected of possible contamination, the hospital said.
Sixteen of the children have died from their cancers, the hospital said.

    There has been no sign of contamination in the gene-based medicine given to
six children at Baylor, said spokeswoman Claire Bassett. Two of those children
have died of their cancers.

    The worry about possible contamination arose when St. Jude researchers
realized cells used to grow some of the genetic medicine several years ago might
not have undergone proper quality testing. So an outside lab tested samples and
found signs of low-level HIV and hepatitis C contamination.

    Those initial tests often give false results. The FDA began strict testing
Thursday. It hopes to know within two weeks whether the children's therapy was
contaminated.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2006


                              523 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            February 8, 2000 Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH; SECOND OPINION; Pg. R11

LENGTH: 1038 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy technique under scrutiny

BYLINE: DR. MIRIAM SHUCHMAN

BODY:

    Cancer patients who underwent experimental gene therapy at Toronto's
Princess Margaret Hospital during the past few years were told that the benefits
of gene therapy are uncertain, and that it has risks. But it turns out that
patients were not told the full extent of the risks involved. That's because
even the researchers themselves did not know how great the risks might be.

    Then, last September, a patient died as a result of a gene therapy
experiment in the United States. His death brought the entire field of gene
therapy under intense scrutiny. And that's led to new information emerging about
gene therapy's potential dangers.

    Keith Stewart, director of Princess Margaret's cancer gene therapy program,
says that now, any patient considering a gene therapy experiment at the hospital
will be told that a similar experiment proved fatal to one participant. "We'll
tell them someone died after an adenovirus was injected," he says, explaining
that the experiments he's running use that virus to shuttle genes into a
patient.

    Dr. Stewart's decision to change the way Princess Margaret patients are
informed about gene therapy trials is laudable. But it's not the result of a
directive from Health Canada's Bureau of Biologics. The Bureau, which oversees
gene therapy in this country, has no intention of requiring that patients in
gene therapy trials be better informed. Nor does it plan changes to the way
these experiments are monitored, despite several reports of deaths in gene
therapy experiments south of the border.

    In the past few weeks, the turmoil swirling around gene therapy has led to
the following events:

    *  The U.S. Senate held hearings to assess the safety of gene therapy and to
consider whether the field merits greater oversight.

    *  The U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) announced that it would
investigate why researchers have been slow to report that some patients enrolled
in gene therapy experiments have suffered serious side effects.

    *  The NIH also said it would begin inspecting institutions that conduct
gene therapy and reviewing their records.

    *  The director of gene therapy monitoring at the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) said that the agency might do random inspections of human
gene therapy trials, and also might require that more information about gene
therapy be made public.

    *  A major pharmaceutical company, Schering-Plough Corp., announced that it
would no longer insist that information about gene therapy side effects be
classified as a trade secret.

    In the face of all this activity, the man who oversees gene therapy
throughout Canada is not convinced that anything needs to change to ensure that
Canadian patients taking part in these experiments are protected.

    Dr. Anthony Ridgway, manager of the Biotherapeutics Division at Health
Canada's Bureau of Biologics, said in an interview that he's "confident with the
processes and the regulatory procedures that we have in place."

    Dr. Ridgway reviews and approves every gene therapy experiment proposed by
Canadian facilities. In the past five years, 28 such experiments have been
approved. Two were approved just last month.

    The idea behind most of these experiments is that by correcting or replacing
a faulty gene, doctors might be able to cure diseases that would otherwise be
incurable and fatal. These sorts of cures have been demonstrated already in
animal studies. But in humans, getting corrective genes delivered to the right
cells has been a huge stumbling block.

    Four years ago, an NIH panel charged with evaluating gene therapy urged
scientists to perform more experiments in test tubes and animals. As Dr. Stewart
recalls, "They said people should go back to the lab, don't do patients yet."
Now, it looks as if the panel gave the right advice, but scientists didn't
listen. They were overly enthusiastic, and they felt pressure from their
financial backers.

    They're listening now. U.S. scientists expect human clinical trials of gene
therapy to slow way down.

    But at Health Canada, Dr. Ridgway views the gene therapy-related death last
September as "a surprise, isolated" event.

    "This is leading-edge science that's being studied," he explained, "and
there's always the possibility that something unexpected could go wrong."

    The 18-year-old who died was enrolled in a controversial gene therapy
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. When his death was
first reported, many scientists viewed it as an unavoidable research mishap. It
was believed to be the first death linked directly to the decade-old field of
gene therapy.

    But a subsequent probe by the U.S. National Institutes of Health has
revealed several additional deaths that may have been caused by gene therapy.
And an inquiry into the University of Pennsylvania experiment concluded that the
death might have been avoided if proper procedures had been followed. As a
result, the FDA shut down gene therapy trials at the university in January.

    None of the gene therapy experiments currently underway in Canada resemble
the Pennsylvania experiment. But if problems are encountered in gene therapy
trials here, Canadians won't hear about them. That's because reports of problems
in gene therapy studies conducted here are confidential. They aren't available
to reporters, scientists, or patients.

    By contrast, when patients are harmed in the course of gene therapy
experiments in the U.S., the NIH must be informed, and the reports to the NIH
are considered public information. Washington Post reporters trying to access
the reports had to request them under the U.S. Freedom of Information Act, but
at least they were accessible.

    Eric Morin, a spokesperson for Health Canada, explained in an interview last
week that if problems arise in a gene therapy study done under the auspices of a
private company, his agency "can't just divulge the information." Some of the
details and specifics about the studies are proprietary, Mr. Morin said. And he
added, "Complete openness could well inhibit certain trials."

    That's precisely the point. Given what we've learned about the field of gene
therapy in the past few months, some trials may need to be stopped.


E-mail Dr. Shuchman at:
shuchman@acsu.buffalo.edu

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2006


                              526 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           February 5, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: NET WORTH; Pg. N1

LENGTH: 2700 words

HEADLINE: Is the biotech boom for real?;
While earlier rallies in the biotech sector have turned sour,;
some industry watchers say it's different this time. Here's a;
primer on what's driving the sector and some of the;
lower-risk - and higher-risk - ways to play it.

BYLINE: SHIRLEY WON and ANDREW BELL, The Globe and Mail

BODY:

    Biotechnology stocks, the wallflowers of Wall Street and Bay Street in
recent years, have suddenly started to turn heads again.

   Affymetrix - a leader in human gene-chip technology - has seen its stock
skyrocket more than 500 per cent in the past year on the Nasdaq Stock Market.
And Millennium Pharmaceuticals,which uses multiple genomic technologies to speed
drug discovery, has surged more than 400 per cent.

    These U.S. biotech stocks may not be familiar names in Canada but fund
managers are betting some of the companies in the promising genomics sector are
going to be stellar performers. "I think that Affymetrix and Millennium
Pharmaceuticals will respectively be to the genomics industry what Intel and
Microsoft are to the high-tech," says Rick Serafini, manager of the Trimark
Discovery Fund. "Both have been 10 baggers for me. I have owned them for three
years."

    A lot of the market buzz surrounds the potential for genomic companies that
can analyze and manipulate genetic information to develop new drugs and
treatments. "I believe that the genomics industry is going to change the way
that medicine is practised and delivered," Mr. Serafini says.

    Move over technology stocks, it's time to share some of the spotlight with
your biotech cousins. The 100-company biotechnology Nasdaq subindex has soared
123 per cent for the year ended Jan. 31. And the Yorkton Healthcare Index of
biotech stocks in Canada surged 36 per cent.

    Unlike the boom-and-bust cycles experienced by biotech stocks in the early
1980s and 1990s, some observers see smoother sailing ahead. They see a growing
demand for drugs from aging boomers. And the industry has matured - it now has
products on the market instead of just touting concepts.

    But there are market veterans who warn that as soon as investors start
arguing "this time is different," it usually isn't. It's a complex industry,
they warn, one in which dreams can easily go up in smoke.

    Until recently, the biotechnology sector languished as investors focused on
high-flying Internet plays. The sector has caught fire for a number of reasons:
A spate of mergers and acquisitions; more companies maturing with later stage
products, and better-than-expected earnings and revenue from some U.S. companies
like Genentech, developer of the Herceptin breast-cancer drug, and Idec
Pharmaceuticals,developer of Rituxan for low-grade Hodgkins lymphoma.

    John Schroer, manager of AIM Global Health Sciences Fund, is more positive
on biotech now because there are more companies with earnings and revenue than
in the 1980s and 1990s when firms were only in Phase 1 or Phase 2 clinical
trials and "those who were coming out of Phase 3 were unsuccessful."

    The increasing demand by well-heeled aging baby boomers for drugs for
assorted ailments is another driver of the sector.

    Some treatments like Idec Pharmaceutical's Rituxan can cost $2,000 to $3,000
(U.S.) a month, said John Sinkins, portfolio supervisor for the Sentry Select
Biotechnology and Health Sciences Fund. "With all the wealth that is being
created in the U.S. with the stock market boom, aging boomers can afford these
treatments."

    Another bullish factor is that it's easier and quicker to get drugs approved
these days. "If a company has all of its ducks in line, it can bring a drug
effectively to market in about four to five years, and that's less than half of
what it was in the early nineties."

    Stephen Waite, manager of the C.I. Global Biotechnology Sector Fund, said
the U.S. regulators have had to become more efficient because of the surge in
activity in the sector. About 70 U.S. biotech companies are looking to go public
in the next six months, he said. "We are at the early stages of a profound and
almost quantum jump in our knowledge of genetics and understanding of disease. .
. . I think that over the next 20 years we will see more innovation in medicine
than we have seen in the last 500 years."

    Some of these companies will fail, one reason why he argues that mutual
funds - as opposed to investing directly in stocks - are a safer way to approach
biotech investing.

    Dr. Calvin Stiller, co-manager of the Canadian Medical Discoveries Fund,
said the outlook for biotech has improved because some companies - like Biogen,
Amgen and Genentech - are finally turning in profits.

    The profitability is being fuelled by a change in the business model for
more biotech firms, Dr. Stiller said. In the past, biotechs would ally with a
big drug company, which would help finance their research, and the biotech firm
in turn would end up with the low-end of royalties. "It was quite punitive - it
ranged from 3 to 9 per cent of revenue."

    But more biotech companies now own their products and are taking them to
market themselves or doing co-marketing arrangements with the big drug companies
and getting 20 to 50 per cent of revenue, he said. "That has completely changed
the valuation for these companies."

    Despite the enthusiam over biotech, Patrick McKeough, editor of the
Successful Investor newsletter, cautions that investing in the sector is still a
risky area and shouldn't make up more than 10 per cent of a portfolio.

    "There are a lot of biotech companies in the developmental stage and it's
very difficult to tell - before they start selling a product - which ones will
succeed or won't," Mr. McKeough said.

    Investing in biotech mutual funds as opposed to stocks spreads the risk over
many companies instead of just one but there is "nothing magical about a mutual
fund," he said.

    "Mutual fund managers may not know a lot better than you do just how the
clinical trial will turn out. A diverse mutual fund is going to be a lot safer
than a mutual fund that invests only in biotech."
   How to play the sector

   MUTUAL FUNDS


Trimark Discovery Fund: This fund, which falls into the science and technology
category in newspaper listings, aims to invest in companies involved in
"innovation." The fund has 19 per cent in biotech and 52 per cent in high-tech
stocks. The rest is in other sectors. Because of market appreciation, the
biotech weighting has ballooned from a low of 8 to 10 per cent last year but Mr.
Serafini, the manager, has also taken some profit lately. His biotech stocks are
focused on the genomics industry. The fund gained 99.1 per cent last year and
has an average annual return of 40 per cent over three years.

    * Health sciences funds typically have some biotech stocks. For example, AIM
Global Health Sciences Fund manager John Schroer said the fund's weighting in
biotech has increased to 35 per cent from 15 per cent last year from market
appreciation and adding new names. He owns stellar performers like Idec,
Genentech and Immunex - but has added companies that have "late stage products
still and that are maybe in their mid-tier of valuations." The rest of the fund
is in drug and medical-device firms. The fund had a tough time last year as drug
companies took a hit when investors rotated to cyclicals. There were also fears
about potential price controls on drugs in the United States that would hurt
margins. The fund lost 7.4 per cent last year but has posted an average annual
return of 25.5 per cent over five years.

    * Sentry Select Biotechnology and Health Sciences Fund, 1999: This fund was
launched last November and will be closed to new investors by May 31. It invests
in 25 companies. Twelve are biotech firms, which make up 47 per cent of the
portfolio. They include stocks like Affymetrix, Amgem, BioChem Pharma, Biogen,
Biovail, MedImmune, and Millennium Pharmaceuticals. Portfolio supervisor John
Sinkins said the fund uses a buy-and-hold strategy. The fund is set to wind up
by Oct. 31, 2004, but investors can redeem anytime. The fund gained 4 per cent
for the month ended Dec. 31.

    * C.I. Global Biotechnology Sector Fund: This is the only pure biotechnology
play among Canadian mutual funds. It was launched last August. Manager Stephen
Waite said 30 per cent of the fund focuses on drugs known as monoclonal
antibodies - Y-shaped proteins designed to ward off disease - which he sees as
one of the most promising areas. These stocks include Abgenix, Medarex and
Genentech. He has 10 per cent in the genomics sector and 10 per cent in what he
calls "new and improved" companies like Sepracor,which make improved versions of
existing drugs. The fund returned 40.6 per cent for the three months ended Dec.
31.

    * Canadian Medical Discoveries Fund is a labour-sponsored venture capital
fund that invests in early-stage Canadian companies. The fund holds 42 stocks
with one-third that are public companies. Co-manager Dr. Calvin Stiller said two
of the original companies in the fund have gone public and he expects three more
- GlycoDesign, Nexia Biotechnologies and Morphometrix Technologies to do so this
year.

    The fund has had a tough time in recent years as investors gravitated to Web
stocks and large-cap companies. But he notes that two-thirds of the fund is in
private companies that are still valued at cost.

    The fund gained 0.4 per cent in the year ended Dec. 31 and has remained
unchanged for five years. "My view is that over the next 18 months is going to
be a very interesting time," he said.

   STOCKS


  What about steel-toed investors who are courageous enough to wade in and have
a go at picking stocks themselves? Certainly, there have been some glittering
returns this year.

    (To see how good, go to the Globe's stock market Web site at
www.globeinvestor.com and click on "Filters." Call up Biotechnology &
Pharmaceuticals stocks by highlighting the category under "Industry" and then
press Go. Then click on the "YTD" column for percentage changes from biotech
stocks during this year to date. As of midweek, 15 of the 38 stocks had soared
more than 50 per cent so far in 2000.)

      Think on-line shares are complicated? For a non-scientist, biotechnology
makes buying Web stocks look like shopping for a GIC. Just take this gem from a
Jan. 10 press release issued by Inflazyme Pharmaceuticals Ltd. of Richmond,
B.C.: "Inflazyme announces selection of Phosphodiesterase-4 Inhibitor without
potential for emesis." Brokerage analysts who follow biotech tend to sprout PhDs
after their names.

    But if you take the plunge, here are some guidelines suggested by analysts.

    * Don't get blinded by science - check out the suits.

    Above all, biotech observers say, a company's success is based on the
experience and expertise of its senior executives.

    "The temptation is to fall in love with a particular element of science or a
particular product," says Cameron Groome, an analyst with National Bank
Financial in Toronto.

    Regulatory submissions for new drugs can run from 100,000 to one million
pages, he says, meaning that getting a biotech product to market "is very
difficult to do without experience."

    He cites the example of Inflazyme, which "had some good technology out of
[the University of British Columbia] which was really having trouble going
somewhere and then they brought in an experienced executive from the U.K."

    In mid-1998, Inflazyme named Ian McBeath, chief executive of British gene
therapy company Neuro Vex Ltd., as its president and chief executive officer.
Its stock, then trading at less than $1, has since soared to around $3.

    The company expects to complete early studies of IPL576,092, its lead
product for asthma, in the first quarter of 2000. This product is being
developed under a $91-million (U.S.) pact with multinational Aventis
Pharmaceuticals.

    * Stick to companies that are already carrying out "clinical" trials or
tests of the drug in human beings.

    "You should be looking for companies that have a track record, and a track
record is having one or two products in clinical trials," says Claude Camiré, an
analyst with Groome Capital Inc. in Montreal.

    In industry jargon, Phase 1 trials are usually tests on about 40 patients
that are aimed at finding out if the drug is toxic. Phase 2 is a larger set of
trials, involving 200 or 300 subjects, which are supposed to find out if the
product works. Phase 3 or "late-stage" trials, carried out on 500 to 3,000
patients, are the final set of research. They are supposed to establish the
drug's efficacy in different groups by race, sex and lifestyle practices.

    "I tell people, just pick five late-stage companies and hold them in their
portfolios," says Michael Denny, director of investment banking in health care
for Yorkton Securities Inc., which has been carving out a niche in underwriting
biotechnology stock offerings.

    * Look for a "platform" or technology that can be adapted to treat other
diseases.

    Ideally, a biotech player has several products (or different applications
for one product) on the go so that "if something goes wrong, the other ones
might work," says Mr. Camiré of Groome Capital.

    In a Jan. 18 report, he called versatile AEterna Laboratories Inc. of Quebec
City, a "buy." The company has a big arsenal of products: It's expected to have
Phase 3 trials under way this year in lung cancer, kidney cancer and psoriasis.
AEterna stock traded at around $11 (Canadian) on the Toronto Stock Exchange this
week, up more than 100 per cent in a year.

   StressGen Biotechnologies Corp. of Victoria also meets the platform test
because its technology, based on proteins that get the immune system working
overtime, is "widely applicable" to a range of ailments, says Brian Bapty, an
analyst with Goepel McDermid in Vancouver. The company's stock traded at around
$4 on the TSE this week, up from $2.66 at the start of the year.

    * Look for plenty of alliances with big drug companies.

    A small biotech that thinks it can do everything on its own may be headed
for trouble, Groome Capital's Mr. Camiré says. "That's a great risk."

    Mr. Groome of National Bank Financial reckons Angiotech Pharmaceuticals Inc.
of Vancouver has done a good job of signing up major licensing partners.

    Giant Boston Scientific Corp. of Natick, Mass., and privately held Cook Inc.
of Bloomington, Ind., have licensed the company's technology for drug-coated
"stents," tiny metal cages that hold arteries open after surgery.

    Mr. Groome assigned a "speculative buy" to the stock in a Jan. 29 report.
Angiotech shares traded at around $57 this week, up from $20 at the start of
2000.

    * A biotech company should have enough cash to keep it going for at least
two years.

    "Typically, you're looking for a company with more than two years of cash,"
says CIBC World Markets analyst Lennox Gibbs.

    Biotechs consume cash like pigs eat truffles, especially as they move into
expensive large-scale clinical trials, and a shortage of the folding stuff can
hamstring their research or force them to give away their technology for less
than it's worth.

    That's why Mr. Gibbs was pleased to see DUSA Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Toronto
strike a juicy deal with German drug giant Schering AG in November under which
DUSA got more than $20-million in cash almost immediately for giving Schering
marketing rights to its Levulan drug in dermatology.

    "This is a dramatic change for the historically cash-constrained DUSA
Pharmaceuticals," Mr. Gibbs said in a report late last year, assigning a "strong
buy" rating to the stock. DUSA traded at about $24 (U.S.) on the Nasdaq Stock
Market this week, down from $28.50 at the start of the year but up from $6 in
early 1999.

    The company hopes that Levulan, a light-activated drug, will post between
$50-million and $100-million in annual sales within three years.

   And, a couple of bad signs are:

    * Be wary if the technology is absolutely radical.

    "When a company is doing something that's tremendously different from its
peers, usually it's questionable," says CIBC World Markets' Mr. Gibbs.
"Scientific breakthroughs are rare."

    Such ground breaking may work out in the long term, he says, but the payoff
is probably years off.

    "You've ultimately got to have a product that you can shrink-wrap and put on
the pharmacy shelf," National Bank's Mr. Groome warns.

    * Beware of companies that produce a torrent of press releases.

    "I don't like to see too [much] news on a company that doesn't mean
anything," Groome Capital's Mr. Camiré says. "Sometimes they seem to be building
up stories to get the financing."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2006


                              528 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           February 3, 2000 Thursday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 553 words

HEADLINE: Hopes rise for better asthma therapy;
Alberta scientists successfully test;
genetic alternative to steroids

BYLINE: KRISTA FOSS, Health Reporter

BODY:

    Scientists at the University of Alberta have successfully used a gene
therapy to treat asthma in rats, raising hopes for an effective treatment for
humans, and an alternative to steroids.

    Asthma develops when a person's airways become inflamed and make it
difficult for him or her to breathe. It afflicts as many as 10 per cent of
Canadians and is responsible for 10 deaths a week, according to the Asthma
Society of Canada.

    Steroid-based medications that effectively control asthma symptoms do not
work for everybody, and many chronic asthma sufferers fear their long-term side
effects.

    As a result, scientists are seeking alternatives that patients won't fear
and which more effectively target the source of inflammation.

    The new research, to be published in the Journal of Immunology this April,
suggests such a gene-therapy alternative is not far off.

    Dr. Dean Befus, a professor of medicine and director of the Alberta Asthma
Centre in Edmonton, and postdoctoral researcher Grant Stenton treated asthmatic
rodents using a spray of tiny fat-like droplets that contained a genetic
medicine. Inflammation in the rats' lungs was reduced by 75 per cent.

    Dr. Befus said extra sensitivity in the rats' airways - a condition asthma
sufferers call "twitchiness," reacting to everything from perfume to cold air -
was also significantly reduced by the gene therapy.
   "This is neat, really neat work," said Dr. Paul O'Byrne, a professor of
medicine at McMaster University and an asthma expert who noted that currently
there is an "enormous problem" with patients who improperly take their asthma
medications.

    To develop the new gene therapy, Dr. Befus collaborated with University of
Pennsylvania genetic researcher Alan Schreiber in Philadelphia. It was Dr.
Schreiber who identified a gene involved in the chain reaction of events that
lead to inflammation. The new therapy blocks this gene from sending messages
that eventually get relayed to the cells involved in inflammation.

    As many as 90 per cent of people who develop asthma as a child do so after
an allergic reaction to anything from cat hair to mould to certain kinds of
food, according to Dr. Befus. As a result, they form a particular antibody to
the allergy-causing substance that gets triggered the next time they are
exposed. That antibody sets off an immune response that may include everything
from extra mucous, to watery eyes and itchiness and will almost always include
breathing difficulties. Thereafter, a person with asthma becomes hypersensitive
to anything that irritates their airways.

    Dr. Schreiber isolated one gene that helps activate this immune response -
the Syk gene - and then developed a way to block it from getting its message to
molecules involved in the cascade of events that lead to inflammation.

    In Edmonton, Dr. Befus and his team tested the new gene therapy on rats,
whose asthma is triggered by an allergy to egg whites.

    "It's blocking the inflammation and it has no significant side effects that
we know of and it is very targeted," said Dr. Befus of the gene therapy. "So it
could be a supplement treatment or a replacement treatment for people who are
steroid-resistant."

    Dr. Befus said the gene therapy will likely be tested in Phase One trials,
in which its safety is tested on humans, within the next two years.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2006


                              530 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           January 26, 2000 Wednesday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. R10

LENGTH: 1718 words

HEADLINE: Is it back to square one for gene therapy?;
The revolutionary genetic technique is suffering setbacks;
and even patient death. Even so, some researchers are tinkering;
with the idea of using some of nature's most devilish viruses

BYLINE: BILL ATKINSON, Special to The Globe and Mail

DATELINE: Vancouver

BODY:

    The potential for gene therapy to alleviate human illness is proving nothing
short of spectacular. It also raises spectacular concerns - and spectacular
debate.

    At one extreme are proponents who say that "all disease is genetic" and
predict that GT will soon dominate medicine. Other clinicians define GT more
narrowly and are cautious about its future. So far, the only consensus among
scientists is that GT uses genetic material to address the symptoms or causes of
human disease.

    The bolder scientists have one point on their side - every illness has some
genetic component. In the so-called "genetic diseases," the link is obvious:
Patients lack some normally functioning gene that healthy humans take for
granted. If their genome can't break down sugar properly, they have diabetes. If
it can't assemble a proper retina, they are color blind, and so on. But even in
infectious diseases, genes play a role. People blessed with genetic immunity may
shrug off the most vicious pathogen. Millions of children have ingested live
polio virus and escaped with a sniffle. A group of Kenyan prostitutes have
immune systems that eat HIV for lunch. The life-and-death differences lie in the
genes.

    Cancer has a particularly high genetic component. Most cancers arise when
something in the environment stresses the genome, reactivating a fetal gene that
had been mothballed. Here again, only some people succumb. Current theory calls
cancer a matter of statistics. Each human has fifty trillion cells. Most of
these divide fiftyfold in an average lifetime: whoever reaches age 70 thus
experiences 2,500,000,000,000,000 cell divisions - the number of stars in 10,000
Milky Ways. If only one division per billion slips up and leads to carcinoma,
the average person generates over 2,000,000 cancer cells in a lifetime. But
though all of us are constantly getting cancer, our genome has methods to blow
it away. Some genes manufacture chemicals called tumour necrosis factors, or
TNFs, which butcher cancer cells. Other genes encode for substances that attract
TNFs, or that starve tumour cells for blood.

    Only when this complex, effective system gets overwhelmed - by the onslaught
of carcinogens in tobacco, or by a defect in a cancer-fighting gene - does the
scale tip and someone "gets cancer." GT began when experimental clinicians
wondered what would happen if they could alter the living genome. The result,
they felt, could be a radical new surgery at the molecular level-filling gaps,
making repairs and strengthening defences. In attempting this, the GT pioneers
not only fell over unforeseen obstacles: They made triumphs that proved to be as
baffling as their failures.

    Dr. French Anderson, an American scientist called the "father of GT," was
the first to score a success. In 1990, he took on the case of two four-year-old
girls who suffered severe combined immuno-deficiency disease, also called SCID.
In his clinical protocol, Dr. Anderson inserted modified genes so that the girls
developed healthy immune systems. While it was of irrefutable benefit to the two
patients, it's debatable whether Dr. Anderson's first huge success was good for
GT. It raised GT's profile from nascent and experimental to that of a saviour.
Overnight, dozens of new GT companies sprang up; investors fought over who would
bankroll them. Daily press releases trumpeted the discovery of genes "causing"
an array of disorders, from MS to osteoarthritis.

    Inevitably, setbacks followed. For example, genes implicated in genetic
diseases often proved not to be the sole cause. Just as infectious diseases had
a gene component, genetic disorders were often mere predispositions which might
never erupt without some environmental trigger. Dr. Anderson still predicts that
GT will cure other diseases as it cured SCID. He has even proposed GT for the
unborn. But as a group, gene therapy researchers received a sharp lesson in the
basic motto of science: It's Not As Simple As You Thought.

    Consider the "vector," the means by which GT material finds appropriate
target cells and invades the cell nucleus. If you think this process sounds
familiar, you're right: The common virus has done it from time immemorial. The
scientists' conclusion? Enlist the virus as a GT vector.

    This poses problems. A virus, observes the Nobel laureate Sir Peter Medawar,
is neither dead nor alive: it's "a bit of bad news wrapped up in protein." It's
a stripped-down, free-floating genome that can't even reproduce alone. What it
is good at - enough to have imperilled humanity at several junctures - is
invading living cells, cramming its genes into the host nucleus, and remaking
the host cell into a high-powered virus factory. But if a virus does this to
humanity's peril, the scientists mused, it may also be coaxed to do it to
humanity's profit.

    Such ideas sound abstract, but their human consequences are profound. This
was illustrated in September by what has proved the most tragic check so far to
overoptimism about GT - the death of Jesse Gelsinger, the first person to perish
in a GT clinical trial. Mr. Gelsinger had a genetic disease called OTC, which
occurs once every 25,000 births. OTC compromises production of a liver enzyme,
so that the GT team at the University of Pennsylvania injected a functioning
enzyme gene directly into Mr. Gelsinger's hepatic artery. The vector chosen to
deliver this gene to his liver cells was a bit of bad news called adenovirus,
which in healthy humans causes only a severe cold. In one sense, adenovirus is
an efficient vector. It's a master at breaching cellular defences and foisting
its genes on human cells. Unfortunately, adenovirus may also provoke a violent
immune reaction. The preliminary post mortem suggests this happened to Mr.
Gelsinger. "The drug used in the trial," reports the team, led by Dr. James
Wilson of the university's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, "initiated an
unusual and deadly immune-system response that led to multiple organ failure and
death." Because of this catastrophic failure, the U.S. government a few days ago
shut down further clinical trials on GT at the university.

    In the team's defence, however, animal studies and 17 other human volunteers
in the same trial gave no indication that Mr. Gelsinger was at risk before the
fact. Further, biotechnologists had attenuated the adenovirus beforehand by
deleting critical genes. Still, even that process was a trade off. Dr. Anderson
himself wrote in a review paper that "Deleting more and more viral genes may not
always be advantageous . . . these genes may have beneficial attributes, for
example suppressing an immune response against the vector." As the old saying
goes, he who sups with the devil needs a long spoon. In Mr. Gelsinger's case,
adenovirus may have been a spoon too short.

    GT has arrived in Canada, too. Earlier this month, doctors at St. Michael's
Hospital in Toronto announced that a local real-estate agent had become the
first Canadian to receive gene therapy for coronary disease. Grenville Dungey
was given an injection of a DNA-based substance into a part of his heart that
was too clogged for surgeons to perform a conventional bypass operation.

    The important difference in the Toronto experiment is that doctors did not
use a virus to deliver the genetic material. Surgeons simply injected "naked
DNA" into his heart to promote the growth of new blood vessels and bring
much-needed blood supply to an area of the heart that cannot be operated on in
the conventional bypass manner. Heart muscle is one of the few areas in the body
where injected DNA can penetrate cells and be beneficial without a special
vector.

    So far, doctors say Mr. Dungey is making an excellent recovery but that it
is too early to say whether GT is responsible. He will return for a full
examination in March. In the meantime, he has already returned to work (though
only on a part-time basis).

    Elsewhere in Canada, several laboratories are also pursuing GT work. One of
the most advanced trials is at NeuroVir, a GT company spun off from the research
lab of Dr. Frank Tufaro, a professor of Microbiology at the University of B.C.
Wisely, the NeuroVir team has chosen a target cell they do not mind destroying:
cancer. They have developed a clinical protocol that exposes tumours to Herpes
simplex virus. Anecdotal evidence from two clinical trials confirms one fact:
HSV hits cancer like a high explosive.

    NeuroVir first attenuates HSV by removing critical genes so that the virus
cannot replicate unless conditions are optimal - as they are inside cancer
cells. One natural gene left intact is gamma 34.5, which prevents cell death
long enough to let the virus replicate. It is, Dr. Tufaro notes, a treatment of
last resort for those whom the cancer would otherwise kill in weeks or days.

    "We don't fully understand how it works," he confesses. "But it seems clear
that HSV has no toxicity to normal organs. It's not even an opportunistic
pathogen in cancer patients whose immune systems have been compromised by
radiation and chemotherapy. HSV is selectively toxic to cancer cells."

    Because of this, he says, HSV dosage appears to have no upper limit. "Since
there are no adverse effects on normal cells, there seems to be no such thing as
a maximum dose."

    How about lingering effects in a patient whose life has been prolonged?
That's unlikely, says Dr. Tufaro. "When HSV kills a cancer cell, it also
destroys itself."

    For all its promise, Dr. Tufaro is very cautious in his claims. "I'd even be
tempted not to call it GT," he says. "It's a precursor to the true GT that will
occur when we stitch in an oncotoxin [cancer poison]. Now we're just using
naturally occurring genetic material for therapy."

    Not all scientists share Dr. Tufaro's caution. At Bio 99, a world
biotechnology congress held last May in Seattle, one researcher enthusiastically
outlined how his company creates artificial chromosomes and inserts them into
host cells using Epstein-Barr virus.

    A hand rose in the audience. "Epstein-Barr causes mononucleosis and is a
suspect in human chronic-fatigue syndrome. Have you had any reservations about
using it as a GT vector?" "Nope," said the scientist, without looking up. "Next
question."

   Bill Atkinson writes on science, technology and their economic and social
effects.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2006


                              532 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 25, 2000 Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. R11

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: Bypass surgery gets a boost from gene therapy

BYLINE: LEE BOWMAN, Scripps Howard News Service

BODY:

    A new gene-therapy procedure promise for keeping arteries open following
heart bypass surgery, researchers say.

    Writing in the Tuesday edition of Circulation: Journal of the American Heart
Association, British researchers say the procedure delivers a double-fisted
assault on the formation of cells that can re-block an artery.

    The treatment both inhibits a molecule that encourages overproduction of
cells that can block a blood vessel and destroys those cells when they do form.

    Coronary bypass operations are among the the most common surgeries performed
in industrialized nations. But "up to half of these procedures fail within 10
years because the vessel re-blocks, and 20 per cent of all bypass surgeries are
now repeat procedures," said Sarah George, a lecturer at the University of
Bristol's Heart Institute in England.

    Atherosclerosis, a form of "hardening" of the arteries, is caused by a
build-up of fatty deposits and an overgrowth of cells that collect on the walls
of the arteries. This eventually leads to blood clots that can prevent the heart
from getting sufficient oxygen-rich blood.

    To restore the flow, surgeons bypass the blocked section, usually with veins
that are taken from the leg. But this grafted section is also prone to becoming
blocked, either by a blood clot that forms in the days following surgery or from
an overgrowth of cells along the inner wall of the vein.

    "If we could find a way to block that abnormal layer from growing, it could
make the grafts last longer and delay or even avoid second bypass surgeries,"
Dr. George said. "This study shows the potential of this type of gene therapy in
preventing re-blockage of vessels."

    Dr. George and her colleagues sought to manipulate molecules called matrix
metalloproteinases that encourage the growth of cells in a process similar to
scar tissue formation.

    Earlier studies had indicated that a type of molecule called tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase could stop overgrowth of cells and destroy those
that did form.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2006


                              534 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           January 22, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 606 words

HEADLINE: Proposals cut drug-trial wait periods;
In some cases, pharmaceutical companies could begin;
testing within 48 hours of application

BYLINE: KRISTA FOSS, Health Reporter, With a report from Carolyn Abraham

BODY:

    Canadians will get access to new drugs sooner and will have more chances to
be research guinea pigs under proposed changes to the way clinical trials are
regulated.

    The changes, announced yesterday by federal Health Minister Allan Rock,
would let drug companies begin so-called Phase 1 trials, in which they test the
safety of new drugs on healthy people, within 48 hours of applying. The present
review time is 60 days.

    Phase 2 and Phase 3 clinical trials, in which new drugs are given to large
numbers of patients to see if they affect a specific condition, would be
reviewed within 30 days, half the present 60-day period. If Health Canada can't
complete a review within the prescribed time period, drug companies would be
free to start testing anyway.

    Canada's pharmaceutical industry cautiously welcomed the proposed amendments
to the federal food and drug regulations yesterday and suggested they might lead
to more drug research here. But others were openly critical of fast-tracking a
process that is supposed to protect patient safety.

    "The reviewer's role is to look at volumes and volumes of data to determine
what we know about a drug before we play with people's lives," said Michele
Brill-Edwards, a physician and former drug reviewer for the Health Protection
Branch. "That's not something you do in 48 hours. This government can't return
phone calls in 48 hours."

    Dann Michols, director of the program that evaluates and approves drugs for
Health Canada, said the proposed changes will make Canada more competitive in
the global market for drug research.

    Mr. Michols said very few Phase 1 clinical trials are conducted in Canada
now, but a 48-hour review would give Canada a competitive edge over the United
States, where approval takes 30 days.

    (Phase 1 trials for certain cutting-edge treatments such as transplanted
animal organs, gene therapy and vaccines remain subject to a 30-day review in
Canada under the proposal.)

    "It's a big deal for Canada in the world stage," agreed Dr. Neil Shear,
director of the clinical pharmacology division at Sunnybrook and Women's College
Health Sciences Centre in Toronto.

    "Once a drug company brings a drug into the country for a Phase 1 trial,
they build a relationship with you; they understand your services and abilities,
and they're going to bring more studies in Phase 2 and Phase 3."

    In 1998, pharmaceutical companies invested $363-million in clinical trials
in Canada, according to an industry organization in Ottawa.

    "If there is a better environment, a number of our member companies have
plans to increase their clinical-trial work here," said Murray Elston, president
of the organization, Canada's Research-Based Pharmaceutical Companies.

    Phase 1 is the only stage of drug research in which people are paid, earning
anywhere from $800 to $2,000 for taking drugs so researchers can determine
proper doses and learn about toxic side effects.

    In the United States, the fees for people participating in Phase 1 trials
have created a class of professional guinea pigs, who depend on trials as a main
source of income.

    Dr. Brill-Edwards warned that Canadians should not confuse better access to
clinical trials with better access to treatment.

    "When you enter a clinical trial you are participating in an experiment; you
are agreeing you may not get the experimental drug, you may get a placebo, and
if you do get the experimental drug, it may not work and there may be side
effects," she said.

    Health Canada is to publish the full text of the amendments today, followed
by a 30-day consultation period. The changes would become effective by Sept. 1,
2000.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2006


                              536 of 545 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 2000 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           January 15, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 586 words

HEADLINE: Heart patient's gene therapy a Canadian first;
Toronto medical trial begins with man who,;
surgeons discover, has an inoperable problem

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM and KRISTA FOSS, The Globe and Mail

BODY:

    A Toronto real-estate agent has become the first Canadian to receive gene
therapy for coronary disease after surgeons realized a part of his heart was too
clogged for them to repair.

    Doctors at St. Michael's Hospital injected the inoperable region of
Grenville Dungey's heart with an experimental, DNA-based substance while
surgeons performed bypass operations on three other regions.

    The hope is that the gene therapy will do for 52-year-old Mr. Dungey what
surgeons' hands could not: improve blood supply to that area of his heart with
the growth of new blood vessels.

    In an announcement made yesterday, the St. Mike's team said the procedure
they performed last month as part of the country's first gene-therapy trial for
heart disease may become an alternative for patients who cannot undergo surgical
bypasses.

    "If cardiac gene therapy works as we hope it will, there will be a new
source of hope for heart patients who otherwise could not be treated," said Dr.
Duncan Stewart, head of the cardiology division at St. Mike's and the University
of Toronto.

    At the moment, doctors said, Mr. Dungey is making an excellent recovery, but
they could not yet say whether the gene therapy is responsible, because it is
too early to look into his chest.

    "If it works for me, then down the road, it will give others a new lease on
life," said Mr. Dungey, who has been released from hospital.

    Gene therapy to improve blood supply to the heart could be a great leap
forward in treating coronary disease. An estimated 15,000 Canadians are
potential candidates for such a treatment.

    Michael Sole, a spokesman for the Heart and Stroke Foundation and founder
and director emeritus of the Heart Research Centre at the University of Toronto,
said it signifies the beginning of a "golden age in medicine."

    The first breakthrough came with the emergence of bypass operations in the
1970s, he said. Then the advent of balloon angioplasties in the 1980s offered an
alternative to unclog arteries by widening their passageways.

    "Now this gene therapy is the next big step," said Dr. Sole, who continues
research as a molecular cardiologist at Toronto General Hospital.

    "In the end, my belief is that all of these surgical strategies will
gradually diminish and disappear over the next 10 years. We will develop bypass
surgery without the surgery."

    Not long ago, many scientists predicted genetic-based therapies would
quickly revolutionize medicine. After all, gene therapy holds the promise of
treating disease by correcting genetic malfunctions that lead or contribute to
it.

    Human genetic coding that has the potential to repair cells is copied or
cloned, and injected into the diseased or injured part of the body.

    But enthusiasm for the procedure was tempered last year after an 18-year-old
patient in the United States died within 24 hours of receiving a gene therapy
injection for a severe liver disorder.

    In that case, however, researchers at the University of Pennsylvania had
used a mild cold virus to deliver the genetic material to the young man's liver
cells. Those viral delivery trucks are now implicated in the death, and the
trial itself has been halted.

    Doctors at St. Mike's did not use a virus to deliver the genetic material to
Mr. Dungey's heart. Dr. David Latter, the cardiovascular surgeon for Mr. Dungey,
said doctors simply injected "naked DNA" into his heart.

    "The heart muscle is one of the few areas in the body that if we just inject
DNA, we get penetration of the cell," said Dr. Latter.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2006
